Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Genetic epidemiology: Promise or compromise?

R. H. Ward

To cite this article: R. H. Ward (1980) Genetic epidemiology: Promise or compromise?, Social
Biology, 27:2, 87-100, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.998841 1

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988411

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 4 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Genetic Epidemiology: Promise or Compromise?

 

R. H. Ward

Department of Medical Genetics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada

ABSTRACT: Although our ability to define ‘genetic syndromes”’ has increased exponentially, we are
less able to identify the relevant etiological factors in a precise fashion. Similarly, there is only inadequate evaluation of the contribution that genetic factors make to the burden of ill health. Genetic
epidemiology, which attempts to integrate concepts from quantitative and population genetics with
epidemiological principles, gives promise of solving these problems. Recent efforts in this area have
not been uniformly successful, partly because of a failure to adequately define the aims of the field
and partly because of a lack of appreciation for the importance of epidemiological principles. Consideration of the distribution of genetic disease along an etiological spectrum yields some valuable
insights for generating valid research strategies in addition to indicating which segments of the population bear the heaviest affliction. In the area of common diseases, it is apparent that failure to
incorporate epidemiological procedures into study designs has been a significant drawback in the
past. To a large extent this stems from a reluctance to consider the problem of genetic disease in a
biological context. Some simple remedies include: setting up study designs that emphasize a quasiexperimental approach; increased use of epidemiologically sound “fixed cluster’ units rather than
large complex pedigrees; a greater use of quantitative phenotypic information; and development of
hierarchical hypothesis testing.

During the past two decades our so- presumptive Mendelian traits were 1,545
ciety has been profoundly influenced by and 2,811 (McKusick, 1978). This correthe exponentially increased awareness of sponds to arate of discovery of between 11
the role played by genetic factors in dis- and 13 traits per year, and the total numease. At the same time, the rate of recog- ber of recognized traits in man (2,811)
nition of newly defined geneticsyndromes _ represents seven times the number of loci
has been equally explosive. Eighty years that have been identified in that extenago when Mendel’s laws were becoming — sively studied mammal—the laboratory
incorporated into the nascent field of mouse.
genetics, a small number of medical cu- While the majority of these traits are
riosities were recognized on the basis of _ too rare to separately impose a significant
their adherence to basic Mendelian princi- burden on society (as distinct from
ples. By the early 1960’s, despite the rapid afflicted individuals and their families),
progress that had been made in other thecumulative effect of the more common
areas, human genetics had made relatively deleterious alleles is appreciable (Carter,
little progress (Dunn, 1962) withatotalof 1977). Nonetheless, despite the impres412 Mendelian traits being recognized by _ sive array of Mendelian traits that can now
1958, or an average rate of discovery of _ be catalogued, it is increasingly apparent
about 7 traits per year. For confirmed that a far greater component of our burMendelian traits this number rose to 692 den of ill health stems from the contribuby 1968 and 1,364 by 1978, while the cor- _ tion of genetic factors to the ““common disresponding totals for confirmed traits plus eases,” such as cardiovascular disease and

87

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

88 Ward

cancer. Here causation and apportionment of burden are much more difficult to
specify than for the Mendelian traits, since
etiology tends to be multifactorial. With
genetic effects confounded with environmental factors and the existence of genotype-environment interactions, it is not
surprising that estimates of the precise
genotypic role in the etiology of common
disease remain largely conjectural. Nevertheless, there is general agreement that
the role of genetic factors in disease is
highly significant (Morton and Chung,
1978; Sing and Skolnick, 1979).

Curiously, the increased identification
of Mendelian traits and the growing
awareness of the importance of a genetic
contribution to the etiology of common
diseases has created something of a paradox. The circumstantial evidence for an
overwhelmingly pervasive contribution of
genetic factors to the distribution of morbidity and disability in populations is impressive. Yet, relative to advances in the
clinical, biochemical, and molecular aspects of human genetics, our progress in
quantifying the extent of this burden has
lagged behind. We can catalog a daunting
number of genetic syndromes, but can
specify population distribution and etiological complexity for only a small fraction.
Still worse, the failure to quantify the apportionment of cause, especially genotype-environment interactions, has resulted in a failure to appreciate the
complex interactions that underly the distribution of disease and disability. This in
turn has led to an overly simplistic interpretation of group differences in disease frequency as being genetic or environmental in origin, depending on the
bias of the observer.

The existence of such a paradox is not
unique to genetic epidemiology, but has
cropped up repeatedly in the history of human genetics (Dunn, 1962). In the present
instance an undue reliance on biochemical

 

Social Biology

sophistication, in the expectation of a
“technological fix’ for genetic disease,
has diverted attention from the necessity
of evaluating the distribution of disease in
populations. Even though the danger of
extreme specialization within human
genetics was pointed out some time ago
(Neel, 1966), there is little evidence that
any attempt is being made to bridge the
widening gap between a preoccupation
with molecular mechanisms and a concern
for developing rigorous mathematical expressions for the distribution of genetic
traits in populations. A more general approach is needed which places the concept
of genetic etiology into the matrix of demographic, sociological, and historical
factors which combine to influence the distribution of genetic disease. Ironically, it
was this identical realization by Weinberg
(1912) which established one of the major
foundations of human genetics.

Adoption of such a perspective would
suggest that an appropriate objective of
the quantitative aspect of human genetics
would be to evaluate the relative contribution of specific genotypes to man’s burden
of morbidity and disability. Achieving this
goal would also help develop a genuine interface between the quantitative side of
human genetics, defining the contribution
of genetic variability to the frequency of
disease, and the biochemical side,
defining the genetic contribution to disease in molecular terms. In defining the
genetic burden of disease, a quantitative
approach is needed, but also an appreciation for the social, biological, and historical milieu of the population. The integration of elements from genetics and
epidemiology into a holistic discipline as
originally suggested by Weinberg (1908,
1912) would fulfill this need. However,
despite the current enthusiasm for the rubric “‘genetic epidemiology,” there seems
to be an unfortunate tendency to disregard a solid epidemiological foundation in

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vel. 27, No. 2

favor of mathematical sophistry. The distinction between a temporary fad and a
burgeoning discipline is a narrow one, and
it is not entirely clear into which category
“senetic epidemiology” will fall. One
rather pessimistic viewpoint has already
labeled ‘“‘genetic epidemiology” as being
the most recent example of along series of
continual failures to incorporate the principles of population genetics into the discipline of human genetics (Caplan, 1979). I
do not believe the situation is so bleak to

warrant such a dismissal at this time.

If there is to be a successful integration
of elements from epidemiology and quantitative genetics into a division of human
genetics called genetic epidemiology, then
it is worth identifying impediments to this
goal so they may be avoided. At this stage
in the development of genetic epidemiology, there are two major criticisms
that could be leveled at the field, as
defined by its advocates. First, there is the
general complaint that all too often the
underlying biological nature of the disease
being studied is ignored in favor of the development of a specific model of analysis.
Such an apparent lack of sensitivity for the
very real concerns of the nonquantitative
biologist is not unique to genetic epidemiology. The only real solution is to break
the barriers isolating the subspecialties so
that communication between them can occur. This will take effort on the part of
both the statistical geneticist and the clinical geneticist, but it is absolutely essential
that this process of communication occurs
if genetic epidemiology is to become an integral part of human genetics.

The second type of criticism is that the
proponents of genetic epidemiology tend
to employ ad hoc research strategies and
to apply them with a disregard for basic
epidemiological principles. To ignore ascertainment and the lack of independence
between variables, for example, is not
only bad epidemiology but also bad popu
Genetic Epidemiology 89

lation genetics. A number of characteristic approaches tend to place the individual
investigator in a compromised position in
this regard: an undue emphasis on a preferred statistical technique rather than a
method of analysis tailored to the problem
at hand; a failure to incorporate relevant
phenotypic information; and a naive reliance on large pedigrees rather than an
epidemiologically sound sample. It is
these issues which will be addressed below. But first it is necessary to give some
definition to the field of genetic epidemiology and place it in its proper perspective. This in turn will help identify both the
range of research strategies that are required and the benefits of carrying out
such research—issues which will also help
in avoiding such compromises.

GENETIC EPIDEMIOLOGY IN
PERSPECTIVE

In outlining the intent and scope of
genetic epidemiology in terms of a formal
definition, it becomes clear that the field
of genetic epidemiology has two broad objectives. For example, if we follow Morton (1977, 1979), who has been at pains to
define “‘genetic epidemiology”’ following
earlier adumbrations (Neel and Schull,
1954; Neel et al., 1965), the twin objectives can be defined as:

1. To focus on the etiological distribution and control of diseases in groups of
“relatives,” where “relatives” may be as
close as twins or as extended as an ethnic
group.

2. To elucidate the underlying causes of
inherited disease, whether the inheritance
be biological or cultural.

In short, the objectives are to define the
distribution of risk and to identify the
etiological factors that contribute to the
burden of disease.

To meet these two objectives, which
are central to the epidemiological method
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

90 Ward

in general, the distribution of disease in
space and time must be analyzed in sucha
way that experimental contrasts can be set
up and hypotheses tested. However, just
as Murphy (1978) has reminded epidemiologists of the perils of ignoring the
“unifying concept of heritable transmission,” we need to remind geneticists of the
dangers that follow from an undue emphasis On simplistic genetic models. Indeed,
Murphy (19795) has provided an impressive demonstration of how limited our vision will be if we confine attention to Mendelian and Galtonian methods of analysis
without admitting the full range of epidemiological possibilities. However, if the
epidemiological strategy is to be stressed,
it is important to develop an overview of
the categories of disease in terms of the
underlying etiology. This is because the
appropriate strategy required to meet the
twin objectives of genetic epidemiology
will depend on the type of interaction between genotype and environment and
hence different categories of disease will
merit emphasis on either the first objective of genetic epidemiology or the second, as well as requiring very different
methods of attack.

A rather simplified view of the etiological dimension of disease is to consider a
spectrum ranging from wholly genetic
causes (e.g., the Mendelian disorders) to
wholly environmental causes (e.g.,
trauma). For purpose of discussion, a set
of six rather arbitrary categories can be
identified along this spectrum. Obviously
this oversimplification obscures the fact
that the etiological distribution within
each category is complex and may involve
a variety of genotype-environmental interactions. Nevertheless, the six categories identified below do provide a useful
means of identifying the range of problems and possible research strategies in
the area of genetic epidemiology.

1. Mendelian etiology. At the “‘genetic

Social Biology

pole” of the etiological spectrum, these
comprise the classical “‘genetic diseases.”
In total, they represent a vast number of
syndromes, though as noted above their
total impact in most populations is not
large. In this category the first epidemiological objective, that of identifying etiological factors, is not usually of primary concern, although a more _ rigorous
application of segregation analysis would
benefit the field (e.g., estimating penetrance and ascertainment from an epidemiologically sound survey). However, the
second objective of specifying the distribution of risk should be pursued with vigor. More than twenty years ago, a start
was made tn this direction for two dominant disorders by a careful evaluation of
the nature of the diseases and the distributions in space and time in defined populations (Crowe et al., 1956; Reed and
Chandler, 1958; Reed and Neel, 1959).
Little has been done to follow up on this
pioneering work and, apart from the exceptional studies in Finland (Norio et al.,
1973; Nevanlinna, 1980), there seem to be
few nations or territories where the distribution of Mendelian diseases in the population is adequately characterized.

Given the current level of biochemical
sophistication, coupled with the move to
upgrade the quality of genetic screening
and counseling (e.g., National Academy
of Sciences, 1975), it is imperative that the
distribution of Mendelian disorders be
placed in a sound epidemiological setting.
It remains a curious anomaly, that even
today there is but a single population in
North America—British Columbia—for
which there is any hope of obtaining even
elementary estimates of the general burden due to Mendelian diseases (Newcombe, 1967, 1978; Trimble and Doughty,
1974).

2. Chromosomal etiology. In this category, genotype also plays a dominant
etiological role, inasmuch as the clinical
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 2

condition is attributable to a disruption or
imbalance of genetic material. However,
since the occurrence of chromosomal
aberration is not usually due to Mendelian
segregation, but instead stems from nonMendelian factofs, more effort needs to
be expended in determining the etiological parameters than is the case for disorders with a Mendelian etiology. In many
instances this can be done by application
of classical epidemiological methods as in
the case of the initial demonstration of
maternal age effect in Down’s syndrome
(Penrose, 1933). However, following the
recent advances in cytology, such as the
ability to identify both the parent and the
meiotic phase that gave rise to a nondisjunction event, epidemiological studies
should be designed to incorporate such
techniques.

The identification of high-risk groups
would also fall into the province of genetic
epidemiology. While cytological surveys
have contributed much to this area, there
are still substantial gaps in our knowledge.
With the need to obtain accurate costbenefit estimates for amniocentesis and
similar programs, epidemiologically sophisticated studies should not remain too
long in abeyance.

3. Multifactorial etiology—“high heritability”’. Here the etiological component
shifts further from the ‘‘genetic pool”’ and
also becomes more complex. Disorders
are placed in this category rather than the
following one on the premise that here
genetic factors make a major contribution
to the variability of phenotypic expression
associated with the disease. While the sep
aration of the “multifactorial” category

into two groups is clearly arbitrary, the
distinction is important in terms of devising research strategies. Even so, it should
be frankly recognized that diseases falling
into this category are a heterogeneous
group and may often be placed here because of ignorance. In many instances,

Genetic Epidemiology 91

dissection of heterogeneity by techniques
of genetic epidemiology will identify subsets of the disorder that have a predominantly Mendelian etiology as opposed to
those that have a predominantly environmental etiology. The identification of
specific genetic lesions in the hyperlipidemias (Goldstein and Brown, 1977) is a
case in point.

The primary objective for the genetic
epidemiologist will be to identify the
genetic contribution to the etiological
pathway, since identification of populatioris at risk is already well established.
Since many of the diseases in this category
are common, and impose massive burdens
on society, the goal of identifying genetic
elements in etiology is an important one.
It is also a difficult and demanding one.
Although most of the recent research effort of ‘‘genetic epidemiology” has occured in this area, there is much to do in
terms of devising study designs and analytic techniques that will ensure success.
This will be elaborated on below.

4. Multifactorial etiology—“‘low heritability’. This category is rather arbitrarily
distinguished from the former by the presumed higher contribution of environmental factors to phenotypic variability.
As long as identification of the underlying
nongenetic etiology is a major preoccupation of epidemiologists, geneticists are unlikely to have much impact. However, at
the elementary level of specifying whether
diseases fall into this category or the preceding one, genetic epidemiologists do
have a distinct role. This would imply that
reliable estimates of heritability do have
some intrinsic value as a means of evaluating whether a specific condition warrants
further genetic study or not, though care
should be taken not to confuse “‘heritability” with “etiology.”

5. Infectious agents. Long the traditional province of epidemiologists, there
is increasing evidence that ‘‘host factors”

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

92 Ward

under genetic control play an important
role in diseases caused by infectious
agents. It now appears likely that functional differences in immune response
caused by genetic factors are likely to
influence morbidity and mortality for a
wide variety of infectious agents. A case in
point is the involvement of the B27 allele
at the HLA-B locus in the development of
ankylosing spondylitis and reactive arthritis (Brewerton, 1978). Evidence is now accumulating suggesting involvement of the
HLA region in rheumatoid arthritis
(Stastny, 1978; Karr et al., 1980) as well as
in a host of other diseases in which an initial infection may act as the precipitating
event (Dausset and Svejgaard, 1977).

Malaria has long been as a model for
the role of genetic susceptibility in mediating the effect of parasitic diseases. It now
appears that for many other tropical infectious diseases, the burden of morbidity is
influenced by genotype as exemplified by
the recent findings in schistosomiasis (Salam et al., 1979). Familial aggregation of
response to respiratory virus infections
(Fox and Hall, 1979) and the demonstration of a major locus effect on the development of immune response to streptococcus (Greenberg et al., 1980) suggest that
genetic factors are also important in
influencing the burden of infectious disease in temperate developed countries. In
general, it seems that the field of infectious disease is an extremely important
but sadly neglected area of genetic investigations. The evidence to date suggests this
would be a fertile field for genetic epidemiology with a major emphasis on identifying populations at risk in terms of their
specific genotypes.

6. Environmental hazards. Morbidity
and mortality due to environmental hazards used to be of little concern to the
geneticist. However, now that the environment can be defined in molecular
terms, a broader perspective needs to be

Social Biology

taken. Along with the recognition that
certain populations are exposed to a variety of potentially mutagenic and carcinogenic agents comes the realization that
genetic susceptibility might play a major
role in the subsequent expression of disease and disability. Since the analogous
concept has proved very successful in the
area of pharmacogenetics, it is likely that
this component of genetic epidemiology
could come to assume a prominant position as society grapples with the pervasive
problem of deteriorating environments.
As in the area of infectious disease, an immediate goal would be to identify susceptible genotypes at the population level.

BURDEN OF GENETIC DISEASE

Having placed genetic epidemiology in
some perspective by classifying disease in
terms of etiological attributes, we could
ask whether genetic epidemiology has
made any contribution toward its first objective, namely, specifying the distribution of the burden of disease. Ideally, this
would be done not just in terms of point
prevalence but also in terms of agespecific rates with appropriate calculations of relative risk for identifiable subpopulations. Besides allowing a realistic
assessment of research priorities and the
development of sampling strategies, this
procedure could also initiate the establishment of public health policies keyed to
community needs. Unfortunately, assessment of disease pressure in these terms
has rarely been attempted. For children,
some attempt has been made to estimate
the overall burden of ‘‘genetic disease”’
(Trimble and Doughty, 1974; Trimble and
Smith, 1977) as well as mortality (Carter,
1956; Roberts et al., 1970) or hospital admissions (Day and Holmes, 1973). In the
majority of such surveys the focus has
been on Mendelian diseases and congenital malformations. More recently the con 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 2

tribution of disorders with a chromosomal
etiology has begun to be assessed at the
population level (Hook and Hamerton,
1977).

Such surveys indicate that ‘“‘genetic diseases,” broadly defined, make a considerable contribution to the burden of mortality and morbidity in childhood. Mendelian
and chromosomal diseases combined account for about 12 to 15 per cent of childhood mortality, with congenital malformations contributing an additional 25 to
30 per cent. If general morbidity, rather
than mortality, is assessed, the pattern is
similar, with 17 to 30 per cent of hospital
admissions being attributable to ‘“‘genetic
disease.”’ More important for the genetic
epidemiologist is the evidence that the distribution of burden may shift drastically
by etiological category during early childhood as shown by the risk ratios in Table
1. While these risk ratios are crude indications of the real burden, it seems clear that
the distribution of burden due to Mendelian disorders during childhood is different than the burden due to congenital
malformations. There are also differences
within the Mendelian disorders, with recessive disorders having a more significant
mortality component than the dominant
disorders, as was first posited by Macklin
(1932). Even with such crude measures, it
is apparent that a useful evaluation of
community burdens can be made. The effective administration of health services
and development of research strategies
could then follow.

For adults, the situation is less clear.
Compared to the burden for children, the
burden for adults of Mendelian disease is
not striking if mortality or hospital admissions are used as guides (Trimble and
Doughty, 1974; Day and Holmes, 1973).
The major portion of the burden due to
dominant Mendelian disorders is derived
from a very few clinically severe conditions occurring during the third to fifth

Genetic Epidemiology 93

TABLE 1

AGE-SPECIFIC BURDEN OF ““GENETIC DISEASE”

IN CHILDHOOD EXPRESSED AS INCREASED RISK

RELATIVE TO THE RISK FOR THAT AGE GROUP
IN THE GENERAL POPULATION ™.

AGE (YEARS)
BURDEN OF
GENETIC DISEASE
IN CHILDHOOD

Dominant disorders

Mortality.............. 4 it 4 7 7
Hospital admissions. .... 5 7 9 7 9
Days of hospital stay .... 9 13 12 13 33
Total «aan, isqeeseacs 18 31 24 27 49
Recessive disorders
Mortality.............- 4 19 33 39 22
Hospital admission ..... 7 8 10 10 7
Days of hospital stay.... 12 13 16 24 13
Total sas sae senws as 23 40 59 73 42
Congenital malformations
Mortality.............- 5 6 6 4 5
Hospital admission ..... 5 6 6 6 7
Days of hospital stay .... 7 9 8 9 11
Total ........0. 0000s 17 21 20 19 23

*The total burden is merely the sum of the individual specific
burdens and is presented solely as a heuristic variable. Data is
taken from Trimble and Smith, £977. and refers to the experience of approximately 840,000 children born in British Columbia from 1946 to 1970.

decades of life plus a slightly larger number of milder conditions with an earlier
age of onset (Carter, 1977; Newcombe,
1978). Nothwithstanding the devastating
and highly publicized effects of certain disorders such as Huntington’s disease, the
total contribution of Mendelian disorders
to the burden of ill health and mortality in
adult life appears very small compared to
that of the more common diseases. Since
admissions to specialist hospitals will tend
to overestimate the impact of diseases
with predominantly genetic etiology, the
magnitude of this burden in the general
population is hard to assess. If admissions
to semirural general hospitals are analyzed, it is clear that the impact of such diseases pales into insignificance beside the
impact of disorders due to inadequate environments (Barton and Schull, ms.). This
finding implies that we have an inadequate
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

94 Ward

and biased viewpoint concerning the
genetic contribution to the national burden of ill health.

Despite these limitations, enough preliminary evidence exists to make an initial
guess at the overall distribution of the burden of genetic disease. Such an attempt is
portrayed graphically in Figure 1 for the
six etiological categories defined above.
For each category, the relative burden is
expressed by the width of the column and

as the magnitude of the burden changes by

age, the column becomes thicker or thinner. Similarly, depending on whether
genetic or environmental factors play an
increasingly important role with increasing age, the column is displaced to the left
or the right respectively. This graph is only
a crude approximation of the actual distribution of the burden by age for the various
etiological categories, especially since this
“‘gestalt” 1s only relevant to a population

Social Biology

like that of the United States. Nevertheless, it has some use in providing a focus
for discussion. As genetic epidemiology
develops, this kind of overview will become progressively refined. Ultimately,
the impact of diseases within each etiological category will be accurately monitored at both the local and national level.

STRATEGIES FOR GENETIC
EPIDEMIOLOGY

The rough approximations of Figure 1
suggest some directions for research strategy in genetic epidemiology. Concentration on the classical genetic disorders (diseases of Mendelian and chromosomal
etiology) implies that the focus should be
on childhood diseases, as already tends to
occur in clinical genetics where pediatric
concerns predominate. Alternatively, diseases that impose a more dramatic burden

ETIOLOGICAL CATEGORY

Muftifoctoriol Multifectorial
low Infectious
Agents

Mendetion Chromosomal High

Age
Elder

Adult

Juvenile

Child

Infant
Birth

100%
Genetic

Heritability

Etiological Spectrum

Environmental

Heritability Hazards

 

100%

Environment

Fig. 1. Representation of the distribution of the age-specific burden of disease
within each of the six etiological categories. The width of the band at a given age depicts
the relative magnitude of the burden at that age as well as indicating the changing pressure of environmental and genetic factors contributing to the burden. No comparison
should be made across etiological categories since the horizontal axis is scaled separately

for each category.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 2

On society may be tackled only by relinquishing simple Mendelian models. Since
many models of the genetic involvement
in the etiology of common diseases are the
products of faith or imagination, it 1s
difficult to specify the most appropriate
mode of attack (Murphy, 1979a, 1979b).
Consideration of the six etiological categories and their distribution in Figure 1
suggests three general strategies.

1. Application of epidemiological principles to define the spatial and temporal distribution of diseases that have an underlying Mendelian or chromosomal etiology.
—This is a ready-made area for
collaboration between epidemiologist and
geneticist. As well as identifying the population at risk and thus indicating ways of
alleviating the burden, this strategy may
also lead to a better understanding of complex etiologies as in the case of the chromosomal disorders.

2. Integration of epidemiological principles with genetic statistics to develop research strategies that aim to quantify the
etiological interaction in the two multifactorial categories.—Once the relative
magnitude of genetic involvement has
been used to discriminate between these
two categories, the emphasis should then
be on specifying the exact nature of the
genetic etiology as well as on determining
the role played by environmental interactions. Only then can populations at risk be
defined in terms of genotypes interacting
with specified environments.

3. Evaluating the role played by genetic
susceptibility in influencing the distribution
of disease caused by infectious agents or
environmental hazards.—Although the
underlying etiology can be considered in
terms of specific genotype-environment
interactions, the initial research will have
to incorporate time-honored epidemiological methods in order to identify the susceptible genotypes. Confirmation can occur by demonstrating biochemical or

Genetic Epidemiology 95

immunological attributes that characterize genetic susceptibility. In the initial
stages, while there will be little need for
complex genetic statistics, there will be a
pressing requirement for genetic input in
devising sound study designs that will
identify genotypic susceptibility. If this
strategy were successfully applied to tropical and parasitic diseases, the global impact could be profound. In the developed
countries the potential benefits are also
appreciable, given our current exposure
to environmental hazards and the advances that have been recently made in
the development of sensitive biological assays.

PRECEPTS FOR THE ANALYSIS OF
COMMON DISEASES

From the above, it appears that the
most immediate problems in genetic epidemiology revolve around issues of study
design and methods of analysis for disorders with a multifactorial etiology—the
‘common diseases.” This is also the area
that has received most attention by geneticists (Inouye and Nishimura, 1977; Morton and Chung, 1978; Sing and Skolnick,
1979). Although some rather sophisticated statistical issues have been identified,
insufficient attention has been given to the
necessity of incorporating basic epidemiological principles into study designs.
Frequently, genetic parameters are estimated from data collected for a completely different purpose and a good deal
of epidemiological information (stemming from case control comparisons, distribution of concomitant variables, etc.) is
disregarded. In addition, basic genetic
concerns like ascertainment, penetrance,
and genotype-environment interactions
are also neglected. Such issues should not
be avoided. Instead, they should be
merged into acoherent study design that is
both epidemiologically and genetically

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

96 Ward

sound. While some complications will remain intractable, attention to the following precepts will resolve many problems
and will enhance the probability of
success.

1. Biological definition of the problem.—Before any extensive statistical
modeling is done, the biology of the disease should be given careful consideration. Failure to do so 1s at the root of
much that is untoward in genetic epidemiology today. Clinical heterogeneity, physiological processes, Concomitant variables, the existence of discontinuous or
varying environments—all must be evaluated and accounted for in the genetic
study design. Only then can hypotheses be
constructed and parameters estimated.

2. Development of quasi-experimental
studies.—Among others, Kempthorne
(1978) has recently stated with vigor that
causation cannot be estimated from
studies that are merely observational. I
agree. The difficulty of developing quasiexperimental study designs when dealing
with human disease is little excuse for ignoring the issue altogether. This is especially true for genetic epidemiology, since
developing an adequate study design to
substitute for direct experimentation is
one of the hallmarks of epidemiology.
Since genotype-environment interactions
are likely to play a major role in many diseases of multifactorial etiology, experimental study designs are likely to become
a critical factor in the resolution of
etiology.

The essential requirement of such
study designs is the ability to evaluate the
response of different genotypes in the face
of specific environmental perturbations.
While this may be impossible in the strict
experimental sense, such a design can be
approximated whenever related individuals are distributed over contrasting and
changing environments. In these situations, genotypic similarity can be approxi
 

Social Biology

mated via coefficients of genetic relationship, while response to environmental
perturbation can be estimated from physiological differences between contrasting
environments standardized by the distribution in one environment. This approach
could be readily adopted by the development of study designs that focus on transitional isolates, small populations with
measurable coefficients of genetic relationship that are experiencing a major
transition in the relevant environmental
variables (Ward et al., 1979; Ward, 1980).

3. Appropriate selection of genetic
units. —Usually it appears that little
thought is given to the selection of appropriate genetic units (clusters of related individuals) when research strategies are
formulated. Ideally, the selection of
genetic units for study would flow from a
consideration of both epidemiological and
genetic principles (e.g., Schull et al., 1970,
1977). Unhappily, expediency rather than
scientific considerations tends to dictate
the structure of the genetic units that are
analyzed in most studies. Besides acerbating the problems of ascertainment bias
and confounding of genotype and environmental distributions, this has helped
contribute to the acrimonious and
profitless debate between the protagonists
of different statistical methods which are
locked into a particular sampling unit.
While nuclear family units and large complex pedigrees are influenced by different
sources of bias, larger pedigrees with their
attendant statistical problems seem least
suited for epidemiological studies. In particular, large pedigrees suffer from the defect that their probability of ascertainment
from the general population is difficult or
impossible to quantify and the influence of
culturally transmitted environments is extremely difficult to control for. From an
epidemiological standpoint, a form of
fixed cluster design (Chakraborty and
Schull, 1979) is most likely to yield valid
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 2

information, since the set of individuals in
a cluster (e.g., index, spouse, sib, first
cousin) can be designed to control for confounding variables, and the clusters themselves can be sampled in an epidemiologically sound manner. Even here there are
problems, since in many instances a given
sample design will not necessarily discriminate between alternate genetic hypotheses (Beatty, 1980). Hence, it is clear
that the sampling design has to be constructed with reference to the accumulated epidemiological knowledge of the
disorder as well as to take account of the
set of hypotheses to be tested.

4. Maximize use of phenotypic information.—The frequent application of sophisticated quantitative models which
treat the phenotype as a qualitative or
one-dimensional variable leads to consid
erable loss of information and consequent _

ambiguity of interpretation. This is unnecessary since there is usually an abundance
of phenotypic information available,
much of it clinically relevant. Incorporation of such information into methods of
analysis will increase the power of detecting etiological heterogeneity as well as allow more critical tests of hypothesis. Age
of onset is but one example of an extremely useful variable which is almost
universally disregarded. Also ignored are
the changing interrelationships between
concomitant variables as a function of age,
local group of origin, and adherence to
cultural norms.

In this regard, it should be noted that
the actual distribution of a phenotype in
time and space, conditional on a given
genotype, will not only influence the type
of analysis to be used in uncovering
etiology (Murphy, 1979a, 19796) but will
also influence the probability of ascertainment. Hence, information about phenotypic distribution should be used to a
greater extent in defining the type of
genetic unit to be sampled than is cur
 

Genetic Epidemiology 97

rently the case. This principle applies to
simple procedures such as calculating recurrence risks as well as to more complex
analyses aimed at defining etiology. An
example of the way in which knowledge of
age of onset distributions can be coupled
with a fixed cluster design is given in Chakraborty et al. (1980) where the objective
is the analysis of familial cancer.

5. Hierarchy of hypothesis testing. —
Present studies in “‘genetic epidemiology”
tend to be motivated by the desire to use a
favorite model which allows testing of but
a single hypothesis. In the study of complex diseases like hypertension or diabetes, such a strategy is unlikely to be
profitable. There is much more promise in
a research strategy that involves a carefully constructed set of procedures so that
estimation at one level leads to hypothesis
testing at another. A hierarchical strategy
like this will only be achieved if geneticists
and epidemiologists work side by side to
develop both the study design and the appropriate statistical tests. In this regard,
the utilization of case control studies has
been much neglected by geneticists. With
the efflorescence of methods to analyze a
variety of case control study designs
(Bishop et al., 1975), it should not be
difficult to set up a genetically based case
control study to explicitly test a hypothesis
generated by a previous analysis involving
genetic statistics. An obvious genetically
based design is the use of monozygous
twin pairs appropriately selected for concordance and discordance in one trait
(case vs. control) and evaluated for the
distribution of a second trait. This kind of
design has been used to disentangle some
of the genetic and environmental
influences on the relationship between
smoking and health (Cederl6éf et al.,
1977). Such study designs could be extended to include families of monozygous
twins, or other types of fixed cluster designs, with great effect. However, it would
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

98 Ward

be difficult to conduct such case control
studies in large complex pedigrees which
is an additional factor weighing against
their usefulness in epidemiological
studies.

CONCLUSION

The above comments should not be
construed as an indispensable nostrum for
success. The sporadic merger of genetics
and epidemiology has a long history and is
unlikely to be inhibited in the future because of our present inability to perceive
clearly defined research strategies that will
illuminate the field. There can be no doubt
that there is a pressing need for development in this intersection of genetics and
epidemiology and further that some important steps have already been taken.
Unless societal concerns suddenly change,
level of integration of the two fields will increase rather than the reverse. However,

 

Social Biology

a variety of obstacles, both conceptual and

‘technical, must be identified and over
come before the potential of the field can
be realized. Many of the issues identified
above will have to be addressed and resolved before the main objectives of
genetic epidemiology can be attained.
Since there are many strategies for doing
this, it seems likely that resolution of the
issues and attainment of these goals will
eventually occur. What is less clear is what
contribution the present protagonists of
“genetic epidemiology” will make in this
regard or what will be the label ultimately
used to address the discipline that does resolve these issues.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was adapted from a presentation
at the AAAS Symposium “Genetics in Epidemiology,” Houston, January 4, 1979.

REFERENCES

Barton, S. A., and W. J. ScHULL. The burden of
genetic disease in eight Texas counties. Ms.
Beatty, T. H. 1980. Discriminating among single
locus models using pedigrees. Amer. J. Med.

Genet. 6:229-240.

Bisuop, Y.M.M.,S. E. FIENBERG, and P. W. HotLAND. 1975, Discrete multivariate analysis.
M.1.T. Press, Cambridge.

BrEWERTON, D. A. 1978. Inherited susceptibility
to rheumatic disease. J. Roy. Soc. Med.
71:331-338.

Caplan, A. 1979. Genetic counseling, medical
genetics and theoretical genetics: An historical overview. In A. M. Capron, M. Lappé, R.
F. Murray, T. M. Powledge, S. B. Twiss, and
D. Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts,
values and norms. Alan Liss, New York.

CarTER, C. O. 1956. Changing patterns in the
causes of death at the Hospital for Sick
Children. Great Ormond St. J. 11:65-68.

. 1977. The relative contribution of mutant
genes and chromosomal abnormalities to
genetic ill health in man. Jn D. Scott, B. A.
Bridges and F. A. Sobels, Progress in genetic
toxicology. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

CEDERLOF, R., L. FRIBERG, and T. LUNDMAN.
1977. The interaction of smoking, environ
 

ment and heredity and their implications for
disease etiology. Acta. Med. Scand. Supplement 612:2-128.

CHAKRABORTY, R., and W. J. ScHULL. 1979.
Fixed cluster designs in human genetic
studies: Interpretations and usefulness. Jn C.
F. Sing and M. H. Skolnick (eds.), The
genetic analysis of common disease: Applications to predictive factors in coronary heart
disease. Alan Liss, New York.

CHAKRABORTY, R., K. M. WErtss, and R. H.
Warp. 1980. Evaluation of relative risks from
the correlation between relatives: A theoretical approach. Med. Anthrop. 4:395—414.

Crowe, F. W., W. J. SCHULL, and J. V. NEEL.
1956. A clinical, pathological and genetic
study of multiple neurofibromatosis. Thomas,
Springfield.

DausseET, J., and A. SVEJIGAARD. 1977. HLA and
disease. Munksgaard, Copenhagen.

Day, N., and L. B. Hotmgs. 1973. The incidence
of genetic disease in a University Hospital
population. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
25:237-246.

Dunn, L. C. 1962. Cross-currents in the history of
human genetics. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
14:1-13.

 

 
CY
=
©
N
mei
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
CO
oe
4
=
—
CS
‘g
oS
ON
aon
O
S
Ce
©
>>
—
—
N
Samed
oO
>
os
c
=
re)
OQ
cv
oO
co
oS
©
—
c
S
©
A

 

Vol. 27, No. 2

Fox, J. P., and C. E. Hatt. 1979. Viruses in families. Publishing Sciences Group, Littleton,
Mass.

GoLpsTEIN, J. L., and M. S. Brown. 1977. The
low density lipoprotein pathway and its relation to atherosclerosis. Ann. Rev. Biochem.
46:897-930.

GREENBERG, L. J., P. W. BRADLEY, R-L Cuopyk,
and J-M LALOuEL. 1980. Immunogenetics of
response to a purified antigen from group A
streptococci. Immunogenet. 11:145-167.

Hook, E. B., and J. L. HAMERTON. 1977. Frequency of chromosome abnormalities detected in consecutive newborn studies—
differences between studies. Jn E. B. Hook
and I. H. Porter (eds.), Population cytogenetics. Academic Press, New York.

INouyE, E., and H. Nisuimura (eds.). 1977.
Gene-environment interaction in common
diseases: University Park Press, Baltimore.

Karr, R. W., G. E. Ropey, T. LEE, and B. D.
ScHwaRTz. 1980. Association of HLADRW4 with rheumatoid arthritis in black and
white patients. Arth. Rheum. 23:1241-1245.

KEMPTHORNE, O. 1978. Logical, epistemiological
and statistical aspects of nature-nurture data
interpretation. Biometrics. 34:1-23.

Mack IN, M. T. 1932. The relation of the mode of
inheritance to the severity of an inherited disease. Hum. Biol. 4:69-79.

Mattel, J. E., S. AyME, M. G. MatTrTeI!, and F.
GrrauD. 1980. Maternal age and origin of
non-disjunction in trisomy 21. J. Med. Genet.
17:368-372.

MckKusick, V. A. 1978. Mendelian inheritance in
man. 5th ed. The Johns Hopkins Press, Balltimore.

Morton, N. E. 1977. Some aspects of the genetic
epidemiology of common diseases. Jn E. Inouye and H. Nishimura (eds.), Geneenvironment interaction in common diseases.
University Park Press, Baltimore.

. 1979, Diseases determined by major
genes. Soc. Biol. 26:94-103.

Morton, N. E., and C. S. Cuuna (eds.). 1978.
Genetic epidemiology. Academic Press, New
York.

Murphy, E. A., 1978. Epidemiological strategies
and genetic factors. Int. J. Epidem. 7:7—14.

. 1979.a. Where are we going? InC. F. Sing

and M. H. Skolnick (eds.), The genetic

analysis of common disease: Applications to
predictive factors in coronary heart disease.

Alan Liss, New York.

. 1979 b. Quantitative genetics: A critique.
Soc. Biol. 26:126—141.

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1975. Genetic
Screening. National Academy of Sciences,
Washington, D.C.

NEEL, J. V. 1966. Between two worlds. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 18:3-20.

NEEL, J. V., and W. J. Scuuti. 1954. Human

 

 

 

 

Genetic Epidemiology 99

heredity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. °

NEEL, J. V., M. SHAw, and W. J. ScHuLt (eds.).
1965. Genetics and epidemiology of chronic
diseases. DHEW. Public Health Service Publ.
1163. Washington, D.C.

NEVANLINNA, H. R. 1980. Rare hereditary diseases and markers in Finland: An introduction. In A. W. Eriksson et al. (eds.), Population structure and genetic disorders.
Academic Press, London.

Newcomse, H. B. 1967. Record linking: The design of efficient systems for linking records
into individual and family histories. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 19:335-359.

. 1978. Problems of assessing the genetic
impact of mutagens on man. Canad. J. Genet.
Cytol. 20:459-470.

Norio, R., H. R. NEVANLINNA, and J. PERHEENTUPA. 1973. Hereditary diseases in Finland:
Rare flora in rare soil. Ann. Clin. Res.
5:109-141.

PENROSE, L. S. 1933. The relative effects of paternal and maternal age in mongolism. J.
Genet. 27:219-223.

REED, T. E., and J. H. CHANDLER. 1958,
Huntington’s chorea in Michigan. I. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 10:201-206.

REED, T. E., and J. V. NEEL. 1959. Huntington’s
chorea in Michigan. II. Selection and mutation. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 11:107-136.

Roserts, D. E., J. CHAvez, andS. D. M. Court.
1970. The genetic component in child mortality. Arch. Dis. Child. 45:33-38.

SaLaM, E. A., S. IsHaac, and A. A. F. MaHmouD. 1979. Histocompatibility-linked susceptibility for hepatosplenomegaly in human
Schistomiasis mansoni. J. Immun.
123:1829-1831.

ScHULL, W. J., E. Harspurac, J.C. Errurt, M.A.
Scuork, and R. RIcHARD. 1970. A family set
method for estimating heredity and stress. IT.
J. Chron. Dis. 23:83-92.

SCHULL, W. J., E. Harspurc, M. A. ScCHoRK, and
R. CHAKRABORTY. 1977. Heredity, stress and
blood pressure, a family set method. Epilogue. J. Chron. Dis. 30:701-704.

Sinc, C. E., and M. H. Sko.nicx (eds.). 1979.
The genetic analysis of common disease: Applications to predictive factors in coronary
heart disease. Alan Liss, New York.

STASTNY, P. 1978. Association of the B-cell alloantigen DRW4 with rheumatoid arthritis.
New Eng. J. Med. 298:869-871.

TRIMBLE, B. K., and J. H. DouGuty. 1974. The
amount of hereditary disease in human populations. Ann. Hum. Genet. 38:199-223.

TRIMBLE, B. K., and M. E. Smit. 1977. The incidence of genetic disease and the impact on
man of altered mutation rates. Canad. J.
Genet. Cytol. 19:375—385.

Warp, R. H. 1980. Genetic epidemiology in an

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

100 Ward Social Biology

anthropological context. Med. Anth.
4:293-306.

Warp, R. H., P. G. CuHin, and I. A. M. Prior.
1979. Genetic epidemiology of blood pressure
in a migrant population: Prospectus. In C. F.
Sing and M. H. Skolnick (eds.), The genetic
analysis of common disease: Applications to
predictive factors in coronary heart disease.
Alan Liss, New York.

 

WEINBERG, W. 1908. Uber den Nachweis der
Vererbung beim Menschen. Jahreshefte des
Vereins fiir vaterlandische Naturkunde in
Wurthemberg 64:368-382.

. 1912. Weitere Beitrage zur Theorie der

Vererbung. IV. Uber Methode und Fehler
quellen der Untersuchung auf Mendelschen

Zahlen beim Menschen. Arch. Rass. Ges.

Biol. 9:165-174.
