Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Quantitative genetics: A critique

Edmond A. Murphy

To cite this article: Edmond A. Murphy (1979) Quantitative genetics: A critique, Social Biology,
26:2, 126-141, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988371

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988371

 

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 12 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Quantitative Genetics: A Critique

 

Edmond A. Murphy

Diviston of Medical Genetics

Department of Medicine

The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Baltimore, Maryland

ABSTRACT: The quantitative aspects of human genetics have hitherto been confined to (1) Mendelian categorization of qualities, which is enumerative and best applied to single-locus conditions;
and (2) Galtonian analysis, which is an examination of the first and second moments of quantities
and best applied to multiple-locus conditions. The latter analysis throws no light on the details of
the genotype or how they shape the phenotype; and even as a descriptive device it is adequate only
where narrowly restrictive assumptions (equality, additivity, and independence of the component
contributions) are met. The utility of such general models as approximate describers, provided that
they are tempered by explicit empirical inquiry, is illustrated by familiar analogies. Several examples are discussed where neither Mendelian nor Galtonian analysis is appropriate. Many mechanisms do not even fulfill the assumption of monotonicity. Heritability in the conventional sense is
briefly discussed.

Marshal Von Grock was quite determined on the poet’s death; and sent orders for his execution that very evening. A reprieve was sent afterwards to save him; but as the man

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

carrying the reprieve died on the way, the prisoner was released, after all.
—G. K. CHESTERTON, The Three Horsemen of Apocalypse

It is a common failing in scholarly
humility that we make much of our
achievements, little of our ignorance.
Quantitative geneticists are no exception.
Because the Mendelian and the Galtonian
modes, two out of a great many types of
genetic mechanisms, are comparatively
easy to handle and have elegant properties, they have made a vulgar display of
them. And they have had so little to say
about the rest, what Isaac Newton called
“the great ocean of truth” which awaits
discovery, that few geneticists, and fewer
onlookers, ever imagine anything else.
Now, for my part, I view this perspective
as grossly distorted; and although I shall
try to keep my discussion nontechnical, I
think the time well spent in which I attempt to redress the balance. It is a car
126

dinal, but commonly overlooked, principle that we may not claim to have
exhausted the aspects of a subject merely
because our imagination fails. We are required to prove that no other aspect is possible, often a difficult undertaking. I propose by examples to demolish any such
claims of exhaustiveness made or implied
for genetic analysis. I shall attempt also to
open the mind with ideas rather than to
stifle it with putative facts.

QUALITY AND QUANTITY

I would like to take from the Greek philosophers two seminal ideas which are
widely ignored, and with dire consequences. Aristotle gave us his categories,
nine in all, a scheme of descriptive paraDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

digms. In genetics, we have crassly reduced them to two—quantity and quality.
We have, for instance, paid little attention
until recently to relationship. For a century there has been a polemic (see
Murphy, in press), which has too often
been destructive, between the adulation
of quality (the Mendelian idea that traits
should be classified) and that of quantity
(the Galtonian idea that they should be
measured). In a famous paper, Fisher
(1918) showed that, under certain highly
constraining assumptions, the two claims
can be reconciled. But his splendid
achievement has, among the unadventurous, sadly cramped the development of
quantitative genetics, and in the heady excitement during the last quarter century of
molecular genetics it has been all but
trampled under foot. We are slowly and
painfully learning that we must return to
quantitative genetics, as the study of regulation of gene expression, reiterated
DNA, and complex interrelation (for example in redundant pathways with feedback mechanism) demands; but we also
need more conceptual enterprise in our
explorations.

The second seminal idea is Plato’s image that what we call reality is like
shadows cast on the wall of acave. In modern terms, all our formulations are “projections,” each an algebraic composite of
many fundamental units, individually
identifiable with difficulty, if at all. I shall
build extensively on this theme—that
mere external description, however accurate, guarantees nothing about insight
into truth. It would be erroneous to suppose because one can describe something
that one understands it. This delusion 1s
akin to the superstition, commonly
described by the cultural anthropologists,
that to know a person’s name gives one
power over him. On the one hand, understanding is a metaphysical ideal to be
pursued humbly, rather than a simple ob
Quantitative Genetics 127

jective within ready grasp. On the other
hand, what we consider the capacity to
describe is a tenuous claim, apt to falter
with improved resolving power of
measurement.

Granted, then, that truth is elusive,
perhaps forever unattainable, there are
three broad courses open. They represent
the fundamental tension of Heraclitus: the
one and the many, of particularity to the
point of idiosyncrasy at the one extreme
and unity to the point of uniformity at the
other. First, intellectual nihilism: If reduction is impossible, it is impossible. Second, we retreat from the attack on reality
and content ourselves with certain sound
and unexceptionable statements that,
nonetheless, may not grapple with the issues we should be interested in. Thirdly,
we make do with approximations which
we may hope to improve steadily, on the
one hand attaining greater and greater accuracy in our descriptions and, on the
other, gaining more and more insight into
the essence of what we are studying. The
last course is the traditional method of
science and the only one to which I have
any ultimate commitment. My experience
has suggested that where quantitative
genetics is concerned geneticists fall
mainly into the first two groups: the majority, who are not prepared to relinquish
their belief in the infinite particularity of
phenomena, into the first; the minority
(who include most of the quantitative
geneticists), into the second.

As a simple analogy of the standpoints
which I am trying to delimit, let us consider the shape of the mainland mass of
the United States (Figure 1). We may
portray it in all its details, leaving out no
twists or turns in the coastline, regarding
conservation of each one as vital (Figure
1, Part A). Such portrayal would tax the
memory; and it seems to offer no insight as
to why the shape of the country is what it
is. Theories of continental drift, for inDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

128 Murphy

Social Biology

B

Area 2:975 million sqm

10° 51

 

Fig. 1.—Representing the form of the mainland United States:

A. Detailed map.

B. Some cardinal dimensions: area, and the number of degrees of longitude or latitude to the most extreme point north, south, east, and west of the confluence of the Mississippi and the Missouri,
C. A simplified outline subject to the constraint of symmetry about the horizontal axis.

D. A more elaborate simplified outline.

In C and D the components of the outlines are derived from segments of standard French curves. The dots

represent the junctions between adjacent segments.

stance, would forever be stubbing their
toes against the minor irregularities, however well they fitted in the gross. There
can be no “‘editing”’ of the shape; every detail is message, none noise. The second
representation comprises a few simple and
unambiguous dimensions—of extreme
distances, of area (Figure 1, Part B). To
rest content with these measurements is
akin to attempting to represent some complicated phenotype by its mean or its variance. Thirdly, we can deal in broad
sweeps of the brush: accept, perhaps, that
the main importance lies in large masses
and abandon a slavish representation of

the outline for a greatly simplified diagram. The scientist making the model may
erroneously suppose that symmetry about
the horizontal axis is a feature of the mass
(Figure 1, Part C). Further theory and
analysis might suggest that, say, Cape Cod
and Puget Sound are of particular relevance to some surmise and that they require disproportionately detailed representation on the map (Figure 1, Part D). I
would designate the first (A) as the raw
data; the second (B) as a set of model-free
(or almost model-free) describers; the
third and fourth (C and D) as tentative serial models.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

THE NEED FOR QUANTIFICATION

Why does the issue of quantification
arise at all? Even for the pure Mendelian
disease (if it exists) the patient wishes to
know prognosis as well as diagnosis—not
merely what condition he may have, but
how severe its course is likely to be. The
parents of the achondroplast want to
know not only what we call the disorder
but also how tall the child may grow, what
lifespan may be expected, how much (if at
all) intelligence may be impaired, and so
forth. But in what is called, rather pompously, constitutional short stature, the
meaning resides entirely in the measurement. Once we have excluded specific
diagnoses, we derive no more penetrating
insight from analyzing this condition than
the platitude that children are like their
parents. Here what matters is what the
phenotype is, not what it is called. A competent physician may be mistaken about
whether a man has achondroplasia but not
about whether he is over four feet tall. The
disorder defined by quantity (given accurate observation) is infallible, because
its meaning (unlike that of the diagnosis

C C

RP R R F

PLEIOTROPIC

COMPOSITE

Quantitative Genetics 129

‘“‘achondroplasia”’) embodies, but does
not transcend, the evidence. If we agree to
call any adult under five feet a dwarf, there
is no diagnostic ambiguity and no conceivable way of disproving this definition empirically.

THREE BASIC CONCEPTS

Some distinctions need to be established (Figure 2)(Murphy, 1972). The
notion of a Mendelian trait is the phenotype for a single gene or locus often with
diverse effects; for example, arterial
blockage, stunted growth, and susceptibility to pneumococcal infections are ascribable to a single abnormal gene, that for
sickle hemoglobin. This diversification
from a single cause is known as pleiotropy,
the whole anomalous phenotype being
dictated by one locus.

The notion of Galtonian inheritance is
quite the opposite. It involves one phenotypic feature only—say, height, or weight,
or intelligence, but not combinations of
them. But while the outcome is simple,
the causative mechanisms reside at a
multiple loci, each contributing its small

C UC C C C

RP R Ri)

HETEROGENEOUS

Fig. 2.—Three basic patterns. In each, the cause is represented by C and the result by R. On the left is
diversification of results from a single locus (pleiotropy); in the middle, a single results stems from multiple
causes (the multilocal trait); on the right are displayed the relationships between multiple causes (Joci) and
multiple results (traits) united by their chromosomal localization, but otherwise quite heterogeneous. These

patterns ignore totally the nongenetic components.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

130 Murphy

component. The Mendelian trait is a
tyranny; the Galtonian, a democracy. The
misdeeds of a tyranny are readily fathered
on the tyrant; but for the democracy, no
one person is to blame. It is easy to categorize the views of a tyrant, but those of the
assembly have to be measured. A tyrant
may have fifty simultaneous decisions to
make, but a democracy cannot decide
more than one issue per vote.

We have no general name for a third
rather vague group of conditions in which
multiple loci are involved and have multiple effects. Such states have unity of
neither cause nor consequence. They are
exemplified by the anomalies of the number of chromosomes, where the unifying
principle is topological. Such conditions
are neither Mendelian nor Galtonian, and
most of them, although theoretically
heritable, are not even inherited, because
of the sterility or severe mental retardation which they produce.

COMPOSITE EFFECTS

The image of an election will do our understanding no harm if used intelligently.
It is a naive over-simplification to suppose
than an election is a pure binomial or
multinomial process and that the distribution of the outcome is well known except
for one or at most a few parameters which
have to be estimated. Even though in a
properly conducted election the results
are found by adding votes, there are all
manner of factors at play in how the electorate votes. There is contagion, for instance: X’s vote may well be changed if he
knows how Y votes. The number who vote
is influenced by the weather. There is
diversity of views among voters and the
strength of conviction with which they are
held. There are defects, natural or cultivated, in the voting machines. In a nutshell, there are more ways of combining
effects than simple addition of outcomes

Social Biology

and multiplication of probabilities. The
explicit and strict assumptions of the binomial mode are always violated in some degree (Murphy, 1979).

Now the proposal in Fisher’s 1918 paper (which originally was not intended to
be either exhaustive or restrictive but has,
deplorably, been treated as if it were so)
was in effect that Galtonian genetics is a
more or less ideal democracy with simple
additive effects. This surmise does not
commit us to the view that all multilocal
systems, that is, systems ascribable to the
effects of many genes, are in this sense
Galtonian. As a prescription for all
genetic reality, additive democracy is
doomed from the start. But, of course, if
the only rule of combination we will allow
ourselves is additivity, why naturally all
our successes will be for additive systems;
and all nonadditive systems, proving intractable to such a restricted analysis, will
remain obscure. To those who speak only
English, it is fatally easy to suppose that
their inability to understand foreigners
means that foreigners are not saying anything intelligible. If the only provision we
make is for the one kind of model, 100 per
cent of the successes are going to result
from that model. On these narrow terms
we can scarcely wonder why we have not
made more progress.

Let us note one feature, obvious but
neglected, of Fisher’s model. If any large
part of the variation in the phenotype is
due to discrete segregation at a single locus, we cannot expect a Gaussian distribution to result. But the whole object of the
Mendelian is to find such lumps of causation. The very thing the Mendelian regards as a success is a failure to the Galtonian, and conversely. These two systems
are based on the same fundamental units,
operating according to the same laws. But
there is no prospect of peaceful coexistence between them. Their emphasis,
aims, and triumphs are not reconcilable.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

EPISTEMOLOGICAL
IMPLICATIONS
We have been lured into this intellectual regimentation by a pernicious type of
incorribibility. It is much easier to understand the shortcomings of the Galtonian
model by analogy with systems that have
been abandoned. Ptolemy proposed that
the path of a planet be described by a circle on which are superimposed certain circular perturbations called epicycles. This
structure can be made to agree with the
facts. Indeed, in the nineteenth century,
Fourier showed that any periodic form,
however complicated, can be resolved
into a mixture of such simple harmonic
forms. It follows that by invoking enough
epicycles, Ptolemy could account for any
regularly periodic planetary path whatsoever, no matter how bizarre. Hence, the
Ptolemaic theory could not be disproved.
Why, then, did we abandon it for Newtonian gravitation? It is only the naive who
suppose that the main arguments are elegance and simplicity. We have no right to
demand either of these properties in nature; and we know plenty of exceptions.
The main issues are really ontological:
How far do we believe in what we have
postulated? We accept readily enough the
complexities of a Fourier analysis of a musical note because we can grasp a physical
model of the organ pipe or the vibrating
string, because ultimately we can reify the
“overtone.’’ But we cannot comfortably
reify the Ptolemaic epicycle. I could go
through the life and death of the phlogiston theory of combustion in the same
terms, or many other discarded ideas. Ontologically, we judge a model by its plausibility. Epistemologically, its acceptability
depends on corrigibility (see Gasking,
1956), on the fact that there are degrees of
freedom for error—that it would be disprovable if false.

Now classical quantitative genetics is,
in the latter respect, decadent. It starts out

  

 

 

Quantitative Genetics

 

131

by proposing that the analysis be directed
to the magnitudes of the sources of variation, which seems eminently reasonable.
Under the democratic assumptions of
Fisher, we may appeal to a well-known
group of principles of statistics known as
the central limit theorems (see Feller,
1967). They, and the theory of sufficient
statistics (Kendal and Stuart, 1961), tell us
that the analysis of variation in such cases
can be reduced to the analysis of variance
and covariance, that is, the analysis deals
with second moments, quantities derived
from squaring measurements or multiplying them in pairs. It should be, but is not,
universally known among quantitative
geneticists that the central limit theorems
or their equivalent are being implicitly invoked not only for the formal analysis and
interpretation of the results, testing hypotheses, estimation of unknown quantities, and setting confidence limits, but also
as a warrant for ignoring all possible manipulations of the data other than computation and analysis of these second moments. I do not say that there may not be
other justifications for conventional
methods of analysis, merely that geneticists have paid no attention to them. So,
whether we realize it or not, by this course
we have immediately excluded from our
analysis a great many “nondemocratic”
processes that I shall discuss later.

But the mischief does not end there.
For analysis of variance is, in its nature, a
tautological process. It consists of setting
up a balance sheet in which all entries are
reified. Half a century ago, Eddington
(1927) pointed my way with the dictum
that the principal function of the balance
sheet is to balance and that the means by
which it is balanced have not necessarily

anything to do with reality. We have just
so much variance in a genetic system to account for. It has been decreed (from
Mount Olympus) that the origins of all
variation are either genetic or environ
     
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

132 Murphy

Social Biology

TABLE 1
RATE OF CALCIFICATION

Concentration of phosphate
ion (in arbitrary units)

Concentration of calcium ion
(in arbitrary units)

 

1 (1 + a)
1 1 (1 + a)
(1 + bd) (1 + b) (1 + a)(l + b)

mental. But when we add up the effects
from these sources estimated separately,
we find that they fall short of the total. The
discrepancy is accounted for by something
called interaction. But what is the
ontological standing of this interaction?
The honest answer is that it is a descriptive
device to adjust for the incongruity of the
model. Its standing is no more reputable
than that of the Ptolemaic epicycle. In
another system—yjust as in another
planet—the number and size of these adjustments may be quite different. Well, interpolation is apt to be a messy business as
any numerical analyst knows. But it is
when we reify interaction, like a hole in a
budget, when we try to endow this intellectual hiatus, this embarrassment in a
model, with entity, instead of making
every effort both logical and empirical to
track it down, then it is that we get into
trouble. There is a perfectly respectable
genetic phenomenon in which the effect of
one gene masks that of another—
“epistasis.”” And an honest scientist will
explore it by studying how the genes interrelate physically and chemically. But
the classical quantitative geneticist has acquired the deplorable habit of ascribing a
hole in a balance sheet to something called
“epistasis, etc.,”’ the chief property of
which is that it fills a hole in a balance
sheet. Naturally, the property is not independently testable. What results is not
science, but devious accountancy. This
criticism does not, of course, extend to
cases where the various effects are all individually studied.

 

= (1 + a)(1 + bd)
NON-GALTONIAN SYSTEMS

How can we rescue ourselves from this
confusion? It seems evident that the
mathematical properties of the system
must accord with the physical properties.
Our trouble is largely traceable to the
neglect of that principle. Mathematics
without science is an art form. Science
without mathematics is an epistemological
wilderness.

For instance, consider calcification of
bone. There are several disorders known
in which this process is disturbed, and
doubtless the mechanisms are complicated. Let me single out, not as a comprehensive schema but as an isolated component and simply for the purposes of
illustration, two factors: the serum concentrations of calcium and of phosphate
ions. The law of mass action tells us that
the rate at which calcium phosphate forms
depends on the product of the two. Now
let us denote the normal concentrations of
each and the rate of calcification as unity.
Consider the consequences of an increment a in the calcium and of b in the phosphate. Then we may set up a simple table
of results (Table 1). The standard statistical criterion of interaction is whether the
sums of the diagonals are equal. Now here
clearly

(L+a)+(1+b)#
l+(l+a)(1+b)=
(1+a)+(1+b) + ab.

There is an extra term, ab, on the righthand side which is formally interpreted as
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

a “positive interaction.” On the other
hand, if we compare the products of the diagonal terms or (what is equivalent) use
logarithms, the diagonals are equivalent
and there is no interaction.

So far, so good, The statistical analysis
has told us that the effects of the two concentrations are not additive but may be
made additive by logarithmic transformation. Once we have realized these facts,
the interaction becomes ontologically
contentless, and there is no point in measuring it or trying to explain it. But those
who have neither the empirical scientist’s
aversion to finding evidence about an abstraction nor the theorist’s insight into the
arbitrariness of assuming additivity endow
this “interaction,” which is merely the result of an incorrect model, with a false
reality. They set it scientifically on the
same footing as environmental or genetic
mechanisms; treat it as fundamental and
sacrosanct; and invoke it as if it had “‘explained”’ the discrepancies. And its
magnitude, being calculated from the discrepancy and designed to dispose of it,
cannot be tested by comparing it with the
discrepancy.

It would be just as bad a mistake to suppose from this illustration that what the
competent analyst is doing is playing
around with transformations of the data
until results become additive. This maneuver may be a valuable computational
or descriptive device which makes certain
analyses much easier. But any geneticist
who is not intellectually dead will wonder
why some particular transformation
works. Where calcification is concerned,
the warrant for the method is the law of
mass action, a cornerstone from physical
chemistry. If we were concerned with the
genetics of myopia we would, I hope, remember that in optical systems focal
lengths are not additive but their reciprocals (lens strengths in diopters) are. I also
hope that we would realize this fact from

Quantitative Genetics 133

the start and not let the result emerge
merely as a meaningless party trick resulting from playing around on the computer.
Many years ago Mustard and I found empirically that whole blood clotting time has
a lognormal distribution (Murphy and
Mustard, 1962). The point was incidentally important because we wanted to use
normal (Gaussian) theory on some data.
This transformation was a purely analytical device with a narrow area of application. But a good scientist would wonder
why this transformation should work.
Two years later Macfarlane (1964) produced his cascade theory of coagulation
which, it can be shown (Murphy,1976),
would lead to a lognormal distribution
such as we had found.

In Table 2, I have laid out a list—which
I am sure is far from exhaustive—of ways
in which the phenotype may be pathogenetically related to the genotype.

Monotonic systems are those in whch
the structure of the phenotype shows
either a nonincreasing or a nondecreasing
relationship to the genotype; for instance,
in a Mendelian system, there is, in
general, a “‘dosage”’ effect between the
phenotype and the number of mutant
genes. The level of a metabolite, say, increases with the number of affected genes
or, conversely, decreases with the number
of normal genes. Where the heterozygote
shows higher levels than either homozygote (‘‘over-dominance’’), the relationship is nonmonotonic. All additive systems are monotonic, but the converse is
not true. In calcification, the system is not
additive, but other things being equal an
increase, however small, in calcium ions
always results in an increase in
calcification and conversely; and the same
is true for the concentration of phosphate
ion.

But there are also systems governed by
a rate-limiting step, or, as in length of life,
by whichever of several systems is first to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

134 Murphy

 

Social Biology

TABLE 2
SOME PossiBLE TYPES OF MULTILOCAL TRAITS

Type

I. Monotonic
A. Additive
1. Pure Galtonian
2. Mixed models (Mendelian
and Galtonian)
B. Additive on transformed scale

Height

Isonicotinic acid
hydrazide inactivation

Example Reference

Galton, 1889
Evans et al., 1960

1. Logarithmic Blood coagulation Macfarlane, 1964
2. Harmonic Optical systems
Collateral circulation
3. Other special transforms Recombination of genes Bailey, 1961
C. Nonadditive systems
1. Parastasis (with fail-safe Synthetic lethals Dobzhansky and
redundancies) Powell, 1975
2. Bingo models (competing Length of life Murphy, 19785
causes of failure)
D. Catastrophes
1. Threshold phenomena Gout Falconer, 1965
Kidney Stones
Cerebral hemorrhage Edwards, 1960
2. Cumulative results Coronary disease Murphy, 1967
Retinoblastoma Knudson, 1973
Polyposis coli Ashley, 1969;
Murphy, 19784
3. Unstable equilibria Schizophrenia Zeeman, 1965

II. Nonmonotonic
A. Feedback systems
1. Regulatory defects

2. Compensatory
B. Faulty metric
C. Nonmonotonic relationship
to intermediate phenotype
D. Disruptive interloper
E. Emergence or quasi-emergence

Familial hypercholesterolemia

Intelligence quotient

Compensatory scoliosis

Complete transposition of the viscera
Tracheal fistula and nutrition

Height in Marfan syndrome

Number of red cells bearing fetal

Brown and
Goldstein, 1977

Murphy, 1975

Dover et al., 1977

hemoglobin

Laterality in Kartagener syndrome

fail. They are manifestly not additive and,
to my knowledge, cannot be made so by
transformation. Nevertheless, the phenotype is quantitatively related to the values
of the individual phenotypes. Survival, for
instance, is exactly related to the failure
time of the most vulnerable system.
Finally, one may note that certain systems, which I shall call catastropic, are allor-none responses reflecting solely
whether some critical level has been ex
MckKusick, 1978
(Entry #24440)

ceeded. Some such systems are static, the
so-called threshold models; others are
time-dependent, such as multiple-hit
models. Some are, perhaps, unstable
equilibria precariously maintained and
randomly disturbed in an unpredictable
way by chance stimuli (e.g., catatonic excitement or stupor in schizophrenia).
Nonmonotonic systems. But there are
more violent disruptions possible than the
foregoing. Much of health depends on
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

control mechanisms. A notable and widespread example is homeostasis, the autoregulatory feedback mechanism. Many
systems are difficult to elucidate because
we cannot tell whether what we are looking at is the thrust of the primary disorder
or the counterthrust of a compensating
mechanism. I do not understand in any detail the Goldstein-Brown mechanism
(1977) of familial hypercholesterolemia. I
do not suppose anybody does. But it
seems clear now that the disorder which
they studied is not due to a primary overproduction of cholesterol but to a breakdown in a negative feedback mechanism.
Doubtless there are other mechanisms in
other families.

A rather fundamental point arises in
the choice of descriptive measure. We demand certain properties of a measure including monotonicity; but this property
must be proved. I have pointed out elsewhere (Murphy, 1975) that an examination candidate may not give the “right”
answers because the candidate is either
much less or much more intelligent than
the examiner. Such a test is not monotonically related to the intelligence of the candidate.

Again, anybody who has managed hypertensive patients is familiar with the vigorous body responses which oppose attempts to lower blood pressure even from
dangerously high levels; and these forces
operate even when blood flow to vital organs is conserved, so it can hardly be
viewed as an adaptive mechanism. I find it
difficult to escape the conclusion that the
primary defect in hypertension is likely to
be a disturbance of homeostasis, rather
than overactive vasopressor mechanisms
as the unhappy name “hypertension” implies. In spite of the patrician comments of
the textbooks of medicine, there can be
little doubt that low blood pressure must
also be harmful (Murphy, 1973); and
again I surmise that the defect lies com
Quantitative Genetics 135

monly in an incongruous setting of
homeostasis.

But then I wonder to myself whether
these two disorders, high and low blood
pressure, superficially so different, are in
fact two manifestations of the same defect. Perhaps the notion of a hypertensive
gene is a non-thing; perhaps what we
should look for is genes bearing on vasomotor instability. Perhaps we have mistaken what the selection pressures are doing. Perhaps my facile surmise (Murphy,
1973), that what we call the range of normal blood pressure results from balancing
selection against both extremes, is mistaken. Perhaps the genetically fittest types
are not the patients with high, medium, or
low blood pressure, but those with stable
blood pressure. It has been supposed
rather naively that high blood pressure
bursts blood pressure. But it has been
known for many years that blood vessels
obtained at necropsy can withstand much
greater pressures than are ever seen in hypertension (Zehnder, 1955). It is quite
possible that it is the fluctuation in blood
pressure which does the damage, as certainly seems to be true of dissecting
aneurysm. This is by no means unfounded
conjecture. The traditional analysis of the
genetics of hypertension which treats the
means of blood pressures, not their variances, as the point of the point furnishes,
at best, indifferent evidence of a genetic
factor (Miall and Oldham, 1963; Fox et
al., 1969; Chazan and Winkelstein, 1974).
But it provides no opportunity for this issue of instability to be explored at all. Indeed it seems clear that in such a system
we would predict little, if any, correlation
between parent and child in the means of
blood pressure whereas there might be an
excellent correlation in the variances.

All this may sound fanciful, but I would
point out that we have at least casual evidence that, where blood sugar is concerned, stability is a major prognostic fac
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

136 Murphy .

tor. The bane of the endocrinologist’s life
is the “‘brittle”’ diabetic, the patient who is
sensitive to small doses of insulin, but apt
to go into diabetic coma if these small
doses are withheld. Perhaps we have here
a glimpse, in the light of broad genetic
principles, of why it is that florid diabetes
is a disorder of the young, while diabetes
in the elderly is relatively benign.

I need hardly point out the even more
obvious cases of manic-depressive psychosis, Cheyne-Stokes respiration, and thalamic rage. These are all disorders not
mainly of means but of variances. A statistician, it will be recalled, is a man who
drowns in a river with an average depth of
one inch. I think we might with advantage
develop the art of analysis of variance of
variance and of higher moments and other
characteristics of distributions as well.

Let me try to construct a very simple
example. Suppose we ask patients to
stretch out their arms, and then we
measure the height of their fingertips
above the floor. Patients will vary in the
precise angle at which they hold their
arms. So if we are to make anything of this
measurement, for example, to explore
how far it may be genetically determined,

‘we will wish to deal with the mean of many

independent determinations. The true
mean will vary from patient to patient,
and we can do analysis of variance to our
heart’s content to see whether relatives

_are more alike than nonrelatives.

But suppose that the study is being
done by a neurologist who wishes to study
the inheritance of tremor. Obviously it
would be futile to analyze the mean height
above the floor which depends on height,
posture, the mobility of the shoulder
joints, muscle strength, psychological attitudes, and much much more, but not the
short-term oscillation about the mean
which is the essence of tremor. A useful

analysis in this case must concern itself _

with something other than the mean.

Social Biology

Now some may feel that I am cheating
in this example, that naturally if we analyze irrelevant data we gain no enlightenment. The neurologist knew from the start
that he was interested, not in the position
of the arms, but in the amplitude of their
movement; and he would have communicated this fact to the geneticist. Exactly so.
The neurologist would have explained
what this branch of science was concerned
with; he would not have laid a set of readings on the geneticist’s desk and asked
whether they show heritability. We might
surmise that what is segregating in families
is a large-amplitude abnormal movement
(tremor) or a physiological unsteadiness.
The analysis might then be not of means
but of variances. Rather than analysis of
variance, the analyst might wish to do
something like Bartlett’s test for heterogeneity of variances. Covariances, heritability, and the other traditional measurements of quantitative genetics might tell
him a great deal about the inheritance of
shoulder height but nothing about tremor.

J] would draw two conclusions from this
example. First, the geneticist must be concerned with what is going on before he can
do useful analysis. Furthermore, the analysis cannot be stereotyped. I have a profound mistrust of the idea that a small
number of procedures laid out in slim elementary texts equip the geneticist to analyze every set of quantitative data he may
encounter. Indeed I suspect they are
seldom of any real value at all. In the study
of the disorder of coordination known as
dysdiadochokinesis, the analysis would involve correlation coefficients of correlation coefficients, a subject certainly not
covered in the primers.

My second conclusion is more subtle
and more far-reaching. We can easily perceive the absurdity of analyzing the mean
position of the fingers to study the inheritance of tremor. But this ready perception
obscures two facts. For one thing, the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

neurologist has already decided what the
point of the point is. The tremor has some
regularity of pattern, and it is the pattern
of movement which he proposes to study,
not the mean. But there may be no pattern
at all. The typical movements in choreic
disorders are recognized by the fact that
they are patternless. A quantitative
geneticist doing analysis of variance on
pattern-free data would be a sight to see!
But we do well to remember that perhaps
the neurologist has not, after all, got the
point of the point. The history of medicine
is littered with such false perceptions:
dropsy, the fever, fatty heart, and much
more. I hold dearly to the view that the
genetic analyst is there to throw light on
science not merely to carry out docile
computations inside a conceptual framework dictated from without. We merely
have to look at the history of the
classification of muscular dystrophies to
see the futility of that policy and how misleading elaborations of the neurologist
could be put right by the geneticist.

Again, consider the case where some
intermediate metric 1s monotonically related to the genotype, but the overt
phenotype—what the patient complains
of—is not. An obvious illustration is the
patient with one short leg. To maintain
balance, a compensating spinal curvature
is necessary. This scoliosis will occur in the
appropriate direction according to
whether the right leg is shortened or the
left. But if both are shortened, it will not
occur at all. Viewing the leg lengths as the
phenotype, a person with two short legs is
twice as extensively affected as a person
with one. But where the spine is concerned we have the equation which (except to the student of finite algebra) will
seem very strange:

1+1=0.

Again, we expect persons with two congenital defects to have more serious inca
 

Quantitative Genetics 137

pacitation than those with one. But those
with total reversal, the so-called complete
transposition of the viscera, have less disability than those with only the heart on
the wrong side.

Much emphasis has been put in textbooks of physiology on how much can be
learned about the normal from the study
of the abnormal. But there are what we
may call the disruptive interlopers. Nutrition has nothing ordinarily to do with the
esophagus. But a tracheo-esophageal
fistula may cause serious feeding problems
and hence, indirectly, malnutrition.

Finally, let me just mention the problem of emergence. There has been much
debate in the philosophical literature in
this century about the following question.
Is it always possible in principle to infer
from an exquisite knowledge of the parts
what the nature of the whole may be? The
reductionist would claim that it is, but
there are dissident opinions. The conflict
will presumably be gradually resolved as
failures or successes eventuate. But we
may at least assert that an “‘ensemble
effect’’ is often not readily understood.
When compared with the properties of the
individual genes, the outcome of phenotypic expression may be counterintuitive
and often baffling. [ quote three problems
of increasing difficulty, all involving apparently Mendelizing traits.

1. Why are subjects with Marfan’s syndrome characteristically so tall? We believe this disorder to be a defect in connective tissue. Excessive growth is hard to
explain as a simple consequence of a defective tissue, especially since height is a
matter of bone length and we have no reason to believe that the long bones are
qualitatively affected. Moreover, the excessive height is not proportionate but due
mainly to excessive lengths of the legs.

2. How can the level of the proportion
of red blood cells bearing fetal hemoglobin, which Boyer and associates find

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

138 Murphy

breeds true in families (Dover et al.,
1977), be controlled by a single gene?

3. How is laterality coded for? The evidence of physics seems to suggest that parity of laterality is not conserved except at
the subatomic level. With special care, it
would require at least three items of information to code for laterality. Yet McKusick (1978) identifies, on plausible evidence, the disorder known as
Kartagener’s syndrome in which the heart
is right-sided, as a convincing Mendelizing
condition, that is, that it is due to a change
in one nucleotide. Furthermore, this disorder, we are to believe, is a recessive; the
heterozygotes do not, for instance, have
the heart placed symmetrically in the center of the chest.

I do not say these problems are insoluble or that it would be impossible to construct models for them. But they are in
fact so far not solved. What is more to the
point, one would have surmised (without
the evidence of pedigrees) in all three
cases—and especially the last—that they
cannot be Mendelian. And apparently,
the conclusions would be false.

We are thus led to propose a principle
which is commonplace enough, but which
is vital to the future of quantitative
genetics. The analysis must be fitted to the
biology, not the biology to the analysis.
We analyze, at our peril, data, the inner
workings of which we do not even attempt
to understand.

HERITABILITY

However, I shall end on an orthodox
note, and perhaps a somewhat less disillusioning one. In that restricted subset from
Table 2 where we may invoke Galtonian
theory, where effects are additive and
where no moments higher than the second
are germane, our traditional components
of variance give us some measure of the
relative importances of the factors of interest.

Social Biology

Let us suppose (Figure 3) that the
standard deviation of the phenotype in the
population at large and represented by the
line AB in the “backdrop” plane, has
magnitude ¢. The square of this quantity is
the total or phenotypic variance. We shall
express the quantities which follow as
multiples of this unit. Now suppose that
we can show that of this quantity, /, similarity between parent and child can account for a fraction termed the additive
genetic variance and denoted by h?. Then
we may construct a right-angled triangle,
ABC, shown on the backdrop. The square
of the sine of the angle ¢ is termed “‘heritability in the narrow sense.” It is the proportion of the total variance accounted for
by additive transmission. But the square
of the remaining horizontal component
BC can be made the hypoteneuse of a
further triangle CBD, right-angled at D
and further decomposed on the horizontal
plane into an environmental component,
e’, and a nonadditive genetic component,
he . The latter comprises the less obtrusive
heritable sources, those which may be
temporarily concealed (such as the effects
of dominance and epistasis, that is, obscuration by genes at the same and at
different loci, respectively.) The total
genetic variance in such a system is represented by h’ , the square of AD; and the
ratio it bears to the total variance is “‘heritability in the broad sense,”’ sin? which
lies in the inclined right-angled triangle
ABD. Note that, in general, the use of
right-angled triangles supposes there is no
interaction. If there were interaction, we
would have to appeal, not to the theorem
of Pythagoras, but to that of Apolonius.
However, heritability in the narrow sense
is always Pythagorean.

Two further points are noteworthy.
The deeply-ingrained nature of Galtonian
genetics and the mystique of second moments is pointed up by the traditional use
of the quadratic symbol /” to denote heri
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

Quantitative Genetics 139

 

Fig. 3.—A simple geometrical representation of heritability. The angles CDB, DCA, and BDA are all
right angles, but in differing planes. The total genetic component, #,, is decomposable into a nonadditive
component, h2, in the horizontal plane and an additive component, h2, in the backdrop. Heritability in the
narrow sense is sin’, i.e., (AC/ABY’*, and in the broad sense is sin”, i.e., (AD/AB)°. In this special case it is
assumed that there are no interactions (which would call for non-right-angled triangles).

tability. Second, there is a constant peril
that as a result of repeated fragmentation
into ever more subtle components of variance, such an analysis may become so ornate that it would be difficult, or even impossible, to demolish it ifit were false. The
quantitative geneticist grapples with this
problem of incorrigibility by attempting to
get independent estimates of the same
component by different lines of evidence.
The issue is brought most sharply into focus in the study of data from twins (Nance
and Corey, 1976; Christian and Kang,

1977). But even there, it is a constant
struggle to get enough degrees of freedom
to test for error; and the tests, based on
Gaussian theory, are heavily dependent
on the central limit theorems and the notion of the Fisherian democratic assembly.

Although there are cases where such
analyses appear to have some ontological
value, I think the main dividend is as a
means for assessing in broad terms the
direction of inquiry. A large heritability,
in general, suggests that the trait is heavily
genetic and that preventive medicine lies

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

140 Murphy

in the area of genetic counseling and
eugenics. But this equivalence must not be
used slavishly. Wealth, accent, and
whether or not a person goes to medical
school all exhibit high heritability (Lilienfeld, 1959), but I do not imagine that any
scientist doubts that these effects are
mainly cultural. Low heritability suggests
that genetic factors are unimportant. But,
as we have seen in the discussion on brittleness, variance may be highly heritable
and yet not show up in the means and
hence in the conventional measure of heritability; and this counterexample is by no
means isolated.

One final point. Heritability, by its nature, is a parochial index. On reference to
Figure 3 it will be clear that the heritability
of a trait can be made small either by
flooding the system with environmental
variance or by making our observations on
highly inbred populations, and conversely. Thus, to find a trait has a herita
Social Biology

bility of 50 per cent in Annapolis tells us
little about what its heritability is likely to
be in Verkhoyansk. The transfer of
scientific inference from the one center to
the other is of doubtful validity. Nevertheless, those who are interested in improving the health of their communities may be
helped somewhat in formulating their policies by what their own studies of heritability have to tell them.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research in this paper was supported by
Grant No. 24736, Theoretical Aspects of Clinical Genetics of the National Institutes of

Health. ;
The original version of this paper was pre
sented at the symposium “Genetics in Epidemiology,”’ sponsored by the AAAS Sections
on Biological and Medical Sciences, the Society for the Study of Social Biology, and the
American Public Health Association at the
Annual Meeting of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, Houston,
Texas, January 4, 1979.

REFERENCES

ASHLEY, D. J. B. 1969. Colonic cancer arising in
polyposis coli. J. Med. Genet. 6:376.

BalLey, N. T. J. 1961. Introduction to the mathematical theory of genetic linkage. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.

Brown, A. S., and J. L. GoipsTE1n. 1977. Familial hypercholesterolemia: Unraveling a
genetic receptor disease. Trans. Assoc. Amer.
Phys. 90:91-108.

CHAZAN, J. A., and W. WINKELSTEIN. 1974.
Household aggregation of hypertension: Report of a preliminary study. J. Chron. Dis.
17:9.

CurisTIAN, J. C., and K. W. Kanoa. 1977. Maternal influence on plasma cholesterol variation. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 20:462—-467.

DoszHANsky, T., and J. R. Powe. 1975. The
willistoni group of Drosphila. Chap. 21. Jn R.
C. King (ed.), Invertebrates of genetic interest. Handbook of genetics, Vol. 3. Plenum,
New York.

Dover, G. S., H. Boyer, W. H. Zinkuan, H. H.
KAZAZIAN, JR., D. Pinney, and A. SIGLER.
1977. Changing erythrocyte populations—
Juvenile chronic myelocytic leukemia: Evi
dence for disordered regulation. Blood
49:355-365.

EppincTon, A. S. 1927. The nature of the physical world. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge.

Epwaprps, J. 1960. The simulation of Mendelism.
Acta Get. 10:63.

Evans, D. A. P., K. A. MANLEY, and V. A. McK
usIck. 1960. Genetic control of isoniazid metabolism in man. Brit. Med. J. 2:485—491.

Fatconer, D.S. 1965. The inheritance of liability
to certain diseases estimated from the incidence among relatives. Ann. Hum. Genet.
29:51.

FELier, W. 1967. An introduction to probability
theory and its application. Vol. I. 3rd ed. Wiley, New York.

FisHER, R. A. 1918. The correlation between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inheritance. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin. 52:399,

Fox, R. R., G. ScHLacer, and C. W. Lairep. 1969.
Blood pressure in thirteen strains of rabbits. J.
Hered. 60:312.

GALTON, F. 1889. Natural inheritance. MacMillan, London.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

GaskInc, D. 1956. Mathematics and the world.
In J. R. Newman (ed.), The world of mathematics. Simon and Schuster, New York.

KENDAL, M. G., and A. Stuart. 1961. The advanced theory of statistics. Vol. I]. Haffner,
New York.

Knupson, A. G. 1973. Mutation and human cancer. Adv. Cancer Res. 17:317-352.

LILIENFELD, A. M. 1959. A methodological problem in testing a recessive genetic hypothesis in
human disease. Amer. J. Publ. Hith. 49:199.

MacFaRLANgE, R. G. 1964. An enzyme cascade in
the blood clotting mechanisms and its function
as a biochemical amplifier. Nature 202:498.

McKusick, V. A. 1978. Mendelian inheritance in
man. 5th ed. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,
Baltimore.

MIALL, W. E., and P. D. OLpHaM. 1963. The hereditary factor in arterial blood pressure. Brit.
Med. J. 75:80.

Murpur, E. A. 1967. Some difficulties in the investigation of genetic factors in coronary disease. Canad. Med. Assoc. J. 97:1181-1192.

. 1972. Application of genetics to epide
miology. In G. T. Stewart (ed.), Trends in epi
demiology. Charles C Thomas, Springfield,

Til.

 

 

. 1973. Genetics in hypertension: A per
spective. Circ. Res 21(Suppl. 1): 129-137.

 

Quantitative Genetics 14]

. 1975. The normal, eugenics, and racial
survival. Johns Hopkins Med. _ J.
136(2):98—106.

1976. The logic of medicine. The Johns

Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.

. 1978a. Epidemiological strategies and

genetic factors. Internat. J. Epidemiol.

7:7-14.

. 19786. Genetics of longevity in man. In

E. L. Schneider (ed.), The genetics of aging.

Plenum, New York.

. 1979. Probability in medicine. The Johns

Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.

. Classification and its alternatives. Zn H.
T. Engelhardt et al. (eds.), Clinical judgement. D. Reidel Pub!., Dordrecht, Holland
(in press).

Murpuy, E. A., andJ, F. Mustarp. 1962. Coagulation tests and platelet economy in atherosclerotic and control subjects. Circulation 25:
114-125.

Nance, W. E., and L. A. Corey. 1976. Genetic
models for the analysis of data from the families of identical twins. Genetics 83:811-826.

ZEEMAN, E. C. 1965. Catastrophic theory. Scient.
Amer. 234 (April).

ZEHNDER, M. A. 1955. Zerreissfestigkeit und
Elastizitat der Aorta. Schweiz. Med. Wschr.
85:203-208.

 

 

 

 

 

 
