Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Empirical risks in genetic counseling

Newton Freire-Maia

To cite this article: Newton Freire#Maia (1970) Empirical risks in genetic counseling, Social
Biology, 17:3, 207-212, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987870

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987870

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 6

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53
Empirical Risks in Genetic Counseling

Newton Freire-Maia

Laboratério de Genética Humana
Universidade Federal do Parané
Curitiba, Parané, Brazil

The risk of any pregnancy resulting in an
affected child depends on a number of environmental and genetic variables. It decx, pends, for instance, on the type of marriage
= (whether or not consanguineous); the family
= history of malformations or anomalies; the
& posture and presentation of the fetus; the
"5 season and conditions of the labor; the oc= currence or nonoccurrence of polyhydram‘6 nios or oligohydramnios; the occurrence of
= certain diseases, the use of certain drugs, and
exposure to ionizing radiation in the first
trimester of pregnancy; parental age; and

parity.

MAGNITUDES AND CATEGORIES OF RISKS

54 08 December 2015

t

1

The table of risks encompasses a range
that goes from close to zero—for example, a
© large number of the congenital skeletal limb
deficiencies—to close to 1, as when both
parents are homozygous for an autosomal
recessive gene. However, these extreme situations represent a minority in the total number of consultations at a genetic counseling
service. Many of the risks are found at the
levels of } (autosomal dominant genes) and
4 (autosomal recessive genes); and risks at
other levels (2%, 4%, 10%, 15%, etc.) may
also be very important in counseling services.

There are two different categories of

Downloaded by [Univers

 

risks: (a) those based on knowledge of the
etiology, and (6) empirical ones. Those in
the first category are generally referred to as
“genetic risks.”’ Malformations due to exogenous factors such as toxoplasmosis, rubella,
diabetes, and thalidomide may involve
risks that are partly based on etiological
considerations. These risks may be called
“semi-empirical,”

Empirical risks are figures entirely based
on previous experience of clinically similar
situations in samples of families, but without knowledge of the etiological mechanisms
involved. Therefore, they simply represent
a pragmatic statement of the probability of
an event, based on a purely statistical interpretation of a series of data. They do not
predict the likelihood of the occurrence of a
particular pathological condition as derived
from a general theory (as the “genetic” do)
but on the basis of pure ‘‘empiricism.”

ESTIMATES OF RISKS

The problem of assessing risks based on
etiology (“genetic risks”) requires the compiling of pedigrees and their analysis according to genetic theory. The method of collecting these family data (ascertainment or
selection) will determine the necessity for
correction as well as the type of correction
needed. When selection is “‘complete,’’ no

207
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

208 Freire-Maia

correction is needed; when it is “‘incomplete,” the type of correction will depend on
its being truncate, single, or multiple, according to the terminology adopted by Morton (1959). The treatment of the data will be
rather complex in a number of different situations as when clinically similar sporadic
cases due to fresh mutation, phenocopy, extra-marital conception, or constellation of
polygenes occur together with those due to
oligogenes present in the couple; when penetrance is not complete; when the ascertainment probability varies from one family to
another; when parity and parental age play
a role on the recurrence risk; or when contraception occurs preferentially after the
birth of affected children (Morton, 1959),
These factors also affect the estimates of
empirical risks, either decreasing or increas
Social Biology

according to the number of affected individuals already born in the family, In the absence of complicating factors, empirical risks
may be estimated (with the exception of
those for sibs) simply by dividing the number of affected relatives by the total of these
relatives. If, for instance, in a sample of families, there are 4 affected individuals in a
total of 200 first cousins of probands, the
empirical risk equals 2% + 1%. As regards
recurrence for sibs, different simple approaches may be used (see Reed, 1961). As
an example, taking the sibship in Figure 1,
where the proband is indicated by an arrow,
these approaches will be summarized with
the indication in parenthesis of how it would
be counted:

1, Recurrence after the first affected child,
This includes only the sibs born after the

 

Fia, 1

ing them. On the basis of current estimates
of empirical risks, there is the assumption,
proved wrong in some instances, that the
risk is uniform in all the families under investigation, In reality, what may occur is
that we are dealing with two groups of families: the so-called “high-risk”? and “lowrisk” ones. An analysis of these families, as
if they formed a homogeneous group,
would lead to empirical risk figures of relatively little value, since these figures would
be underestimates for the high-risk families
and overestimates for the low-risk ones.
However, modern segregation analysis (see
Morton, 1962, for a review) is sufficiently
exact to discriminate between the two types
of family and to estimate their proportions
in the population.

EMPIRICAL RISKS

Empirical risks may be classified according to the relatives to whom they apply and

first affected (2/7). This procedure corresponds to “simple counting after first appearance” or method ‘‘based on the children
after the first recessive’’ (Li, 1964, 1965). It
may only be used in cases of truncate selection. Li suggests the use of a weighted average between the estimate so obtained and
that obtained by the “method of first appearance time” also suggested by him (Li,
1964, 1965).

2. Risk for sibs. This includes all sibs,
with the exception of one affected in each
sibship. This estimate corresponds to the
segregation proportion as estimated with
Haldane’s @ posteriori correction that is specific for the cases of single selection (2/11).

3. Recurrence after each affected child, Al
the children subsequent to each affected one
are included. In a sibship with three affected
children, for instance, the children between
the first and the second (included) are
counted once; those between the second and

 
 

Vol. 17, No. 3

the third (included) are counted twice; and
those after the third are counted three
times. Therefore, this figure may be accepted as an index of recurrence after any
affected one (3/13). Since in counseling services there is always the need to know the
probability of the birth of an affected child
after the birth of one or more affected children, the present approach may seem to
have little, if any, application. It is, however, only an artifice to obtain, from biased
in data, a good estimate of the recurrence risk
& (see the discussion below).
9 4, Recurrence after the probands, In each
E sibship, this includes only the children born
5 9 after the probands, excluding therefore both
A ", normal and affected sibs born before. Thus,
S this approach disregards all the sibs born
2 before the probands (0/1).
— 5. Risks for the sibs of each affected child,
S Similar to No. 3, but also including, in each
& case, the children born before. This estimate
5 = corresponds to the segregation proportion as
= estimated with the correction by Weinberg’s
+= sib method that is specific for the cases with
>truncate selection (6/33).
To these five, as described by Reed
2, (1961), we would like to add the following.
6. Risk for the sibs of the probands. This
>corresponds to approach No. 2 in cases of
y single selection (each sibship with only one
= 3 proband) and to approach No, 5 in cases of
< truncate selection (in each sibship, the num5 = ber of probands equals the number of afA fected sibs), When we face, however, a
situation of multiple selection, this approach
(‘‘Weinberg’s proband method’’) leads to a
different estimate. In the present example,
we would have to count 2/11, as in No. 2.
7. Precurrence (Margallo, Freire-Maia,
and Azevedo, 1967). In the cases of sibships
ascertained through recent admissions to
children’s hospital or of anomalies with late
onset, the recurrence risk may be better estimated through the precurrence approach,
that is, the frequency of affected sibs born
before the Jas? affected one (2/10).

[University o

b

Genetic Counseling

209

This list clearly shows that different
methods may lead to completely different
estimates of risks and that the correct method to be used in each situation will depend
on the way the data have been obtained. For
example: for samples ascertained through
single selection, method No. 2 is the best;
with truncate selection, method No. 5 will
be the appropriate one; if the probands were
ascertained through recent admissions in
children’s hospitals, method No. 7 may
prove to be better.

In the situations in which there is a
marked parity and/or a maternal-age effect,
the probability of the birth of a second, a
third, etc. affected child in a sibship is not
to be estimated on the basis of the classical
corrections, such as Nos, 2, 5 and 6, that do
not take account of these effects. In a sample
ascertained through truncate selection but
showing a parity effect (i.e., a tendency for
affected children to be born in the last pregnancies), method No. 3 may prove to be
better than all the others. However, if single
selection has been used and the tendency is
the same, then method No. 1 seems to be
preferable. When samples are obtained in
maternities, through recently born probands, these tend naturally to be the last in
the respective sibships. Since this situation
resembles that obtained through recent admissions to children’s hospitals, we would
suggest the use of precurrence (method No.
7).

Assuming that sibships with two or more
affected children are not overrepresented in
the sample (a house-to-house survey would
give us an unbiased sample), that contraception is not an important factor after the
birth of affected children, and that parity
and parental age do not significantly affect
the probability of birth of affected children,
these different approaches (except No. 2)
would lead to reasonably similar estimates.
They have been applied to a series of
“white” Brazilian families with these requisites and with cases of harelip with and with
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

210 Freire-Maia

out cleft palate (Arce-Gomez et al., 1968)
and led to the following respective estimates:
2.7%, 1.4%, 2.5%, 2.5%, 2.5%, 2.5% and
2.2%. Applied to another series of white
families without these requisites (Arce-Gomez et al., 1968), the estimates were as follows: 12.8%, 3.4%, 12.2%, 0, 6.1%, 3.4%

and 4.2%). On the basis of the characteris
tics of the two series, the recurrence risk
for sibs, in “pure”? Caucasian families,
would probably be higher than 2.5% and
lower than 6.1%, say roughly 4%, i.e.,
a figure similar to the precurrence in the
second series, exactly where precurrence
could give a good estimate (4.2%).
Sometimes, it is possible to subdivide a
sample of conditions known to be highly
heterogeneous into a series of subsamples
where heterogeneity is less intense on the
basis of clinical data alone or with the help
of laboratory information. This has been
done, for instance, in a sample of mentally
retarded probands in whose sibships the
overall recurrence risk was found to be
around 2%. It was verified that in the five
subsamples in which the total sample was
subdivided, the estimated risks were respectively 0, 0, 2.5%, 4% and 6% (Freire-Maia
et al., 1970; see also Braga et al.). The
first one was classified as “cases probably
due to genetic mechanisms of low average
recurrence” (for instance, mongolism); the
second, as “‘cases probably due to exogenous
mechanisms”; the third was the total with
the exclusion of the first group; the fourth
was the total with the exclusion of the second; and the fifth was the total with the
exclusion of both the first and second groups.
In other situations, the clinical data are of
little or absolutely no importance, but analysis of the pedigree may permit a reasonable
empirical separation between high-risk and
low-risk situations, This was done for congenital skeletal limb deficiencies, where the
large majority of cases belongs to the lowrisk category, but where a minority is due

Social Biology

to genetic mechanisms leading either to
“moderate” or to “high” risks (FreireMaia and Freire-Maia, 1967; Freire-Maia
and Azevedo, 1968; Fonseca and FreireMaia, 1969, 1970; review in Freire-Maia,
19692).

In some cases, such as in congenital pyloric stenosis, the recurrence risk varies according to the sex of the first affected sib as
well as with the sex of the individual whose
risk one wants to measure. This sex effect
introduces 2 new complication into the estimates. According to Carter (1964), this risk
varies from 2.6% (for daughters and sisters
of affected males) up to 18.2% (for brothers
and sons of affected females). Congenital
pyloric stenosis seems to be due to multifactorial inheritance, the polygenes involved
in the process having different thresholds of
manifestation in both sexes (Carter, 1961,
1964),

EMPIRICAL RISKS AND COUNSELING

Owing to many possibly biasing factors,
to the fact that empirical risks are generally
only averages of different risks operating in
different families and to the possibility of
environmental differentials acting on different populations such figures must be used
with great caution. Persons seeking consultation must therefore be warned about the
precarious information given by these risk
estimates and told clearly that they describe
the average situation in a sample of families
rather than the situation in their own family.

The formulation of the advice must therefore be different according to whether we are
using an empirical risk figure or a probability based on etiology. We may say to the
normal consanguineous parents of a child
affected by an anomaly clearly due to an
autosomal recessive gene that the probability of the next child being equally affected is
1/4, but it is not advisable to tell the normal
parents of a child with cleft lip that the
probability of the birth of an equally af
 
 

 

 

Vol. 17, No. 3

fected child in the next pregnancy Is, say,
4%, In this last case, it is always necessary
to state that this figure is an empirical one,
that it is simply a corrected mean in a
sample of families, and that in the present
case the risk may be higher or lower.

The same applies to empirical risk figures
for morbidity and precocious mortality in
the offspring of consanguineous marriages.
If, in these cases, we use some assumptions
to estimate the risks (for instance, those of

‘0 the theory of Morton, Crow, and Muller,
3 1956), it is also necessary to inform the
© parents that the counseling is being based on
£ theoretical considerations. In this area, we
2 must also be especially cautious because of
e the well-known action of extraneous congS comitant variables (see Schull and Neel,
0 1965; Krieger, 1966; Freire-Maia and Azeve“do, 1967; Freire-Maia, Barrai, and Krieger,
Ss 1970; Krieger, Freire-Maia, and Azevedo,
a © 1970), both on the outbred and inbred sam5 = ples being used to estimate the risk, either
< increasing or decreasing the real inbreeding
4x effect. When the consanguineous subsample
p>belongs to an average socioeconomic level
Z lower than that of the nonconsanguineous
.2 (control) subsample, the number of lethal
~ equivalents per gamete (B) is expected to
appear inflated since adverse environmental
y factors are acting in the same direction as
'S the inbreeding effect; in the opposite situag tion, we may simply have an underestimate
= of B. As regards abnormal equivalents, the
A biasing effect may have a different direction,
since many genes that would express themselves as agents of precocious mortality in
the low socioeconomic levels (and then used
to estimate lethal equivalents) will be expressed as anomalies in the high socioeconomic levels (and then used to estimate abnormal equivalents)!

Finally, it must be pointed out that the

use of an empirical risk figure does not imply

1 For an analysis of this problem, see Mi et al.,
1965, and Freire-Maia, 19698.

Genetic Counseling

211

that some endogenous, although unknown,
agent is being exclusively invoked. Empirical risks may also be calculated for infectious diseases, In which, although “inborn”’
liabilities are known to exist, a microbial
agent is the etiologically “important” factor
(see Beiguelman, 1967, for leprosy), as well
as for situations in which unknown environmental determinants seem to act side by
side with a genetic predisposition. This last
situation seems to be that of anencephaly
and spina bifida, whose recurrence risk for
sibs seems to change with its incidence in the
general population (Yen and MacMahon,
1968). Another probable example is that of
cleft lip and palate in whose etiology experimental data show the importance of teratogens (folic-acid antagonists, for instance).
On the other hand, clinical observations suggest that folic-acid deficiency is relatively
common in pregnancy, there being a suggestion that some anticonvulsant drugs, known
to act as if antagonizing folic-acid, may be
responsible for palatolabial defects in the
offspring of epileptic mothers (Meadow,
1968), Empirical risks for congenital abnormalities may be higher in the offspring of
women with different ailments, in consequence either of their own disease—the syn~
drome of maternal diabetes, for instance
(Lenz and Maier, 1964; McCracken, 1965;
and Passarge, 1965), or of drugs such as the
above-mentioned possible effect of anticonvulsants and the thalidomide syndrome. All
these investigations show that not only genetic anomalies or congenital malformations, but also chronic diseases and drugs
used during pregnancy must be exhaustively
investigated before giving advice with an
appropriate empirical risk figure.

In spite of the concept of probability
being generally understood by the majority
of the consultants, it is necessary to try to
increase its understanding by introducing
the idea of the probability of the nonoccurrence of the dad event. The situation will be

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

212 Freire-Maia

much more clearly understood, for instance,
if we say in relation to a 10% recurrence risk
for a given defect that the probability of its
nonoccurrence will be nine times larger, or
90%. The intention of providing such information is not to minimize the real risk, but
only to make it clearly understood.

 

Social Biology

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Yam very grateful to Dr. H. Krieger for reading the manuscript.

This paper was written when our research
projects were sponsored by the Rockefeller
Foundation, the National Research Council of
Brazil, the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation,
the Research Council of the Federal University
of Parané and WHO.

REFERENCES

Arce, B., J. B. C. AzEvepo, N. Freree-Mara, and
Ere A. CHAUTARD. 1967. Cleft lip and palate.
Lancet 2:1364, and personal communication.

BEIGUELMAN, B. 1967. Leprosy and genetics. A review of past research with remarks concerning
future investigations. Bull. Wid. Hlth. Org.
37 :461-476.

Brac, J. C. B., N. Frerre-Marta, Hamfe AspAtta, and N., Tarruce. Estudos clinicogenéticos
em uma amostra de retardados mentais. I.
Aspectos cl{nicos. Ms.

Carter, C. O. 1958. The inheritance of congenital
pyloric stenosis. Brit. Med. Bull. 17:251-254.

. 1964. The genetics of common malformations, p. 306-313. Second Int. Conf. on Cong.
Malform., Int. Med. Congr., Ltd., New York.

Fonseca, Lucta G., and N. Freree-Mara. 1969.
Novos dados sébre deficiéncias esqueléticas dos
membros, Cién, e Cult. 21:279-280.

FonsEca, Lucia G., and N. Frerre-Mara. 1970.
Congenital malformations of the limbs. Lancet
1:90-91.

Frerre-Mata, N. 1969¢. Congenital skeletal limb
deficiencies—A general view, p. 7-13. In Daniel
Bergsma (ed.), First Conf. on the Clinica] Delineation of Birth Defects. Part II. The National
Foundation, New York.

. 19695. Consanguineous marriages and inbreeding load. In F. M. Salzano (ed.), Proc.
Conf. Ongoing Evolution Latin-Amer. Popul. In
press.

Frerre-MarA, N., and J. B. C. Azeveno. 1967.
Extraneous variation in inbreeding studies.
Amer, J. Hum. Genet. 19:686-689.

: ee Skeletal limb deficiencies. Lancet
2: 1296.

Frerre-Mara, N., J. C. B. Braca, Hamfr AppatLA, and Nizza Tartuce. 1970. Mental retardation: Risks of recurrence. Lancet. In press.

Frerre-MarA, N., and A. Frerre-Mara. 1967. Recurrence risks of bone aplasias and hypoplasias of
the extremities. Acta Genet. 17:418-421.

FreEIRE-MArA, N., I. Barra, and H. Kerecer. 1969.
The capacity of estimates of B/A to discriminate
genetic loads. Ms.

Krrecer, H. 1966. Inbreeding effects in Northeast
 

 

 

ern Brazil. Ph.D. thesis, University of Hawaii,
Honolulu.

Krrecer, H., N. Frerre-Mara, and J. B. C.
AzEVEDO. 1970. The inbreeding load in Brazilian
whites and Negroes: Further data and a reanalysis. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. In press,

Lenz, W., and W. Mater. 1964. Congenital malformations and maternal diabetes. Lancet 2:
1124-1125.

Lr, C. C. 1964. Estimate of recessive proportion by
first appearance time. Ann. Human Genet.
28 :177-179.

Lr, C. C. 1965. Segregation of the Ellis-van Creveld
Syndrome as analysed by the first appearance
method, Amer. J. Human Genet. 17:343-351.

Marcalt1o, F. A., N. Frerre-Mara, and J. B. C.
AZEVEDO. 1967. Recurrence and precurrence.
Lancet 2: 566.

McCrackEv, J. S. 1965. Absence of foetal femur and
maternal pre-diabetes. Lancet 1:1274-1275.

MeEapow, S. R. 1968. Anticonvulsant drugs and
congenital abnormalities. Lancet 2:1296.

Mt, M. P., ELIANE AZEVEDO, H. Kriecer, and N. E.
Morton. 1965. Malformations in Northeastern
Brazil. Acta Genet, 15:177-189,

Morton, N. E. 1959. Genetic tests under incomplete ascertainment. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
ll:

. 1962. Segregation and linkage, p. 17-52. In
W. J. Burdette (ed.), Methodology in human
genetics. Holden-Day, Inc., San Francisco.

Morton, N. E., J. F. Crow, and H. J. Mutter.
1956. An estimate of the mutational damage in
man from data on consanguineous marriages.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 42:855-863.

PASSARGE, E. 1965. Congenital malformations and
maternal diabetes. Lancet 1:324-325.

Rrep, S. C. 1961. Counseling in medical genetics,
p. 151-177. In L. Geppa (ed.), De genetica medica. Edizione Istituto Mendel, Rome.

ScHULL, W. J., and J. V. NEEL. 1965. The effects of
inbreeding on Japanese children. Harper & Row,
New York.

YEN, STELLA, and Beran MacManon. 1968. Genetics of anencephaly and spina bifida? Lancet
2:623-626.

 
