Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Household crowding and reproductive behavior

John N. Edwards , Theodore D. Fuller , Santhat Sermsri & Sairudee
Vorakitphokatorn

To cite this article: John N. Edwards , Theodore D. Fuller, Santhat Sermsri & Sairudee
Vorakitphokatorn (1992) Household crowding and reproductive behavior, Social Biology,
39:3-4, 212-230, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1992.9988818

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988818

 

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 2
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Household Crowding
and Reproductive Behavior

 

John N. Edwards, Theodore D. Fuller, Santhat Sermsri,
and Sairudee Vorakitphokatorn

Department of Sociology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA
24061; Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

ABSTRACT: Ethological studies suggest that animal populations that live in crowded conditions
display a number of behaviors that tend to limit the size of the population, such as aberrant forms
of sexual behavior, small litter sizes, a higher incidence of spontaneous abortion, ineffectual
maternal care, and even cannibalism of their young. Studies of household crowding in North
America cities have produced only modest and selective evidence that crowding has similar
effects among humans. In this paper, we examine the effect of household crowding on marital
sexual relations, on desire for additional children, and on fetal and child loss in Bangkok,
Thailand, a city with a much wider range of household crowding than is typically found in North
America. In spite of the wider range, and higher mean level of crowding, we find that both the
objective and subjective dimensions of crowding have only modest selective effects on sexual and

reproductive behavior.

Most of what is known about crowding and sexual behavior—and, more
generically, about crowding and reproductive behavior—is derived from
ethological research. Unfortunately,
findings from research on animal populations have sometimes been uncritically extrapolated to human populations. In this paper, after first reviewing some of the ethological research
and the prior research on humans, we
examine the effects of household
crowding in one relatively crowded
environment, namely, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND:
PRIOR RESEARCH

Observations of crowded animals
have suggested that lower animals exhibit aberrant forms of sexual behavior, aberrant at least in terms of the respective patterns normally observed in
those animal populations. Investiga
tions of crowded house mice, voles,
Mongolian gerbils, wild monkeys, fish,
and laboratory as well as wild rats note
a diverse set of sexual pathologies
(Southwick, 1955; Louch, 1956; Jillings, 1967; Susiyama, 1967; Morris,
1952; Calhoun, 1962). In some cases,
the observations are of interrupted
copulation, such as among crowded
house mice. Other studies report hypersexuality as a result of dense conditions. A high incidence of homosexuality has been noted, particularly
among crowded fish. Some investigations indicate there is a combination of
these aberrations, suggesting that
crowding precipitates pansexual behavior on the part of certain animals.

Calhoun’s classic study (1962) is one
of the better controlled experiments
on crowding effects. Under high and
unchecked crowding conditions— what
Calhoun refers to as a behavioral sink
—several pathological behaviors developed among the rats in the experi
212

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

ment. These ranged from extreme withdrawal on the part of some animals to
the frenetic overactivity of others.
Cannibalism emerged. Sexual deviation was widespread. Hypersexuality
was one such deviation. Females in estrus were relentlessly pursued by packs
of males, unable to divert the unwanted attention of the males. Some
males became pansexual, apparently
unable to discriminate between appropriate and inappropriate sexual partners. Another group of male rats became completely passive, paying no
attention to even the estrous females in
their midst. Still other males became
what Calhoun termed “‘probers,” who
engaged in both hypersexual and homosexual activities.

The evidence concerning the effect
of crowding on the reproductive behavior of animals is somewhat more
consistent, generally reporting an inverse relationship. Particularly among
rats and mice, it has been observed,
crowded conditions are related to
smaller litter size and a higher incidence of spontaneous abortion (Calhoun, 1962; Davis, 1964; Snyder,
1968). Crowded females engage in ineffectual maternal care, raising the
probability of infant mortality, and
sometimes resort to cannibalism of the
young. In one experiment where the
animal population was allowed to
reach a peak, 30 litters were subsequently born without any of the young
surviving (Christian et al., 1965). In
reaction to high population density,
declines in fertility also have been observed among birds, elephants, rabbits, wolves, chickens, and deer (Perrins, 1965; Laws and Parker, 1968;
Lockley, 1961; Hoffman, 1958; Siegal,
1959; Christian et al., 1960).

Household Crowding

213

While this body of ethological research is indeed suggestive, it must be
interpreted very cautiously in extrapolating it to human populations. What
looks to us as pathological and ultimately dysfunctional behavior among
these various animals—and perhaps so
among humans—actually may have
utilitarian value. Withdrawal, inter
‘rupted copulation, bisexuality, and ho
mosexuality each serve to check population growth. Along with a high rate
of infant mortality, which often occurs
under extreme crowding conditions,
sexually deviant behavior can be functional in serving as a populationreducing mechanism, bringing some
measure of equilibrium back to the
group.

Furthermore, the analogy between
human behavior and that of other species breaks down at some crucial
points. Environmentally, there is little
similarity. Most of the evidence on sexual pathologies comes from the study
of rodents, and some of the strongest
evidence stems from experimental situations. For these animals, there is no
escape from crowded conditions.
Crowding is a constant part of their
lives. Even among so-called freeroaming animals, territoriality may impose severe limitations on the ability to
escape from crowding. Human habitats seldom have such limitations.
There is, moreover, no cross-species
analogue to the human experience of
feeling crowded and a perceived lack
of privacy. These are symbolically conceived and may be symbolically expressed experiences that are absent in
other animals. Inasmuch as the subjective experiences of crowding for hu-~
mans may be more important than the
objective circumstances themselves,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

214

comparisons with other animals may
be altogether inappropriate.

As far as natality and reproductive
behavior are concerned, the analogy
between humans and other species is
incomplete. In other species, sex and
reproduction are governed by the estrous cycle of females. As a result, the
natality rate among most animals approximates the limits of their biological
potential. Humans make choices as to
when to have sexual intercourse and
under what circumstances they will do
so. While women are able to conceive
twelve months of the year, most seek
to limit their pregnancies, so that human natality is usually far below biological capacity.

It is also the case that the ethological
research is not as unequivocal as it first
may appear. Significantly, most of the
studies dealing with the effects of population densities on animal behavior
are silent about the existence of any
sexual deviations or unusual reproductive behavior. Some investigations
even note that there are no significant
relationships between high density,
sexual behavior, and reproduction
(Syme, 1973). Others suggest that fertility may actually increase as a result
of crowding (Ludwig and Boost, 1939).
As we mentioned, most of the attention has been focused on rodents in experimental situations. Until there are
more observations of a broader range
of animals in natural settings, we need
to be wary of generalizing these findings to other animal species, let alone
to humans.

What evidence we have regarding
the impact of crowding on human sexual relations and reproductive behavior is quite limited and often inconsis
Edwards et al.

 

Social Biology

tent. Based on some of the ethological
evidence, Galle and his associates
(1972), using aggregate data, found
crowding to be positively associated
with a high fertility rate. This, they
speculated, could stem from either the
sort of hypersexuality observed in
some other crowded animals or could
result from the inability to plan carefully, which would be reflected in the
inconsistent use of birth control. Galle
and Gove (1979) later replicated the
finding about high fertility using data
from four different time periods.

In a rather unique study dealing
with the residents of Ciudad Kennedy,
a government-constructed satellite city
of Bogata, Columbia, Felson and Solaun (1975) found just the opposite.
Two types of dwellings were available,
individual houses and apartments. The
apartments were close to three times
the size of the houses. After controlling for key variables affecting fertility
and possible self-selection factors, Felson and Solaun found that the apartment dwellers reduced their fertility,
while occupants of the houses increased theirs. The house dwellers had
the ability to increase needed space by
adding rooms, whereas the apartment
residents were unable to neutralize any
increases in objective crowding. The
response on the part of the latter, Felson and Solaun suggest, was simply to
reduce the number of children they
otherwise may have had.

Two important studies provide evidence concerning the effect of household crowding in North America, In
his study of household crowding in
Toronto, Booth (1976) examined two
aspects of reproduction: number of
pregnancies and total infant mortality
 

oaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

—
S
©

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

(which included induced abortion,
spontaneous abortion, proportion stillborn, and proportion dying in the first
year of life). Neither aspect of reproduction was related to either objective
crowding or subjective crowding.

In a related analysis, using the Toronto data, Edwards and Booth (1977)
focused on the sexual behavior of those
living in crowded circumstances. This
involved an examination of marital relations, extramarital affairs, homosexual contacts, and incestuous experience. On the assumption that crowding
interferes with privacy, one of the
questions asked in regard to marital
sex had to do with whether the respondents had ever refrained from having
intercourse because of a lack of privacy. This, it turned out, was one of
the strongest findings. Subjective
crowding was strongly related to reports that a lack of privacy interfered
with intercourse. The perceived lack of
privacy was not, however, followed by
any appreciable withdrawal from sexual activity. If anything, crowded individuals tended to have marital coitus
somewhat more frequently than people living in less compressed conditions. A similar tendency was observed
with respect to the other forms of sexual behavior that ‘were examined.
Those in crowded households had
slightly elevated levels of extramarital,
homosexual, and incestuous activities.
However, the differences between
crowded and uncrowded people were
small and generally not statistically significant. Crowding in itself, Edwards
and Booth point out, explains a very
modest portion of the variance in sexual behavior, and they contend (1977,
p. 805) that human sexual behavior—

Household Crowding

215

perhaps unlike that of other animals—
“is not appreciably influenced by
crowded conditions.”

A parallel analysis of marital sexuality and reproductive behavior is contained in a study conducted in Chicago.
Gove and Hughes (1983) found that
both their objective and subjective indicators of crowding were related to reports that a lack of privacy sometimes
prevents sexual intercourse, and there
was a small—but statistically significant—negative relationship between
persons per room and the frequency of
marital intercourse. In short, neither
the Toronto nor the Chicago study
finds any evidence of hypersexuality,
contrary to some of the reports contained in the ethological literature.

With regard to reproductive behavior, a series of questions was posed in
the Chicago study asking about the desire for children, birth control practices, and the occurrences of miscarriages and abortions. Two indexes
were used having to do with the desire
for children. One was calculated by
dividing the number of offspring the
respondent already had, or expected
to have, by the number desired. Overcrowded individuals generally had
more children than they ideally
wanted. The second index concerned
simply a response as to whether the respondent currently was “‘purposely trying to have a child.” Persons per room,
as Gove and Hughes expected, was
negatively associated with the desire
for an additional child, but the subjective crowding measures were only
weakly related to this variable. One
subjective indicator (lack of privacy),
in fact, was positively related to the attempt to have another child, which is

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

216

contradictory to overcrowded people
reporting that they presently have
more children than they actually want.

If people residing in crowded households have more children than they
think are an ideal number, on the surface they would seem to have a powerful incentive for practicing birth
control. However, for the adults who
live in crowded households, there is a
counter-hypothesis. Galle and his colleagues (1972) have argued that crowding in the household, simply because

there are too many people around,

makes it difficult to plan one’s activities, and practicing birth control clearly
requires planning and a conscious effort on the part of the sexual partners.
If crowded couples already have more
children than they perceive as ideal,
this is prima facie evidence that they
tend to be poor family planners. Overall, Gove and Hughes found that

crowding has little effect on whether

individuals practice birth control, but it
does have a small effect on sometimes
forgetting to do so.

The Chicago investigation also explored the issue of the impact of crowding on fetal mortality, an issue raised
in ethological research and found by
Booth (1976) not to apply to the
Toronto sample. Gove and Hughes
(1983), however, did find a persistent
relationship between persons per room
and the occurrence of a miscarriage or
abortion, even after a number of controls were introduced. The subjective
crowding measures were not so re
~ lated. Gove and Hughes are careful to

point out, though, that they had no information on whether the death was
spontaneous or induced, and that because the mortality was a past event, it
was uncertain the respondent was re
Edwards et al.

 

Social Biology

siding in a crowded household at the
time of the occurrence.

The previous studies alert us to the
possibility that human crowding may
have some effect on the frequency of
sexual relations, on the desire for additional children, on the effective use
of birth control, and on the extent to
which offspring survive. Furthermore,
as Booth and Gove have recognized,
crowding has a subjective dimension
that does not appear in studies of
crowding among animal populations.
One aspect of the subjective dimension
may be called simply ‘“‘subjective
crowding,” i.e., the feeling of being
crowded, as opposed to the objective
reality of being crowded. Subjective
and objective crowding are presumably related, but there is not necessarily an isomorphic relationship between
the two. A second subjective aspect is
the psychological distress that may result from crowded living conditions.
Crowding has been viewed by most
crowding researchers to be stressful,
and we may expect that this distress has
some impact on various aspects of reproductive behavior. —

It should be noted that however representative the above studies may be of
conditions in industrialized countries,
they may be less representative of conditions in developing countries. This is
so in part because of the differences in
the average level of household crowding. While the average number of persons per room is about 0.5 in North
America, it is typically much higher
in cities in developing countries. In
Bangkok, for example, the average
number of persons per room is 2.1.

While previous research does sensitize us to a number of concerns and
issues, it provides rather mixed and

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

equivocal findings regarding crowding
and human sexuality and hence gives
little specific guidance as to what
precisely we might find in a very
crowded context, such as Thailand.
In part for this reason, we conducted
a series of focus group interviews in
several neighborhoods in Bangkok
prior to designing the questionnaire.
Before discussing what we learned

from those group interviews, we pro- .

vide some more general information
about Bangkok.

THE THAI CONTEXT

Bangkok represents one of the more
striking examples of a primate city. Its
population, as recently as 1960 numbering some 1.8 million, now exceeds
6.0 million. As the center of commerce, finance, manufacturing, and
trade, Bangkok dominates the entire
economic fabric of the country, as indeed it dominates in nearly every
sphere of Thai culture—whether it be
political, religious, or educational.
Bangkok’s primacy is illustrated by the
fact that, in 1980, Bangkok’s population was more than 50 times larger than
Thailand’s second largest city (Sternstein, 1984, p. 67), and over 60 per cent
of the urban population of Thailand resided in Bangkok (Fuller, 1990).

Compared to cities in the industrialized world, families in Bangkok experience high levels of household
crowding. In our representative sample of households in Bangkok, less
than 1 per cent of households had 0.5
or fewer persons per room. It should
be noted, however, that while the level
of crowding is high by the industrialized world’s standards, there is a wide
range of crowding represented in our

 

Household Crowding

217

sample. There was at least one person
per room in over 90 per cent of the
households, at least two persons in
over 40 per cent, at least three in over
20 per cent, and at least four in over 10
per cent of the households. The average number of persons per room was
2.1, with a standard deviation of 1.3.
The average number of persons per
100 square meters was 12.25. To have
the same level of household crowding
in the United States, a 1,500 square
foot home would have 17 people living
there.

Hong Kong is often mentioned as
one of the most crowded cities in the
world. But Bangkok’s level of crowding is nearly as great, if not more so,
than that of Hong Kong. The population density in Hong Kong is 13,097 per
square mile (1986), compared to 9,280
in Bangkok (1987).! More to the point,
the level of household crowding is
comparable in the two cities. While the
average is 2.1 persons per room in
Bangkok, in Hong Kong, according to
the most recent data available (1971),
the average was 1.9.

Thailand has achieved a substantial
reduction in fertility in the past two decades; its Total Fertility Rate of 2.2 indicates that Thailand has now reached
replacement level fertility. The Total
Fertility Rate is even lower in Bangkok
than elsewhere in the country, having
recently dropped to 1.6. Thailand, and
Bangkok, have also reached high rates
of contraceptive prevalence. A recent

1If we consider only the relatively densely settled parts of each city, we find comparable population densities in Bangkok and Hong Kong. Hong
Kong Island had a density of 73,815 per square mile,
while the five most densely populated districts in
Bangkok, with a combined population of 1.3 million
in 1987, had a density of 70,880 persons per square
mile.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

218

study found that nationally, and in
Bangkok, about two-thirds of all married women were currently using some
type of contraceptive (Chayovan et al.,
1988). As noted below, we found an
even higher rate of contraceptive prevalence in our sample, in part because
by design we excluded married women
who had not yet had children. In Thailand, such women are much less likely
to be using contraceptives.

By choosing Bangkok as a research
site, it was our intention to explore the
often speculated-upon role of culture.
A number of crowding researchers
have suggested that the reactions to
crowding may be conditioned by the
cultural context (Booth, 1976; Gove
and Hughes, 1983). While the level of
household crowding in Bangkok is obviously high by North American standards, suggesting that we might find
strong effects, there are several cultural factors that could, contrary to this
hypothesis, result in finding crowding
effects more modest in nature.

First, Thais have a comparatively
long history of crowding. Even in rural 
areas, where land is relatively abundant, similar levels of persons per
room are found. This history of crowding may make it easier for Thais to accommodate to high levels of crowding.
Second, the tropical climate allows
household members to be out-of-doors

- many hours every day, during all sea
sons of the year. Living space is not
confined to the housing unit itself, but
expands to adjacent communal areas.
Moreover, in Bangkok, those who
work outside the home often work long
hours and may have a time-consuming
commute to work. This means that
some household members are absent
during most of their waking hours. The

Edwards et al.

Social Biology

effective level of crowding may be
lower than indicated by a simple “head
count.” Hence, it is quite unclear
whether higher objective levels of
crowding necessarily lead to more serious consequences and more deleterious effects. Our findings shed some
light on this issue.

As noted above, we conducted a series of focus group interviews before
designing the survey instrument. A primary purpose of these group interviews was to ascertain the salience of
household crowding, privacy, and related concepts to Thais. The modest
demeanor of Thais led us to expect that
privacy—especially as it relates to sex
—might be a major issue for those living in crowded households. The lack of
privacy could lower the frequency of
marital coitus and, if persistent, might
lead to prolonged periods of sexual
abstinence. These group interviews,
then, provided some guidance as to
what we might expect to find in the survey itself.

Privacy, or the lack thereof, was a
recurrent theme in the focus groups,
both for the male and female groups.
The participants spoke of what it
meant to them, the steps they took to
try to achieve it, and especially mentioned how the lack of privacy affected
their lives with their spouse, including
the impact on their sex lives. This is a
group of males talking:

Wattana: “I don’t think people living
here have the activity [sex] during
the daytime.”

Mongkol: “Yes, it’s impossible. Our
houses are not private. There is a
path in front of the house.”

Pen: “Many people passing by. If you
close the door, neighbors would
tease you loudly outside. Spoil the
mood.”

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

And here are excerpts from a discussion in one of the female groups
when the subject of sex came up:

Chamnian: ‘When the kids sleep, we
can make love.”

Sriprai: “My husband is a nervous type.
He is afraid the kids will wake up.
He works at night, so he has time
with me during the daytime.”

Malee: “‘Why don’t you just close your
door?”

Sriprai: “Even with the door closed, we
feel that there are children outside.”’

The problems posed by having children present came up time and again,
particularly in the female focus groups.
Many mentioned that at some point—
usually by the age of four or five—
children become aware of the sexual
relationship between their parents.
This had led to some wives -trying to
minimize the frequency of sexual intercourse, if not withdraw from the sexual
relationship altogether.

Lamjai: ‘Long before, I wanted to be
close to my husband. Now, it’s
dead.”

Chamanian: “It’s boring for us, not for
them.”

Malae: “During the Khao Pansa period
[Buddhist Lent, a period of three
months], I'll eat only vegetables. I
told him not to have sex with me
during that period. He said no. He
thought that’s crazy. It won’t work
for him—not to have sex for three
months.”

Sriprai: “I ask him not to have sex one
day a week on Buddhist day. But
more than that it’s not possible for
him.”

Nim: ‘Not even one day off for my
case.”

Malee: “I don’t want it with my husband. When he asked for it, I would
take a longer prayer and he would
fall asleep while waiting for me to
finish the prayer. In the morning,

Household Crowding

 

219

he would ask me ‘Did I do it last
night with you?’ I would then answer ‘Of course you did! How soon
you forget!’.”

It was evident from these conversations, mostly among slum dwellers,
that privacy was an important issue,
and its lack seemed to be very much
implicated in how people conducted
their daily lives, including having consequences for their sexual interaction
with their spouse. These findings from
the focus groups prompted us to explore how crowding, in both its objective and subjective dimensions, might
affect the husband-wife sexual relationship and how it might relate to matters associated with their reproductive
behavior.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLE DESIGN

The population of interest in this
study is intact married couples living in
Bangkok in 1988 who had at least one
child and where the mother was not
more than 45 years of age. Since stress
plays a central theoretical role in our
model and since migration can be a
stressful experience, recent migrants
(living in Bangkok less than one year)
were excluded. Using a two-stage,
probability-proportional-to-size, cluster sample design, we selected a representative sample of 2,017 households
and interviewed either a wife or a husband in each household. A total of
1,399 wives and 618 husbands were interviewed by trained native Thai interviewers. The response rate was 87 per
cent.

Bangkok is divided administratively
into 24 districts comprised of a total of

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

220 Edwards et al.

150 subdistricts.2 The National Statistical Office (Bangkok) used probability-proportional-to-size (pps) sampling to select 45 subdistricts. Prior to
doing so, the districts were arranged by
population density in order to implicitly impose stratification by population
density. Next, the National Statistical
Office used pps sampling to select
three blocks from each subdistrict. Detailed block maps showing each housing unit in the sample blocks were used
as the sampling frame to randomly select houséholds to be interviewed.

The average household size in our
sample is 5.5. The large majority of
these households (72 per cent) are
comprised of nuclear families, the average couple having 2.1 children. However, extended families of various
types are fairly common. Fully 25 per
cent of the sample households are
three-generation households. A small
number of two-generation households
in the sample (3 per cent) include not
just one but two or three married couples and their offspring.

Lest one should think that our sample design yields an unusually crowded
sample of households, we would point
out that (a) the vast majority of
Bangkok households are comprised of
families (only 8 per cent are nonfamily
households), (b) very few individuals
live alone (1 per cent of persons, and
less than 6 per cent of households), (c)

?Three districts which are administratively
within Bangkok but which have comparatively low
density were omitted from the sampling frame.
These three districts, which had only 3.2 per cent of
the total population of Bangkok, had a population
density only one-fifteenth as high as that for the remaining districts (313 persons per square kilometer,
compared to an average of 4,690 persons per square
kilometer).

Social Biology

the average household size in Bangkok
is quite similar to that found in our
sample of families (5.1 versus 5.5; the
5.1 includes nonfamily households,
which may be smaller), and (d) the per
cent of Bangkok family households
that are nuclear, as opposed to vertically or horizontally extended, is also
quite similar to that found in our sample, 76 per cent versus 72 per cent.
(The comparisons are based on census
data published by the National Statistical Office, 1983.)

INDEPENDENT VARIABLES

As indicated above, the primary independent variable in this study is
‘household crowding, which has both
an objective and a subjective dimension. Objective crowding is measured
as persons per room, a standard measure of objective crowding (Booth,
1976; Baldassare, 1979; Gove and
Hughes, 1983). The subjective aspect
of crowding (‘‘perceived crowding’’) is
based on four agree-disagree items, derived from the Toronto study, designed
to tap this aspect of household congestion. The items are scaled so that a
higher score means the respondent
feels more crowded. In addition to
the perceived crowding scale, another
scale, called “lack of privacy,” also
taps the subjective dimension of
crowding. The lack of privacy scale was
developed by Gove and Hughes (1983)
for use in the Chicago study. In most of
the analyses presented in this paper,
we rely on the perceived crowding
scale, but we use the lack of privacy
scale in supplementary analyses for the
sake of comparability with the Chicago
study.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

Psychological distress is a third independent variable. As Mirowsky and
Ross (1989) point out, psychological
distress has two major forms: depression (“feeling sad, demoralized,
lonely, hopeless, worthless, wishing
you were dead, having trouble sleeping, crying, feeling everything is an effort, and being unable to get going”’)
and anxiety (“being tense, restless,
worried, irritable, and afraid’). According to Mirowsky and Ross (1989)
and Dohrenwend et al. (1980), depression and anxiety are not clearly distinct
forms of psychological distress, but instead are closely intertwined. Tapping
the broader concept of felt stress, our
measure of psychological distress is a
scale comprised of ten items reflecting
various symptoms, including aspects of
both anxiety and depression. A higher
score indicates greater distress.

The specific items that comprise
these three scales, along with their alpha coefficients, are shown in Table 1.
The items for each scale comprise a
single factor, as determined by factor
analysis. The scales were formed by
taking the unweighted sum of the component items. The scales all have a satisfactory level of reliability, with alpha
coefficients ranging from 0.70 to 0.85.

DEPENDENT MEASURES

The ethological literature suggests
that crowding may either increase or
decrease the frequency of sexual relations. The sparse literature addressing
this question as it pertains to human
beings is equally equivocal. In order to
address this issue, we asked our respondents, ‘‘How many times in the
past month did you and your husband/

Household Crowding

221

wife have sexual relations?’”’ For the
minority of respondents who could not
remember the number of times in the
past month, we asked for the number
of times they had sexual relations in the
past week and extrapolated this number to obtain a monthly estimate..

We were also interested in whether
the respondents perceived that crowding had any effect on their frequency
of sexual relations. We accordingly
asked, “Are you ever reluctant to have
sexual relations because the children or
others are at home?”

Another issue that the literature
sensitizes us to is whether crowding
leads to the cessation of sexual relations (Edwards and Booth, 1977). To
obtain information pertaining to this
issue, respondents were asked, “Have
you and your husband/wife ever
stopped having sexual relations for a
period of time for any reason other
than pregnancy?” If so, we ascertained
the reason for this cessation and how
long it lasted.

As Gove and Hughes (1983) suggest, parents who are more crowded
may be less likely to desire additional
children. In order to examine this aspect of reproductive wishes, we inquired, “Do you want to have any
more children in the future?’ Closely
related to the desire to have, or avoid,
additional children is the use of birth
control. Respondents were asked several questions pertaining to birth con
trol. First, “Are you or your husband/

wife currently using some family
planning or doing something to avoid a
pregnancy?” Those who were using
some form of birth control were then
asked, ““How often do you forget to use
your method of birth control?” (often,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

222 Edwards et al. Social Biology

TABLE 1

SCALE ITEMS

PERCEIVED CROWDING~4 ITEMS
(This introduction was used for items [A] through [D].) ‘Here are things some people say when they
are talking about their home. Tell me whether you agree or disagree with each item.”’ The response
categories are strongly disagree, disagree, agree, strongly agree.

(a) At home, there are too many people around.

(6) In this house, I have almost no time alone.

(c) In my home, people get in each other’s way.

(d) At home, I don’t have enough room to do things conveniently.

Alpha for this unweighted scale is 0.80.

LACK OF PrivacY—5 ITEMS
The response categories for [a] through [c] are usually, sometimes, rarely, often. The response categories for {d] and [e] are no, yes. :
(a) At home, do you have as much privacy as you want?
(b) At home, if you want to relax or work quietly at some task without interruption, do others leave
you alone?
(c) At home, if you want to talk quietly to someone in the family (e.g. husband/wife) without others
listening to your conversation, are you able to do that?
(d) At home, does it seem as if you can never be yourself?
(e) At home, if you want to be alone, is there someplace you can go to be alone?

Alpha for this unweighted scale is 0.70.

PsyCHOLOGICAL Distress—10 ITEMS
(This introduction was used for items [A] through [F]. The response categories ‘“‘never” through
‘‘often” were used for items [A] through [J}.) ‘Now I’m going to ask you some questions about how
you have been feeling. When I read a question, I'd like you to tell me whether you've felt that way
during the past few weeks.” The response categories for Items [a] through [j] are never, rarely,
sometimes, often. The response categories for [k} are no, yes.

(a) Anxious about something or someone?

(6) That people are trying to pick quarrels or start arguments with you?

(c) So depressed that it interferes with your daily activities?

(d) That personal worries were getting you down physically, that is making you physically ill?

(e) Moody?

(f) Felt you were confused, frustrated, and under a lot of pressure?

(hk) Are you ever bothered by nervousness, i.e., by being irritable, fidgety, or tense?

(i) Do you ever feel that nothing ever turns out for you the way you want it to?

(j) Do you have trouble concentrating or keeping your mind on what you are doing?

(k) Are you the worrying type—you know, a worrier? . .

Alpha for this unweighted scale is 0.84.

that crowding may affect child survival
and fetal survival. To measure these

sometimes, rarely, never) and “Does a
lack of privacy in your home ever pre
vent you from using your method of
birth control?’

Finally, both the ethological and the
human literatures on crowding suggest

3The latter two questions did not apply to couples who were not using any form of birth control or
who were relying on either a tubal ligation or a vasectomy to prevent pregnancy.

 

 

aspects of reproductive behavior, we
inquired, “Did you have any children
who died?”, “Have you (has your
wife) ever had a miscarriage?”, and
“‘Have you (has your wife) ever had an
abortion?” As Knodel and his associates have pointed out (1987, p. 89),
abortion is illegal under most circum
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

stances in Thailand and is believed by
most Thais to be contrary to the principles of Buddhism. For this reason,
survey data on abortion must be interpreted with caution.

CONTROL VARIABLES

A number of control variables are
included in the analyses because of
their potential impact on various aspects of reproductive behavior. Inasmuch ‘as reproductive behavior is related to the stage in the personal and
family life cycle, we control for the
age of the respondent, the age of the

spouse, and the number of years the

respondent has been married. Certain
aspects of reproductive behavior are
related to socioeconomic status, indicating the need to control for the respondent’s level of education and family income. The desire for additional
children is related to the number of
children a person already has; hence,
the number of children is controlled.
Finally, controls are introduced for the
wife’s employment status and the overall health of the respondent.

RESULTS
SEXUAL RELATIONS

In the way of background, our respondents, on average, reported having sexual relations with their spouse
4.4 times per month, almost exactly
once per week. The reported average
varied significantly between husbands
and wives. Husbands reported having
sexual intercourse with their wives 5.2
times per month, while wives indicated
having sexual relations with their husbands 4.1 times per month (Table 2). It

Household Crowding

 

223

is not clear whether husbands overreported or wives underreported; the
pattern nonetheless is consistent with
American findings (Kinsey, 1953). Inasmuch as there is a systematic sex difference, sex of respondent becomes an
important control variable.

The frequency of marital intercourse varies in a curvilinear fashion
with the age of the respondent. Husbands and wives age 25-29 report the
highest level of sexual relations (6.4
and 5.4 times per month, respectively).
The frequency of sexual relations is
lower in the age group 20-24 (5.6 and
5.2), as well’ as among older age
groups. Generally, the frequency of
sexual relations is lower the longer a
couple has been married. As the results from the focus group interviews
suggested, frequency of sexual relations is related to the age of the oldest
child. Focus group participants indicated that finding an opportunity to
have sexual relations became more
problematic after. the children reached
a certain age. We found that the frequency of sexual relations was significantly lower once the oldest child was
at least four years old.

Husbands and wives who have relatively high, but not the highest, levels
of education and income tend to have
sexual relations more often. Moreover, the frequency of sexual relations
tends to be higher for those in better
health, especially for husbands. For
wives, a similar but smaller trend is noticed. On the other hand, household
structure —i.e., whether there are two
or three generations in the household,
whether there is only one or more than
one married couple in the household—
has no effect on the frequency of sexual
relations. |

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

224 Edwards et al. 
Social Biology

TABLE 2

FREQUENCY OF SEXUAL RELATIONS PER MONTH BY SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS

Characteristics Husbands Wives

Sex of respondent

F=27.0% picccccseccesenseeees §.2 4.1
Age of respondent |

20-24 veeeccesserses vesseesees 5.6 5.2
2O~ 29 cana anus van wuss swaerns 6.4 5.4
BO=-34 Loe eeececcececeueceeeeees 6.2 4.1
35-39 Liescecececeeencstereeees 6.0 4.5
AO~44 Loe ecceeseee ences 4.0 3.3
ABAD Looe cecesenceeeeeeees 3.2 2.9
50 OF MOTE ....... cece eee 2.6 #4
F=12,90

Interaction NS
Years married

UDP $05 insesss osiciges tenance 6.4 4.6
oe 6.1 4.5
L115 voice ec eee ee eceeeeees 5.2 3.8
16-20 oo. iccecceceeeeceeeeeees 3.5 3.2
More than 20 .............4. 3.0 2.7
F=15.82

Interaction NS
Age of oldest child

3 Or YOUNZET .............068 5.8 4.7
A OF OMIET sisasseasasvnssass 3.5 3.9
F=4.9¢
Interaction NS
Education of respondent
4 years or less .............. 4.4 3.7
5-7 YOATS ...ecesceeeesecueees 5.7 4.4
8-10 years oo... ce eeeeeeee 5.9 4.1
11-12 years «00.0.0... 5.6 5.0
4p < 0.001.
bn < 0.01.
fp < 0.05.

IMPACT OF CROWDING ON
SEXUAL RELATIONS

The zero-order correlations between the crowding measures and the
measures of reproductive behavior are
reported in Table 3; the multivariate
results are contained in Table 4. As the
zero-order correlations show, none of
the crowding measures is significantly
related to the frequency of sexual reJations (Table 3). Not surprisingly, the
multivariate analyses confirm that neither objective crowding nor subjective

Characteristics Husbands Wives

Education of respondent (cont.)
College graduate ......... - §.2 4.2
F=5.74
Interaction NS

Family income

Less than 3000 Baht ..... 5.3 4.1
3000-4999 Baht .......... 4.5 3.9
5000-7999 Baht .......... 5.6 4.1
8000-13,999 Baht ........ 5.8 4.4
14,000-or more Baht ... §.1 3.9
F=1.7 (NS)

Interaction NS
Number of generations

TWO .icccccccccccvecssccnccaes 5.2 4.0
THYEE oo... cece eecceecceseues 5.3 4.2
F=0.53 (NS)
Interaction NS

Number of married couples
ON ...ccceccesccetcveseeesecs 5.2 4.1
Two or more .............. 5.2 4.0

F=0.06 (NS)
Interaction NS

Overall health of respondent

Not very good ............ 3.8 3.9
Fair ...cscessccsssececeseeeees 4.8 3.8
Good ............5. seeceeenes 5.6 4.3
Very 200d ...... eee eee seen 5.7 4.6
F=3.3°

Interaction NS

crowding has any effect on frequency
of sexual relations (Table 4).

Turning to the reluctance to engage
in sexual relations because of children
or others, a very different result 1s obtained. This is one area in which the
objective level of crowding, as well as
subjective crowding, decidedly have
significant effects. Persons per room,
lack of privacy, and psychological distress are all significantly correlated
with such reluctance. Furthermore, the
multivariate analyses confirm that all

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3~4

Household Crowding

225

TABLE 3

ZERO-ORDER CORRELATIONS AMONG CROWDING, SEXUAL RELATIONS, AND REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR
Persons Lack of Perceived Psychological
Variables Per Room Privacy Crowding Distress
1. Frequency of sexual relations ............. —0.022 —0.008 —0.009 0.012
(1977) (1977) (1975) (1971)
2. Reluctance to engage in ..........ceeeeeeees 0.183 0.171¢ 0.105¢ 0.1894
sexual relations (2004) (2004) (2002) (1998)
3. Temporary Cessation ........cccceeeeeeneeeues 0.0972 0.070° —0.021 0.078
of sexual relations (2010) (2010) (2008) (2004)
4. Desire additional child(ren) ............... —0.047¢ —0.018 —0.039 —0.002
(2014) (2014) (2012) (2007)
S. Using Birth camtr ol 5 sccagss vcs ssa sas nemanwa vs 0.035 0.015 0.042 0.029
(1833) (1833) (1831) (1828)
6. Forget to use birth control .............606. —0,033 -0.051¢ —0.009 —0.026
(2001) (2001) (1999) (1994)
7. Lack of privacy prevents use ..........500. —0.038 —0.056° —0.003 —0.029
of birth control (2001) (2001) (1999) (1994)
Bic CAI VOSS ccscaow wns tencsoms sanvnre nom sss ana swan 0.024 0.003 —-0.041 0.024
(2017) (2017) (2015) (2010)
9. MiSCALTiage 2... cece cee ee eeeecseereceeeersones —0.056¢ ~0.049¢ —0.037 0.031
(2015) (2015) (2013) (2008)
TO. ADOItION .......c cece ececeeeeeeeeenenaeasneoes 0.021 0.034 —0.026 0.0822
(2014) (2014) (2012) (2007)
Note: The natural log of persons per room, perceived crowding, and lack of privacy is used in this paper.
a < 0.001.
bn < 0.01.
tp < 0.05.

three variables have significant independent effects on the reluctance to
engage in sexual relations.

The zero-order correlations show
that objective crowding, lack of privacy, and psychological distress also
are all significantly related to the temporary cessation of sexual relations.
However, objective crowding has the
most robust effect on the cessation.
When lack of privacy and psychological distress are added to the multivariate model, they do not have significant
impact, but persons per room retains
its significance.

Similar results are obtained when
perceived crowding is used as a measure of subjective crowding instead of

lack of privacy. Compared to the effects of lack of privacy, perceived
crowding has a weaker effect on the reluctance to have sex due to the presence of others, but has a stronger, and
significant, effect on the cessation of
sexual relations.

IMPACT ON DESIRE FOR
ADDITIONAL CHILDREN

Are crowded parents less likely to
desire additional children? The correlations indicate. that parents who are
objectively crowded desire fewer children, while subjective crowding is not
related to the desire for additional children. The multivariate analyses show,
on the other hand, that parents who
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

226

Edwards et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 4

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR AND OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE
CROWDING, WITH CONTROLS: STANDARDIZED REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS

Measures Beta 1 Beta 2 Beta 3
Frequency of sexual relations (N= 1,936)
POPSONS POP LOOM, sivas viv saves cen snweseny eraagsaaunomannes ~0.026 ~—0.024 —0.024
Lack Of Privacy .........ccccscsecsecesrectescescscnsseceesens —0.009 —0.017
Psychological distress ..........ccecscessecsenecessoeeeeerees vee “ae 0.030
FR cases sna mansanenonscunnes vsteosns 408 NEA eon Ra AS MC Kio MRCS 0.0667 0.0667 0.0674
Ever reluctant to have sex (N=1,958)
P@rsOnS Pel TOON, sai sccsescnasacscnssswnens saw aces von vemeunes 0.171 0.1472 0.1494
LGC GE PEVEGY sea emomes ane evn ns enccene mecemes me rena wae 0.130 0.0914
Psychological distress .........ccccseseeeeeeccnsteeeseeveenes tee tae 0.1487
PRP iy ecco women mecarseent mea Rn aes LotRO RUINS TARAS MARTON SR 0.0374 0.0522 0.070
Temporary cessation of sexual relations (N= 1,964) 7
FPSUSTUE OE I, ace enceccomns sina ecient ween eon. ee eI 0.063° 0.057¢ 0.057¢
Lak OF PYiVacy’ éiies ise cesiyscids dh cendenne te nade rad $050—08 ae 0.031 0.023
Psychological distress: pecssasccssossieusite sestensigs recon wa e+ 0.033
Re iicvceseveeceveectecencnsssereeseeeesoetnecseeecaneeeueeroenes 0.0249 0.0252 0.0267
_ Want more children (N= 1,965)
PerSONS PET TOOM ......cccceeeseseecsecececsetccscecsseeoeses 0.010 —0.002 -0.002
LACK OE PEIVACY ites scnasies ins ten 503 exittten tin wand end 3OSERIERS bas —0.042 —0.041
Psycholopical distress, css ics ccvsswssensens poasees evs swnsswen ia eae —0.005
BR va weeainas yonaseaseg sees ons enpewes eensuns Reser etna wows paee 0.1492 0.151¢ 0.1512
Using birth control (N= 1,788)
PersOnS PET FOOM vs cavsses ves cova sass vuanss ixesues ows cree enws 0.003 0.003 0.004
Lack Of Privacy .........cecsceessseeeeeeececeseeeeteesetsosens eae 0.001 —0.009
Psychological distress ........:.cseccsececcsceeeeeoseeresaers wee wae 0.035
RR iccsccesseceeceectseessoneceeceeseeseesaesansteceeeansaseonens 0.014 0.014¢ 0.015¢
Forget to use birth control (N= 833)
PETSONS PET TOOM ......:ccceceeeceeeecnececseescereccoeteeees 0.016 0.010 0.013
Lack Of Privacy .........ccccesececsececsvenescesneeeeeeesueens 0.032 —0.009
Psychological distress ............cscssesscserensccecereeeues wae .- 0.1562
FE sos exten umibenxe bene esniio nen eee smewnes wewenone sare eorsemeeeisieans 0.022 0.022 0.043

 

are objectively crowded are neither
more nor less likely to want to have
additional children. The multivariate
analyses, in addition, confirm that
neither perceived lack of privacy nor
perceived crowding has any effect on
the desired number of children.
Using American data, Gove and
Hughes found that ‘‘crowded respondents are less likely than most respondents to want more children” (1983, p.
94). They did not control, however, for

the number of children the respondent
already had. Our analyses of the Thai
data show that the number of children
the respondent already has is the single
most important predictor of whether
the respondent wants additional children. Additional analyses of the Thai

‘ddta indicate that if we omit the num
ber of living children the respondent
has, we too would conclude (spuriously) that objective crowding and
both measures of subjective crowding

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

Household Crowding

TABLE 4 (continued)

Measures

Lack of privacy prevents use of birth control (N =833)

Persons per room
Lack of privacy
Psychological distress

R PAHO THM AETHER SOE H HH OSH H HE HOH ETHER HHH ECE HHEH OCDE ROOD HSHAES

Child loss (N= 1,968)
Persons per room
Lack of privacy
Psychological distress

R2

Miscarriage (N= 1,966)
Persons per room
Lack of privacy
Psychological distress

R SCO HOH OS ESHA ROT HHH EARTHS ET EHR EME ORO OTHEH ACHES LETT TERETE HOOD

Abortion (N= 1,965)
Persons per room
Lack of privacy
Psychological distress

BRP wg cea syns say caves nya conn gan ong menesaas sa ome umwemen mas wa

SOLER ARH ETH HOMER oE EHH ELE REVESETHE BOE

PeehORececee tHE Sabet orretcevstsesrtuerEe

CAH aE eC ree eeeestesesstnesesenoe

SERA Da eH aM ATHH OTOH HOSE TEMA ETEHEEEH ODES

POCO HAERHHEAEPH OH OED HHH EHO CEH SOOT HEBeEDE

SHER PEHHO eee ease seneeeeneseeee

PERE EEHRE ECO EAO ETHER TEETH TFHEMHOOEHH SHEE SEER E HERE TE H EEE

PUKE ECHO HRHSEHH SEETHER HET THERES EHH BOOTHE

POCA SETH AEH E MH OHHH N OHM OBO TERR ETE HEED

ROooHH Hass se hess esaes eens oEdevare

POH COOH HATE HAT ETHE HEE EE OBER OH OO DFER EE

PHT T ORE COKE HEF HAAAO TERETE RHEE HEE REL ED

Peers ster eet seer eReoertooesweauee

227
Beta 1 Beta 2 Beta 3
veeeee -0.011 —0.021 —0.017
vecees a 0.057 —0.004
1a vew nS eae 0.2334
beaees 0.004 0,007 0.053
wa ed 0.020 0.021 0.021
sien emis 2 —0.006 —0.006
saa rex er ume 0.001
mes oni 0.030 0.0302 0.0304
nme nail —0.036 —0.031 —~0.031
paves aus —0.026 —0.038
yas au Lee sms 0.046
wna aid 0.0172 0.0182 0.020
sevens 0.012 0.007 0.008
nd bd abs 0.026 0.006
imeoe a am 8 0.073°
veseee 0.011¢ 0.011¢ 0.016°

Note: Controlling for sex of respondent, age of respondent and spouse, years married, family income, respondent’s education,
wife’s employment status, overall health, and number of children. The natural log of persons per room and lack of privacy is used in

this paper.
4p < 0.001.
bp < 0.01.
fp < 0.001.

have significant effects on the desire
for additional children.

A related concern, for those desiring to limit family size or increase the
spacing between births, is the effective
use of birth control. Galle and his associates (1972) argued that crowding
may impede the ability of individuals
to plan and to execute their plans. It is
thus possible that crowded parents may
be more likely to forget to use birth
control, or that the lack of privacy in
their homes may more often prevent
the use of their chosen method of birth
control.

Nearly 80 per cent (N= 1584) of the
married men and women in our sample
reported currently using some form
of birth control. Nearly half of these

(N=744) relied on either male or female sterilization, a method of birth
control that, once obtained, does not
require contraceptive planning. For
the 840 married couples who were using other forms of birth control, the issue of the effective use of their method
is relevant. We explored this issue by
using the two items mentioned above,
namely, how often the couple forgets
to use birth control and whether a lack
of privacy ever prevents-the-use of
birth control. The multivariate analyses indicate that neither persons per
room nor lack of privacy is significantly
related to either item.

The results for perceived crowding
are similar. In the multivariate analyses, perceived crowding is not related
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

228

to wanting more children or forgetting
to use birth control. It is the case, however, that perceived crowding is significantly related to reports that a lack of
privacy more often prevents respondents from using birth control. Overall, though, there is little evidence to
suggest that crowded parents are less
able to carry out their plans to use
some form of birth control.

IMPACT ON CHILD Loss

The ethological literature, as earlier
mentioned, suggests that under conditions of extreme crowding, adult animals do not care for their young as effectively and higher levels of mortality
result. We explored these issues by
examining patterns in child mortality,
miscarriages, and abortion.

The results provide no evidence that
either objective crowding or subjective
crowding increases fetal mortality or
child mortality. Neither persons per
room, nor felt lack of privacy, nor perceived crowding is significantly, positively correlated with any of the three
dependent measures of mortality. The
multivariate analyses, furthermore, do
not reveal any positive significant effects of crowding on fetal or child mortality.

Contrary to expectations, our findings suggest that crowding reduces the
risk of fetal or child mortality. The
zero-order correlations show that both
persons per room and a felt lack of privacy are negatively correlated with
miscarriage. While these particular effects are not found in the multivariate
analyses, the analyses involving perceived crowding do suggest that parents who feel more crowded are less
likely to have suffered child mortality
and are less likely to report having had

Edwards et al.

 

Social Biology

an abortion. It is not clear why crowding would have these apparent effects
of reducing mortality. Note, however,
that only two unanticipated effects are
significant in the multivariate results,
and one of these (that pertaining to reported abortions) must be viewed with
caution. There is, in sum, little evidence that objective or subjective
crowding affects fetal or child survival
either positively or negatively.

As a final consideration, we looked
at the possibility that men and women
might react differently to household
crowding in terms of their sexual and
reproductive behavior. To examine
this possibility, sex interaction terms
were used. None of the sex interaction
terms for persons per room, felt lack of
privacy, or psychological distress was
significant. The effects of household
crowding on sexual and reproductive
behavior, it would appear, are similar
for Thai men and women.

CONCLUSIONS

The level of objective crowding is
four times as high in Bangkok as it is in
North America. If household crowding
has any effect on reproductive behavlor, its effect in a context with such a
high level of household crowding might
be especially discernible. The objective level of crowding—persons per
room—does have a significant effect on
certain aspects of sexual behavior. Although persons per room is not significantly related to reported frequency of
sexual relations, those who live in objectively more crowded households do
sometimes have greater reluctance to
engage in sexual relations because of
the presence of others, and they are
more likely to have had periods of tem
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

porary cessation of sexual relations
with their spouse. However, those who
live in objectively more crowded
households are no less likely to want
additional children, are neither more
nor less likely to use birth control, are
no more likely to forget to use their
method of birth control, and do not
feel that the lack of privacy prevents
them from using birth control. Moreover, objective crowding, we find, has
no effect on fetal and child survival.
The results pertaining to perceived
crowding are similarly mixed. Parents
who feel more crowded are more likely
to report that they are sometimes reluctant to engage in sexual relations
because of the presence of others and
that lack of privacy sometimes prevents them from using birth control.
Contrary to some prior research, those
who feel more crowded are less likely
to report that they have ever stopped
engaging in sexual relations for a period of time, and they are less likely to
report having suffered a child loss.
Felt lack of privacy affects only one
of the measures examined. Individuals
who have a greater felt lack of privacy
are more often reluctant to engage in
sexual intercourse. Otherwise, a felt

Household Crowding

229

lack of privacy has no significant effects
on any of the measures examined.

Perhaps more surprising than the effects that crowding has are the effects
that crowding does not have. Our analyses show that in Bangkok, where the
fertility is at a relatively low level but
where household crowding is high,
household crowding does not reduce
the desire for children. Fortunately,
household crowding does not seem to
impede the effective use of birth control, nor does crowding significantly affect fetal or child survival. Our findings
suggest that, overall, household crowding, both in its objective and subjective
dimensions, has a very selective—and
generally modest—impact on sexual
and reproductive behavior, if it has any
consequences at all.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research reported in this paper was
supported by Grant SES~8618157 from
the National Science Foundation. We are
grateful to the Institute for Population
and Social Research, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, for additional support. We wish
to thank Kristi Hoffman for research assistance.

REFERENCES

BALDASSARE, M. 1979. Residential crowding in
urban America. Univ. of California Press,
Berkeley.

Booth, A. 1976, Urban crowding and its consequences. Praeger, New York.

CaLuoun, J. B. 1962. Population density and social pathology. Sci. Amer. 206:139-148.
Cuayovan, N., P. KAMNUANSILPA, and J. KNoDEL. 1988. Thailand: Demographic and
health survey. Inst. of Population Studies,

Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.

CHRISTIAN, J., V. FryGer, and D, E. Davis.
1960. Factors in the mass mortality of a herd
of Sika deer. Chesapeake Sci. 1:79-95.

CHRISTIAN, J., J. Ltoyp, and D. E. Davis. 1965.
The role of endocrines in self regulation of
mammalian populations. Recent Progress in
Hormone Res. 21:501~578.

Davis, D. E. 1964. The physiological analysis of
ageressive behavior, p. 53-74. In W. Etkin
(ed.), Social behavior and organization
among vertebrates. Univ. of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

DOHRENWEND, B. P., P. E. SHrouT, G. G. Ear,
and F. §. MENDELSON. 1980. Nonspecific psychological distress and other dimensions of
psychopathology. Arch. General Psychiat.
37:1229-1236.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

230

Epwarps, J. N., and A. Bootu. 1977. Crowding
and human sexual behavior. Social Forc.
55:791-808.

Fetson, M., and M. SoLaun. 1975. The fertilityinhibiting effect of crowded apartment living
in a tight housing market. Amer. J. Sociol.
80:1410~1427.

GaLLe, O., W.R. Gove, and J. MCPHERSON.
1972. Population density and pathology:
What are the relationships for man? Science
176:23-30.

GALLE, O., and W. R. Gove. 1979. Crowding and
behavior in Chicago, 1940-1970, p. 23-29. In
J. Aiello and A. Baum (eds.), Residential
crowding and design. Plenum, New York.

Gove, W.R., and M. Hughes. 1983. Overcrowding in the household: An analysis of determinants and effects. Academic Press, New
York.

HorrMaNn, R. S. 1958. The role of reproduction
and mortality fluctuations of wolves (Microtus). Ecol. Monog. 28:79-109.

JILLINGS, L. 1967. A behavioral analysis of the
Mongolian gerbil. Unpublished manuscript.

Kinsey, A. C. 1953. Sexual behavior in the human female. Saunders, Philadelphia.

KNODEL, J., A. CHAMRATRITHIRONG, and N. DEBAVALYA. 1987. Thailand’s reproductive revolution: Rapid fertility decline in a ThirdWorld setting. Univ. of Wisconsin Press,
Madison.

Laws, R., and J. Parker. 1968. Recent studies
on elephant populations in East Africa.
Symp. Zool. Soc. 21:319-359.

Lockey, R. M. 1961. Social structure and stress
in the rabbit warren. J. Animal Ecol. 30:385423.

Edwards et al.

 

Social Biology

Loucn, C. D. 1956. Adrenocortical activity in
relation to the density and dynamics of three
confined populations of Microtus. Ecology
37:710-713.

Lupwic, W., and C. Boost. 1939. Uber das
Wachstum von Protistenpopulationen und
den allelokatalytischen Effekt. Arch. Prostistenkunde 92:453~484.

Mirowsky, J., and C. Ross. 1989. Social causes
of psychological distress. Aldine, New York.

Morris, D. 1952. Homosexuality in the tenspined stickleback. Behavior 4:233-261.

NATIONAL STATISTICAL OFFIcE, 1983. 1980 Population and housing census: Bangkok metropolis. National Statistical Office,
Bangkok.

PeRRINS, C.M. 1965. Population fluctuations
and clutch size in the great tit. J. Animal
Ecol. 34:601-647.

SreGAL, H. A. 1959. Egg production characteristics and adrenal function in white leghorns
confined at different floor space levels. Poultry Sci. 38:893-898.

SNYDER, R.L. 1968. Reproduction and population pressures. In E. Stellar and J. M.
Sprague (eds.), Progress in physiological psychology. Vol. 2. Academic Press, New York.

SOUTHWICK, C. 1955. Regulatory mechanisms of
house mouse populations: Social behavior affecting litter survival. Ecology 36:72-83.

SusiyaMA, Y. 1967. Social organization of hanuman langurs. Jn S. Altmann (ed.), Social
communication among primates. Univ. of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

SyME, L. A. 1973. Social isolation at weaning:
Some effects on two measures of activity.
Animal Learn. Behav. 1:161-895.
