Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Some notes on the genetics of behavior traits in
man, especially of abnormal mental traits like
Schizophrenia

M. Ye. Vartanian & V. M. Gindilis

To cite this article: M. Ye. Vartanian & V. M. Gindilis (1973) Some notes on the genetics of
behavior traits in man, especially of abnormal mental traits like Schizophrenia, Social Biology,
20:3, 246-253, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988050

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988050

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Some Notes on the Genetics of
Behavior Traits in Man,

Especially of Abnormal Mental Traits

Like Schizophrenia

M. Ye. Vartanian and V. M. Gindilis

Institute of Psychiatry
Academy of Medical Sciences
Moscow, USSR

It is well known that, with few exceptions, behavioral traits in man including the
mental disorder schizophrenia are not based
on classical Mendelian genetics. This fact
accounts for the difficulties which occur in
attempting genetic analyses of such traits.
Support for a more complex mode of inheritance include the following three reasons:
(1) polygeny has been found to fit statistically as the appropriate mechanism for
genetic determination of complex behavioral
traits; (2) complex behavioral traits are not
separable into their elementary components
in order to permit traditional Mendelian
analysis; (3) there is a heterogeneity of
genetic mechanisms controlling even the
relatively simple behavioral acts. As a
result, most simple genetic methods of
evaluation are inappropriate for the analysis of the inheritance of many behavioral
traits in man.

Among existing methods in this field, the
twin method has been found to be quite
adequate for the solution of some problems
in the genetics of human behavior. In our
opinion, however, traditional explanations
used in interpreting the results of twin anal
 

yses require some modifications. Differences
between monozygotic twin partners with
regard to a trait have been explained, for
example, as the result of environmental influences on the expressions of the genes
involved in the control of the given trait.
Differences between monozygotic twin partners as compared with differences between
dizygotic twin partners has often been used
for quantitative evaluation of the contribution of these influences to the total variance.
One can approach this problem, however,
from a different point of view.

Indeed, after the separation in the early
stages of clevage, monozygotic twins initiate their existence in space and time to a
great extent as independent organisms.
Though they possess identical genomes, the
degree of the similarity for some traits can
depend upon the characteristics of the gene
systems which are involved in the control
of these traits. If the system includes only
one major gene, then it apparently possesses
few degrees of freedom (possible deviations
in the expression of the gene). That is why
monozygotic twin pairs show as a rule very
high concordance rates for hereditary dis
246

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 20, No. 3

eases, whether somatic or mental, which are
apparently due to one mutant gene.

On the contrary, if we deal with a complex trait controlled by many genes, then
an increased number of degrees of freedom
in the system should be expected. This
means that possible deviations in expression
from such a gene system should by no
means be as rare and as imperceptible as
those found in monogenic systems. It is
not very likely that the identical polygenic
systems would be expressed in a different
manner due to the different microenvironments in which monozygotic co-twins develop.

It is possible, of course, that the abovementioned variation in expression is functional in nature and inherent in the genome
as an evolutionary adaptive mechanism.
Such a mechanism would reflect purely
stochastic aspects of gene expression in ontogeny even when the microenvironmental
conditions are the same. In other words, we
should like to point out that paired differences between monozygotic twin partners
may, in fact, be due to genetic factors and
not only to environmental influences. In
such cases we can expect that the differences
between monozygotic twin pairs for a particular trait will occur more often and with
greater variability as the number of genes
involved in the control of the given trait
increase.

We have presented this point of view in
more detail elsewhere (Vartanian and Gindilis, 1972). In this publication we should
like to add some examples for illustration.
One interesting case published recently concerned monozygotic twin sisters from Denmark discordant for color blindness and
with the father also affected by the same
trait (Philip et al., 1969). The authors of
this report quite naturally assumed that in
this case the reason for the difference with
regard to color blindness in the two twin
sisters was apparently due to the frequency

Genetics of Behavior Traits

247

of inactivation of one or another of the two
X chromosomes in each of the co-twins. In
the affected twin sister, the maternal X
chromosome with the normal allele for color
vision was more frequently inactivated,
while in the normal twin the paternal X
chromosome with the mutant allele was
more frequently inactivated. This unusual
case illustrates a genetic mechanism which
can lead to monozygotic twin divergence
even with a monogenic trait. Based on this
finding, we may all the more expect the
existence of similar consequences for polygenic traits with some genes on the X
chromosome.

The data published by Vandenberg and
his colleagues (1962) support this conclusion. These authors have demonstrated that
for some metrical traits (which are obviously polygenic) within-pair differences in
female monozygotic twins are significantly
higher than those found for the same traits
between male monozygotic partners. The
authors are correct in assuming that the
cause of this is the phenomenon of X chromosome inactivation in females.

Other genetic situations can also lead to
monozygotic twin divergence. One is based
on the existence of certain mitochondrial
genes. It is believed that these genes take
part in the control of some energy sources
and that their role is consequently important for the metabolism of the whole cell.
Many investigators believe that these genes
undergo mutations which are later reproduced during the division of the mitochondria. Further complications occur based on
the fact that the segregation of mitochondria in cell division is not as precise as the
segregation of nuclear genes. Hence, if the
dividing cell contains several mutant mitochondria, then an unequal number of these
may appear in each of the daughter cells.
This divergence in mitochondrial genes in
the two cell lines will increase during subsequent cell divisions. In other words, it is
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

248

possible that through the mechanism of
random segregation of mutant mitochondria
during the cleavage stages of monozygotic
twin development divergence results in spite
of the identity of their nuclear genes and

irrespective of the environmental conditions 
in which the given monozygotic twin pair
is developed.

The idea that discordance between monozygotic twin partners may include a purely
genetic component has also been supported
by Smith (1970) who based his statistical
procedures on the concept developed by
Falconer and Edwards in their description
of a polygenic trait with a threshold manifestation. Smith writes, “in the absence of
environmental similarities concordance rates
for a disease in MZ twins will only be high
if the heritability is very high. Thus a low
concordance rate in MZ twins cannot be
taken to prove that genetic factors are not
important in the predisposition to a disease”’
(p. 90).

According to Smith, the concordance for
traits in monozygotic twins is a function not
only of heritability, but of the frequency of
the given trait in the general population
as well. In Figure 1 we have adapted
Smith’s findings, applied them to schizophrenia, and marked an appropriate curve
corresponding to a frequency of one per
cent. (This ‘figure is approximately the
prevalence of schizophrenia in the general
population.) As can be seen, a relatively
low concordance rate of 40% corresponds
to a significantly high rate of heritability
equal to 80%. Even when the concordance
rate is 20% (one of the lowest figures
found in the published data) this still corresponds to a sufficiently high level of
heritability, that is, 60%.

Therefore, a low concordance rate for a
trait in monozygotic twins does not mean
that the contribution of genetic factors in
the determination of the given trait is in
Vartanian and Gindilis

Social Biology

significant. If traits are controlled by many
genes, it should be expected that the concordance rates for traits in monozygotic
twins will be less than usually found for
monogenic traits. While some of the abovementioned considerations are rather hypothetical, the finding obtained by Smith is
a fact which requires adequate biological
interpretation.

Schizophrenia is a behavioral disorder
that can be considered an example of an
abnormal behavioral trait suitable for an
investigation of many of the problems in
human genetics including those discussed
above. This is true, of course, only within
the framework of a biological concept of
schizophrenia. Many psychiatrists, however,
are inclined to doubt the validity of this
conception. The problem of “nature-nuture” when applied to schizophrenia has
existed for a long time, and each of the
two alternatives has been discussed with
many pros and cons during these years. We
must admit that at either end the arguments
given by both sides are convincing only to
those who have formulated them.

Lately, new approaches have been developed to solve this old problem. These
include the studies of adopted children
(Rosenthal and Kety, 1968; Heston, 1970)
as well as the studies of the offspring of
schizophrenic monozygotic twins (Fisher,
1971). In our opinion these studies should
finally enable us to conclude that heredity
is of prime importance for the development
of schizophrenia.

This finding certainly does not mean that
the role of the environmental factors should
be disregarded. Moreover, their significance
is evident in some clinical forms of schizophrenia, especially those which have a relatively good outcome. Specific hereditary
factors, however, are the primary major
requisite for the development of the more
severe schizophrenic psychoses, while the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 20, No. 3

100

80

60

40

CONCORDANCE RATE (%)

20

40

 

Genetics of Behavior Traits

 

 

249

60 80 100

HERITABILITY (%)

Fic, 1.—Expected heritability of schizophrenia given the various concordance rates in monozygotic
(MZ) twins. Middle curve corresponds to 1%, the prevalence of schizophrenia. Adapted from Smith,

1970.

environmental circumstances appear to play
a role only as nonspecific precipitation
factors.

Since the hereditary aspects of this disorder is often the major one, we think it
time to analyze the nature of this specific
hereditary predisposition to schizophrenia.
The genetic investigations carried out at
present in our laboratory initially strive to
achieve this aim. A general design of our
investigations consists in the genetic testing

of different clinical and biological displays
of schizophrenia in such a way that we can
consider each of them as independent and
elementary aspects of the disease pattern.
We believe that our analysis will establish
whether or not the characteristics which
we are exploring are controlled by independent gene systems or whether they
follow as a consequence of one and the
same mutant gene. It is our opinion that a
population of monozygotic and dizygotic
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

250 Vartanian and Gindilis

twins, concordant and discordant for schizophrenia, may serve as adequate population
for such an analysis. We shall, of course,
take into consideration the various aspects
of the twin method which have been previously discussed.

At present we are in the process of accumulating data from studies of our twins
and their closest relatives according to
various clinical, psychometric, neurophysiological, and biological tests. These procedures are used in the evaluation of schizophrenic patients at our institute. In this
connection we should like to present some
findings obtained from our genetic evaluation of schizophrenia displays in our twin
population.

Based on our long term clinical investigation at the Institute of Psychiatry, we are
able to conclude that a genetic aspect of
importance is to be found in the development of the schizophrenia process. Schizophrenia is classified in our institute into
three main forms: (1) nuclear schizophrenia—the continuous process with relatively rapid development of a deep
schizophrenic deterioration; (2) periodic
schizophrenia—a disorder characterized by
an alteration of acute psychotic affective
conditions and relatively good remission;
and (3) intermittent schizophrenia—a form
between the two above mentioned types (a
shift-like form) in which the process develops a series of attacks accompanied by
gradual personality changes.

A genealogical analysis of several hundred families where the probands were
characterized by different forms of schizophrenia have shown that each of these
clinical types has a particular family background (Shakhmatova et al., 1971). A significant accumulation of schizoid psychopaths has been found among the relatives of
probands with continuous schizophrenia,
whereas secondary cases of psychotic manifestation were only encountered rarely.

Social Biology

Among the relatives of patients with
periodic schizophrenia, however, acute
psychotic conditions were seen more frequently, while cases of schizoid psychopathy were seen significantly less frequently
than in the relatives of patients with continuous schizophrenia. The relatives of
probands with shift-like schizophrenia occupied an intermediate position.

These findings can be explained from a
genetic point of view in a variety of ways.
One may assume, for example, that continuous, shift-like, and periodic forms of
schizophrenia are really different genetic
entities. If this were so, these three forms of
schizophrenia would occur as a result of
independent mutant genes. Another proposal is that the primary genetic trigger is
one and the same for all the clinical forms
of schizophrenia. Then the specific manifestations of each form would depend on other
genetic or environmental factors. We hope
that further analysis of our twin family
data will give additional information along
these lines in order to avoid the development of poorly-founded widely-generalized
hypotheses.

Some of the clinical-genealogical correlations mentioned seem to be reflected in
biological findings. As has been shown in
our laboratory previously, patients with
different clinical forms of schizophrenia also
differ in the frequency of positive tests for
serum antibodies to brain proteins. The
anti-brain antibodies are found regularly in
patients with continuous (nuclear) schizophrenia, while periodic schizophrenics do not
differ in the frequency of this trait from normal individuals (Kolyaskina and Kushner,
1971; Kolyaskina et al., 1971). Other biological phenomena found in schizophrenics
are related to the increase of the total
activity and quantitative changes in the
spectrum of serum lactic dehydrogenase
izoenzymes (LDH). Unlike the immunopathological shifts, however, these bioDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 3

chemical abnormalities are seen in all
schizophrenic patients irrespective of the
clinical form of the disease (Lozovsky and
Mishchenko, 1971).

At present we do not possess sufficiently
convincing arguments necessary to demonstrate a markedly close relationship between
the levels of pathogenesis and those reflected by the biological phenomena. We do
not as yet know whether these findings reflect the primary factors which should be
regarded as a triggering mechanism for
the emergence of the disease entity or
whether they reflect secondary consequences of a previously developed pathological process. An investigation of the
immediate relatives of schizophrenic patients may be of significance to resolve this
problem. To date, our laboratory has collected data on more than one hundred
relatives of schizophrenics. Some data
concerning the frequency of positive tests
for serum anti-brain antibodies and the
total activity of serum LDH are given in
Table 1. It is clear from this table that our
findings in the group of relatives of schizophrenic patients as a whole differ significantly from that observed in normal persons. The findings in the schizophrenic
patients are similar to those observed in
their relatives. Further details with regard
to these studies will be discussed by one of
us (Vartanian) elsewhere.

Tt is well known that increased LDH

Genetics of Behavior Traits

251

activity and the isoenzyme spectral shifts
reflect increased membrane permeability or
cell destruction. Based on this knowledge
from the field of cell biology as well as
the evidence obtained in our own laboratory, it is possible that membranotropic
mechanisms play an important role in the
development of schizophrenia. If this is
the case, consideration should be given to
the possibility that a correlation exists
between immunologic and membranotropic
mechanisms in schizophrenia. It may be
assumed that the immunopathologic shifts
observed in patients and some of their
relatives are a result of a primary genetic
abnormality in the function or structure of
the nerve cell membrane. This defect may
be the cause of an increased outflow of
brain antigens beyond the organ which
in turn results in an autoimmune response.
One can, of course, also assume that both
phenomena are a result of independent
causes. The emergence of anti-brain antibodies, for example, may be explained by
spontaneous mutations of certain genes in
some lymphocytes belonging to a specific
cell line (Burch, 1971). Our choice of
which mode of hereditary transmission we
accept in schizophrenia will depend upon
which of the suppositions concerning the
nature of the biological abnormalities found
in this disease will turn out to be the right
one,

It is our hope that analysis of this twin

TABLE 1

SEruM LDH anp ANTI-BRAIN ANTIBODIES IN NORMAL PERSONS, SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS,
AND THE RELATIVES OF SCHIZOPHRENICS

FreEQ. OF Positive Tests oN SERUM
ANTI-BRAIN ANTIBODIES

Torta. Activity oF LDH (in un/ml/min)

No. positive

No. 2% i

SAMPLE
Normal persons ........ 50 290+ 9
Schizophrenic
patients ............. 91 340 7
Relatives of
schizophrenics ........ 38 320 s& 14

No results %+op
87 3 3.5 & 2.0

344 77 22.4 2.2

136 28 20.6 & 3.5

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

252

data will give additional information which
will enable understanding of the genetic
mechanisms underlying the biological mechanisms detected in specific schizophrenic
patients and some of their relatives. Many

Vartanian and Gindilis

Social Biology

point of view of various single-gene models
(Odegard, 1972). The findings obtained
in our Institute (Shakhmatova and Gindilis,
unpublished) support the findings published
by Odegard and reported in Table 2.

TABLE 2

Morsip RIsKS FOR SIBLINGS OF PROBANDS IN RELATION TO THE NUMBER OF SCHIZOPHRENIC
RELATIVES IN THE PARENT GENERATION

AutHors’ Data (444 Famirres)

NuMBER OF PsyCHOTIC No. of
RELATIVES IN PARENT No. of Psychotic
GENERATION* Siblings Siblings
0 361 36
Lo cee ec cc cee eee eee 127 21
dL emenertneswne 8s nn ne ok 78 14
3B ceccccccnnccnetncctene 29 9
AOtAL ceasiscagsceagazge 595 80

ODEGARD’s DATA

% No. of
Without No. of Psychotic %
Correction Siblings Siblings (Corrected)
10.0 990 67 8.3
16.5 521 55 14.9
17.9 284 45 20.9
31.0 . eee bee
13.4 1795 167 9.3

* Authors’ data include only uncles and aunts; Odegard’s data include parents as well.

authors have proposed various well-known
hypotheses regarding the modes of inheritance in schizophrenia, and it is unnecessary with this audience to evaluate them
once again. We should, however, like to
focus attention on one proposal that seems
to us to be of importance. Among those
suggesting polygenic inheritance is one
postulating a small number of complementary interacting genes at specific loci.
It should be pointed out that many arguments in favor of an additive polygenic
model are also true for the model based on
complementary major genes. For example,
the morbidity risk of schizophrenia among
the siblings of a proband increases when
the number of affected relatives in the
parental generation (uncles and aunts)
increased from zero to one or more affected
relatives. This fact may be understood in
the framework of polygenic inheritance
only, but cannot be explained from the

Furthermore, as discussed earlier, the
relatively low concordance rate for schizophrenia between monozygotic twins (with a
high heritability) can best be explained in
the context of polygenic models. On the
other hand, some of the difficulties which
one faces with the model of additive polygenes and a threshold for the manifestation
of schizophrenia does not appear in the
model of complementary interacting major
genes. Based on our present state of knowledge, the latter model seems to be the most
adequate for the description of the hereditary transmission in schizophrenia.

In the near future, we intend to subject
all of the data obtained in our twin study
to a cross-correlation analysis. We hope this
analysis will add to an understanding regarding the hereditary predisposition to
schizophrenia and will result in a verification of one of the different models for its
inheritance.

REFERENCES

Burca, P. R. J. 1971. Schizophrenia: Initiation
and development. Brit. J. Psychiat. 118:451452, 545.

FisHer, M. 1971. Psychoses in the offspring of

schizophrenic MZ twins and their normal cotwins, Brit. J. Psychiat, 118:43-52.

Heston, L. L. 1970. The genetics of schizophrenia
and schizoid disease. Science 167:242~-256.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 3

Koryasxina, G, I., and S. G. KusHner. 1971. The
role of hereditary factors in development of
the immunopathological shifts in schizophrenia.
Zh. Nevropat. Psikhiat. im S. S. Korsakova 71:
245~-247.

Kotyasxina, G. IL, R. R.

Lozovsky, and D. D. OrtovsKaya, 1971. Biological factors of schizophrenia. Bull. Acad. Med.
Sci. USSR 5:59-61.

Lozovsxky, D. V., and B. P. MisHEenxo. 1971. The
membranotropic damaging effects in schizophrenia. Zh. Nevropat. Psikhiat. im. S. S.
Korsakova 71:711-717.

OprcarD, O. 1972. The multifactorial theory of
inheritance in predisposition to schizophrenia.
In A. R. Kaplan (ed.), Genetic factors in
schizophrenia. Charles C Thomas, Springfield,
Til.

Pair, J., C. H. V. AnpEerson, V. Drever, E.
FREIESLEBEH, H. GurTLer, M. Hance, F. KuissMEYER-NIELSEN, L. S. Niersen, M. Pers, E. B.

Genetics of Behavior Traits

LipeMAN, D. V.

 

253

Rosson, A. SVEJGAARD, and B. SorENSEN. 1969.
Colour vision deficiency in one of two presumably MZ twins with secondary amenorrhoea.
Ann. Hum. Genet. 33:185-195.

RosenTHAL, D. and S. S. Kery, 1968. The transmission of schizophrenia. Pergamon Press,
London.

SHAKHMATOVA, I, V., I. L. Akopova, E. K, Losova,
T. M. SirvAcHENKO, and V. L. SHENDEROVA.
1971. Genealogical studies in schizophrenia. Bul!
Acad. Med. Sci. USSR 5:46-50.

SMiTH, C. Heritability of liability and concordance
in MZ twins. 1970. Ann. Hum. Genet. 34:85-91.

VANDENBERG, S. G., V. A. McKusicx, and A. B.
McKwusicx. 1962. Twin data in support of the
Lyon hypothesis. Nature 194:505.

VarTanian, M. Y. and V. M. Grnpiis. 1972.
Genetic models and biological research in schizophrenia. In A. R. Kaplan (ed.), Genetic factors
in schizophrenia. Charles C Thomas, Springfield,
Tl.
