Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Schizophrenia: A bag of dilemmas

L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling

To cite this article: L. Erlenmeyer#Kimling (1976) Schizophrenia: A bag of dilemmas, Social
Biology, 23:2, 123-134, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988218

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988218

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling

 

Department of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York, and Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York

ABSTRACT; This paper is concerned with the efficacy of genetic counseling with respect to
schizophrenia. Evidence for the genetic basis of schizophrenia is reviewed. as are data demonstrating increases in the marital and reproductive rates of schizophrenic patients. The dilemmas
of genetic counseling are discussed, and a strategy for early identification of individuals with a

predisposition to schizophrenia is described.

Of the psychiatric disorders, schizophrenia is the one for which the greatest
number of people are at risk at any given
time. Occurring in 1 to 2 per cent of the
population, it is a relatively common condition and certainly among the commonest
of psychiatric illnesses. Moreover, rather
than declining in frequency, schizophrenia
may increase by small but significant degrees in the future if recent trends, which I
shall review briefly, continue.

Schizophrenia is therefore the psychiatric disorder that probably does the greatest
harm to the greatest number of people. It
is marked by high costs in personal
tragedy and by high costs to society, only
some of which can be reckoned in dollars
and cents. Systematic approaches to prevention are still unknown; and although
treatments introduced in the past two decades have accelerated release following
admission to hospital and have benefited
many patients for appreciable periods of
time, the lifetime prognosis continues to be
poor for the majority of persons afflicted
with schizophrenia.

From these perspectives, efforts to reduce schizophrenia risks in the next generation can be seen as desirable, even as
urgently needed. Genetic counseling appears to be the obvious focus of such ef
forts, and, in fact, it is the only measure
available at this time that could be supposed to have any effect whatsoever upon
future risk rates. Nevertheless, in our
present state of knowledge, the implications of genetic counseling with respect to
schizophrenia are trivial, at the individual
level as well as at the population genetics
level. Schizophrenia poses a bag of dilemmas.

I will attempt to review in this paper
some things that we know about schizophrenia as they relate to genetic counseling
and to consider a current approach in research that may help to resolve some dilemmas, though it will almost surely
create new ones.

GENETIC BASIS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA:
EVIDENCE AND UNCERTAINTIES

That genetic counseling can be considered useful at all implies the involvement
of genetic factors in schizophrenia. Until
quite recently, the majority of workers on
schizophrenia might have disagreed with
such a premise; genetic hypotheses were
regarded as a myth, and a malicious myth
at that. However, most investigators
nowadays are convinced that heredity, interacting with environmental factors, does

123
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

124 Erlenmeyer-Kimling

play a role in the development of the disorder. Starting with the first family study
reported by Riidin in 1916 and continuing
to the current methodologically sophisticated work on adoptive samples, research
on well over fifty thousand individuals
(schizophrenic probands and their relatives) has demonstrated that the “myth” is
rooted in reality.

The cumulative genetic evidence can be
distilled into the following main points.!

1. Family studies have shown significantly higher schizophrenia risk rates
among first-degree relatives of schizophrenic probands than among _ seconddegree relatives and moderately higher
risks among the latter than expected for
members of the relevant general population.

2. With sufficient follow-up of cotwins,
all of the twin studies have found very
substantially greater concordance rates in
monozygotic pairs than in dizygotic pairs.

3. Communality of environment is not
sufficient to explain the latter findings.
For example, schizophrenia occurs more
frequently in full siblings of affected probands—whether reared apart from or with
the probands (Karlsson, 1966)}—than in
half-siblings who share the same environment as the probands, and more frequently in the half-siblings than in stepsiblings who also share the probands’ environments but none of their genes
(Kallmann, 1938; Rtidin, 1916). The concordance rate for schizophrenia in the 17
pairs of monozygotic twins reared apart
that have been reported in the world liter
ature is approximately the same (actually

slightly higher) as the average, across
studies, for monozygotic twins reared together and much higher than the concordance rate reported by any investigator for
dizygotic twins reared together.

1 Detailed reviews appear in Rosenthal, 1970;
Shields, 1968; Slater and Cowie, 1971; and ZerbinRudin (1967), among others.

Social Biology

4. Specific environmental conditions
are apparently not capable of explaining
data on schizophrenia risks. For instance,
children with one schizophrenic parent
have a relatively high (7 to 19 per cent)
expectancy of manifesting the disorder
whether they are exposed to the undoubtedly pernicious influences of a home that
includes a mentally ill parent or are separated from such a home from birth (see
No. 6 below). Both genetic and environmental loads are doubled in children with
two schizophrenic parents and, as might
be expected, empiric risk figures for such
children jump to 39 per cent. Yet, children
who presumably have an equally malignant environmental exposure but a lower
genetic load—by virtue of having one
schizophrenic and one psychopathic parent—show a schizophrenia risk similar to
that for children of schizophrenic X normal matings (Kallmann, 1938).

A study of persons with early total deafness further illustrates the nonspecificity
of environmental explanations. Early total
deafness imposes unusually stressful and
disruptive conditions on childhood development and later life, including disturbed communication patterns, developmental imbalances, and marked
disruption of parent-child relationships
(Altshuler and Sarlin, 1962). Just such
types of stress are frequently claimed to be
implicated in the etiology of schizophrenia, and it might therefore be expected
that highly increased rates of schizophrenia would be found among the deaf. Yet
Altshuler and Sarlin (1962) found only a
slightly increased schizophrenia rate of 2.5
per cent in the deaf population of New
York State compared to the usual estimate
of 1 to 2 per cent for the general population.

5. A review of the world literature on
folie a deux has demonstrated that persons
who were presumably “induced” into irrationality by another person actually had

 
—|
=
©
N
~
oO
=
oO
O
oO
a
Co
©
—|
e
oN
=
—
CS
‘gf
oS
ON
=
oo
O
S
Ch
©
>>
—
=
N
mei
oO
>
=
c
-,
ra
O
vO
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
5
©
a

Vol. 23, No. 2

positive family histories for mental illness
themselves (Scharfetter, 1972). Risk rates
for schizophrenia in relatives of the “inducees” were found to be similar to those
for relatives of schizophrenic patients generally. Thus, the “inducees” are evidently
genetically predisposed individuals whose
breakdown is precipitated by a close psychological relationship with another disturbed individual.

6. Finally, powerful evidence in support of the genetic theories has come in
recent years from studies of adopted individuals. These investigations allow the
transmission of biological and of cultural
factors to be separated and examined independently. In the first adoption study,
carried out in Oregon by Heston (1966), 47
subjects born to schizophrenic women,
but reared away from their mothers and
all maternal relatives from birth, were
evaluated for psychiatric status in adulthood and compared with matched subjects reared in equivalent foster placements but born to parents with no recorded psychiatric illness.

Among the offspring of the schizophrenic mothers, 5 (10.6 per cent; agecorrected risk of 16.6 per cent) had been
hospitalized with a diagnosis of schizo
phrenia, and close to one-half of the re-.

mainder exhibited “major psychosocial
disabilities” of other types. The figures for
these subjects are in line with those found
in earlier studies? of children who were
usually reared in their own parental
homes. By contrast, none of Heston’s control subjects had had psychiatric hospitalizations or received diagnoses of schizophrenia, although 18 per cent were classified as showing a serious psychosocial
impairment.

In a Danish investigation of adoptedaway offspring of schizophrenic parents

2 Age-corrected figures for schizophrenia are cited:
above; rates for other disabilities range between 15,
and 42 per cent.

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

125

and controls, Rosenthal and colleagues
(Rosenthal, 1972) have obtained results
similar to Heston’s: 11 per cent of the
adopted-away offspring of chronic
schizophrenics had a definite diagnosis of
schizophrenia and 22 per cent had less
severe diagnoses within the “schizophrenia spectrum”; none of the offspring of
parents with “spectrum” diagnoses had
definite diagnoses of schizophrenia, but 33
per cent received spectrum diagnoses as
did 15 per cent of the adopted-away offspring of parents without psychiatric
illnesses. The Heston (1966) and the Rosenthal (1972) studies both point to the
specificity of genetic factors in relation to
definite hard-core schizophrenia and,
likewise, indicate the genetic relationship
of a considerable range of less clear-cut
pathology.

Two other investigations—by Kety et
al. (1973) in Denmark and by Wender et
al. (1968) in the United States—are examining the reverse side of the coin. Rather
than tracing forward the psychiatric histories of offspring of parents known to be
schizophrenic, these studies start with
adoptees who are known to be schizophrenic and with control adoptees who are
not schizophrenic. The psychiatric status
of the adoptive relatives—and, in the Kety
study, of the biological relatives as well—
is examined for both groups of adoptees.
Analyses reported thus far reveal no differences in the schizophrenia rates of
adoptive relatives of schizophrenic and
control adoptees. In the Kety study,
moreover, biological and adoptive relatives of the controls do not differ from
each other, but biological relatives of the
schizophrenic adoptees have significantly
higher schizophrenia rates than do the
other three groups.

The results of the several adoption
studies agree well with each other and corroborate the large body of data obtained in
earlier investigations with less powerfully

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

126 Erlenmeyer-Kimling

compelling research methods. The new
evidence should effectively remove the last
lingering doubts about the fact of genetic
involvement in the predisposition to schizophrenia.

Genetic counseling may therefore be regarded as a legitimate approach to be
taken in relation to schizophrenia. However, one reason that it is not likely to
prove a very effective approach to the
problem of risk reduction in the immediate
future is that the exact nature of the genetic predisposition remains as uncertain as
it was when the first family study was
conducted, although theories have grown
more sophisticated as other human genetic
diseases have come to be better understood. Seeming equally viable at present
are theories postulating: monogenic inheritance, probably acting as a partial dominant with reduced penetrance and variable expression; polygenic threshold inheritance; or genetic heterogeneity involving a number of genetic mimics which
might differ among themselves with respect to the kinds of environmental variables that act as primary stressors, with
respect to the degree of responsivity to
such variables, and with respect to transmission pattern (primarily dominant versus primarily recessive). The various models have different implications both for the
type of approach to be taken in genetic
counseling and for the benefits to be expected from intensified efforts to provide
counseling services.

GENETIC COUNSELING: FOR WHOM?

Whatever model may eventually be
shown to best describe the genetic situation, it is evident that many “carriers” do
not manifest overt schizophrenia and do
not come to attention for psychopathological deviances at all. Who makes up the
target population for genetic counseling?

Despite the strong evidence for genetic

Social Biology

involvement in schizophrenia, 80 per cent
of persons who will eventually manifest
the disorder do not have either an affected
parent or an affected sibling. Most of the
parents whose children will eventually become schizophrenic cannot be recognized
beforehand. Of course, the same is often
true of parents of children afflicted with
recessive diseases, although family histories and knowledge about the pattern of
inheritance underlying such conditions—
and the availability of screening programs
for some types of carriers—may help to
direct many of these potential parents to
genetic counseling services prior to the
birth of a damaged child. Moreover, even
when there are no recognized signals to
warn parents prior to the birth of an affected child, genetic counseling can at
least be effective in preventing births of
additional children with the same condition. Parents of a schizophrenic-to-be,
however, have few chances of receiving
counseling to guide their decisions about
subsequent births. Usually, all of their
children will have been born long before
any one of them shows signs of becoming
ill.

Often, the siblings of schizophrenics
have also completed their families before
the patient’s condition becomes apparent.
Some siblings, though, will have an opportunity to seek counseling before entering parenthood, as will the children of
schizophrenic parents. The estimation of
risks in the next generation should then
depend upon the counseling team’s evaluation of the individual sibling’s or child’s
own chance of experiencing a schizophrenic breakdown. The situation is similar to that encountered in counseling, for
example, young relatives of Huntington’s
patients, except that the risks to siblings
and children of schizophrenic patients are
considerably lower than the 50 per cent
risk for first-degree relatives in Huntington’s disease. Frequently, however,

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

counselors are satisfied with citing the low
risks (approximately 2.5 per cent) to
nephews and nieces or to grandchildren of
schizophrenic patients; such figures apply
only if the would-be parent remains free of
the disorder.

In general, neither a relationship to a
known schizophrenic nor specifiable individual characteristics serve to identify preschizophrenic individuals as being at risk.
Thus, genetic counseling is not indicated
for most persons until after a breakdown
has occurred, and the target group for
counseling is pretty much narrowed down
to those who have already become ill.

I do not think there is usually much
question about the direction that genetic
counseling should take in advising persons
who have already experienced a schizophrenic breakdown or their spouses or
prospective spouses. Parenthood and schizophrenia tend to mix poorly. In addition
to the genetic risks to the children of
schizophrenic parents, there is considerable likelihood that any children of such
parents will be exposed to a disrupted
home environment, and frequently to a
grossly unsuitable one. The birth of a child
often exacerbates the patient’s illness, and
the responsibilities of bringing up the children tend to trigger further difficulties.

Prospects for the nonschizophrenic
spouse’s happiness are not good either; it is
difficult to be mother and father, wage
earner and homemaker, sometime mate
and companion, and, increasingly, parttime nurse and attendant to a departed
mind. Most counselors would probably
agree that schizophrenic patients should
be advised against parenthood, or having
further children, and probably even
against marriage if they are not already
married.

There zs a question, however, regarding
the value of genetic counseling, at the
population genetics level if not at the individual level, if counseling is confined to

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

 

127

known schizophrenics. To explore that
question, I want to review what is known
about reproductive patterns in schizophrenic patients.

MARITAL AND REPRODUCTIVE
PATTERNS OF SCHIZOPHRENIC
PATIENTS

Studies in Germany (Essen-Moller,
1935; Kallmann, 1938), Switzerland (Garronne, 1962), Norway (@degaard, 1960),
and England (Norris, 1956) established
that schizophrenic patients admitted to
mental hospitals earlier in this century
had, on the average, substantially reduced
rates of marriage and reproduction compared to the prevailing rates for the general populations of their own times and
places. Marriage and fertility differentials
may shift very rapidly as indirect consequences of social changes or of medical
advances that improve life expectancies
and fully or partially normalize the living
style of the victims of a particular disorder. Diabetes and hemophilia are cases in
point. Schizophrenia may be another.

Important changes in the hospitalization patterns of schizophrenic patients
began to take place about twenty years
ago, following the introduction of modern

‘drug therapies and of the movement to
ward out-of-hospital management. The
average length of separate stays in hospital
has declined steadily ever since.

To investigate the impact of this trend
upon schizophrenic patients’ opportunities
to marry and become parents, the late
Franz J. Kallmann initiated a study in
1960 in which marital and reproductive
rates could be compared for patients admitted at the beginning of the era of tranquilizing drugs and outpatient care and
patients admitted at an earlier period of
time. Detailed description of the sampling,
diagnostic evaluations, follow-up procedures, and methods of analysis have been

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

128 Erlenmeyer-Kimling

presented elsewhere (Erlenmeyer-Kimling
et al., 1966, 1969; Goldfarb and Erlenmeyer-Kimling, 1962).

The admission periods selected were
1934-36 and 1954-56. Sampling of consecutive admissions was carried out in 11
state hospitals in New York, yielding records on 9,790 admissions, unselected for
diagnosis. Psychiatric reevaluation of
these records led to verified diagnoses of
schizophrenia for 1,922 patients in the
1934-36 period and 1,415 in the 1954-56
period. Marriage, fertility, psychiatric,
and demographic data up to the time of
admission were recorded for all but 170
cases (110 in 1934-36, 60 in 1954-56) for
which reliable information was unattainable.

Randomly drawn subsamples consisting
of approximately two-thirds of the white
cases in each sample were designated for
follow-up to the date of death, to the end
of the reproductive period (age 45 for
women, age 50 for men), or to the time of
investigation (1961-65). Follow-up was
successfully carried out for 81 per cent of
the cases attempted in the 1934-36 sample
and 90 per cent of the cases attempted in
the 1954-56 sample. No differences were
found between the successfully followed
cases and those unsuccessfully attempted,
or between the followed cases and those

Social Biology

not designated for follow-up. I will therefore discuss the findings on the followed
cases only.

The main results that bear upon the
question of genetic counseling and that indicate important trends in the reproductive patterns of schizophrenic individuals
may be summarized as follows.

1. At the time of the survey admission
(i.e., the admission in 1934-36 or in
1954-56 which was drawn through our
sampling procedures), proportionately
more patients of both sexes in the 1954-56
sample were, or had been, married and
proportionately fewer had childless marriages than was true for the 1934-36 cases
(Table 1). As shown in Table 1, the childper-person rate (Line 5}—which provides
the best measure of the average reproductive rate for the group—was significantly
higher in the 1954-56 sample, as was the
proportion of patients who had produced
at least one child. The increase in marriages, rather than higher fertility rates
within marriage, accounted for the increased reproduction of the later sample.
Male patients, starting from extremely low
marital and reproductive rates in the
1934-36 sample, made greater gains than
did the females in the later sample.

2. The child-per-person rate was higher
for patients in the 1954-56 sample at all

TABLE 1

MARRIAGE AND REPRODUCTION OF MALE AND FEMALE SCHIZOPHRENIC
PATIENTS AT “SURVEY ADMISSION”*

MALES FEMALES
MARRIAGE —————qm—™AND 1934-1936 1954-1956 1934-1936 1954-1956
REPRODUCTION (NV = 546) (N = 383) (NV = $72) (NV = 398)
Marriage
Per cent ever married .............. 24.2 40.6 53.1 60.0
Per cent childless marriage .......... 28. 24.1 34.2 26.1
Reproduction
Child/person...........2ce cece cece 0. 0.7 0.9 1.1
Child/marriage..................06. 1. 1.6 1.8 1.8
Child/fertile marriage ............... 2 2.2 2.7 2.5
Per cent with one or more children .. 17 30.8 35.0 44.4

* Followed cases only; al! ages combined.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

historical reference points examined: onset
of illness, first admission, survey admission (as noted above), and final date of

follow-up. The differences between the

samples with respect to this measure
tended to widen over the course of the
histories, from onset forward (see Table
2).

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

129

31, 1941, for the early sample and as of
December 31, 1961, for the later sample to
provide standard reference points and
equal time intervals following survey admission in which hospitalization patterns
and reproductive histories could be examined. As may be seen in Table 3, the birth
rate during the interval (Line 1) was mar
TABLE 2

REPRODUCTION MEASURED BY CHILD-PER-PERSON RATE AT REFERENCE POINTS
IN MALE AND FEMALE SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS’ HISTORIES

MALES
REFERENCE
PoINnTs 1934-1936
Onset ..........cce ee eees 0.35
First admission ........... 0.41
Survey admission ......... 0.45
Final follow-up........... 0.60

3. At final follow-up, the reproductive
potential of the 1934-36 sample was
nearly exhausted; only 8 per cent of the
surviving patients were still within reproductive ages at that time. However, a
number of patients in the later sample
might have had additional children after
the end of follow-up, as 57 per cent were
then living and in the reproductive period.

4. Schizophrenic patients in previous
investigations produced relatively few of
the total number of children after first
admission. In Kallmann’s (1938) study of
patients hospitalized in Berlin around the
turn of the century, only 32 per cent of the
offspring of male patients and only 20 per
cent of the offspring of female patients
were born after the parent’s first hospitalization. Figures for our 1934-36 sample
were virtually identical to Kallmann’s
findings. Compared to the earlier samples,
patients in the 1954-56 sample had a substantially larger percentage of their children after first admission: 44 per cent of
the children of male patients and 27 per
cent of the children of female patients
were produced after first admission.

5. Data were evaluated as of December

; FEMALES
1954-1956 1934-1936 1954-1956
0.40 0.76 0.77
0.57 0.86 0.95
0.67 0.94 1.10
0.82 1.08 1.21

kedly higher in the 1954-56 group. For
females, it was double the interval birth
rate of the 1934-36 females, and for
1954-56 males it was four times as high as
the rate for males in the early sample.

6. The hospitalization patterns of the
two samples were quite different during
the equivalent time intervals following
survey admission. Of the patients admitted in 1934-36, 57 per cent remainéd hospitalized throughout the interval, and 70
per cent were resident patients at the end
of the interval. By contrast, 27 per cent of
the later group stayed in the hospital continuously, and 38 per cent were inpatients
at the standard evaluation date. Time
spent outside of hospitalization may be regarded as a measure of “opportunity” for
marriage and reproduction, and the
1954—-56 patients clearly had more opportunity (Table 3, Line 2).

7. The effect of increased opportunity
upon the increased birth rate of the later
sample can be assessed by comparing the
average birth rate per year of opportunity
in the two samples (Table 3, Line 3). First
of all, this comparison demonstrates that
when unequal amounts of opportunity are
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

130 Erlenmeyer-Kimling Social Biology
TABLE 3
BIRTH RATES OF SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS DURING THE STANDARD EVALUATION
INTERVAL FOLLOWING SURVEY ADMISSION*
MALES FEMALES

VARIABLES 1934-1936 1954-1956 1934-1936 1954-1956
Birth rate for total interval........... 0.04 0.16 0.06 0.16
Mean no. years out of hospital ........ 1.85 3.61 2.06 3.93
Birth rate per year out ............... 0.02 0.04 0.03 0.04

* All ages combined.
t Birth rate = number of births/number of patients in the group.

controlled for, the intersample difference
in the birth rates is markedly reduced.
Thus, a large part of the gain in reproduction evidenced by the 1954-56 patients
during the standard evaluation interval
was indeed attributable to the greater degree of opportunity enjoyed by those patients compared to their peers in the earlier
sample.

Second, controlling for differences in
opportunity does not completely eliminate
the between-sample differences in birth
rate. It is evident, therefore, that patients
in the 1954-56 sample actually utilized
their opportunities to a greater extent than
did patients in the earlier admission period. This finding fits with the observation
that, even prior to onset and first admission, marriage and reproduction rates for
the later group exceeded those for the
1934-36 cases at the same reference points
in their histories.

Several factors probably account for the
greater utilization of opportunity by the
more recently admitted group. Especially
important is the fact that, between the
1930’s and 1950’s, the general population
of the United States experienced pronounced trends toward increased marriage
and birth rates, earlier marriages, and less
delay before birth of a first child.

8. To understand the implications—if
any—of the rising birth rate among schizophrenic patients, it is necessary to
examine the magnitude of changes in the
differential reproduction of such patients
relative to the reproductive rates in the

general population. Table 4 presents the
reproductive rates of the schizophrenic
women in each sample, at survey admission and at the end of the standard evaluation interval, as well as similar reproductive measures for cohorts of U.S. women.?
Figures for the U.S. women refer to cohorts that were between the ages of 15 and
44 in 1935 or 1955—as were the schizophrenic women at survey admission—and
to the same cohorts of women between the
ages of 22 and 51 at the end of 1941 or
1961, the same ages as the schizophrenic
women at the end of the standard evaluation interval. The reproductive rate is calculated throughout as the child-per-person
rate, using all women, married and unmarried, as the base for each age group.

Table 4 also gives the reproductive rates
of the schizophrenic women as ratios of
the reproductive rates of the U.S. women.
Obviously, the rates for the schizophrenic
women in the earlier sample were significantly depressed below those for the general population women. This fact was still
true for the schizophrenic women admitted in 1954~-56, and it is apparent from
Table 4 that they were still not doing very
well in comparison with the population of
their time. Nevertheless, the data do show
a small but significant narrowing of the

3 The calculations of reproductive rates of the U.S.
women were derived from unpublished data on birth
cohorts of native white women in the United States.
These data were kindly supplied for our use by Dr.
Arthur A. Campbell, Chief, Natality Statistics, National Center for Health Statistics.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

 

TABLE 4

REPRODUCTIVE RATES AND RELATIVE FERTILITY RATIOS FOR SCHIZOPHRENIC WOMEN
AT SURVEY ADMISSION AND STANDARD EVALUATION COMPARED TO U.S. WOMEN
OF THE SAME AGES AND SAME PERIODS OF TIME

Periods and Ages

Earlier period
Ages 15-44 in 1934-36 ........ ce eee eee
Ages 22-51 in 1941 ..... ccc eee ee ees

Later period
Ages 15-44 in 1954-56-00... cc eee ee eee
Ages 22-51 in 1961 .......... 0. cece ee eae

131

Schizophrenic US
Women Women Ratro*
0.75 1.30 0.58
0 82 1.79 0.46
1.09 1.56 0.70
1.24 2.31 0 54

* Ratio = reproductive rate of schizophrenic women/reproductive rate of US women

reproductive differential between schizophrenic and general population women.

Moreover, age-specific data reported in
Erlenmeyer-Kimling et al. (1969) reveal
that the reproductive rates of the 1954-56
schizophrenic women and those of the
general population were closer at every
age, both at admission and at evaluation,
than were the reproductive rates of the
1934-36 schizophrenic women and of the
general population of their time. Of particular importance is the fact that the
largest differences were observed among
the patients who were in the younger age
groups at admission.

9. Figures on the reproductive rates of
men in the United States population are
not available. Data on the schizophrenic
men in our samples, however, may be
compared with those for U.S. women five
years younger than the male patients to
allow for a sex difference in the average
age at marriage. At the end of the standard evaluation interval, men in the early
sample had only 27 per cent (reproductive
rate, 0.27) as many children as the general
population women of their time, while
men in the later sample had 40 per cent as
many children as women in the United
States in 1961. Similar differences between the two samples can be seen in
every age group. Thus, between the two
time periods under study, the schizophrenic men, even more than the schizo
phrenic women, exhibited a sharp decline
in the magnitude of the previously existing
reproductive disadvantage relative to the
general population.

In summary, the study indicates: (1) a
trend toward increased marital and reproductive rates was apparent for schizophrenic patients of both sexes at the beginning of the era in which tranquilizing
drugs and community-care programs
came into prominence; (2) the decreased
duration of hospitalizations was partly responsible for the trend in marriage and
reproduction, but other factors must also
have played a role; and (3) the differential
between the reproductive rates of schizophrenic patients and those of the general
population was in the process of declining.

Data on schizophrenic women _hospitalized in Norway in 1936 and in 1955
(O@degaard, 1960) are consistent with our
findings on the New York State patients of
both sexes. Theoretical calculations derived by Bodmer (1968) on the expected
reproductive rates and fitness ratios of
male and female schizophrenics in the
United States in 1940, 1950, and 1960
point to the same kind of trend observed in
our sample, although Bodmer’s estimates
suggest even larger increases in reproduction and in “fitness” than we were able to
show for our 1954-56 sample.

The extent to which relaxation of selection against schizophrenia may be ex
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

132

pected to increase the incidence of the illness in the immediate future depends upon
two unknowns: the genetic basis for the
disorder and the nature of factors responsible for maintaining schizophrenia—and
the underlying gene or genes—in the face
of strong negative selection thus far.
Monogenic and heterogenic theories suggest more important immediate consequences than would be expected under
polygenic theories. Even polygenic models, however, would predict increasing
frequencies of implicated genes and of the
disorder itself in future generations as an
outcome of a long-term decline in a previously existing reproductive disadvantage.

Some of the increase in “fitness” displayed by the 1954-56 patients might have
been pared down if genetic counseling had
been available on a systematic basis following a first, or even a second, admission
to a mental hospital. As noted above,
these patients—unlike schizophrenic individuals observed in samples from earlier
admission periods—contracted a considerable number of marriages and produced
a considerable number of children after
the first hospitalization. A good part of the
difference in the reproductive rate of the
two samples at final follow-up resulted
from births that took place after patients
in the 1954-56 group had already experienced a schizophrenic breakdown.

It is likely that patients being admitted
to mental hospitals now, and those being
treated outside hospital facilities, are following patterns similar to those seen for
the 1954-56 sample, and possibly experiencing even greater gains in reproduction both before and after onset of the
disorder. Certainly, genetic counseling
could benefit persons already recognized
as being ill, and to the extent that it might
succeed in lowering their subsequent birth
rate, counseling would help to attenuate a
trend toward relaxation of existing selection pressures.

Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

Nevertheless, it is clear that counseling
of patients can have only a very limited
impact upon the reduction of schizophrenia risks as a whole. The majority of children of schizophrenic parents probably
will continue to be born before the parent’s
illness becomes evident; and the majority
of schizophrenics-to-be still are born to
parents who will never display a schizophrenic psychosis. To be effective, genetic
counseling would have to reach both preschizophrenic individuals and the ostensibly unaffected persons who are capable of
producing children with a genetic predisPosition to develop the disorder. As I
pointed out earlier, however, neither preschizophrenics nor potential parents of
schizophrenics can usually be recognized
at present.

EARLY IDENTIFICATION OF
VULNERABILITY

Early identification of individuals with
a predisposition to schizophrenia is the
main goal of one type of research that is
being pursued by a number of workers.
These studies start with groups of individuals who are considered, on a statistical
basis, to be at high risk for developing the
disorder later in life, but who have not yet
done so at the time of the initial examination.

The criteria used in defining risk are not
the same in all studies. Some investigators
(Watt, 1972) prefer to select subjects on
the basis of specific behaviors or behavioral profiles that are hypothesized to
be characteristic of preschizophrenics.
Many researchers, though, consider that
the association between given behaviors in
childhood and later manifestation of
schizophrenia remains to be documented
and that groups of subjects for whom empirical risk figures are well established

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

make better candidates for high-risk research at this time.

In particular, children of schizophrenic
mothers and fathers—for whom reported
risk estimates average about 12 per cent
(range, 7 to 19 per cent)—are being examined in infancy, childhood, and adolescence in several studies (see Garmezy,
1974). Two of our studies (ErlenmeyerKimling, 1973) allow comparisons to be
made between groups of children with different levels of risk by including, in addition to children with one affected parent,
children with two schizophrenic parents;
the latter group has an estimated schizophrenia risk of 39 per cent.

The investigations of high-risk subjects
share common objectives concerned with
the evaluation of etiological questions,
which retrospective research tends to
obscure, and with the unfolding of the
disease process. Above all, however,
these studies aim at developing measures,
behavioral or biological, that can be used
for reliably identifying vulnerable persons
well in advance of the onset of overt symptoms. By definition, of course, such measures would also reveal which members of
a group at high statistical risk would actually be expected mot to undergo serious
mental difficulties.

It is not unreasonable to assume that
vulnerable children in the statistically
low-risk population at large could eventually be located through mass-screening
programs using adaptations of the identification measures originally worked out
in the studies of high-risk groups. Thus, it
is quite possible that the majority of predisposed individuals could be recognized
early in life and that they would therefore
become accessible to genetic counseling.

Early identification, should have other
more immediately satisfying ramifications
beyond an increase in the efficiency of
genetic counseling. Specifically, the ability
to distinguish youngsters in need of atten
 

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

 

133

tion is the sine qua non for preventive
intervention efforts. The endeavor to develop intervention methods aimed at preventing, or at least moderating, a psychotic breakdown is a major long-term goal of
much of the ongoing research on high-risk
subjects.

To the extent that combined goals of
detection, mass screening, and successful
interventions can be realized, the frequency of manifest schizophrenia can be
expected to decline dramatically.

However, the proportion of genotypically predisposed individuals would not
decline as a consequence of preventive intervention. In fact, it might increase
slightly because, if prevention worked
well enough, any vestige of a former selective disadvantage would probably disappear. But, if prevention worked well
enough—meaning that it could ensure adequate functioning in adult life—would an
increase of “schizophrenic genes” matter?
The answer, depending upon a number of
factors including costs and personal inconveniences entailed in detection and intervention, might be “yes.”

SUMMARY

I have called schizophrenia “a bag of
dilemmas” because: (1) Until the disorder
can effectively be prevented from developing through environmental interventions,
the reduction of risks through genetic
counseling is clearly desirable. (2) The role
of genetic counseling is sharply restricted,
however, until measures for reliable early
identification of preschizophrenic individuals become available. (3) Once detection
is possible at relatively young ages, vulnerable persons become accessible to both
genetic counseling and preventive intervention. (4) Prevention of adverse effects
of the illness may allow implicated genes
to accumulate in greater frequency in
the future. (5) Costs of intervention, and

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

134

other considerations, might make genetic
counseling advisable despite prevention of
distressing phenotypic manifestations. (6)
The ethical aspects of promoting genetic
counseling among persons who are not expected to experience a serious illness (and
whose children are not expected to either)
are in doubt. (7) The effectiveness of
counseling in such a situation is also in
doubt.

Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Research reported in this paper has been
supported by Public Health Service grants
MH-03532 and MH-19560 from the National
Institute of Mental Health and by a grant
from The Benevolent Foundation of Scottish
Rite Freemasonry, Northern Jurisdiction,
U.S.A. This paper was prepared for a conference on Genetic Counseling in Psychiatric Disorders: State of the Science and the Art, May
17, 1973, at the University of Indiana, Indianapolis.

REFERENCES

ALTSHULTER, K. Z., and B. SARLIN. 1962. Deafness
and schizophrenia: Interrelation of communication
stress, maturation lag and schizophrenic risk. In
F. J. Kallmann, L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, E. V.
Glanville, and J. D. Rainder (eds.), Expanding
goals of genetics in psychiatry. Grune & Stratton,
New York.

BopMER, W. F. 1968. Demographic approaches to
the measurement of differential selection in human
populations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 59:691-699.

ERLENMEYER-KIMLING, L. 1973. Comments on
past and present: Genetic research on schizophrenia. Psychiat. Quart. 46:363—-370, 585.

ERLENMEYER-KIMLING, L., S. NIcoL, J. D.
RAINER, and W. E. DEMING. 1969. Changes in
fertility rates of schizophrenic patients in New
York State. Amer. J. Psychiat. 125:916-927.

ERLENMEYER-KIMLING, L., J. D. RAINER, F. J.
KALLMANN. 1966. Current reproductive trends in
schizophrenia: A psychiatric-genetic survey. In P.
H. Hoch and J. Zubin (eds.), Schizophrenia.
Grune & Stratton, New York.

EsSSEN-MOLLER, E. 1935. Untersuchunger tiber die
Fruchtbarkeit gewisser Gruppen von Geisteskranken. Acta Psychiat. Neurol. Scand. Suppl. 8

GARMEZzyY, N. 1974. Children at risk: The search for
the antecedents of schizophrenia. Part I: Ongoing
research programs, issues, and intervention.
Schiz. Bull. 9:55-125.

GARRONE, G. 1962. Etude statistique et génétique de
la schizophrénie a Genéve de 1901 4 1950. J. génét.
hum. 11:89-219.

GOLDFARB, C., and L. ERLENMEYER-KIMLING.
1962, Mating and fertility trends in schizophrenia.
In F, J. Kallmann, L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, E. V.
Glanville, and J. D. Rainer (eds.), Expanding
goals of genetics in psychiatry. Grune & Stratton,
New York.

HEsTON, L. L. 1966. Psychiatric disorders in foster
home reared children of schizophrenic mothers.
Brit. J. Psychiat. 112:819-825.

KALLMANN, F. H. 1938. The genetics of schizophrenia. J. J. Augustin, New York.

KARLSSON, J. L. 1966. The biological basis of
schizophrenia. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill.

KeEtTy, S., D. ROSENTHAL, P. WENDER, F. SCHUL
SINGER, and B. JACOBSEN, 1975. Mental illness in
the biological and adoptive families of adopted
individuals who have become schizophrenic: A
preliminary report based on interviews with the
relatives. In R. R. Fieve, D. Rosenthal, and H.
Brill (eds.), Genetic research in psychiatry. Johns
Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.

Norris, V. 1956. A statistical study of the influence
of marriage in the hospital care of the mentally
sick. J. Ment. Sci. 102:467.

MDEGAARD, O. 1960. Marriage rate and fertility in
psychotic patients before hospital admission and
after discharge. Intl. J. Soc. Psychiat. 6:25—-33.

ROSENTHAL, D. 1970. Genetic theory and abnormal
behavior. McGraw-Hill, New York.

. 1972. Three adoption studies of heredity in
the schizophrenic disorders, p. 63-75. In L.
Erlenmeyer-Kimling (ed.), Genetics and mental
disorders. Intl. J. Ment. Hith. I.

RUDIN, E. 1916. Studien tiber Vererbung und Entstehung geistiger Storungen. I. Zur Vererbung
und Neuentstehung der Dementia praecox.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

SCHARFETTER, C. 1972. Studies of heredity in symbiontic psychoses, p. 116-123. In L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling (ed.), Genetics and mental disorders. Intl. J. Ment. Hith. 1.

SHIELDS, J. 1968. Summary of the genetic evidence.
In D. Rosenthal and S. S. Kety (eds.), The transmission of schizophrenia. Pergamon Press, Oxord.

SLATER, E., and V. A. Cowlr. 1971. The genetics of
mental disorder. Oxford Univ. Press, London.

WaTT, N. 1972. School-age children at risk by genetic and behavioral criteria. Position paper presented at Conference on Risk for Schizophrenia,
Dorado Beach, Puerto Rico, October 18-22.

WENDER, P. H., D. ROSENTHAL, and S. S. KETY.
1968. A psychiatric assessment of the adoptive
parents of schizophrenics. Jn D. Rosenthal! and S.
S. Kety (eds.), The transmission of schizophrenia.
Pergamon Press, Oxford.

ZERBIN-RUDIN, E. 1967. Endogene Psychosen. In
P. E. Becker (ed.), Humangenetik, ein kurzes
Handbuch. Vol. V/2. Thieme, Stuttgart.

 
