Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Comment on Kunz and Peterson, “family size, birth
order, and academic achievement”

Frank M. Howell & Linda C. Malone

To cite this article: Frank M. Howell & Linda C. Malone (1979) Comment on Kunz and Peterson,
“family size, birth order, and academic achievement”, Social Biology, 26:1, 80-84, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1979.9988363

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988363

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Communications

Comment on Kunz and Peterson, “Family

Size, Birth Order, and Academic
Achievement’’

 

Frank M. Howell and Linda C. Malone

Department of Sociology, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, Mississippi; and Department of
Computer Science and Statistics, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, Mississippi

In their paper on “Family Size, Birth
Order, and Academic Achievement,”
Kunz and Peterson (Social Biology, 1977,
Vol. 24, No. 2, p. 144-148) undertake a
test of the Zajonc and Markus “confluence
theory” of family configuration effects on
cognitive ability (see Zajonc and Markus,
1975). The authors use as a proxy for intelligence the self-reported grade-point averages of high-school students in their sample. We find the confluence model of intellectual development very instructive in attempting to discern the intricate relationship between the dynamics of family
configuration and the cognitive development of individuals. An attempt to test the
theory with an independent set of data is
laudable. However, the Kunz and Peterson paper has several flaws and inconsistencies which severely limit the utility of
the findings.

The Kunz and Peterson paper purports
(1977, p. 145) to “test the Zajonc model of
birth order and family size while controlling for social class of the father.” The
analysis proceeds to cross-tabulate average grades (GPA) by family size and birth
order, paralleling similar analyses using
intelligence test scores by Belmont and
Marolla (1973) and Breland (1974). These

This comment was submitted January 28, 1978.

latter two studies are the basic sources of
data from which Zajonc and Markus develop the confluence model of family
configuration effects on intelligence. Our
major criticisms of the Kunz and Peterson
paper are: (1) the authors never really discuss the confluence model as outlined by
Zajonc and Markus, obviating any plausible test of it; (2) the tables which are supposed to show discrepancies between the
Kunz-Peterson data and the ZajoncMarkus model in fact support the latter
model; and (3) the use of the stepwise regression routine in the SPSS computer
package (Nie et al., 1975) as the basis for
examining the Kunz-Peterson model appears to be in error.

One, the authors, in any theoretical
sense, do not “test” the confluence model
of intellectual development as outlined by
Zajonc and Markus (1975). This error
seems to be precipitated by a conceptual
misunderstanding by Kunz and Peterson
of the confluence model. Their analysis
uses as a conceptual proxy for intelligence
the self-reported grades of high-school
students as the outcome of the “alpha process” underlying confluence theory. The
plausibility of using academic performance
(GPA) as a realistic approximation of academic ability (IQ) is, at minimum, rather
tenuous. This use of GPA in place of IQ as

80

 

 

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. |

a formal test of confluence theory confounds the analysis with a reversal of
cause-effect relationships, since academic
performance most often is specified as dependent on academic ability. Aside from
this conceptual confusion, the utility of
GPA as an empirical indicant of IQ is
simply not warranted. See, for example,
the discussions of Porter (1974, 1976) and
Williams (1976).

The original exposition of the theory
(Zajonc and Markus, 1975, pp. 76-77)
states that the model

is based entirely on the mutual intellectual
influences among children as they develop in
the family context. The major emphasis js on
the intellectual environment of the individual during the course of his development:
more specifically, on the intellectual level of
the individual’s siblings and parents... .
We shall show... that. . . family size must
have a depressing effect on intellectual level,
that intellectual ability may under some circumstances decrease and under others increase with birth rank, and that age gaps
between successive children play an exceedingly important role in the birth order effects
found by Belmont and Marolla and by others.

It should be clear that the confluence
model posits a person-environment interaction process (the “alpha” process) as
an explanatory factor in intellectual development. The latent variable, specified as
“average intellectual pool” in the family
milieu, is merely indicated by the observable variables of family size, birth order,
and age spacing between these siblings.
The matter of age spacing between siblings is a central feature of confluence
theory (see Zajonc and Markus, 1975, p.
83) and one which Kunz and Peterson
omit entirely from their analysis, without
comment.

In the latter portion of their paper,
Zajonc and Markus (1975, p. 83) use a
regression equation to relate changes in
family intellectual climate to birth order,
family size, and last born’s handicap.

Communications

$1

Using the Dutch data (see Belmont and
Marolla, 1973) to estimate the equation,
they conclude that birth order effects are
relatively inconsequential, given the use of
aggregate population parameters for sibling spacing and other assumptions. Thus,
confluence theory suggests that it is the
cumulative nature (see, for example, Bijou
[1971], Stinchcombe [1969], Bloom [1964])
of a specific environmental dimension,
average “intellectual climate,” with which
the child interacts through the early stages
of the life cycle, that explains the ubiquitous effects of family size (and partially
birth order) on intelligence. The omission
of age spacing by Kunz and Peterson from
their analysis is a misspecification of the
confluence model and negates the supposed “test” of it.

Two, Table 2 in the Kunz and Peterson
article is entitled Grade Point Average By
Birth Order. Kunz and Peterson state (pp.
145-146) “Table 2 indicates that while
there is a general decrease in GPA as birth
order increases, there are reversals in the
case of the sixth-born and also for the line
representing eight or more children. This
may indicate the relationship is nonlinear,
i.e., parabolic.” There are several criticisms which might be levied at Table 2
and the Kunz and Peterson remarks concerning Table 2. First, the data themselves appear inappropriate. It appears as
if the grades given are averages over all
family sizes, i.e., for the Birth Order 1 it
appears that Kunz and Peterson found the
average of all first-born children whether
from a one-child family or an eight-child
family. Clearly since “within each family
size, the last born shows a greater decline
in intellectual performance than any other
birth rank” (Zajonc and Markus, 1975, p.
74), the grades may be distorted by ignoring family size. Second, if we were to assume the data were appropriate, the reversal in the case of the sixth-born and
eight or more is not contradictory to the

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

82 Communications

Zajonc and Markus theory. “With one
specific exception, family size must have a
depressing effect on intellectual level, that
intellectual ability may under some ctrcumstances decrease and under others increase with birth rank, and that age gaps
between successive children play an exceeding important role in the birth order
effects...” (Zajonc and Markus, 1975, p.
77). Lastly, if Kunz and Peterson expect a
linear relationship based on the Zajonc
and Markus paper they have misunderstood the article. “The Dutch data
were characterized by a quadratic trend
.... The transformed Raven scores of the
Belmont-Marolla study are accurately described by the following regression equation which accounts for 97% of the variance:

My = 101.31 — .31i + .017?

— 377 + .48A.” (1975, p. 83).

Clearly, this is a quadratic equation which
fits the data well.

Table 3 is titled Grade Point Average
By Birth Order By Family Size. Kunz and
Peterson state (p. 146):

Examination of the data in terms of adjacent
pairs shows that there are nine discrepancies
going across the matrix and 15 discrepancies
going down the matrix. The theory predicts
that GPA’s should decrease as one moves to
the right and also as one moves down, that
is, as family size and birth order increases.
... Generally, there appears to be no pattern
emerging in Table 3 like that predicted by
the Zajonc model except in the second, third
and fourth rows where there is a GPA decrease in each case of increasing birth order
when family size is held constant.

The quote cited earlier from page 77 of the
Zajonc and Markus (1975) article indicates
that Zajonc and Markus expect there to be
a reversal in some cases. In fact, they state

(p. 85):

Intellectual performance decreases with
birth order but only where there is close

Social Biology

spacing between successive children... .
With larger gaps between children, this pattern can be arrested or even reversed. . . .
Finally, the upswing in the Raven scores
which were found for the lower ranks in
larger families is a feature of combining exponential functions, and it occurs because
lower ranks have an environment that includes fewer individuals with an intelligence
level lower than their own, while this is not
the case for higher birth ranks.

Table 4 of the Kunz and Peterson article
is similar to Table 3 with social class held
constant. The number of “discrepancies”
according to Kunz and Peterson is now 25,
only 2 more than for Table 3. Yet Kunz
and Peterson state (p. 146): “with this type
of pattern, one would have to argue that
the Zajonc model is not supported insofar
as grade point average is concerned.” The
comments about Table 3 are relevant to
Table 4. Kunz and Peterson seem to feel
social class is an important variable. The
Zajonc and Markus theory seems to work
well ignoring social class. However,
Zajonc and Markus did not exclude the
possibility that it should be considered (see
Zajonc, 1976). In fact, their regression
equation between the a’s andi, i*, 7 and
(where z is birth order, 7 is family size and
d is an indicator variable for the last born’s
handicap) had an R? = 0.69. Perhaps this
R?*, although very respectable, could be
improved by inclusion of social class as a
variable.

Finally, some comments are in order
regarding the step-wise multiple regression, the results of which appear in Table
5 (p. 147) of the Kunz and Peterson article.
It is well known that step-wise regression
is inappropriate and can be misleading
when multicollinearity is present. That is,
when there is a high correlation (this may
or may not be a simple pairwise linear
relationship) among the independent variables, step-wise regression should not be
used. Certainly social class, birth order,
and family size are not wholly independent (see, for example, Thompson and

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. I

Lewis, 1970; Terhune, 1974; Blau and
Duncan, 1967). Additionally, if forward
inclusion was used in the SPSS regression
routine (Nie et al., 1975), then the independent variable with the highest zeroorder correlation with GPA is entered into
the equation first, followed sequentially by
the variable with highest partial regression
coefficient. This technique for entering independent variables into the equation presupposes no causal ordering, and also in
the presence of multicollinearity it may not
produce the “best” prediction equation.
Testing a theoretical model presupposes a
causal ordering among a set of variables
and requires an explicit empirical statement that is isomorphic with the theory. It
is unfortunate that the authors do not include a correlation matrix for these variables so that a reanalysis would be possible. The above problems alone could invalidate the conclusions Kunz and Peterson draw from the regression results.
There are other considerations also. It is
not clear from the text of the article how
the social class variable was handled. It
appears to have been handled as an indicator variable. If it was indeed handled
thusly, how were the two social classes
defined? A change in the technique for
measuring social class could drastically affect the resulting regression equation. A
lack of discussion on this point leads one to
wonder if the authors realized the impor
Communications

83

tance of this variable or if they simply
chose a procedure which appeared to them
to support their opinions.

To summarize this critique, we reiterate
two main points raised in the above discussion. Sibling spacing was not considered at all by Kunz and Peterson, but according to Zajonc and Markus, “It is less
important to know what birth rank the
individual occupies than how many years
separate him (or her) from older or
younger siblings” (1975, p. 83). The addition of a single variable when multicollinearity is present can completely change
the resulting inference. For a purported
test of the confluence model, this omission
of a central factor is disastrous to the
plausibility of the findings. Lastly, one
needs to ask (as indeed Kunz and Peterson
themselves point out elsewhere in their article) if GPA is indeed a credible proxy for
intellectual level as measured by the transformed Raven score (see Zajonc and Markus, 1975).

The intent of the Kunz and Peterson
paper is laudable. Zajonc and Markus
raise some questions themselves about the
Belmont-Marolla data, especially for inferences to other populations. Clearly, further work is indicated. The ZajoncMarkus confluence model is rather sophisticated and could therefore be easily misunderstood as we feel is the case with the
Kunz and Peterson article.

REFERENCES

BELMONT, L., and F. A. Marouiua. 1973. Birth
order, family size, and intelligence. Science
182:1096-1101.

Biyou, SIONEY W. 1971. Environment and intelligence: A behavioral analysis, p. 221-239. In R.
Cancro (ed.), Intelligence: Genetic and environmental influences. Grune and Stratton, New
York.

Buiau, P. M., and O. D. DUNCAN. 1967. The American occupational structure. Wiley, New York.
BLOOM, BENJAMIN S. 1964. Stability and change in

human characteristics. Wiley, New York.

Kunz, P. R., and E. T. PETERSON. 1977. Family
size, birth order, and academic achievement. Soc.
Biol. 24:144-148.

 

Nig, N. H., C. H. Hutt, J. G. Jenkins, K. STEINBRENNER, and D. H. BRENT. 1975. Statistical
package for the social sciences. 2nd_ ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York.

PORTER, J. N. 1974. Race, socialization and mobility
in educational and early occupational attainment.
Amer. Sociol. Rev. 39:303-316.

. 1976. Socialization and mobility in educational and early occupational attainment. Sociol.
Educ. 49:23-33.

STINCHCOMBE, ARTHUR L. 1969. Environment: The
cumulation of effects is yet to be understood. Harvard Educ. Rev. 39(3):511-523.

TERHUNE, K. W. 1974. A review of the actual expected consequences of family size. Calspan Re 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

84. Communications

port No. DP-5333-G-—1. Prepared for National
Institutes of Health, Publication No. (NIH) 76779, Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C.

THOMPSON, W. S., and D. T. Lew1s. 1970. Population problems. 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.

WILLIAMS, T. 1976. Abilities and environments, p.
61-102. In W. H. Sewell, R. M. Hauser, and

Social Biology

D. L. Featherman (eds.), Schooling and achievement in American society. Academic Press, New
York.

ZAJONC, R. B. 1976. Family configuration and intelligence. Science 192(16 April):227-236.

ZAJONC, R. B., and G. B. Markus. 1975. Birth
order and intellectual development. Psychol. Rev.
82(1):74-88.

Response to Comment by Howell and Malone

Phillip R. Kunz and Evan T. Peterson

Department of Sociology, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah

The authors, commenting on our earlier
paper, begin by indicating that the use of
grade point data as a proxy for intelligence
is “laudable.” For them, it then becomes
“rather tenuous,” and finally “simply not
warranted.” In view of the very narrow
band of differences reported in IQ by
Zajonc and Markus (not exceeding the
standard error of measurement) we believe
this to be an acceptable alternative test of
the Zajonc notion. We recognize that IQ
and GPA are not the same; however, we
believe the GPA to be a better measure of
outcome because it is a better performance
indicator.

It is true that our article does not discuss
the Zajonc-Markus model in detail, but
the fact that the confluence model has
been generally published and read reduces
the need for a recounting of that which is
so generally well known in the area of
family size and birth order.

Much is made of the intellectual level
which develops within the environment of
the siblings and parents, and Howell and
Malone quote Zajonc and Markus that

“family size must have a depressing effect
on intellectual level... .” Why must it?
Older children may teach younger siblings
and be culturally enriching rather than
depriving. This case may be made as well
as the former.

We did not treat spacing because (1)
Zajonc did not in his earlier work and (2)
preliminary analysis indicated it made no
sense theoretically or empirically. We
tested the first model in our paper. The
criticism of Table 2 is handled in Table 3,
where GPA is separated out for family size
and birth order.

While social class does not account for
as much of the difference in GPA as we
expected, we do not allow that the
“Zajonc and Markus theory seems to work
well ignoring social class.” One can’t ignore the social class bias in the IQ tests.

Social class was arrived at using the
McGuire S.E.I. table which uses as the
determining variables occupation, education, income, and religion, weighted by 4,
4, 3, and 1 respectively. We should have
spelled that out in our article.

 

 
