Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Ambivalence toward small families in Rural Latin
America

Alan B. Simmons

To cite this article: Alan B. Simmons (1974) Ambivalence toward small families in Rural Latin
America, Social Biology, 21:2, 127-143, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988100

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988100

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Ambivalence Toward Small Families in

Rural Latin America

Alan B. Simmons

Population and Health Sciences
International Development Research Centre
Ottawa, Canada

The recent proliferation of fertility surveys and the use in them of simple measures
of family size preferences have led to a
widespread discussion of the nature of fertility motivation among traditional women.
On the one hand are those investigators
who assume that straightforward questions
on the “best” or “ideal” number of children
(for oneself, or for women in general) can
be readily understood, even by women ignorant of birth control, and that responses
to these questions are meaningful measures
of motivation. For example, Stycos (1965)
argues that although lower class and rural
Peruvian women have seldom thought
about family size preferences or discussed
them with their husbands prior to being
interviewed on the topic, their answers to
several questions on family size preferences
indicate a latent motivation for small families which could likely be activated through
public discussion and the spread of contraceptive knowledge.

On the other hand, evidence collected in
several studies suggests that attitudes toward small families may in fact be very
ambivalent. In Puerto Rico, it was noted
that women who had “small” family size
ideals often also saw clear advantages to

 

 

large families (Hill et al., 1959, pp. 23-24).
Ambivalence in family size issues (e.g., the
pleasures provided by a new baby) and
about contraceptive practice itself have
similarly been noted for lower class Black
women in the United States (see Rainwater, 1960). Young women who have
never been exposed to pregnancy, as well
as mated women entirely ignorant of contraception, may not even recognize family
size differences as salient dimensions when
presented with photographs of various size
families (Simmons, 1971; Stycos, 1964).

In reviewing several studies of family
size attitudes, Hauser (1967, pp. 399-405)
concludes that a simple interpretation of
available data on family size desires is
not possible; that validity checks have been
sorely absent from the research on this
topic; and that more elaborate scales and
_hew measures must be devised. Mertens
(1970, Part 4.2) comes to similar conclusions regarding research on this topic in
Latin America. As a result of such considerations, the direction of at least some
current research seems to be more toward
determining concretely the patterns of values and motives which favor large and small
families in different cultures and social

127

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

128 Simmons

contexts, the importance of these motives
relative to other values, and their net effect
on family size preferences (see, for example,
Flapan, 1969; Wyatt, 1967; Hoffman and
Hoffman, 1973; Mueller, 1972).

. The purpose of this paper is to analyze
social definitions of “large” and “small”
families in rural Latin America and to examine perceptions of advantages (‘‘good”
features) and disadvantages (“bad” features) associated with family size. The
paper develops a hypothetical model of the
relationships between patterns of perceived
advantages and disadvantages, diverse measures of family size preferences, and interest in learning about contraceptives. Measures of the principal variables in this
model are developed, and some of the empirical associations between these variables
suggested by the hypothetical model are
examined. The results presented here are
directed toward a better understanding of
family size preferences in rural Latin America and toward an alternative methodology
for assessing family size preferences.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data for this study are from a
rural fertility survey coordinated by the
Centro Latinoamericano de Demografia
(CELADE) in Costa Rica, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru, between 1968 and 1969.2
This survey was designed to be representative of all women 15 to 49 years of age in
the rural and small urban areas of these
four nations. Between 2,100 and 3,000

1 These rural surveys were carried out to supplement previous comparative fertility research
coordinated in Latin America by the United Nations Latin American Demographic Centre
(CELADE) Santiago, Chile. The cumulative nature of this survey has been discussed by Mertens
(1970, Part 1-3) and some preliminary results
from the pilot stage of the rural surveys have
been compared with previously collected urban
information by Miré and Mertens (1968). Selected general results from the earlier urban surveys may be found in Miré (1966) and Elam
(1971).

Social Biology

women were sampled in each country. Rural
areas were defined to include villages with
less than 2,500 inhabitants and scattered
farm populations, Small urban areas were
defined as towns with between 2,500 and
20,000 inhabitants. Together, the rural and
small urban areas sampled contained about
half of the population in the four nations
studied. In the present analysis, we consider only currently mated women, since
birth planning and family size preferences
are likely to be particularly meaningful
issues for these women.

The social-economic and family planning
characteristics of the women vary substantially from one nation to another, reflecting
overall differences in rural development between them. As Table 1 indicates, modern
institutions (schools) and services (electricity, piped water) have achieved the
greatest penetration into the rural and small
urban sectors of Costa Rica and the least
penetration into these sectors in Peru, with
Colombia and Mexico occupying intermediate positions.

The per cent who have knowledge of at
least one birth control method and the per
cent who have ever used a birth control
method generally follow the pattern of
educational differences, with Costa Rica
being much more advanced in the spread
of contraceptive knowledge and practice,
followed in order by Colombia, Mexico, and
Peru. Levels of contraceptive use (range:
34 per cent to 11 per cent) are low. Only
in Costa Rica have more than half of the
women discussed contraceptives or family
size issues with their husbands. In Peru,
only 19 per cent of the women have discussed contraceptive use with their husbands. Although women sampled have on
the average not yet completed their childbearing, the number of children already
born to them is high in all four nations
(ranging from 4.8 in Peru to 5.3 in Costa
Rica and Mexico).
 

—|
=
©
N
Samed
5
&
oO
oO
oO
A
CO
CO
=z
oe
oN
=
—
3
'S
CS
OQ
ao
oO
=
Cee
©
>>
—
N
~
oO
>
a
c
-,
Me)
2
cv
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

 

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families 129

TABLE 1

SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF CURRENTLY MATED WOMEN SAMPLED IN RURAL AND
SMALL UrBan AREAS OF Four LATIN AMERICAN NATIONS

Costa RIcA
CHARACTERISTICS (N = 1,336)
Some schooling ...........cccceecs 82%
Electricity in home ...........000. 41%
Running water in home ........... 60%
Radio in home .......cccccccccees 77%
Know at least one birth control
method ........... seABESIEESaeS 67%
Have ever used a birth control
method ....ccccccccccncvcsceces 33%
Have ever talked with husband
about using contraceptives ....... 64%
Have ever talked with husband
about no. of children wanted ..... 52%
Mean no. of children ever
born alive ....ccecccccccccccees 5.3

ALL
CoLoMBIA Mexico Peru NATIONS
(N =1,712) (N=2,009) (N=1,757) (VN = 6,814)
73% 63% 53% 67%
29% 41% 20% 33%
32% 21% 11% 29%
66% 74% 38% 63%
37% 32% 18% 37%
18% 10% 10% 17%
43% 28% 20% 37%
34% 44% 40% 42%
5.2 5.3 4.9 52

i pg
Source: Pecfal-Rural survey of all women 15 to 49 years of age in rural and small urban (population less than
20,000) areas of Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Peru, 1969, Percentages rounded to the nearest whole number for

presentation.

A MODEL OF FAMILY SIZE ATTITUDES

The methodological approach and analysis in this study emerged from the following general conceptualization of the nature
of attitudes toward family size.

1. Attitudes toward a given number of
children may be considered in terms of
preferences among alternatives. A woman’s
belief that “4 children is the best number
to have” can be interpreted as saying that
“4 children is better than some other numbers (3 children, 5 children, etc.)’? which
she has in mind as alternative possibilities.

2. Preferences form within a range of
alternatives which are principally defined
by cultural circumstances. In some cultural
settings the desire not to have any children
may not be “legitimate” or even “possible”; hence, this alternative would lie outside the range in which preferences are
made. In other cultural settings, having
twelve children would be equally “unthinkable,” and hence outside the range within
which preferences are made. One of the
research problems in the area of family size
preferences is to determine, for any given

 

culture, the range of alternatives which are
considered.

3. The formation of a preference may
be explicit and reflected upon, as would
be the case when the issue has been publicly discussed and/or privately thought
about, or it may be unconscious and nonreflected upon, as would be the case when
cultural patterns or individual characteristics make discussion and private consideration unlikely. If the possibility of limiting fertility is unknown, individuals
generally will not have explicitly thought
about advantages and disadvantages of
large and small families. When asked for
their preference, they may frequently answer with “can not say,” “the number that
God sends,” or with a number that reflects
the typical family size in their community.
If asked for the advantages and disadvantages of large and small families, they may
have great difficulty in answering. In such
cases, one may say that the attitude or
issue in question does not seem to exist;
in other words, awareness of the implications of family size differences is low.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

130 Simmons

4. The formation of preferences involves
weighing of advantages and disadvantages
among alternatives. When a given alternative is chosen, the mix of advantages and
disadvantages which lie behind it are usually referred to as the reasons or motives
for the preference. The net combination of
various advantages and disadvantages perceived may be referred to as a valence pattern. Valence patterns need not always
produce a clear preference. Awareness of
compensating advantages and disadvantages among the various alternatives may
produce ambivalence.

5. A respondent may reveal a general

valence pattern favoring more children
than she currently has, yet for reasons re
Social Biology

lated to her own current situation she may
indicate a personal desire for no more children. Her motivation to limit her childbearing (as evidenced, for example, in the desire
to learn about contraceptives) will likely
rest on both her stated desire for more
children and on her general family size valence pattern.

Table 2 summarizes the principal concepts in the above five points and indicates
the logic behind the empirical measures
which will be developed for each of these.
The analysis section of the paper corresponds broadly to these steps. First, an
estimate of the range of alternatives is obtained for rural women in Latin America
by analyzing the number of children which

TABLE 2

A Mopet or Faxory Size ATTITUDIS

GENERAL MopEL

The range of perceived family size
alternatives will vary by culture and
social circumstance.

Awareness of the advantages and/or
disadvantages of different-sized families will also vary by culture and
social circumstance.

Any perceived advantages and/or disadvantages toward various family
sizes will be balanced cognitively
against one another to determine a
distinctive family size valence pattern,

Numerical family size preferences will
be related to valence patterns.

Motivation to limit child-bearing will
reflect both personal preferences and
general valence patterns.

MEASURES AND EmprrtcaL ASSUMPTIONS

. The commonly perceived upper and lower limits of

the range of alternatives in a particular cultural
setting, such as rural Latin America, may be estimated
from beliefs about the number of children which
constitute “large” and “small” families.

. One measure of awareness of the implications of

different-sized families is whether or not respondents
perceive “good” or “bad” features to “small” and
“large” families.

. Four elements of awareness may be distinguished.

These are awareness of: (a) the “good” features of
a large family, (b) the “bad” features of a large
family, (c) the “good” features of a small family, and
(d) the “bad” features of a small family. Theoretically, these are independent of one another; hence,
any combination of these four elements is possible.
Each combination indicates a distinctive attitude
pattern. These attitude patterns may be grouped according to their overall valence.

. A woman whose valence pattern is clearly biased in

favor of a small family will tend to prefer the number
of children which she believes constitutes a small
family. An ambivalent woman will prefer a number
in-between her definitions of small- and large-sized
families.

. Qne limited measure of motivation to limit child
bearing jis the extent to which women who know
nothing about contraception would like to learn about
it. This desire is likely related to the respondent’s
family size valence pattern even when her personal
desire for more children is controlled.

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 21, No. 2

women in our samples believe constitute
“large” and “small” families. Second, attitudes toward these polar family size definitions are analyzed to determine whether
rural women are aware of the implications
of family size differences. Third, patterns
of attitudes toward large and small families
are analyzed to determine whether the general valence pattern tends to favor large
families, small families, or in some part
both large and small families. A fourth step
involves an assessment of the influence of
the general valence pattern of family size
attitudes on the desire to learn about contraceptives among women who want no
more children and who know no contraceptive methods. The measures and response
distributions of the variables entering into
this analysis are discussed in the following
section.

RESULTS

MEASURES AND RESPONSE DISTRIBUTIONS

Range of alternatives—Early in the interview, respondents were asked: “There
are large families and small families, is that
not so? How many children are there in a
large family? In a small family?” The interviewer was instructed to insist on a concrete answer. The average numbers of
children in large and small families noted
by the respondents in each of the four nations are shown in Table 3. “Large” families are defined as having on the average
between 9.5 children (in Peru) and 10.7
children (in Costa Rica). “Small” families

 

 

 

 

Ambivalence Toward Small Families 131

are defined as having on the average between 3.2 children (Colombia and Peru)
and 4.0 children (Mexico).

Awareness.—In relation to her own definitions of “large” and “small” families, the
respondent was asked to indicate the advantages and disadvantages she saw to
each. Four separate questions were asked
to cover separately the good and bad features of large and small families, respectively. All followed the format: “Why (for
what purpose) is it good (bad) to have a
large (small) family?” As Table 2 indicates, a high proportion of respondents in
all countries saw no disadvantages and
many advantages to small families. However, most respondents also saw both
advantages and disadvantages to large
families.

Between one-fifth and one-third of the
respondents in each nation gave specific
advantages and disadvantages for both
large and small families, while a small proportion of respondents in Colombia, Mexico, and Peru saw neither advantages nor
disadvantages to either large or small families, indicating very low awareness of the
implications of family size differences
(Table 4).

Advantages and disadvantages noted by
the respondents were coded for each question into one of 25 or more categories.
These categories included reasons concerning: the health of the mother, the health of
the children, care of the children, schooling
of the children, family income, mother’s

TABLE 3

Mean NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN “LARGE” AND “SuraALL” FAMILIES AS DEFINED BY
CURRENTLY MATED WoMEN IN Four LaTIN AMERICAN NATIONS

Costa
Famty Sizz Rica
“Large” Family .......2cccce eens 10.7

“Small” Family ..........eseee- 3.4

MEAN No. oF CHILDREN

All

Colombia Mexico Peru Nations
10.4 11.4 9.5 10.5
3.2 4.0 3.2 3.5
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

132 Simmons Social Biology
TABLE 4
PER CENT oF RESPONDENTS PERCEIVING ADVANTAGES AND/OR DISADVANTAGES TO
“LARGE” AND “SMALL” FAMILIES
ADVANTAGES/ DISADVANTAGES Costa ALL
To Famity SIzE RIca CoLomMBIA Mexico Peru NATIONS
Advantages to large families .............00 76 83 79 76 78
Disadvantages to large families .............. 88 88 82 62 79
Advantages to small families ............0005 95 95 92 77 89
Disadvantages to small families .............. 39 42 37 33 38
Advantages and disadvantages to
both large and small families .............. 32 34 27 20 28
No advantages or disadvantages to
either large or small families .............- 0 1 2 6 2

career, prestige of the family, duty of the
parents, etc. However, the responses to
each question tended to concentrate in only
a few categories. Generally, the distributions of responses from one nation to another were very similar.

Considering only those respondents who
saw advantages to a large family, between
68 and 78 per cent (depending on the nation) saw help from the children (either
in terms of work or income) as the principal benefit. Of those who saw disadvantages to a large family, the majority (52
to 68 per cent, depending on the nation)
noted the costs of raising many children
and/or the influence of cost factors on family wellbeing. An important minority (22 to
30 per cent) felt that children in large
families suffered from less care, less support for schooling, or related problems
arising from dividing family resources
among more individuals.

The advantages of a small family tended
to parallel in great part the disadvantages

.of large families. Children in small families

were perceived to be better cared for (28
to 43 per cent), and small families were
perceived to be better off economically (46
to 55 per cent). In contrast to the preceding
patterns, the responses to the question on
disadvantages of a small family did vary
more from nation to nation. In Costa Rica,

54 per cent felt that a disadvantage of a
small family was loss of help from the
children; in Peru, 83 per cent felt that
this loss of help was a disadvantage. The
complex combinations of responses for any
given individual and the extent to which
these reflect a concern with the quantity
of children rather than the quality of children constitute topics beyond the limits of
the present paper.

Valence patterns—A scale to measure
family size valence was developed through
combination of responses to the four questions on advantages and disadvantages of
small and large families. The responses to
each of these questions may be considered
in terms of two possibilities: a “yes” (indicating that a specific advantage or a specific
disadvantage was noted) or a “no” (indicating that the respondent saw no advantage or no disadvantage). Since there are
four questions, a total of 16 possible combinations of the “yes” and “no” codes are
possible. The 16 attitude patterns and the
distribution of respondents in each nation
by attitude pattern are shown in Table 5.

While each of the 16 attitude patterns is
unique, they may be grouped into five
broad valence categories, as follows: (1)
Clearly Favors Small. This category is
formed by one attitude pattern only. It
includes only those respondents who saw

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

133

TABLE §

PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONDENTS BY FAMILY Size ATTITUDE PATTERNS
AND VALENCE CATEGORIES*

 

ATTITUDE PATTERNS

Large Families Small Families
Have Have
Ad- Dis- Ad- Disvan- advan- van- advantages tages tages tages
Clearly favors small
1. No Yes Yes No ....06- .
Favors small
2. No Yes Yes Yes .....00.
3. Yes Yes Yes No ..... dee
4. No No Yes NG sncstens
5. No Yes No No ...eceee
Total subsample .........0-. daewunwnmams
Ambivalent (and zero-awareness)
6. Yes Yes Yes VES wc. cceee
7. No No Yes Yes .....26.
8. No Yes No WES pean nea
9. Yes No Yes NO sssvtacs
10. Yes Yes No No ....e0011. No No No No ...eceee
Total subsample ........cccccecvcccceces
Favors large
12. Yes No Yes Ves wc. cece
13. Yes Yes No 2 vag goswe
14. No No No Ves cccceoee
15. Yes No No NO savcnuws
Total subsample isciccscossesccsngsgusws
Clearly favors large
16. Yes No No YVeOS wi cc ceee

Total sample ..cccccetecawvcrapessageens

Costa All

PER CENT DISTRIBUTION

Toran

Rica Colombia Mexico Peru Nations No.
19 12 14 11 14 927
4 3 4 Z 3 216
31 37 35 23 32 2,157
1 1 1 3 1 93
aT 1 eae (32)
37 41 40 30 37 2,498
32 34 27 20 28 1,905
eae a wae eee .. (8)
eae wee eae wee (11)
7 6 9 12 8 568
1 1 1 2 n| 78
Te 1 2 6 2 170
40 42 38 40 40 2,741
2 3 3 6 3 228
1 1 1 2 1 84
ees ee eas ams ies (12)
1 1 2 7 3 189
3 5 6 15 7 514
1 1 1 4 2 134
100 100 100 100 100 6,814

* All percentages shown were rounded to the nearest whole numbers. ‘‘Total subsample” percentages were derived by
rounding the sum of the exact per cents and thus are not always the sum of the rounded per cents shown. Figures in
parentheses in the “Total No.”? column represent numbers whose per cents rounded to zero.

only disadvantages (no advantages) to
large families, and only advantages (no
disadvantages) to small families. (2) Favors Small. This category includes four
attitude patterns in which the respondent
shows a greater awareness of the relative
advantages of small families despite the
fact that other elements in her attitude
pattern counterbalance one another. (3)
Ambivalent. This category is formed by
attitude patterns which permit no prediction of the respondent’s valence, due to the
fact that the responses completely balance
one another. The remaining two valence
categories, (4) Favors Large and (5)

 

Clearly Favors Large, follow the preceding logic. The five valence categories
are also shown in Table 5,

The classification of two of the attitude
patterns into the valance categories provided an interesting conceptual problem.
These two categories are the four “yes’s”
and the four “no’s’”, On the one hand, they
reflect the two extremes of awareness of the
implications of different-sized families. On
the other hand, our conceptual model hypothesizes that family size preferences reflect the valence of the respondent’s underlying attitude pattern. From the latter
point of view, both should predict inter
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

134 Simmons

mediate family size preferences, since they
show no bias to either small or large families. This is an assumption which will be
investigated later in the paper. For the
moment, we have provisionally included
them in the Ambivalent category. Results
bearing on the family size preferences of
individuals with these attitude patterns are
shown in Table 8, ahead.

The distributions of respondents in the
attitude patterns and valence categories
ara rather similar from one nation to another, and thus we may focus on the average pattern for all four nations to summarize these principal findings:

(a) The most frequent response pattern
(32 per cent of the total) is the one in
which both advantages and disadvantages
of large families and only advantages of
small families are noted (Attitude Pattern 3, Table 5). This single pattern accounts for more than four-fifths of all
respondents who fall in the Favors Small
valence category and nearly two-thirds of
all respondents in the Clearly Favors Small
or Favors Small categories combined. Thus,
even among those respondents whose combination of perceived advantages and disadvantages tends to support a small family
preference, there is widespread awareness
that large families, containing on the average 10 to 12 children, also have advantages.

(6) The second most frequent pattern
(28 per cent of all respondents) is the one
in which both advantages and disadvantages were noted for both small and large
families (Pattern 6). In great part due to
the high proportion in this one pattern, a
total of 40 per cent of the sample fall into
the Ambivalent category. Ambivalent attitudes would appear to be a central feature
of family size attitudes in rural Latin
America.

(c) Only a small proportion (2 per cent)
of the entire sample falls into the lowest

Social Biology

awareness category where no advantages or
disadvantages were noted to either small
or large families (Pattern 11). Another 11
per cent fall into patterns where only one
advantage or disadvantage is noted (sum
of patterns 4, 5, 8, 9, 14, and 15). Altogether, 87 per cent of the sample noted two
Or more concrete advantages and/or disadvantages. Thus, the great majority of
respondents are at least aware of certain
implications of extreme family size differences.

(d) Only 7 per cent fall in the Favors
Large Family valence category and only 2
per cent fall in the Clearly Favors Large
valence category. Thus, despite considerable ambivalence on the issue, less than 10
per cent in total were biased toward large
families,

Preferences —Three different measures of
family size preferences were collected (Table 6):

(1) Choice among Fixed Alternatives.
After noting the advantages and disadvantages of small and large families, the
woman was asked which of these she
would prefer to have. This question may
have been difficult to answer, since the
choice was often between two equally undesirable alternatives, the “small” family
perhaps being too small and the “large”
family too large. Other respondents may
have found both the small and the large
family to be equally desirable. Still others
may have found the entire issue to be unimportant. For these reasons, a high proportion—between one-quarter and onethird of respondents—said that they could
not choose between the two alternatives.
Nevertheless, more than half (between 57
and 59 per cent) of the women in each
country chose the small family. Only a
small proportion (between 10 and 20 per
cent) in each country chose the large
family.

(2) “Best” Number of Children. At the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No, 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

 

TABLE 6

RESPONSES ON THREE MEASURES oF FAMILY SIZE PREFERENCE

PREFERENCE MEASURES CosTA
AND RESPONSES RICA
Which do you like better:
a small family, a large family,
or doesn’t it matter?
“Small” Family ..........2ccceeeeees 57%
“Large” Family ......-.seeeececeves 10%
Doesn’t matter ...... cece cece ccens 33%

How many children is the best
number for 2a woman to have?
Mean best number ......ceceeccccces 4.8

Do you want more children?
How many more?
Want no more children ..........e00.

135
ALL
CoLomMBIA Mexico PERU NATIONS
58% 57% 59% 58%
14% 20% 17% 16%
28% 23% 24% 26%
4.6 6.0 5.2 §.2
65% 54% 64% 59%

 

very beginning of the interview, the respondent was asked: “How many children is the best number for a woman to
have?” The interviewer had specific instuctions to obtain a numerical answer.
For example, if the woman answered “those
that come” or “those that God sends,”’ the
interviewer was instructed to probe further
with questions such as: “What is a good
number for God to send?” In this way, the
so-called “vague” responses were reduced
to five per cent or less in each sample. The
ideal measured by this question refers to
the “best number for @ woman to have,”
not the number that the respondent herself
might want; hence, it can simply be interpreted as the respondent’s view of a culturally appropriate number of children. As
noted in Table 6, the mean number considered ideal is high, varying from 4.6 (in
Colombia) to 6.0 (in Mexico).

(3) Desire for Additional Children.
Only one question in the interview refers
directly to the respondents own immediate
family size desires. After several questions
on prior childbearing experience and contraceptive knowledge, respondents were
asked: “Do you want more children? How
many more?” As may be noted in Table 1,
a moderately high proportion (between 43

per cent and 59 per cent) in all countries
said they wanted no more children.
Motivation—The complexity of counterbalancing attitudes which, according to
the model presented earlier, may lie behind
the formation of any overall stance toward
large and small families warns against the
use of any simple (single indicator) measure of motivation to limit childbearing.
However, our focus here is on the operational (or instrumental) element of motivation only: Are women interested in learning something about the contraceptive
methods which would allow them to limit
their fertility? This would appear to be
a relevant question, given that roughly twothirds of the women sampled have no
knowledge of contraceptive methods (Table 1) and that three-fifths of all women
claim they want no more children (Table 6).
In the middle of the interview, a series
of questions on contraceptive knowledge
and use gave women ample opportunity
to learn in general terms what contraceptives were if they had not heard of them
before. Subsequently, they were asked:
“Would you like to learn about things
(methods) which would keep you from
becoming pregnant and allow you to have
children only when you wanted?” The
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

136 Simmons

proportions answering “no” were as follows: 48 per cent, Costa Rica; 61 per cent,
Colombia; 50 per cent, Mexico; 60 per
cent, Peru; 55 per cent, all four nations.
Such negative attitudes toward learning
about birth control quite likely reflect
many factors, such as the “legitimacy” of
treating sexual matters and/or nature in
such an instrumental manner. However, it
is our expectation that these negative attitudes toward learning about birth control
also reflect ambivalence toward small families and positive valence toward large
families.

SELECTED INTERRELATIONSHIPS

In this section interrelationships are examined to test in part some of the assumptions and hypotheses in the model of family
size attitudes. These relationships were
examined separately for each nation. However, the results turned out to be quite
similar from one nation to another, except
in those instances where the number of
cases analyzed became very small. For this
reason, the results presented below are for
all four nations grouped together.

Range of alternatives and family size
preferences-——The meaning of the forced
preference between a “small” and a “large”
family is not immediately clear, since it
may depend on the definitions which the
respondent gives for “small” and “large.”
For example, those women who prefer
“large” families may do so because they
define “large” as a relatively small number,
or because they define “small” as so small
as to be quite undesirable. Alternatively,
definitions of “large” and “small” may be
constant in a given culture, and those
women who prefer large families may have
the same definition of “large” as do women
who prefer small families, In this case,
preference would measure important differences in family size attitudes.

The data in Table 7 support this hypoth
Social Biology

TABLE 7
MEAN NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN DEFINITIONS OF

“SMALL,” “LARGE,” AND “BEST” FAMILY SIZES
BY PREFERENCE FOR “SMALL” or “LARGE”

MEAN No. or CHILDREN

 

Small”? “Large” “Best??
PREFERENCE Size Size Size
Small family ....... 3.5 10.2 4.7
Large family ....... 3.5 11.1 6.4
Small or large;
doesn’t matter .... 3.6 10.9 5.6
All choices ......... 3.5 10.5 5.2

esis. Considering all respondents from the
four nations together, the mean number of
children defining “small” and “large” families does not vary greatly by family size
preference. If anything, there is a slight
tendency for those who prefer large families to define “large” as being composed of
more children (11.1 children, on the average) than do those who prefer small families (10.2 children, on the average).

The mean “best” number of children for
a woman to have varies directly by preference, such that those who prefer small
families have the smallest definition of
“best number” (4.6 children), while those
who prefer large families have the largest
definition (6.3 children). It is of interest
to note that those who could not name a
preference seem to be an “intermediate”
group, whose ‘“‘best number” (5.6 children)
lies between the extremes.

Family size valence and preference—aAs
Table 8 indicates, there is a high but not
perfect association between valence pattern
and family size preference. As one moves
along the valence continuum from Clearly
Favors Small toward Clearly Favors Large,
both the proportion choosing a “small”
family and the proportion defining ‘best
number” as four or fewer children decline
in a linear fashion. Eighty-five per cent of
women in the Clearly Favors Small category did choose a small family on the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

137

TABLE 8

Famity Size Cuorces, Famity Swe PREFERENCES, AND RESPONDENTS’ SCHOOLING BY
FAMILY SIZE ATTITUDE PATTERNS AND VALENCE CATEGORIES*

 

 

ATTITUDE PATTERNS

 

Large Families Small Families
Have Have Per Cent WHO
—_ —_ DEFINED “Best
Ad- Dis- Ad- Dis- Per Cent Wo NuMBER” AS Per Cent Wxo
van- advan- van- advan- Cuose “Saratv”’ 4 on Fewer Have No
tages tages tages tages Fairy CHILDREN ScHOOLING
Clearly favors small
1. No Yes Yes NO «iessseuweas 85 60 35
Favors small
2. No Yes Yes VES woe cc cec aces 77 60 24
3. Yes Yes Yes NO ..cccccevces 65 49 31
4. No No Yes NO ..cccsccenes 69 47 52
5. No Yes No Fe wagge esewsnae eae Yes axe
Total SUBSHINDIE o1e2ecer eens pee meneg pew me ee 67 50 32
Ambivalent (and zero-awareness)
6. Yes Yes Yes YVeOS ..cccccccecs 48 46 25
7. No No Yes Yes ...... comme eee eee exe
8. No Yes No Yes ...... seeces eee eae ane
9. Yes No Yes NO ..cccencceee 41 35 43
10. Yes Yes No No ...... eeenee 36 36 48
11. No No No Th ey geen guagae 47 28 65
Datal SubsgMple os pecgyesns gp comes og camewemens 46 43 32
Favors large
12. Yes No Yes Ves wie ec ec ence 23 34 42
13. Yes Yes No Ves ccc cece eevee 21 30 31
14. No No No ee gees ex neers Te _ =
15. Yes No No IND seen pews gees 29 29 59
Total subsample sgsacens es ca pagenesy geen os gous 25 31 51
Clearly favors large
16. Yes No No VES woe cece neces 11 24 54
Total sample cecvescogepeownecseen ns cxmumnnseen 57 46 34

* Figures based on all four national samples combined.

forced choice question; however, despite
the logic of their previous responses, 15
per cent said that they either could not
choose or that they preferred the large
family. At the other end of the valence
continuum, 11 per cent of those respondents in the Clearly Favors Large category
actually chose a small family.

The proportion in the Ambivalent valence category preferring small families
(46 per cent) is close to the midpoint between the preferences for small families at
the extremes of the valence continuum
(i.e., it is close to the midpoint between
86 per cent and 11 per cent). The range
of variation in the per cent defining “best

number” as four or fewer children (24 to
60 per cent) is not as great as the range
of variation in per cent choosing the
“small” family (11 to 85 per cent). However, both of these preference variables follow the same general pattern in relation to
valence. We may conclude that, as expected, valence does predict family size
preferences quite well.

Table 8 also provides information on the
independent influence of awareness (of the
implications of family size differences) on
preference. When the per cent who chose
a ‘“‘small” family is used as the measure of
preference, awareness seems to have no
independent influence on preference. To
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

138 " Simmons

take the most extreme example, respondents who indicated no awareness (Attitude
Pattern 11) have nearly the same level of
preference for a small family as do respondents who noted explicit advantages and
disadvantages on all four questions (Attitude Pattern 6). In these two cases, 48
and 47 per cent, respectively, preferred a
small family. It would appear that an intermediate level of forced choice preference
for a small family can arise through either
counterbalanced awareness or through lack
of awareness.

When the per cent who gave four or
fewer children as the “best number” is used
as the measure of preference, there is a
relationship between awareness and preference. This is most evident in the comparison of the no-awareness attitude pattern
(Pattern 11) with the complete-awareness
attitude pattern (Pattern 6). Despite this
variation within the ambivalent valence
category, the proportions defining a “‘best
number” as four or fewer remain intermediate relative to the proportions found
in the extreme valence categories.

Evidence on the proportions with no
schooling in each of the valence categories
and attitude patterns (see Table 8) suggests that both valence and awareness are
related to schooling. Those respondents who
clearly favor small families are much
more likely to have attended school (65
per cent) than are respondents who clearly
favor large families (46 per cent). However, controlling valence, there is also a
strong relationship between awareness and
schooling. Only 35 per cent of those respondents with zero awareness have attended
school, while 75 per cent of those with
complete awareness have attended school.

Paradoxically, it would appear that for
many respondents schooling tends to increase awareness of the advantages of large
families as well as awareness of the advantages of small families, and in this manner

 

 

 

Social Biology

tends to produce “intermediate” levels of
preference for small families. In cultural
settings where “Jarge” families are defined
as having, roughly 10 or more children, the
family size preferences of respondents with
some schooling may remain rather large.
Of course, levels of schooling among respondents who clearly favor small families
are also rather high (65 per cent have
attended school). Once schooling has been
controlled, just what other characteristics
distinguish women in Attitude Pattern 1
(Clearly Favors Small) from those in Attitude Pattern 6 (complete awareness; Ambivalent) is an interesting question which
lies outside the limits of the present
analysis.”

Desire to learn about birth control.—
Sixty per cent of the women in our sample
said that they did not want any additional
children beyond the number they had already borne. If this is really a serious
statement about their family size motivation, then one would expect that women
who are ignorant about birth control
methods would be strongly interested in
learning about them. This does not appear
to be the case for a substantial proportion
of these women. As Table 9 indicates, of
those respondents who did not want more
children and who did not know of any
birth control method, 44 per cent did not
express any interest in learning about
birth control when explicitly asked. This
finding leads one to question any simple
interpretation of the stated desire not to
have more children among these women.

The desire to have or not to have more
children is, in itself, only one measure of
personal family size motivation.: Other at
2The relationships of a number of social-cultural background characteristics—such as occupational sector (farm versus nonfarm), age, and
ethnicity—to ambivalence and to valences favoring small or large families are being investigated
by the author in collaboration with Mauricio
Culagovski.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

139

TABLE 9

DestIRE To LEARN More Azsout Birtu ConTROL AMONG WoMEN WHO Know No MEtTHOoDs AND WHO
Want No More CHILpREN, sy VALENCE AND AWARENESS DIMENSIONS OF FAMILy Size ATTITUDES*

Women Wuo Know No MetHonps AND
Want No More CHILpREen

 

Per Cent Who Per Cent Who
Want To Learn Do Not Want To
More About Learn More About
ATTITUDE CATEGORIES Birth Control Birth Control No.
Valence categories
Clearly favors small families ..........- x gms os 64 36 319
Favors small families ........cececeeees cawawen 61 39 850
Ambivalent (and zero awareneSS) .......- Kgeeens 51 49 788
Favors large families ........ccccececceneeces ‘ 46 54 153
Clearly favors large families ..........0. inion 19 81 40
Awareness categories
High
Answered all four questions .......... errr 57 43 502
Answered three of four .....-cccccceerccve 60 40 886
Answered two of four ........ ion eB be neiae ae 55 45 561
Total subsample ........-cccecerersecsces 58 42 1,949
Low
Answered one of four ........ Kwame Perr 51 49 117
Answered none of four ...... ence eeecccceces 21 79 64
Total subsample .......cceccecccececececs 41 59 181
Total SAME sccevisenves vs ceaseness pawn 56 44 2,151

* Figures based on all four national samples combined. Excluded from this table are 4,663 currently mated women who
either knew a contraceptive method and/or who wanted more children.

titudes may reflect ambivalence or perhaps
even a bias toward large families. One may
hypothesize that these general attitudes
toward small and large families will have
an important independent influence on the
desire for contraceptive information. To
examine this possibility, the desire for
birth control information was analyzed
among women who want no more children,
controlling their valence toward small and
large families (see Table 9).

The proportion who do not wish to learn
about birth control among women who are
ignorant about contraceptives yet who
want no more children is positively related
to valence; the higher the valence toward
large families, the greater the proportion
who do not want to learn about contraceptives. Among those who favor large families, the proportion who do not want to
learn about birth control rises above 60
per cent. It would appear that the stated

desire not to have more children has relatively little operational meaning. In contrast to their stated preference for no more
children, many women appear to hold attitude patterns which are ambivalent toward or which favor large families, and for
this reason they are not highly motivated
to learn about birth control.

Low levels of awareness on family size
issues may also explain the lack of desire
to learn about birth control. As Table 9
indicates, this is particularly the case for
the minority of respondents who were unable to cite any advantages or disadvantages on the four motive questions. Of
these women, 79 per cent said they were
not interested in learning about contraceptives, despite their stated desire to have no
more children.

The desire for more children appears to
be a distinct measure of personal preference, It is related only modestly to the reDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

140

spondent’s definition of a “best number”
of children (see Table 10). Fifty per cent
of women who had borne at least three
children fewer than their “best number”
said they wanted no more children. This
proportion rises consistently among women
as they bear more children and approach
their definition of ‘best number.” However, the low correspondence between the
desire for more and the definition of “best
number” among women with fewer children than they consider best is further evidence that the stated desire for more children cannot be taken at face value. General definitions of best number and underlying valence and awareness patterns toward large and small families all influence
the desire for children. All these factors
must be taken into account as part of a
general attitude web toward family size.
Use of any indicator by itself provides

TABLE 10

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN
RESPONDENTS HAVE AND THE NUMBER THEY FEEL
WouLp BE “Brest” FOR A WOMAN TO HAVE FoR
RESPONDENTS WHo Want No More CuHImpren*

 

 

Per CENT
Wo Want No.
No More or REPresent FAMILY SIZE CHILDREN SPONDENTS
At least three children
less than “best”
mumber .....sserceeee 35 1,431
Two children less than
“best” number ........ 42 709
One child less than
“best” number ........ 61 738
The number
considerd “best” ....... 71 945
One child more than
“best” number .......- 76 404
Two children more than
“best” number .......- 78 355
At least three children
more than “best”
WUMDOL ssassescawenys 86 964
All respondents ...... 59 5,546

* Figures based on all four national surveys combined.
Excluded from this table are 1,268 currently mated women
who either did not specify a “best number” of children
and/or did not have any living children and hence were
not asked whether they wanted ‘‘more” children.

 

 

 

Simmons

Social Biology

only a partial and perhaps erroneous view
of the total attitude complex.

DISCUSSION

The issues considered in this paper combine to provide a more complex picture of
attitudes toward family size in rural Latin
America than has been available to date.
On the conceptual side, the findings from
this investigation support a model of family size preferences in which cultural definitions of extreme alternatives (“‘small”’
and “large” families) and awareness of advantages and disadvantages of each are
key elements in the development of family
size preferences. Within the context of the
villages and scattered farm families studied
here, definitions of a small family range
from averages of 3.1 to 3.9 children in the
four countries, while the definitions of a
large family range from averages of 9.5 to
11.4 children. It is of interest that the definitions of “small” in this rural sample are
similar to definitions of the “ideal number” in metropolitan areas of Latin
America (see Miro, 1966; Elam, 1971).

Since many respondents saw some advantages to both “small” and “large” families, they tended to define the “best number” of children intermediate between
these polar extremes. As a result, family
size ideals (“best number for a woman to
have”) tend to be fairly large, ranging
from 4.8 to 5.3 children on the average in
the four samples. These relatively high
ideals, then, originate both from a range
of culturally defined alternatives and from
the ambivalent attitudes toward the more
extreme alternatives in this range. It should
be noted that even if rural women were to
reduce their fertility to the level of these
ideals (roughly 5 children per woman),
under current low and declining mortality
conditions in Latin America, rural population would likely continue to grow very

 

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 2

rapidly, doubling every thirty years or
less.3

On the methodological side, it appears
clear that straightforward questions on the
number of additional children desired or
on the “best number of children for a
woman to have ” provide only incomplete
measures of family size attitudes. Taken
by themselves, they can lead to erroneous
conclusions about the nature of family size
attitudes and motives. Their major limitation is a failure to take ambivalence into
account.

In rural Latin America, the great majority of women continue to see some advantages to families with 10 or more children. The widespread existence of underlying attitude patterns which favor large
families may explain at least in part why
women who claim not to want any more
children also claim that they are not interested in learning about birth control.
Despite ambivalence toward large families,
in the balance, attitude patterns tend to
favor intermediate or small families. As a
result, the stated desire not to have more
children is embedded in part in underlying attitude and motive patterns. However,
underlying ambivalence also apparent in
the family size attitude patterns would

3 Accurate data on proportions of women marrying, age at marriage, and timing of childbearing
are not available for Latin America; hence, no
precise calculation is possible of the impact on
current fertility of the average number of children born (to mated women). However, if one
assumes that 90 per cent of women marry and
that these women have, on the average, 5 children
each, the total fertility rate (TFR) in the population would be 4,500 per 1,000 (see Bogue, 1969,
pp. 658-659). Using Bogue’s (1969, p. 661) regression equations, one may further note that a
TFR of 4,500 corresponds in general with a crude
birth rate of approximately 32 per 1,000. Under
the low mortality levels currently evident in
Latin America (crude death rates of less than 10
per 1,000 in most nations; see OEA/OAS, 1972,
Tables 202-221) population growth would be at
levels near or in excess of 2.2 per cent per year,
and the size of such populations would double
approximately every thirty years or less.

 

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

141

support the conclusion that the motivational foundation for small families is not
firmly based and hence may not have any
strong operational component.

We may conclude that developing a correct understanding of attitudes toward
family size is not just a matter of developing multiple questions to assess the reliability and validity of our measures. It is
also a problem of measuring the multiple
dimensions of the attitudes themselves.
Questions concerning both the advantages
and the disadvantages of both small and
large families appear to be useful in identifying some features of valence and awareness dimensions of family size attitudes.

Comparisons between the findings in
this paper and findings from other studies
are greatly restricted by the limited amount
of research carried out to date on this topic.
In this context, the study reported by Eva
Mueller (1972) of Taiwanese husbands
(cross section of urban and rural men) is
noteworthy because it is based on questions
similar to the ones used in the present
study to determine advantages and disadvantages of small and large families. She
found that 14 per cent of the Taiwanese
husbands saw only advantages to large
families, while 46 per cent were ambivalent
(i.e., saw both advantages and disadvantages to large families) and the remaining
36 per cent saw only disadvantages to
large families. In the rural Latin American samples reported here, 17 per cent
saw only disadvantages to large families,
while 67 per cent were ambivalent and 16
per cent saw only advantages to large families. In other words, the rural Latin
American women appear to reveal much
higher levels of ambivalence and much
lower levels of awareness of only disadvantages to large families than do Taiwanese
men. This difference is highlighted when
one further considers that “small” families

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

142

and “large” families were defined (in the
question itself) for the Taiwanese respondents as having “two or fewer” and
“five or more” children, respectively. The
self-defined “small”? family in some parts
of rural Latin America (e.g., four children on the average in Mexico) is close to
the size of a “large” family as defined in
the Taiwanese interview schedule.

As in the present study, the Taiwanese
survey found that respondents who did
note advantages to large families did so
largely in economic terms. Disadvantages
of large families were also given largely in
terms that stressed their cost and related
disadvantages (particularly for schooling)
for the children. Despite wide cultural
differences between Taiwan and the Latin
American nations studied here, there would
appear to be some structural similarities
in the way that children participate in
work and provide old age security. The
data here suggest broadly that the importance of large families for “help” reasons
may be even greater in rural Latin America than it is in Taiwan. This is of course
only a tentative conclusion which points
to the need for further cross-national research focusing on the institutional features
of society which encourage values favoring large families.

SUMMARY

Currently mated women in representative samples of rural areas (localities with
less than 20,000 inhabitants) in four Latin
American nations (Colombia, Costa Rica,
Mexico, and Peru) reveal attitudes favoring at least in part the very large families
that early marriage and consistent childbearing are capable of producing. “Large”
families, defined by respondents as typically having 10 to 12 children, are seen
to provide some traditional advantages,
particularly economic assistance to parents.
However, these large families are also

Simmons

 

 

Social Biology

widely perceived to be a burden on family
resources and, ultimately, of detriment to
the children themselves. Small families,
defined by respondents as typically having
3 to 4 children, are perceived as having
some advantages and few if any disadvantages.

Net attitude patterns tend to favor
small families, but one must take into
account findings indicating: (1) ambivalence is common; (2) the normative “best
number” of children for a family to have
is approximately 5 children—enough to
produce high fertility and rapid population growth; (3) sizeable minorities of
women partially or completely favor large
families with 10 to 12 children; and (4)
the awareness of the implications of different-sized families is still latent, since
most women have never discussed family
size issues with their husbands.

Under these circumstances, responses to
a straightforward question on the desire
for more children turn out to be poorly
related to interest in learning about contraceptives. This finding indicates that great
caution should be taken in interpreting
responses to single questionnaire items on
family size preferences and motivation to
limit fertility. Responses on various items
should be compared with a specific intent
to highlight ambivalence. The findings also
indicate that levels of ambivalence in rural
Latin America may be high relative to
Asian nations, such as Taiwan, and thereby
suggest that cross cultural comparisons of
the value of children would be useful for
isolating the social institutions which support such values.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Financial support for this analysis from the
International Development Research Centre
(IDRC) of Canada is gratefully acknowledged.
The analysis was carried out under the auspices
of the United Nations Latin American Demographic Research Centre (CELADE) in San
 
 

CY
=
©
N
mei
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
=—
pe
4
=
—
CS
‘g
oS
ON
=
aon
O
S
Ce
©
>>
—
—
N
Samed
oO
>
—
c
=
re)
OQ
cv
oO
co
oS
©
—
c
S
©
A

Vol. 21, No. 2

tiago, Chile, as part of series of training and
investigation seminars (SIEF seminars) in
rural fertility directed by the author in the
period 1972-73. A special note of appreciation is due to Dr. Arthur M. Conning and his

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

 

 

143

staff in the Fertility Sector of CELADE who
prepared the data set on which this paper is
based. Collection of the data was supported by
the Population Council and coordinated by
CELADE.

REFERENCES

Bocurt, Donatp. 1969. Principles of demography.
Wiley, New York.

Eram, Epcar. 1971. Opinion profiles of seven
cities. In J. M. Stycos (ed.), Ideology, faith
and family planning in Latin America. McGraw
Hill, New York,

Frapan, M. 1969. A paradigm or the analysis of
child-bearing motivations of married women
prior to birth of the first child. Amer. J.
Orthopsychiat. 39:402-417.

Hauser, P. M. 1967. Family planning and population programs: A book review article. Demography 4:397-414.

Hi, R., J. M. Srycos anp K. Bacx. 1959. The
family and population control: A Puerto Rican
experiment in social change. Univ, of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

Horrman, L. W., anD M. L. Horrman. 1972. The
value of children to parents. In James T. Fawcett (ed.), Psychological perspectives on population. Basic Books, New York.

MERTENS, WALTER. 1970. Investigacion sobre la
fecundidad y Ja _ planificacion familiar en
America Latina, p, 193-235. In Proceedings of
the Latin American Regional Conference on
Population. Vol, I. Colegio de Mexico. Mexico
City.

Mmo. CarMEN A, 1966. Some misconceptions disproved: A program of comparative fertility surveys in Latin America, p. 615-634. In Bernard
Berelson et al. (eds.), Family planning and pop
ulation programs. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Mrro, Carmen, A., AND WALTER MERTENS. 1968.
Influences affecting fertility in urban and rural
Latin America, Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 46
(Part IT): 89~113.

MUELLER, Eva. 1972, Economic motives for family limitation: A study conducted in Taiwan.
Pop. Stud. 26:383-402.

OxraA/OaAs (ORGANIZACION DE EstTApos AMERICANOS/
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES). 1972.
America en cifras. 1972. Secretariat General for
the OEA/OAS, Washington, D.C.

Rarnwater, L. 1960. And the poor get children.
Quadrangle, Chicago.

Rosen, BERNARD, AND ALAN B. Srcmons, 1971.
Urbanization, family and fertility: A structuralpsychological analysis of the Brazilian case.
Demography 8:46-69.

Smamons, ALAN B,. 1971. Projective testing for
ideal family size. In J. M. Stycos (ed.), Ideology, faith and family planning in Latin
America, McGraw Hill, New York.

Stycos, J. MAyone, 1964, Attitudes toward family
size in Haiti. Human Organiz., Spring, p. 4247,

Stycos, J. MAyone. 1965. Family size preferences
and social class in Peru. Amer. J. Sociol.
70:651-658.

WYATT, FREDERICK, 1967, Clinical notes on the motives of reproduction. J. Soc. Iss. 23:29-56.

 

 
