Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

A note on regression to the mean

Atam Vetta

To cite this article: Atam Vetta (1975) A note on regression to the mean, Social Biology, 22:1,
86-88, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988149

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988149

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 4

»
Q View related articles @

wa Citing articles: 31 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

A Note on Regression to the Mean

Atam Vetta

Department of Science
Oxford Polytechnic
Headington, Oxford
England

Galton’s (1869) law of filial regression
to the mean is as misunderstood today as
it was fifty years ago when Fisher (1924,
p. 198) felt impelled to “allude to one result which has been entirely misunderstood,
even in otherwise important works.” The
misunderstanding was, as it is today, that
regression to the mean will counter the
effect of selection. However, it would appear that the misunderstanding is now
even deeper. To comprehend the nature and
extent of misunderstanding, it is necessary
to quote rather extensively from some wellknown researchers.

Discussing IQ and fertility, Falek (1972,
p. 14) says:

A closer examination of the material, however, presents some new problems which require evaluation. Knowledge
of a slight positive correlation between parental intelligence and differential reproduction is not informative with regard to the
measured intelligence of siblings in each of
the subdivisions. Application of the Galton
law of filial regression should dampen the
1.Q. scores for children of parents in the
highest I.Q. category and increase the scores
to those parents in the lowest I.Q. range. It
would seem that the effect of the law of filial regression to the mean will only serve to
modify the positive effect of differential fertility. Furthermore, as the largest number
of persons measured by standardized I.Q.
tests are within the narrow band of just

 

normal intelligence as designated by the normal distribution curve, it would appear that
the vast numbers of children born to persons in this relatively narrow middle range
would overwhelm the reproductive advantage for parents at the highest I.Q. levels.

Garrison, Anderson, and Reed (1968, p.
126) say:

If assortative mating for the opposite
ends of the distribution of a trait such as
intelligence were accompanied by a strong
differential fertility, then we would expect
the curve for people’s intelligence to become
sharply bimodal. However, there is no evidence of any strong differential fertility.
Even if there were, we should remember
that Galton’s law of filial regression is a
strong counterforce which constantly restores the frequency of persons at the middle of the distribution, thus preserving the
normality of the curve from generation to
generation,

This statement is rather surprising because one had the impression that Reed,
at least, knew the reasons for Galton’s law.
In Reed and Reed (1965, p. 66) we find,
“Thus, Galton’s law provides a paradox of
a sort, in that children born in the worst
environment and to parents with poorest
heredity, average better than their parents.
Conversely, the children born into the best
environments and to parents with the best
heredity average below their parents. For
86
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1

tunately, the resolution of this paradox has
been understood for many years.”

Eysenck (1971, pp. 67-68), discussing
Burt’s? data (1961) on social mobility, remarks:

The regression to the mean is a phenomenon well known in genetics, and characteristics of traits markedly influenced by genetic causes, environment would favour the
children of the higher professional fathers
and disfavour those of unskilled working
class fathers, tending to make the difference
between them even greater than that observed between their fathers. Clearly, this
is not what happens; regression presents
strong evidence for genetic determination of
IQ differences. Regression also implies that
if the next generation [that is, the children
in the sample studied by Burt] take occupations which correlate with their IQ in the
same way that their father’s did, then considerable change in social class must occur,

It would therefore appear that the situation is now worse than that which confronted Fisher (1924). We are told that
Galton’s law of filial regression will not
only counter the effect of selection but also
that of assortative mating. Moreover, if regression to the mean is noticed in any trait,
it is evidence of the genetic determination
of that trait.

The true significance of filial regression
to the mean can be comprehended by considering a trait, with no dominance, which

. breeds true. In a random mating popula
tion, 2 group of fathers whose average value
on the trait in question is x, measured from
the population mean, will have offspring
whose average value on the trait is x/2.
The reason for this regression is obvious.
Both sexes are involved in the production
of children, but we selected fathers only.
Mothers are unselected. Their average
value on the trait is therefore 0. The average value of the offspring is the average of

1For a critical review of Burt’s data (1961),
see Jensen (1974).

 

Brief Reports 37

parental values, or (x + 0)/2 = x/2. However, if we select both sexes in such a way
that the average of mothers as well as fathers is x, then the average of the offspring
will be (x -+x)/2 =x, and there will be
no regression toward the mean. That is,
regression to the mean does not of itself
imply genetic determination and genetic
determination does not imply regression
to the mean when both parents are taken
into account.

It is well known that with traits like
height and IQ, there is some regression to
the mean even when both parents have been
selected, because these traits are imperfectly inherited. Fisher (1924, p. 199) explains:

This effect finds its explanation in the fact
that the actual stature is not quite a perfect
measure of genetic potentiality for begetting
or bearing tall children. If environmental effects, for example, were of any importance
in determining stature, in selecting tall parents we should be selecting not only those
of high genetic potentiality, but to some extent also those who had experienced an environment favourable to tall stature. The
average of the next generation, reared in an
average environment, would for this reason
alone be somewhat shorter than their parents. But the effect would stop there; the
third generation would not show any further regression.

In other words, regression to the mean
does not in any way counter the effect of
selection. Of course, if selection is applied
to the mother only, and not to the father,
the effect on the next generation will be the
average of the two parents, i.e., half of the
effect on the mother. But, after that, it
will persist unaltered unless some other
force (such as heterosis) acts against it.
Similarly, regression in no way diminishes
the effect of assortative mating.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I wish to thank Professor C. A. B. Smith
for valuable advice.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

88 Brief Reports Social Biology

REFERENCES
Burt, C. 1961. Intelligence and social mobility. London.
Brit. J. Statist. Psychol.: 14:3~24. Garrison, R. J., V. E. ANDERSoN, and S, REEp.
Eysrencx, H. J. 1971. Race, Intelligence and IQ. 1968. Assortative mating. Eugen. Quart. 15:113Hamish Hamilton, London. a7.
Fatex, A. 1972, Differential fertility and intelli- Jensen, A. R. 1974. Kinship correlations reported
gence. J. Hum. Evol. 1:11-15. by Sir Cyril Burt. Behav. Genet. 4:1~28.
FisHer, R. A, 1924. The biometrical study of Reep, E. W., and S, W. ReEep. 1965. Mental reheredity. Eugen. Rev. 16:189-210. tardation: A family study. W. B. Saunders,

Gatton, F. 1869. Hereditary genius. Macmillan, Philadelphia,
