Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

What is the purpose of HIV antibody testing?

James Trussell

To cite this article: James Trussell (1989) What is the purpose of HIV antibody testing?, Social
Biology, 36:1-2, 102-109, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1989.9988722

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1989.9988722

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

What is the Purpose of HIV Antibody Testing?

James Trussell

Office of Population Research
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey

 

 

ABSTRACT: Considerable attention, both in the scientific literature and in the popular media,
has focused recently on the accuracy of tests for HIV antibodies. Many have pointed to the
dangers of falsely identifying persons as being infected, and they have stressed that the
predictive power of a positive test result may be small in populations with a low prevalence of
HIV infection. The purpose of this paper is to argue that the current testing/counseling
protocols, which are designed to increase specificity at the expense of sensitivity, are

inappropriate in high-prevalence groups.

The title of this note is not intended
to be facetious. AIDS is a fatal disease
caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which can be transmitted
through sexual contact and exposure to
infected blood or blood products (and
neonatally from mother to neonate). All
would agree that, ideally, an HIV test
should accomplish two goals: (1) reassure those who do not have the virus,
and (2) inform those who do. While informing those who are infected will not
help to effect their cure (because there is
not now a cure), it will enable them to
guard against infecting others. Unfortunately, such an ideal test is not available
for two reasons. First, a test for the virus
itself does not yet exist (except for research purposes). Instead, current procedures test for the presence in the
blood of antibodies to HIV. Because antibodies do not appear until some time
after infection,! some persons infected

‘Current guidelines state that “persons exposed to HIV usually develop detectable levels of
antibody against the virus within 6-12 weeks of in
with HIV would be missed even by a test
that was 100 per cent sensitive (when the
HIV antibody is present, then the test
will yield a positive result) to the antibody. Second, the current tests are not
100 per cent accurate. They are neither
100 per cent sensitive nor 100 per cent
specific.” There is a small possibility that

fection” (CDC, 1987a). This conclusion was based
on follow-up of persons infected by a blood transfusion at a known date. However, analysis of the
experience of Finnish homosexual males has revealed that the antibody may not appear for a year
or longer after infection (Rankiet al., 1987). These
results suggest that the predictive power of a negative test result may be lower than was previously
thought.

2A test for HIV antibody (like any test) should
have two properties. Among those infected, the
test should yield a positive result. This property is
known as sensitivity and may be measured or quantified by the false-negative rate (the proportion of
those who are infected who nevertheless test negative). Moreover, among those not infected, the
test should yield a negative result. This property is
known as specificity and is quantified by the falsepositive rate (the proportion of those not infected
who nevertheless test positive). As a consequence
of the fact that current tests for the HIV antibody
are neither perfectly sensitive nor perfectly specific, some fraction of those with a negative test
result are in fact infected and some fraction of

102

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 36, No. 1-2

a person with the antibody will test negative (false-negative) and that a person
not infected with HIV will test positive
(false-positive). In the remainder of this
discussion, I ignore the first problem
and concentrate entirely on the second.
For ease of discussion, I assume that
current tests detect HIV (and not just
the antibody).

Before proceeding further, I should
note that neither the false-positive nor
the false-negative rates are known with
certainty. Furthermore, there may be a
considerable difference between these
rates under ideal laboratory conditions
and under ordinary laboratory conditions. For a discussion of the variability
in false-positive rates, see the excellent
commentaries by Meyer and Pauker
(1987), Miike (1987), and Center for
Disease Control (CDC) (1988). In the
remainder of this note, I use the rates
employed by the CDC (19875) in their
own simulations.

Current Public Health Service (PHS)
guidelines (CDC, 1987a) call for the following two-step testing procedure:

1. First, perform the Enzyme Immunoassay (EJA) test, which is relatively
inexpensive’ (about $6 in negotiated

those with a positive test result are in fact uninfected. It is well known that these fractions depend
on the false-negative and false-positive rates and
the fraction of those tested who are truly infected.
We explore these issues. As we shall see, the problems we address are “‘caused”’ by the fact that test
results are reported as either positive or negative.
In fact, for example, a negative result should not
be interpreted as negative with certainty, but only
as negative with some probability less than 100 per
cent.

3Actually, the EIA test is repeated when the
initial test is positive (to reduce the likelihood of
laboratory error), so that an “EIA test” may not
be one test but two (or several). A positive “test
result” occurs when both (or all) EIA tests are positive (repeated reactive EIA); otherwise, the “test
result” is negative. The false-positive and falsenegative rates shown in the text pertain to the
“EIA test results” from the entire procedure, not
to the individual tests involved (CDC, 19875).

Brief Reports

103

contracts, Miike, 1987). In simulations
performed by the CDC, it is assumed to
have a false-positive rate (test is positive, given HIV is absent) of 0.005 anda
false-negative rate (test is negative,
given HIV is present) of 0.01 (CDC,
19875).

2. If the EIA test is positive, complete
a more specific but much more expensive (about $50 in negotiated contracts,
Miike, 1987) confirmatory test, usually
the Western Blot (WB) test, on the
same sample of blood used for the EIA
test. In simulations performed by the
CDC, conditional on a positive EIA
result,* the WB test is assumed to have a
false-positive rate of 0.001° and a falsenegative rate of 0.01 (CDC, 19875).

A person is declared to be infected
with HIV if and only if both tests are
positive. Why is the two-step procedure
used? The PHS guidelines state that the
purpose is to “further increase the specificity of the testing process” (CDC,
19872).

The aim of this note is to argue that
this purpose is inappropriate in some circumstances (specifically, in highprevalence groups), circumstances in
which the goal ought to be to increase
the sensitivity of the testing process
rather than the specificity. This conclusion leads to a call for a revision in PHS
counseling/testing protocols. First, however, let us explore the rationale for the
PHS testing guidelines.

Suppose that the prevalence of HIV
in a group is rare, only 0.2 per cent (cer
‘It is important to note that the WB is ordinarily not performed unless the EIA is positive.
Hence, the unconditional false-positive and falsenegative rates for the WB are not even estimated.

SMeyer and Pauker (1987) and Miike (1987)
question whether the WB false-positive rate is this
low. They cite evidence that it can be ten times
higher. If so, then the argument in this note would
be strengthened.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

104 Brief Reports

tainly an upper-bound estimate for lowrisk persons in the United States as a
whole,® and that persons are tested at
random. Then, as we can see from Figure 1, if only the EIA test were used,
0.198 per cent (=0.002 - 0.99) of the
population would be infected with the
virus and test positive while 0.499 per
cent (0.998 - 0.005 would not be infected with HIV and test positive. Thus,
of those who test positive only 28.4 per
cent would be infected with HIV. The
predictive power of a positive test result
is poor. With the two-step procedure,
we see that 0.19602 per cent (=0.002 0.99 - 0.99) would be infected with HIV
and test positive whereas 0.00050 per
cent (=0.998 - 0.005 - 0.001) would
not be infected with HIV and test positive. The predictive power of a positive
result in the two-step procedure is 99.75
per cent. The purpose of the two-step
procedure is nicely illustrated by this example. It raises the predictive power of a
positive test result from 28 per cent to
virtually 100 per cent.

Nevertheless, this result should not
be interpreted as evidence that falsepositives can be ignored when testing
groups with low prevalence of HIV.
First, the prevalence of 0.2 per cent employed in the simulation is an upperbound estimate. If a lower prevalence
were assumed, then the predictive
power of a positive “‘test’’ (positive on
both EIA and WB) result would be
lower. Second, the joint false-positive
rate used here is 0.000005 (=0.005 
6The evidence on prevalence is reviewed in
Meyer and Pauker (1987). Screening of military
recruits has revealed seropositive results in 0.16
per cent of men and 0.06 per cent of women.
Among female blood donors, the seropositive rate
is only 0.01 per cent. Some of these individuals undoubtedly were in high-risk groups, so that the
prevalence in low-risk groups would be even
lower.

Social Biology

0.001), a rate that Meyer and Pauker
(1987) claim is far too low. If it were
higher, then again the predictive power
of a positive test result would be lower.
For example, if the prevalence of HIV
were 0.01 per cent and the joint falsepositive rate were 0.005, then the predictive power of a positive result in the
two-step procedure would be only 1.9
per cent.

I agree completely with Meyer and
Pauker that HIV screening in lowprevalence groups is not warranted. It
should nevertheless be noted that in the
CDC (1988) analysis of data collected by
the College of American Pathologists
Proficiency Testing program, there was
not one false-positive when the two-step
procedure was used. Likewise, there
was not one false-positive among
250,000-plus blood donors in Minnesota (SerVaas, 1987).’ The real problem
lies with the accuracy of testing in some
inexperienced commercial labs, and not
so much with the accuracy under the
“ideal” conditions that seem to be attained by (among others) the Armed
Forces. Regardless of this uncertainty
about the magnitude of false-positive
rates, I argue below that in highprevalence groups (not addressed by
Meyer and Pauker), I reach a different
conclusion: that we cannot afford the
false-negattives.

My reasoning is motivated by another consideration that has not been
addressed by the PHS. Before proceeding further, I should emphasize that this

"There were 15 positives (positive EIA followed by positive WB). In an attempt to determine
the specificity of these results, those testing positive were traced so that a test (which is difficult to
perform and very expensive) for the AIDS virus
(HIV) itself could be performed. HIV was cultured from the blood of 13. The 14th was already
symptomatic with AIDS, and the 15th could not be
located, though had previously admitted to being
in a high-risk group.

 
—|
=
©
N
Some
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
oN
v.
om
=
—
CS
‘gt
wO
oN
—
ao
O
=
Cd
©
>
—
—
N
_
oO
>
=
c
=
va)
OQ
co
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

Vol. 36, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

WB

+
(,0019602)

(0000198)

oo

999
(.0049850)

{.00000499)

(.00499) .001

Fig. 1.—Low Prevalence (0.2 per cent) of HIV. (The figure should be read from left to right. The
conditional probability of advancing from one state to the next is shown along the path connecting the two
states. The unconditional probability of arriving at any state, shown in parentheses under that state, is the
product of the conditional probabilities along the entire path to that state.)

consideration is not relevant in a lowprevalence group (a fact that I will now
demonstrate), but becomes very relevant in a high-prevalence group, as we
shall see below. First, let us examine the
predictive power of a negative “test”
result (negative on either EIA or WB).
Using the logic developed earlier, we
see that it ts 99.996 per cent accurate.
Virtually everyone declared to be HIVfree in fact is uninfected. Next, let us
consider the probability that a person
“reprieved” by the confirmatory WB
test (positive on EJA, but negative on
WB) actually has HIV. We can see from
Figure 1 that 0.00198 per cent (=0.002
- 0.99 - 0.01) would be infected with
HIV, test positive on EJA, and test negative on WB. Similarly, 0.4985 per cent
(=0.998 - 0.005 - 0.999) would not be
infected with HIV, test positive on EJA,

and test negative on WB. Hence, of
those “reprieved,” only 0.4 per cent actually would be infected with HIV. For
each infected person falsely “‘reprieved”
by the confirmatory WB test, there are
252 uninfected persons who are correctly “‘reprieved.’’ Furthermore,
among 100,000 people tested, the confirmatory test will cause only 2 persons
with HIV to be incorrectly informed
that they are not infected. Therefore,
the cost (telling persons that they are not
infected with HIV when in fact they are,
plus the resources expended on the extra test) of the two-step procedure is
small when compared with the benefit (a
reduction in false-positive reports). Under these circumstances, it does indeed
seem reasonable to follow the PHS
strategy.

Suppose, however, that the preva
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

106 Brief Reports

lence of HIV in another group is much
higher, say 20 per cent, which is probably less than the prevalence of HIV
among homosexual men in some areas.®
This situation is depicted in Figure 2.
Using the same logic as before, we find
that the predictive power of a positive
result on the EIA test alone is 98.02 per
cent.? With the confirmatory WB test,
the predictive power rises to 99.998 per
cent. Therefore, the “rights” of those
without HIV seem to be guaranteed, because virtually none will be falsely “convicted.”

But are the uninfected really protected? In this situation, we must examine false-negatives much more carefully.
For example, we can easily deduce that
the predictive power of a negative EIA
alone is 99.75 per cent and that the predictive power of a negative result in the
two-step procedure is 99.5 per cent.
However, if we stopped at this point, we
would overlook an important result.
Closer examination reveals that 33 per
cent of those “‘reprieved” by the WB actually would be infected with HIV. The
cost of reducing false-positives is much
higher than in the low-prevalence
group. To reduce by two the number of
uninfected persons falsely ‘‘convicted”’
by the EIA test, the confirmatory WB
test must “reprieve” one infected person. If the behavior of the false “reprieved” is not modified, there is a high
probability that this group will continue
to spread HIV. The false “‘convicted”’

8For example, Meyer and Pauker (1987) state
that “perhaps 50% of homosexual men in San
Francisco have serologic evidence” of HIV infection.

*This result—that the predictive power of a
positive test result rises when the prevalence of the
disease rises—is well known. It is a common exercise in an introductory statistics course. It is demonstrated for HIV testing in both CDC (1987)
and Meyer and Pauker (1987).

Social Biology

are protected at the expense of the
larger pool of uninfected.

In the high-prevalence case, what
should be done? I would argue that the
answer depends on the purpose of the
test. If it is for screening for employment, immigration, or insurance, then
one might wish to protect the rights of
the falsely “convicted” by following the
PHS guidelines. This conclusion follows
even more strongly if the false-positive
rate is higher; see the discussion by
Meyer and Pauker (1987). However,
when the purpose is for counseling the
individual (especially when the testing is
performed anonymously), then one
cannot protect the rights of the falsely
“convicted” and the uninfected simultaneously. Because the tests are not perfect, there is a tradeoff between the two
goals. In the low-prevalence case, the
rights of the falsely ‘‘convicted” do seem
compelling. Furthermore, the results
powerfully suggest that HIV screening
in low-prevalence groups is unwise
(Meyer and Pauker, 1987; though see
SerVaas, 1987). There was not one
false-positive among 250,000 blood donors in low-prevalence Minnesota). In
the high-prevalence case, the issue is not
at all clear. Indeed, one might be
tempted to argue that the second confirmatory test should be dropped in order to protect the public health.

A better solution would be to use the
results of both tests when counseling individuals. Those positive on both are
virtually certain to be infected with
HIV. Those negative on EJA have only
a tiny probability of being infected with
HIV and may (reasonably) safely assume they are not. Those positive on
EIA and negative on WB may still have
a high probability of being infected with
HIV and should be urged to modify
their behavior (if it is risky) if they are in

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 36, No. 1~2

HIV

2 A+)

(.20)

.80

(.80)

Brief Reports

 

107

WB
EIA
99 +
(.19602)
.99
(.198) 01 =|
(00198)
01 f
(.002)
995
(.796)
9991
005 (+ (,003996)
(004) .001
|
(000004)

Fig. 2.High prevalence (20 per cent) of HIV. (The figure should be read from left to right. The
conditional probability of advancing from one state to the next is shown along the path connecting the two
states. The unconditional probability of arriving at any state, shown in parentheses under the state, is the
product of the conditional probabilities along the entire path to that state.)

groups with a high prevalence of HIV,
at least until further tests resolve the ambiguity. Note that the problem is similar
to the situation after a positive EIA test
in the low-prevalence group in one respect, that is, the majority of those in the
pool are not infected. The difference is
that in the low-prevalence group the
confirmatory test could be used to distinguish relatively accurately the infected from the uninfected. In the current situation—a positive EIA test and a
negative WB test in a high-prevalence
group—there is no further test available.!° Of course, subsequent retesting is

This situation will undoubtedly change in the
near future. SmithKline Bio-Science Laboratories
has developed a confirmatory test for HIV antibodies that is claimed to be 100 per cent specific, so
that the problem of false-positive results would be
eliminated (NYT, 1988a). Another new confirma
certainly warranted when there are ambiguous results, but it cannot be guaranteed to resolve the ambiguity.

The counseling task in this situation
would be very challenging, especially
because the degree of risk depends on
the individual’s prior probability of being infected, which may be unknown to
the counselor. If the prior probability is
20 per cent, then this risk, as we have
seen, is about 1 in 3. If the prior probability is 80 per cent, perhaps characteristic of IV drug users in New York, then
this risk rises to 9 in 10. Furthermore,

tory test developed by the Cetus Corporation detects the AIDS virus directly, even if it is latent
(hidden in cells), and it is claimed to be 100 per
cent accurate (NYT, 19885; Ou et al., 1988). Yet
another alternative would be to culture for the virus. This procedure is very expensive, timeconsuming, and difficult to perform, and it can detect the virus only when it is in an active stage.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

108 Brief Reports

even the individual may not know
whether he or she belongs to a high-risk
group (e.g., unknown to the individual,
a sexual partner may have had sexual relations with a homosexual male or with
an IV drug user). In many instances,
nevertheless, an individual may be confident that he or she does belong to a
high-risk group.!! My reasoning is that
the counseling in situations where a positive EIA ts followed by a negative WB
could be phrased in terms of two hypothetical examples: (1) “If you are not in
any of the following high-risk groups,
then the probability that you are indeed
infected is very small.” (2) “If you are in
any of the following high-risk groups,
then the probability that you are infected 1s moderately high, and you
should act as if you are infected and
therefore could infect others until your
ambiguous test status can be resolved.”
The high-risk groups would be those
defined by the CDC, and they might be
further differentiated if more precise information on the prior probability of infection for various groups becomes
available.

The alternative (the current procedure) to the proposed counseling protocols seems less messy only because the
consequences are not readily evident to
the counselor. One might agree with the
logic of this argument but still conclude
that no alteration to the counseling

"The problem still remains that the definitions
of high-risk groups are imprecise with respect to
true high-risk factors. For example, a male homosexual couple in which both partners have had sexual relations only with each other (even if they live
in a relatively high-risk area such as San Francisco)
should be at no greater risk than a monogamous
heterosexual couple (who live in, say, Salt Lake
City). Likewise, some IV drug users (who never
share a needle and who always use a new sterile
needle) should be at low risk. The hope is that as
more evidence accumulates it will be possible to
define high-risk groups with more specificity and
also to develop good estimates of the prevalence of
HIV in each group.

Social Biology

guidelines is necessary because the situation is so rare. Of 1,000 persons tested,
6 will test positive on EJA and negative
on WB. Note, however, that the tests
have already been performed; the only
issue is the interpretation of the result
(positive EIA followed by negative
WB). The 2 (per 6) who are infected are
just as much a public health problem as
the 2 (per 1,000) who are infected in the
low-prevalence group. The major difference is that they can be identified
more precisely in the high-prevalence:
group than in the low-prevalence group.

Finally, [should note that a variant of
this recommendation is already followed in tests to screen out HIV from
the blood supply. All samples that test
positive on EIA (regardless of the suspected prevalence of HIV) are destroyed, because the confirmatory test
needlessly endangers, if only by a small
amount, the nation’s health—specifically, the health of the uninfected. The
goal of protecting the rights of the uninfected to an HIV-free blood supply is attained at minimal cost. Nevertheless,
because donors are notified (and counseled) only when the confirmatory WB
is positive, the more general protection
of the uninfected is compromised, as it is
whenever the PHS counseling protocols
are followed. Another variant of this
recommendation is the PHS suggestion
that persons in high-risk groups who test
positive on EIA might be counseled
about their probable infection status
(and ways to reduce HIV transmission)
before the confirmatory WB result becomes available (CDC, 1986). Nevertheless, if the WB result is negative,
such persons would be told that they are
HIV-free. Should the rights of the
falsely “convicted” prevail in all circumstances, particularly in high-risk
groups? What, after all, is the purpose
of HIV testing?

 
—|
=
©
N
~
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
oN
vw.
om
=
—
S
‘'S
wO
ON
—
aon
O
S
Ce
©
>>
—
—
N
~
oO
>
—
c
~.
ve)
OQ
vo
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
Ss
©
a

 

Vol. 36, No. 1-2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I have benefited from discussions with, or
comments from, Sylvia Cerel Bowen, Ward

Brief Reports

109

Cates, James Curran, Irma Elo, Noreen
Goldman, Robert Hatcher, Kathryn Kost,
German Rodriguez, and Michael Stoto.

REFERENCES

CENTER FOR DISEASE CONTROL. 1986. Additional recommendations to reduce sexual
and drug-abuse~related transmission of human T-lymphotropic virus type I]/Lymphadenopathy-Associated Virus. Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 35:11~13.

. 1987a. Public Health Service guide
lines for counseling and antibody testing to

prevent HIV infection and AIDS. Morbid.

Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 36:509-515.

. 19876. Recommendations for preven
tion of HIV transmission in health-care set
tings. Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 36:1S18S.

. 1988. Update: Serologic testing for antibody to Human Immunodeficiency Virus.
Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 36:833-840.

MEYER, K., and S. PAUKER. 1987. Screening for
HIV: Can we afford the false positive rate?
New Eng. J. Med. 317:238-241.

Mnokg, L. 1987. Testimony of Lawrence Miike,
Office of Technology Assessment, U.S.
Congress, before the House Committee on

 

 

 

 

 

Small Business, Subcommittee on Regulation and Business Opportunities, October
19, 1987.

New York Times. 1988a. New AIDS test is being offered to confirm infection with virus,
p. A10. February 26, 1988.

. 19885. Two labs licensed for new
AIDS test, p. A17. July 7, 1988.

Ou, C., S. Kwox, S.W. Mrrcuett, D. H.
Mack, J.J. SNINSKy, J. W Kress, P.
FEoRINO, D. WaRFIELD, and G, SCHOCHETMAN. 1988, DNA amplification for direct detection of HIV-i in DNA of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells. Science 239:295297.

Rank, A., M. KRoun, J. ALLAIN, G. FRANCHINI, S. VALLE, J. ANTONEN, M. LEUTHER,
and K. Kroun. 1987. Long latency precedes
overt seroconversion in sexually transmitted Human-Immunodeficiency-Virus infection. Lancet. 2(8559):598-593.

SerVass, C. 1987. Letter to the editor, p. A18.
New York Times, December 14, 1987.

 

 
