Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Education and timing of parenthood among
Canadian women: A cohort analysis

Margaret L. De Wit & Fernando Rajulton

To cite this article: Margaret L. De Wit & Fernando Rajulton (1992) Education and timing of
parenthood among Canadian women: A cohort analysis, Social Biology, 39:1-2, 109-122, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1992.9988808

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988808

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

 
 

Education and Timing of Parenthood Among
Canadian Women: A Cohort Analysis

 

Margaret L. De Wit and Fernando Rajulton

Population Studies Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, Canada

4D

&S ABSTRACT: This research examines factors associated with the timing of first birth in Canada,
“ focusing primarily on the role of women’s educational attainment. Proportional hazards mod‘& elling techniques are applied to data from the 1984 Canadian Fertility Survey (CFS) in order to
& determine how educational attainment, estimated as close as possible to the date of first birth,
5 influences the timing of first birth and whether the importance of this variable varies according
Q to age cohorts. The results suggest that among a number of variables useful for distinguishing
& different levels of risk, educational attainment proves to be the most important predictor in the
xt model. Education exerts a substantial positive influence on birth timing for women of all age
= groups. As expected, moreover, significant cohort differences are also evident, with the greatest
"— to the smallest impact on the risk from the youngest to the oldest cohorts. These clear-cut cohort
© differences indicate a fundamental change in the effects of education over time, a trend most
‘S likely resulting from substantial changes in both the content and social significance of formal

.Oschooling during the past few decades.

It is well known that the timing of
first birth may have important demo“ graphic consequences for lifetime fer‘tility and for the age structure of a pop~ulation. More recently, it has been
psuggested that first-birth timing may
yg also have a significant impact on non"3 demographic processes, such as the de= velopment of future lifecourse alterna= tives for women in modern society
A (Grindstaff et al., 1989). Indeed, the
emergence and spread of the low fertility norm and the greater use of effective contraceptives have made first
birth timing less relevant to completed
family size than it once was and have
increased the importance of the nondemographic consequences of the age
at which a woman enters parenthood
(see Teachman, 1985; Balakrishnan et
al., 1988; Grindstaff et al., 1991; Rajulton et al., 1990). A delay in the tim
sity of Mich

e

ing of first birth allows women to take
advantage of a variety of opportunities
including higher education and paid
work (Waite and Moore, 1978; Hofferth and Moore, 1979; Birdsall and
Chester, 1987). These opportunities,
in turn, have obvious implications for
women’s economic independence and
social status.

Complementary research has also
examined the extent to which a variety
of demographic, socioeconomic, and
behavioral characteristics may influence the timing of fertility among
women in economically-developed
countries. Various factors have been
identified as significant correlates of
the timing of first birth. Among these,
educational attainment appears to be
particularly salient given the relative
stability of its effect over time (Blake
and Del Pinal, 1982), and its important

109
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

110 De Wit and Rajulton

implications for childbearing decisions.
To date, however, surprisingly little
has been done to explicate the potentially important role which education
plays in determining when a woman
commences childbearing. Accordingly, this research focuses on the role
of women’s educational attainment in
influencing first birth timing and seeks
to determine the extent to which the
effects of education may vary according to age cohorts.

The proportional hazards model
(Cox, 1972) used here combines multiple regression with life table techniques. This technique is appropriate
in overcoming the problems of right
censoring which are often present in
life history data. The core assumptions
of proportional hazards modelling are
that heterogeneity is measured by the
set of characteristics at the time of the
occurrence of the event under study and
that the relative risks are proportional
to the baseline hazard over the duration of interest. For lack of information, many studies do not pay attention
to this point and use the characteristics
as measured at the time of the survey.
An important contribution of this paper lies in analyzing the effects of characteristics estimated as closely as possible to the time of first birth (refer to
the section on data, measurement, and
methodology).

The analyses are based on the birth
history data gathered by the 1984 Canadian Fertility Survey (CFS). The
sample is stratified according to age cohorts, 18-29, 30-39, and 40-49, and
the analysis is done separately for each
in order to examine the relative importance of the covariates, primarily education, for each cohort.

Social Biology

THEORETICAL
CONSIDERATIONS

Relevant research suggests that education is a primary predictor of first
birth timing; that is, the dominant direction of effect is found to be from education to first birth (Marini, 1984).
Several studies indicate that the attainment of relatively high levels of education, and hence longer durations of
schooling, is associated with the postponement of first birth to older ages
(Rindfuss et al., 1980; O’Connell and
Rogers, 1982; Rindfuss and St. John, 1983; Marini, 1984; Wineberg, 1988).
An important conclusion from Maxwell’s (1987) work is that higher education delays childbearing among all
groups of women, regardless of age or
ethnic background. It has also been established that relatively large and significant rates of childlessness are to be
found among ever-married women
with higher levels of education
(O’Connell and Rogers, 1982; Jacobson et al., 1988; Grindstaff et al.,
1989).

Added to these findings is the evidence that the significant effect of education on the timing of first birth may
actually be increasing over time or cohorts. Among the most substantial
changes in recent years is the proliferation of economic and political roles
for women outside the home, a development which has enabled many
women to include a significant element
of choice in the decision-making process surrounding work, leisure, and
family life (De Wit, 1991). Increased
levels of education, particularly of a
nontraditional type, have helped
women to bring about many of these

 
 

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

important changes. The rising rates of
childlessness recently observed among
younger cohorts of Canadian women
(Rajulton et al., 1990), particularly
among those born in the postwar era,
may be explained in terms of a variety
of factors, including increased economic opportunities for women,
greater reliance on improved contraceptive methods and changing atti‘tudes toward marriage and childbearming. Younger women who enjoy higher
oaverage educational attainment relaStive to older women may be less disSposed to marriage and childbearing as
primary activities and may thus postone or even forgo parenthood alto~eether.
— The significance of varying levels of
“education for fertility analysis may deend on both the content and the social
‘value or meaning with which education
is invested (Day, 1983; Lesthaeghe and
Moors 1990). In economically adpvanced countries like Canada, the sig‘nificance of education has changed dra‘matically in recent years. Not only has
educational attainment increased con>siderably in recent years (Hoffman,
1974), but educational expectations for
young women have as well become far
more of an investment purchase in hu=man capital than was true for older coFhorts. Changes in the content of education have accompanied these
developments. Whereas education for
women in the past typically involved
learning skills which were expected to
assist them in their “primary responsibilities” as wives and mothers, a
woman today is considerably freer to
pursue higher education in any number
of nontraditional areas, despite the
persistence of certain psychological
and institutional barriers to success in

 

Education and Timing of Parenthood

 

111

professional careers. Given a plethora
of new lifestyle choices, educational attainment is increasingly important to
women as a means of achieving financial independence, enhanced social
status, and greater personal freedom.
All these fundamental changes in the
nature of education itself would suggest that the manner in which, and the
extent to which, it influences fertility
decisions may also be changing over
time. Specifically, educational attainment may be increasingly important in
determining the timing of parenthood.

Previous research suggests several
ways in which education,independent
of individual cohort experiences, may
be linked to differences in birth timing.
From an economic standpoint, education may affect the timing of first birth
through changes in the real and perceived costs and utilities of children
(Kasarda, 1979; Maxwell, 1987). More
educated women are presumably better able to assess the advantages and
disadvantages of childbearing. With
higher education, investment costs of
children may also increase, given
higher socioeconomic and cultural aspirations for children among _ the
better-educated. Delays may thus follow from decisions to postpone a first
birth until a woman and her partner
feel sufficiently able to provide well for
a child. Education may similarly affect
birth timing by altering individual opportunity cost structures. Higher education for women typically enhances
opportunities alternative to childbearing and even marriage, such as paid |
market work. Accordingly, highly educated women who indefinitely postpone parenting or decide to forgo
childbearing altogether in favor of careers are more likely to be childless by
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

112 De Wit and Rajulton

the end of their reproductive years (Jacobson et al., 1988).

Higher education of women has also
been associated with the more effective
use of available contraceptives due to
greater access to information and
greater specialized knowledge of effective contraceptive practices, regardless
of the method chosen (Kasarda, 1979;
Wolfe, 1980). A delay in first birth for
better-educated women may thus reflect their greater ability to successfully
control birth timing, subsequent spacing and ultimate family size.

Sociologically speaking, a primary
effect of education may relate to the
development of value orientations favoring personal fulfillment over more
traditional goals such as marriage,
parenting, or homemaking. Where
women perceive childbearing as incompatible to attaining personal goals
and ambitions, parenting is likely to be
delayed or forgone altogether. Higher
education may further facilitate the fulfillment of individual aspirations with
the development of a heightened sense
of personal efficacy in matters pertaining to family and childbearing. This
normative component of education
may, in fact, have a sizable effect on
fertility decisions in the modern context, although it is perhaps the least understood or documented.

In light of these considerations, it is
quite clear that if the positive (and
hence, delaying) effect of education on
timing of parenthood has increased
over time, the magnitude by which it
affects the timing should be much
greater for more recent cohorts. Not
many analyses have paid sufficient attention to this important point. Notwithstanding, given the extent of social
and economic changes in recent years,

 

 

Social Biology

it is probable that the relationship between educational achievement and
fertility behavior will also continue to
evolve over time. Research which provides insights into these trends and
processes is of great relevance in future
analysis.

Beyond examining the role of education, the present research considers a
number of other variables shown previously to distinguish among varying
levels of risk of timing of parenthood.
Control variables for this analysis include marital status, contraceptive use,
labor force status, rural/urban residence and region of residence, religious affiliation and commitment,
place of birth and ethnicity.

Marital status at the time of first
birth is expected to influence the timing and risk of having a child since most
births in Canada continue to take place
within marriage despite the increasing
prevalence of alternative lifestyles such
as single parenting or cohabitation.
Accordingly, married women should
be observed at greatest risk, followed
by cohabiting and previously married
women and, finally, by single and
never-married women.

Previous analysis of data from the
Canadian Fertility Survey demonstrates that 68 per cent of all women in
the reproductive ages (18-49) practice
some type of contraception (Balakrishnan et al., 1985). A closer examination, however, reveals that about 64
per cent report contraceptive use prior
to first birth. It is thus apparent that the
use of birth control in Canada reflects
more the desire to time births than
avoiding them altogether. Patterns of
contraceptive use have also been
linked to educational attainment, with
better-educated women _ seemingly
Vol. 39, No. 1-2

more successful in planning the number and timing of desired births.

Empirical evidence shows that
women committed to continuous employment are more likely to delay the
onset of childbearing relative to their
nonworking counterparts (De Wit,
1991). Women at greater risk of childlessness, moreover, are also those with
professional occupation status (Grind
wn Staff et al., 1989), for whom continuous
Semployment is likely to be more
§ readily available and for whom opporé tunity costs of childbearing are likely to
9 be greater. For these reasons, women
© who initiate regular full-time work beS fore first birth should be at lower risk
vt ~. compared to women not already in the
a = paid labor force. Alternatively, women
s ‘SS faced with choices between competing
q S activities like parenthood and paid
= = work may be more inclined to initiate
= childbearing earlier in order to mini4 mize work interruptions once a career
>is well underway.
Research on birth and marriage tim.2 ing suggests that rural residence is as5 sociated with earlier marriage and first
pbirth timing (Heaton et al., 1989). This
3 dssociation has been explained by ref3 erence to the presumably more tradig tional family-oriented subculture of ru= ral areas, not to mention the reduced
A economic opportunities for women.
Accordingly, women in rural or small
town areas should be at greater risk of
experiencing a first birth than women
from larger urban areas.

The influences of religion and religious commitment on behaviors like
birth timing and life-time fertility have

_Teceived sufficient attention in the literature. Religious affiliation may reflect value orientation with respect to
the acceptability of certain behaviors,

ersit of Mic

nl

Education and Timing of Parenthood

113

including those related to childbearing.
More traditional religions like Catholicism, thus, would presumably favor
the maintenance of the large family
ideal which in part depends on the
early commencement of childbearing.
Catholics have also been found to have
lower average education compared to
non-Catholics (Greeley, 1974), a factor which may help to explain any observed connection between Catholicism and early birth timing. A greater
risk of first birth should therefore be
obtained for Catholic women than
non-Catholic women, given Catholics’
presumed greater traditionalism in
value orientations.

Degree of religious commitment has
also been linked to differences in labor
force involvement and to variations in
nuptiality and fertility. With respect to
work status, De Wit’s (1990) analysis
suggests a greater propensity for more
religious women to exit the labor force,
a fact which may in turn relate to differences in value orientations with respect to parental responsibilities. Balakrishnan and Chen’s (1990) work
indicates further that more religious
women are less likely to use contraceptives, to engage in premarital sex, or to
cohabit before marriage. They are also
at lower risk of marital dissolution and
are found to have both higher actual
and expected fertility. Given the presumed link between age at first birth
and lifetime fertility, more religious
women should experience a greater
risk of first birth. However, it remains
to be seen whether the greater risk
might be offset by factors such as lower
rates of premarital conception and cohabitation among more religious
women, particularly when the fertility
process, as in this paper, is assumed to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

114

start at age 15 rather than with marriage.

It is of some interest to examine differentials in birth timing between Quebec (francophone) and non-Quebec
(anglophone) women in Canada given
their conspicuous fertility differences.
Quite possibly, differences in timing
patterns for Quebec women may relate
to their distinct minority subculture
based on religion, language, and historical experience. Additionally, differences by place (country) of birth are
examined in the present context in order to determine whether the historical
Canadian pattern of early marriage
and childbearing remains important
vis-a-vis the experiences of foreignborn women.

Finally, differences in birth timing
by ethnic affiliation have also been observed in previous studies (see, for example, Rindfuss and St. John, 1983).
Cultural norms and values influence
the relative valuation of reproduction
(Maxwell, 1987). However, ethnicity,
like religious affiliation, appears to be
of declining importance in explaining
fertility behavior among Canadian
women (Balakrishnan et al., 1979).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The CFS data consist of a national
probability sample of 5,315 women
aged 18 to 49 irrespective of marital
status. Proportional hazards modelling
techniques are applied to the data in
order to determine the extent to which
education, net of other factors, influences the rate at which women from
different age cohorts experience a first
birth upon reaching the starting age of
childbearing at around 15. Unlike

De Wit and Rajulton

 

Social Biology

many past studies (for example, Rao
and Balakrishnan, 1988; Wineberg,
1988), the present research considers
age 15 as the starting age of fertility
rather than the age at first marriage/
cohabitation, given that the timing of a
significant number of births in Canada
is no longer heavily dependent on marital status. Thus, the birth-timing behavior of all women is analyzed, not
just that of ever-married women. The
target population for this study, however, is meaningfully restricted only to
those women actually exposed to the
risk of first birth; the few women
(about 100) reporting a surgical sterilization in the childless state are eliminated from the analysis. Unfortunately, no information is available on
the generally small proportions of
women in any population affected by
natural infecundity or sub-fecundity.
As mentioned earlier, the application of the proportional hazards model
requires the measurement of covariates at the time of the event in question. It is often difficult to obtain this
type of information from survey data
like those used here. Nevertheless,
considerable effort has been made to
estimate values of relevant covariates
for the appropriate time points. With
the exception of province of residence,
religion, and religious commitment,
for which no alternative measures were
available, all relevant covariates are
approximated as nearly as possible to
the time of first birth. This approach is
expected to represent a considerable
improvement over previous analyses
where few or none of the variables are
estimated for the time of the event in
question, and where the danger of confounding cause with effect exists. The
latter is considered to be especially im
 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

portant in the case of education, given
the present research focus.

The CFS obtained the number of
years of schooling as of the survey
date. However, with respect to work
histories, it included information on
the number of years of schooling when
the woman started working for the first
time. We therefore examined the data
on timing of first birth, timing of first
work, education at the time of first
work and education at the time of survey, and arrived at likely estimates of
the number of years of schooling at the
time of first birth for specific categories
of women as follows:

1. For women without a first birth by the
survey date, education at first birth set to
be equal to the survey date measure of
education;

2. Among women having a first birth by the

survey date—

a) students: education at first birth estimated as the survey date education
level minus the difference between
the average completion age of education (survey date education plus 6
years) and the age at first birth;

b) not working: education at first birth
set to be equal to the survey date measure;

c) working:

i. no work stoppage: Where average
age at completion of eduction was
less than age at first birth, education
at first birth set to be equal to education at first regular work. Alternatively, where average completion
age was greater than age at first
birth, education at first birth was
taken as the average of education at
first work and the survey date;

ii. at least one work stoppage:

a. stopped to return to school: education at first birth set to be
equal to education at first work
plus the difference between the

 

Education and Timing of Parenthood

 

115

starting age of work (first or sec
ond work) and age at first birth,
where the starting age of work
exceeded age at first birth; or,
where the starting age of work
was Jess than or equal to age at
first birth, education at first birth
set to the survey date level of education;

b. stopped for other reasons: if age
at first work was less than age at
first birth, education at first birth
set to be equal to education at
first work.

In the case of region of residence,
religion, and religious commitment,
some caution is warranted in interpreting the results, especially in the case of
religious commitment which can vary
so much over the life-course. Any significant effect of religious commitment
might be more visible in the case of
younger women whose first birth can
be expected to correspond more
closely to the survey date. In the case
of region of residence, it is assumed
that the woman’s residence at the survey date is the same as that at the time
of first birth. This assumption seems
fairly realistic given Quebec’s low rate
of in- or out-migration.

The dependent variable is measured
in months and may be interpreted as
survival time from age 15 in the childless state before experiencing the event
of interest, first birth. Throughout this
interval, individuals may either survive
the event up to the survey time, in
which case they are said to be right censored, or experience a first birth.

Covariates for the multivariate analysis are all measured as dummy variables. Women are grouped according
to the age cohorts 18-29, 30-39, and
40 or older. The relative risks are com
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

116 De Wit and Rajulton

pared over cohorts as well as to the
sample as a whole, controlling for age.
The major independent variable, education, refers to education completed
by the time of first birth and is categorized according to less than 9 years of
formal education, 9 to 13 years, and 14
years or more, with women in the highest education category comprising the
reference group. Contraceptive use
status relates to whether a woman initiated birth control practices prior to
first birth; this variable is measured according to use and no use at any date
before first birth with nonusers as the
reference group. Labor force status is
categorized into two groups: those who
began first regular work before first
birth and those who did not. For this
variable, those not working represent
the contrast group. Place of residence
at the time of first birth is measured as
small town or rural residence compared to urban residence, the latter
serving as the reference group. Women
residing in the province of Quebec are
compared to those living outside of
Quebec. Place of birth is divided into
foreign-born and Canadian-born, with
the latter as the contrast. Categories of
ethnic affiliation include British, other
European, and other ethnic group,
with French women comprising the reference category. The religion variable
is coded according to Protestant, other
religion, and no religion, with Catholics as the contrast group. Religious
commitment is measured via frequency
of church attendance and grouped into
regular attendance (at least monthly)
and not regular (less than monthly),
with the latter as the reference group.
Marital status at the time of first birth
includes the following categories: cohabiting, married, and previously mar
 

Social Biology

ried (i.e., widowed, separated, or divorced), all contrasted with the
reference group, single and nevermarried.

RESULTS

Table 1 gives relative risks and proportions censored by age cohort, and
for the sample as a whole, controlling
for age group. In the 18-29 cohort, 61
per cent of the women have not experienced a first birth by the survey date,
compared to 18 per cent of the 30-39
cohort, and only 7 per cent of the oldest cohort aged 40 or older. Thirtythree per cent of the entire sample of
women have yet to experience a first
birth by the time of the survey. All four
models are statistically significant at
p=0.001; the parameter estimates,
moreover, are relatively stable as their
effects do not change to any appreciable degree with the addition or removal of other covariates from the
model. The parameter estimates denoting relative risks are to be interpreted as follows with respect to the
timing of parenthood: Higher risks imply earlier timing, and lower risks, later
timing. The direction of effect, therefore, can be seen as negative or positive depending on whether one considers the timing scale or the relative
risks. Thus, for example, a positive effect on timing is associated with a negative effect on the risk.

In addition to proportions censored,
basic cohort differences in the risk of
first birth are clearly seen in Table 1.
Beginning with the control variables,
frequency of church attendance has Iittle influence on the risk of first birth,
except for the oldest cohort. For these
women, regular church attendance is
 

Vol. 39, No. 1-2 Education and Timing of Parenthood 117

TABLE 1

RELATIVE Risks OF First BIRTH FOR COHORTS 18-29, 30-39 AND 40 OR OLDER, AND STRATIFIED BY AGE
Group, CFS Data

AGE COHORT
Stratified
VARIABLE {8-29 30-39 40+ by Age Group
Religious commitment:
Regular attendance .............. 1.01 1.05 0.81¢ 0.94
Non-regular®..............cseeseees 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Religion:
Protestant.........ccseseeeeeeeues 1.05 1.02 1.28¢ 1.12°
WO Other ...... cee eeceseeeceeeeeeees 1.25 0.98 1.06 1.07
SS NONE .......:scesseesssseeteeeeenes 0,86 0.97 1.31 1.00
5 Catholic oo... cece eeeeeeeee 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
ork status:
© Working.......cceeceeecee 5.624 2.45¢ 1.18? agar
8 Not working® ............ceeeee 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
lace of residence:
& Small town rural... 0.744 0.774 0.84¢ 0.784
St Urban? .0.. ccc ceceeeeceeeeeee 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
“Contraceptive use:
TS USC... eee ce cece eee eceenee eens 0.52 0.48¢ 0.56¢ 0.524
So No use“ 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Sthnicity:
rd BSCIEISH ox sua siomes nas oan nan wenancen ax 0.96 1.02 0.96 0.98
S Other European ............... 0.84 1.01 1.09 0.95
to Other... cece ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 1.35 0.89 0.96 0.96
~ French® actors se tnen pees =F soe 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
“Place of birth:
© Foreign born...........ceeeeeeee 0.76 0.77¢ 0.69¢ 0.744
E Canadian born® ............006 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Region of residence:
S QUEDEC 0. eee ecceeeeeeeeenees 0.80° 0.81% 0.73¢ 0.784
Ty Non-Quebect ....ecceereeee 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Marital status:
S Cohabiting...........ccccceeeee 1.07 0.98 0.63 1.12
"S Married ............ccccsseneenees 1.181.31¢ 1.67¢ 1.56
= Previously married ............ 0.64 0.56° 0.76 0.71%
Q Single/Never married’........ 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Education:
SF YOATS:. sewe ves sna nana nae sae ee 6.144 2.79! 2.674 3.41¢
9-13 Years......cceecee see ee eee 3.344 1.98¢ 1.754 2.198
214 years’... eee eee eee eee 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Sample SiZ@........:scce eee see teens 1,819 1,684 1,001 4,504
Per cent censored .......s..60.06 61 18 7 33
“Reference category for the variable.
’p<0.05.
‘p=0.01.

dp=0.001.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

118 De Wit and Rajulton

associated with a lower risk of first
birth, most likely through the greater
avoidance of premarital sex at primeages. No significant effect is observable
for the group as a whole. In considering religious affiliation, only the
Protestant-Catholic contrast is significant, and once again, only for the oldest group. Protestant women are about
30 per cent more likely than Catholics
to experience an early first birth. This
result does not support the general expectations regarding the greater tendency for early births among Catholics.
The overall risk for the entire sample is
small but significant, owing to its relevance only for the oldest cohort.

The work status variable is considerably more important to the risk of
first birth. Regardless of age cohort,
the risk is significantly greater for
women who had worked at some point
prior to first birth, as opposed to having never worked. For these working
women, however, cohort differences
are striking: Between the oldest and
youngest cohorts, the risk increases by
almost five times that of the oldest
group (1.18 versus 5.62), suggesting a
steady increase in the influence of labor force participation over time. The
greater risk, and hence earlier timing
of first birth among more recent cohorts of working women, may reflect a
motivation to return quickly to the labor force after a birth, an explanation
consistent with the greater labor force
attachment of younger women. The
risk is also greater for working women
as a whole, although the important cohort differences in the magnitude of effect are not distinguishable.

Smaller, though significant, cohort
differences are observable for the place
of residence variable. The risk 1s lower

 

Social Biology

for small town/rural women in the
youngest cohort compared to the two
older cohorts. However, the differences over cohorts are not large
enough to draw any firm conclusions,
except to say that place of residence
seems slightly more important to birth
timing for younger as opposed to older
women. The overall lower risk obtained for the sample may reflect the
more rapid onset of parenthood among
urban women as a strategy for taking
advantage of better economic opportunities through earlier reentry into the
jabor market.

Not surprisingly, contraceptive
practice prior to first birth has an important effect on its timing: Women in
all three age cohorts who initiated contraceptive use before first birth are at
consistently lower risk than women
who did not use contraceptives. It is interesting to note, however, that the effects of contraceptive use are fairly
constant across all cohorts.

As suggested by earlier studies,
none of the ethnic affiliation categories
are significantly associated with the
risk of first birth. Place of birth, alternatively, is more important in that foreign born have a significantly lower
risk of first birth compared to Canadian born, a result which may be explained by selective immigration policies favoring applicants of higher
socioeconomic status. However, this
background variable may be losing its
importance in fertility decisions as revealed by its nonsignificance in the
youngest cohort.

Although residence in Quebec compared to elsewhere in Canada reduces
the likelihood of first birth to a significant degree, no dramatic cohort differences are apparent. The oldest
Vol. 39, No. 1-2

group of Quebec residents are, however, at slightly lower risk compared to
their younger counterparts. Nevertheless, the overall group risk corresponds
fairly closely to those for the separate
cohorts.

From among the categories of marital status, cohabitation at the time of
first birth has an increasing though
nonsignificant impact across cohorts. A

wn previous marriage by the time of first
S birth reduces the risk, but only for the
5 30 to 39 cohort. In contrast to these
two marital status categories, the results for married women evidence a
clear cohort difference. While the two
oldest groups experience a significantly
higher risk (67 and 30 per cent respec“ tively) than the never-married, this is
Snot the case for the youngest
 cohort—an indication that marriage is
‘= becoming less and less important to
= successive generations of Canadian
« women in determining first birth tim> ing.

Finally, we examine the relative
> risks associated with the categories of
5 primary interest, namely education.
>. Striking differentials can be seen in
5 these relative risks shown in Table 1:
3 (a) among women with varying levels
of education; (b) over cohorts; and (c)
= in their magnitudes both among levels
A and over cohorts. Women with 14 or

more years of education have lower

risks than those with 9 to 13 years of
education, whose risks are, in turn,
lower than those with less than 9 years
of education. This steady decrease in
risks associated with increasing levels
of education holds true for all cohorts.

Thus, the overall pattern of risks

among levels of education and over co
horts is consistent with the hypotheses
formulated earlier—a strong negative

:44 08 Decemb

ersity of M

nl

Education and Timing of Parenthood

119

relationship and hence a strong delaying effect on timing of parenthood.

This general pattern of direction of
effects agrees with that obtained by
Rao and Balakrishnan (1988) using the
same data set and the same modelling
technique. The magnitude of effects
are, however, stronger in this study,
substantiating the theoretical expectations outlined in the previous section.
There are two reasons why such strong
effects are obtained here. First is the
manner in which the education variable has been measured in this study:
number of years of schooling estimated
at the time of first birth as opposed to
number of years of schooling at the
time of the survey. This underscores
the importance of measuring the characteristics of interest as close as possible to the appropriate time point as required by the hazard modelling
procedure. Adherence to proper procedures helps to determine with confidence the real pattern of influence of
education. Second, the effects are
stronger not only because of a simple
adherence to proper procedures but
also because the sampling bias introduced by restricting the analysis to
ever-married women has been eliminated in this study. (For an illustration
of this type of sampling bias in fertility
analysis, compare and contrast Rodriguez and Cleland (1981) with Cochrane (1983).)

That the overall pattern holds true
for all cohorts needs special attention,
especially in the light of controls for a
variety of other characteristics frequently hypothesized to be associated
with education and birth timing. The
existence of the same pattern over cohorts irrespective of the obvious
changes in the content and social sig 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

 

nificance of education over time can be
taken to mean that higher education
invariably delays the timing of parenthood in the present as it did in the past.
Moreover, the effects or estimated
risks are of education net of other social and economic variables considered
in the model; they thus denote a ‘‘direct” effect of education. While many
researchers doubt, with the convincing
evidence of the role of the intermediate fertility variables, whether there
can be any direct effect of education at
all, it seems likely, as Kasarda et al.
(1986, p. 95) have argued, that education does indeed directly affect fertility
decisions, since it influences ‘ta wide
spectrum of social-psychological orientations in women, including freedom
from tradition, greater faith in science
and technology, heightened aspirations for themselves and their children,
attitudes and sentiments towards
smaller families’* which are almost impossible to capture and measure in a
formal way. As such, the impressive
significance of education observed in
this study does suggest that educational
attainment has a unique influence on
the timing of parenthood.

Perhaps it may be argued that the
control variables used in the model do
not adequately capture their own effects since many of them are influenced
by education as well. However, the
substantial magnitudes obtained for
education do not support this conclusion. Besides the fact that, of all the
variables used in the model only education has such large effects, the magnitudes themselves reveal that education appears to be increasingly
important over cohorts in explaining
variations in the timing and risks of first
birth. A woman belonging to the oldest

De Wit and Rajulton

Social Biology

cohort with less than 9 years of formal
schooling has 167 per cent greater risk
than a woman with 14 or more years of
schooling in her own cohort. By contrast, a woman with less than 9 years of
schooling in the youngest cohort is at
514 per cent greater risk compared to a
woman from the same age category
with 14 or more years of education.
Even though the operational definition
of education, namely, years of formal
schooling, cannot capture the quality
and the content of schooling, such
large magnitudes of effects can be explained only by the conspicuous
changes in value orientations and preferences resulting from the change in
the content and social value of education. In other words, the greater influence of education among more recent
cohorts is consistent with the changing
nature of formal education itself and its
growing importance for fertility questions in modern society. This aspect,
along with possible changes in the underlying hazard over cohorts, should
be the focus of more in-depth analyses
in future research.

CONCLUSIONS

This study was primarily concerned
with examining the influence of educa- |
tional attainment on the timing of first
birth among different cohorts of
women of childbearing age. While a
number of variables are found to be
useful in differentiating women according to the level of risk, the results
of the proportional hazards model indicate that for women of all age
groups, education at first birth exerts a
strong and significant negative impact
on the risk of first birth (or alternatively, a significant positive impact on

 
Vol. 39, No. 1-2

timing of parenthood). Important cohort differences are also evident, however, with the greatest to the smallest
influence from the youngest to the oldest cohorts. These substantial variations in the risks associated with education may be explained by the
relatively recent changes in the duration, content and social significance of
formal schooling, all of which in com‘pination have augmented the relative

& December 20

ALAKRISHNAN, T. R., G. E. Epanks, and C. F.
© GrinpostaFF. 1979, Patterns of fertility in
St Canada. Statistics Canada, Ottawa.
“BALAKRISHNAN, T.R., K. Krorxi, and E.
— Laprerre-Apamcyk. 1985. Contraceptive use
% in Canada, 1984. Fam. Plan. Persp. 17:209r 215.

BALAKRISHNAN, T.R., K. V. Rao, K. J. Krotki,
and E. Laprerre-Apamcyk. 1988. Age at first
birth and lifetime fertility. J. Biosoc. Sci.
20:167-174.

ALAKRISHNAN, T. R., and J. CHEN. 1990. Religiosity, nuptiality and reproduction in Canada. Canad. Rev. Sociol. Anthropol. 27:316340.

IRDSALL, N., and L. A. CHEesTerR. 1987. Contraception and the status of women: What is the
link? Fam. Plan. Persp. 19:14-18,

LAKE, J.. and J. Dev Pina. 1982. Educational
attainment and reproductive preferences:
Theories and evidence. Jn C. Hohn and R.
Makensen (eds.), Determinants of fertility
trends: Theories re-examined. International
Union for the Scientific Study of Population.

OCHRANE, S. H. 1983. Effects of education and

urbanization on fertility, p. 587-626. In

R. A. Bulatao, R. D. Lee, P. E. Hollerbach,

and J. P. Bongaarts (eds.), Determinants of

fertility in developing countries, Vol. 2, Fertility regulation and institutional influences.

Academic Press, New York.

Cox, D. R. 1972. Regression models and life tables (with discussion). J. Roy. Statist. Soc.
(Ser. 6) 34:184-220.

Day, L. H. 1983. Analysing population trends:
Differential fertility in a pluralistic society.
St. Martin’s, New York.

De Wit, D. J. 1991. Determinants of the timing

of labour force exits and re-entries for ever
married, ever-worked women in Canada: A

hazard model analysis. Ph.D. dissertation,

Dept. of Sociology. Univ. of Western On
Dewnloaded by,[Uniyersity o&Michig

-Education and Timing of Parenthood

121

importance of education for fertility
decisions among younger cohorts of
women. Further, the significance of education, net of all other socioeconomic
and demographic variables in the
model, suggests that theoretical explanations for the education-birth-timing
connection should place greater emphasis on normative or ideational differences associated with different levels of education.

REFERENCES

tario, London, Ontario. Unpublished manuscript.

Greecey, A. M. 1974. Ethnicity in the United
States. Wiley, New York.

GrinpstaFF, C.F., T.R. BALAKRISHNAN, and
D. J. De Wit. 1991. Educational attainment,
age at first birth and life time fertility: An
analysis of Canadian Fertility Survey data.
Canad. Rev. Sociol. Anthropol. 28:324-339.

GrinpstaFF, C. F., T. R. BALAKRISHNAN, and
P.S. Maxim. 1989, Life course alternatives:
Factors associated with differential timing
patterns in fertility among women recently
completing childbearing, Canada 1981. Canad. J. Sociol. 14:443-460.

Heaton, T.B., D.T. Lichter, and A. AmoATENG. 1989. The timing of family formation:
Rural-urban differentials in first intercourse,
childbirth, and marriage. Rural Sociol. 54:{—
16.

HorrertH, S. L., and K. A. Moore. 1979. Early
childbearing and later economic well-being.
Amer. Sociol. Rev. 44 (Oct.):785-815.

HorrMan, L. 1974. The employment of women,
education, and fertility. Merrill-Palmer
Quart. Behav, Develop. 20:99-119,

JacoBson, C. K., T. B. Heaton, and K. M. TayLor. 1988. Childlessness among American
women. Soc. Biol. 35:196-197,

Kasarpa, J. D. 1979. How female education reduces fertility: Models and research needed.
Mid-Amer. Rev. Sociol. 4:{-22.

Kasarpa, J.D., J.O.G. Bitty, and K. West.
1986. Status enhancement and fertility: Reproductive responses to social mobility and
educational opportunity. Academic Press,
New York.

LESTHAEGHE, R., and G. Moors. 1990. Rationality, cohorts and reproduction. Paper presented at the Conference on Population, Society and Demographic Policies for Europe.
Turin, 4-6 April, 1990.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015.

122 De Wit and Rajulton

Marini, M. M. 1984. Women’s educational attainment and the timing of entry into parenthood. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 49:491-511.

MAXxweELL, N. L. 1987. Influences on the timing
of first childbearing. Contemp. Pol. Iss.
$:113~-122.

O’ConneELL, M., and C. C. Rocers. 1982. Differential fertility in the United States: 1976-—
1980. Fam. Plan. Persp. 14:281-286.

RaJULTON, F., T.R. BALAKRISHNAN, and J.
CuHen. 1990. Changes in the timing of
fertility—a Canadian experience. J. Biosoc.
Sci. 22:33-42.

Rao, K. V., and T. R. BALAKRISHNAN. 1988.
Age at first birth in Canada: A hazard model
analysis. Genus 44:53-72.

Rinpruss, R. R., L. Bumpass, and C. St. JoHN.
1980. Education and fertility: Implications
for the roles women occupy. Amer. Sociol.
Rev. 45:431-447.

. 1983. Social determinants of age at first
birth. J. Marr. Fam. 45:552-—565.

Ropricguez, G., and J. CLELAND. 1981. Socio
 

 

Social Biology

economic determinants of marital fertility in
twenty countries: A multivariate approach,
p. 325-425. In World Fertility Survey Conference, 1980, record of proceedings, Vol. 2.
ISI, Voorburg, Netherlands.

TEACHMAN, J.D. 1985. The declining significance of first birth timing. Demography
22:185~198.

WartE, L. J., and K. A. Moore. 1978. The impact of an early first birth on young women’s
educational attainment. Soc. Forc. 56:845865.

WINEBERG, H. 1988. Education, age at first birth,
and the timing of fertility in the United
States: Recent trends. J. Biosoc. Sci. 20:157165.

WINEBERG, H., and J. McCartny. 1986. Differential fertility in the United States, 1980:
Continuity or change? J. Biosoc. Sci. 18:311324.

Wo tre, B. L. 1980. Childbearing and/or labor
force participation: The education connection. Res. Pop. Econ. 2:365-385.
