Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Psychosocial factors in blood pressure variation: A
comparative study of young Samoans

Joel M. Hanna

To cite this article: Joel M. Hanna (1996) Psychosocial factors in blood pressure
variation: A comparative study of young Samoans, Social Biology, 43:3-4, 169-190, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1996.9988922

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1996.9988922

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 9

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Psychosocial Factors in Blood Pressure :
Variation: A Comparative Study of |
Young Samoans ;

- ww

> dee

, ‘ ' 4 A ‘¢ “sy
Coe 23 STb ate
‘ ae ~—t jee

a =
‘Ng

Joel M. Hanna

Department of Physiology
University of Hawaii
Honolulu, Hawaii 96822

ABSTRACT: Traditional peoples contacting modern cultures frequently experience increased levels of blood pressure. The aim of this investigation was to identify some acculturation-related
psychosocial factors which might contribute to those elevations. Young Samoans living in a
traditional village, in modernizing American Samoa, and as migrants in Hawaii were studied.
Casual blood pressure, anthropometric measurements, and extensive interview data were collected. The most important factor predicting variation in blood pressure was body mass (BMI).
This finding was particularly evident among the acculturated and migrant Samoans. In those
locations women’s abandonment of breast feeding may contribute to their higher BMI. Among
acculturated and migrant women, measures of social support favored lower blood pressures.
Among men in all locations a greater number of close social ties was linked to higher blood
pressures with the exception of ties with parents. Parental ties were linked to substantially lower
blood pressures. A knowledge of Samoan traditions favored lower blood pressure among migrant
men, while knowledge of American culture favored higher pressures. Coping strategies and

complaint behavior were also significant contributors in all locations.

Traditional peoples exposed to
modernized cultures often experience
an epidemiological transition. Childhood mortality and infectious disease
morbidity are reduced while chronic
diseases of adulthood become more
pronounced (Hull, 1982; Zimmett,
1979; Taylor et al., 1989; Powles,
1992). This epidemiological transition
is often accompanied by increases in
body mass and in skinfold thickness
(Prior, 1974; Pawson, 1986; Bindon
and Baker, 1985; McGarvey, 1991), as
well as by more frequent minor health
problems such as dental caries and respiratory distress (Corruccini and Kaul,
1983; Stebbins, 1991). From a health
perspective there is a change from the
symptoms of infectious and nutritional
disease to those of chronic disease.
These changes are often attributed to

‘“‘Westernization” or ‘‘modernization,”
which are state (categorical) variables
with limited explanatory power. Although there have been calls for identification of those aspects of culture
contact which promote epidemiological change (Murphy, 1982; Cohen,
1978; Marmot and Syme, 1976),
progress has been slow.

Among the chronic health risks
following acculturation, the most frequently identified is hypertension.
Blood pressures increase to potentially
pathological levels in a short time and
seem to do so at relatively younger
ages. Elevations in blood pressure can
be linked to coronary and cerebral insult which elevate both morbidity and
mortality. The most proximate cause
of hypertension is obesity, but this in
itself is inadequate to account for all

169
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

170

blood pressure elevations. Psychosocial factors also seem to play a role.

BACKGROUND FACTORS
OBESITY

Of the factors observed in the transition, an increase in body fat and subsequent elevations in blood pressure
are most commonly documented. Neither is in itself morbid, but the resulting obesity and hypertension are major
risk factors for the development of
chronic disease. The importance of
obesity is difficult to overestimate for
it is the underlying factor leading to
chronic hypertension and diabetes
(Rocchini, 1990; Cowley, 1992; Reisin
et al., 1978; Tuck et al., 1981; Rocchini
et al., 1988). Migrants develop obesity
in accelerated form (Baker and Hanna,
1981; Bindon and Baker, 1985; Hackenberg et al., 1983) so that their age
and blood pressure relationships rapidly approach those of the dominant
culture (Cohen, 1978; Hanna and
Baker, 1979). Among migrant children, obesity occurs at an early age as
do associated elevations in blood pressure (Cohen, 1978; Bindon and Zansky, 1986; McGarvey and Schendel,
1986). The excessive use of tobacco
and alcohol also contribute to the overall transition (Graves, 1967; Marshall,
1979, 1991; Stebbins, 1991; Klatsky et
al., 1977, 1986), while more frequent
births also may elevate migrant women’s blood pressures (Scotch, 1963).

Although obesity is a major contributor to the change in health status, it
is not a necessary condition. Hypertension, stroke, and diabetes are also
found in the non-obese, where their
occurrence has been related to psychosocial stressors (Jenkins, 1982; Kasl,

Hanna

Social Biology

1984; Thiel et al., 1973; Murphy,
1982). Since culture contact is a potentially stressful process, it has been hypothesized that a change in the social
environment plays a role as a psychosocial stressor (Wirsing, 1985).

SOCIAL RELATIONS

There is a large body of evidence
suggesting that social relationships—
social ties, networks, and the support
which they offer—may influence
health through buffering or by reducing the level of stress (Caplan, 1974;
Cohen and Syme, 1985; Hall and Wellman, 1985; Fiore et al., 1983; Walker
et al., 1994). Research has identified
several social characteristics which
may change during the process of acculturation and become stressors. The
overall size of a network seems important because larger networks offer
more resources than do smaller ones
(Walker et al., 1994). Similarly, the
composition of social ties is important.
The inclusion of friends, close relatives, and parents has been associated
with network support (Stokes, 1983;
Wellman and Worthley, 1989; Rock,
1984; Riley and Eckenrode, 1986). The
frequency and form of interaction also
contributes (Riley and Eckenrode,
1986; Walker et al., 1994) as does the
gender of network members (Riley
and Eckenrode, 1986; Kessler and
McLeod, 1984; Antonucci and Akiyama, 1987; Stokes and Wilson, 1984;
Flaherty and Richman, 1989). In each
case the process of acculturation or migration may modify network relationships.

INDIVIDUAL ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOR

Individuals are parts of networks,
but they also assume personal apDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

proaches to management of psychosocial stressors. These personal adaptations can become important in meeting
the stresses arising from the new environment. Graves and Graves (1977,
1985) have identified a Personal Adaptive Strategy (PAS) as such an adaptive
process. A migrant can rely upon relatives (Kin), friends and co-workers
(Peer), or upon their own resources
(Self) to adapt successfully. Depending
upon the selection, adaptation can
prove stressful or stress-reducing in the
coping process following migration.
Another type of personal adaptation
has been described by Marmot and
Syme (1976), who studied Japanese
Americans. According to their observations, retention of elements of Japanese culture favored lower blood
pressure, hence lower stress, while
assimilation of elements from the dominant culture yielded blood pressure
elevations. Individual adaptive behaviors may lead to status inconsistency,
which has recently been associated
with acculturation. According to this
paradigm, a large discrepancy between
individual status and available resources is stressful (Smith, 1967;
Dressler et al., 1987a,b; Dressler,
1990; 1995; Cohen, 1978; Janes,
1990a,b; McGarvey and Schendel,
1986; Bindon et al., 1991). This concept has proven useful in acculturation
and migration studies. As a final example of personal adaptive behavior, the
expression of affective and physical
complaints has been associated with
individual levels of stress. A high frequency of physical complaints, or somatization, has been linked with longterm health risk (Kleinman, 1986).
Complaints were closely associated
with the stresses of acculturation and

Blood Pressure

171

assimilation (Hanna and Fitzgerald,
1993) or with urbanization (Swartz et
al., 1989).

PREVIOUS SAMOAN
RESEARCH

Samoans have been exposed to
American culture for more than a generation in American Samoa and as migrants to Hawaii and to California
(Baker and Hanna, 1981; Baker et al.,
1986; Janes, 1990b). Causes of death
have become more similar to those of
modernized populations, while among
traditional populations they have not
greatly changed, although there is evidence that some transition may now
be underway (Baker and Crews, 1986;
Taylor et al., 1989). Exposure to
American culture has led to substantial
elevations in body mass (Pawson,
1986; Pawson and Janes, 1981), in
blood pressure (McGarvey and Baker,
1979; McGarvey and Schendel, 1986),
and to less favorable blood lipid patterns (Pelletier and Hornick, 1986).

While obesity is clearly the primary
factor contributing to elevated blood
pressure, a number of psychosocial
stressors have been identified as potential contributors. McGarvey and Baker
(1986) studied blood pressure variation
on the Island of Tutuila, American Samoa. Those villages they believed to
be more “modern” exhibited higher
average blood pressures than others.
Although aspects of the methodology
for village selection have been questioned (Martz, 1982), the importance
of culture contact was not. In another
study of migrants to Hawaii, those living in rural and heavily Samoan populated towns showed higher blood pressures than those living in urban public
housing. This result was observed after

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

172

adjustment for age and body fat and
holds the implication that some aspects
of migrant Samoan culture may differentially influence blood pressure. One
of those aspects may be demands
placed upon migrants by migrant networks. Studies of migrants to San
Francisco (Janes, 1990a,b), San Diego
(DuBois, 1989), Honolulu (Hanna and
Fitzgerald, 1993) and to New Zealand
(Macpherson, 1978, 1979) have documented stressful descriptions of ethnic
networks requiring contributions of
time, resources, and money. Status inconsistency (or lifestyle incongruity)
seems to be another factor implicated
in blood pressure elevation among Samoans. Its influence has been observed
among older Samoans in American
Samoa and San Francisco (Bindon et
al., 1991; Janes, 1990). In their comprehensive summary of Samoan blood
pressure from several locations, McGarvey and Schendel (1986) also found
status incongruity as an important
psychosocial factor. In addition, they
identified education, complaint behavior, emotional depression, and numbers of children (for acculturated
mothers) as potential stressors. For
each factor there were modest associations with blood pressure.

Thus, some elevations in blood
pressure among Samoans may reflect
the contributions of psychosocial stressors arising from contact between Samoan and American culture. However, with the exception of the work of
McGarvey and Schendel (1986), each
inquiry has described a single location
such as American Samoa, Hawaii, or
California. McGarvey and Schendel
have summarized observations from
several different locations, made at different times, with various age group
Hanna

 

Social Biology

ings, and with different methodologies
and protocols. A truly comparative
study of psychosocial variation and
blood pressure has yet to be described.
Likewise, most investigations have focused upon mature adults with chronic
diseases, but morbid associations with
chronic disease are typically established years or decades prior to the
appearance of symptoms. Chronic hypertension, diabetes, tobacco-induced
disease, and other pathological states
develop slowly. In order to understand
more fully the casual relationships, it
will be necessary to examine a younger
cohort at risk, a cohort which is experiencing the stressors, but at a time
before the gross pathological changes
become fully established. The present
investigation attempts to accomplish
these aims. It applies a uniform methodology to three populations of young
adults at differing levels of exposure to
American culture.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Samoan adults between 18 and 37
years were studied at three locations.
Forty-seven (22 males, 25 females) individuals lived in a Western Samoan
village located on the island of Savai’i.
The site was selected because it was
identified as one of the most remote
and least acculturated villages still to
be found in Western Samoa (WS).
The sample included a large portion of
the young adults in the village. In
American Samoa (AS), another 48 individuals (26 males, 22 females) from
seven villages in the Pago-Pago area
were recruited. These were young
adults who had participated in an earlier study and were restudied five years
later. They represent a sample of
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

young Samoans who did not migrate in
the interim and have been described
earlier in some detail (Pearson and
Hanna, 1989; Hanna et al., 1990). In
Hawaii (HI), 48 young Samoans (22
males, 26 females) were interviewed.
They were residents of urban Honolulu
living mostly in public housing. Most
were immigrants, only a few had been
born in Hawaii, but all had been resident in Hawaii for at least three years.
A discussion of the social network
characteristics and family relations of
these groups has been provided by
Fitzgerald and Howard (1990). Similarly, a detailed description of the lifestyle of each population has been presented in other reports (Fitzgerald,
1989; Pearson, 1989). Some characteristics of this sample are provided in
Table 1.

Casual blood pressure was measured on several occasions after the individual had been at rest for at least
one-half hour. In the case of extreme
variation repeated measures were
taken and the lowest blood pressure recorded. Systolic and diastolic pressures
were measured with a mercury sphygmomanometer. With few exceptions
the same person recorded all pressures. Anthropometric measurements
(Table 1) followed the procedures of
Weiner and Laurie (1969).

Each participant provided detailed
information concerning several aspects
of health, lifestyle, opinions, and social
relationships during structured interviews. There were eight distinct protocols requiring several hours of interviews over several days. Included was a
circle diagram containing numbers,
names, and degree of association with
friends and relatives (see House and
Kahn, 1985). There was also a trun
Blood Pressure

173

cated genealogy which included one
generation above and one generation
below ego. There was a 25-item graduated test of knowledge of Samoan
concepts, and a similar 20-item multiple choice list of American cultural
items. Previous reports have discussed
details of their construction and employment (Fitzgerald and Howard,
1990; Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993;
Fitzgerald, 1989; Hanna, nd).

SocIAL NETWORKS AND SUPPORT

The circle diagram and the genealogy provided information concerning
social ties, interactions, and _ exchanges. Each participant was presented with a diagram of four concentric circles. Ego was the center circle,
and those people to whom he/she felt
closest (“I cannot imagine life without
them’’) were placed in the next concentric circle. The second concentric circle
included people he/she liked, but were
not so close. The outermost concentric
circle included the rest of the people
he/she knew. For each person named,
information as to gender, relationship,
frequency of contact, type of interaction, place of residence, and ethnicity
was requested. A total of 5,947 individuals were so identified. Each was
placed in a category CLOSE, MID, or
DISTANT depending upon their perceived closeness to ego as shown by circle position. Family relationships for
each named person on the circle were
categorized as CLOSE FAMILY (parents, sibs, and children), NEAR FAMILY (grandparents, parents’ sibs, and
cousins), DISTANT FAMILY (all
more remote relatives), and AFFINE
(those related by marriage). A fifth
category was derived from the names
on the circle diagram, FRIENDS,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

174

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS?

Hanna

TABLE 1

Social Biology

SAMPLE Western
CHARACTERISTICS Samoa
MEN sca cies anes cas saneoggn eweamis venoms N=22
Age (years) .........ceceseeeeenes 23.6 (3.4)
Married ...........cceceeeeeeeeeees 8
Employed..........cscsecesseeeeee 7
Height (cm)..............0seeeeee 173.1 (4.7)
Weight (kg)? acs scecscs nvcsasasuns 73.5 (7.1)
Fe nas nora sec enescoa vane wae aoe as 24.43 (2.5)
Mean SF (mm)?..............06+ 9.2 (4.4)
Systolic Pres. (mm) ............ 128.9 (9.9)
Diastol. Pres. (mm)............ 76.6 (11.3)
Income: (/ year) ses ssvviews wsinsene $648
Birth Place ..........seceeses sense WS 21, AS 1
WOMEN ....ceeeeeeceeesceeeeeeeeeeees N=25
Age (years) .........ccceeeseeeee 23.6 (3.5)
Married sss sscsiees nec cawaninn omenains 14
Employes ses cass sn csmsxes exes wee 7
Height (cm) .........eeeeeeeeeeees 161.3 (4.2)
Weight (kg)? .........cceceeeeeeee 65.0 (7.9)
30 | 25.0 (2.6)
Mean SF (mm)?............0++0. 18.6 (7.0)
Systolic Pres. (mm)............ 121 (12.6)
Diastol. Pres. (mm)............ 74.0 (11.7)
Income ($/year) .............06 $314
Birth Place ............sseeeeeeees WS 25

American
Samoa Hawau
N=26 N=22
24.2 (5.4) 26.3 (5.4)
6 12
19 13
174.2 (5.3) 175.3 (4.7)
86.6 (13.0) 92.9 (16.9)
28.5 (5.4) 30.1 (4.6)
17.1 (7.3) 20.2 (7.6)
127.0 (7.4) 130.4 (15.2)
83.3 (8.5) 77.3 (11.4)
$3255 $8823
AS 25, HI 1 WS 3, AS 18,
HI 1
N=22 N=26
23.3 (4.2) 24.4 (4.2)
5 15
12 13
162.6 (5.1) 163.7 (4.5)
78.5 (14.6) 86.6 (14.3)
29.7 (5.4) 32.3 (5.4)
25.2 (8.4) 30.7 (8.2)
113 (10.0) 118.2 (9.3)
74.2 (10.6) 75.5 (9.6)
$3785 $4223
WS 1, AS 21 WS 5, AS 13,
HI7, CA I

4Ws, Western Samoa. AS. American Samoa. HI. Hawan CA, California
Statistically significant difference between locations (see text for explanation)

which included friends and coworkers.
In addition to frequency, interactions
were characterized by types of assistance. EMOTIONAL SUPPORT was
the sum of the individuals who were
available when the informant was sad,
mad, or needed advice. INSTRUMENTAL SUPPORT was the number
of individuals who provided food and
gifts, assisted with social obligations or
gave or loaned money. For each type
of support the number of named individuals who fulfilled these conditions
was summed. The circle diagram thus
provided several aspects of the social

ties described by each informant—
their perceived closeness, their relationship, and the degree and types of
regular interaction.

MEASURES OF ADAPTATION OR COPING

From the several protocols, a personal adaptive strategy was constructed (Graves and Graves, 1977,
1985). This strategy was based upon
about thirty items in which the subject
chose kin, peers, or self to make decisions or solve problems. The sum of
the number of choices in each category
became the KIN, PEER, or SELF PAS

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3~4

variable. As part of a health history,
there was a list of 91 items (mostly
symptoms) covering physical and mental health as well as aspects of affect
and minor annoyances. The TOTAL
SYMPTOMS score was the total number of symptoms checked, the SOMATIC SYMPTOMS included those
referring to specific physical pains and
problems, while the AFFECT SYMPTOMS described the total number of
specific emotional symptoms listed.
HASSLES during the last thirty days
from the Hassles and Uplifts Scale
were also included (Kanner et al.,
1981).

The SAMOAN CONCEPTS score
was the number of correct responses
on a 25-item multiple choice test of
Samoan concepts. The items were
graduated from easy to difficult. U.S.
CONCEPTS was the number of correct answers on a 20-item test involving
middle-class American concepts. A
higher score on U.S. CONCEPTS reflected greater assimilation of American knowledge.

Table 2 summarizes the variables
and indices employed in the present
investigation. During analysis, each
variable or index was standardized (ztransformation) by site and by gender
to make them comparable. They were
then employed as independent variables in a stepwise multiple regression
with systolic or diastolic blood pressures as dependent variables. BMI, as
a measure of obesity, was also included
as an independent variable to determine its relative predictive power. If
the multiple regression continued for
an excessive number of steps, it was arbitrarily terminated when less than an
additional 3 per cent of the variation

Blood Pressure

175

was explained. Table 3 summarizes regression relationships by gender and
location for BMI, social, and personal
adaptation variables.

Status incongruity was examined
following Janes (1990a) with the discrepancy between status and resources
investigated from two perspectives.
The first was from within the Samoan
community, and the second was in relation to the dominant society (in
American Samoa and Hawaii). Within
the Samoan community, status was derived from community involvement as
evidenced by organization affiliation,
offices held, chiefly titles and other
measures of social participation. Resources available were personal income, tangible aid and other nonfinancial assistance from friends and family,
as taken from the circle diagram. Status with respect to dominant society
was determined through occupational
classification. Four categories of occupation (housewife/farmer, unskilled,
skilled, professional) were compared
to education and training as well as to
resources (financial and nonfinancial)
available. In a technique employed by
Dressler (Dressler et al., 1987a,b;
Dressler, 1990), each measure of status
and of resources was standardized. The
sum of the resources was then subtracted from the status, yielding a difference. Those with the largest discrepancy between status and resources
show the greatest difference while
those with less discrepancy show
smaller differences.

Some individual characteristics

were also investigated. These included educational level (years of
formal schooling), employment status
(employed vs. unemployed), marital

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

176

 

Hanna

Social Biology

TABLE 2

PSYCHOSOCIAL VARIABLES

Variables

Network or

Support Variables
TOTAL SIZE. 15, isms wen sass sae anas ens
CLOSE FAMILY scone snssans cow ssexaowms
NEAR FAMILY..........ceecesseesseaees

DISTANT FAMILY ...............-2068
AFFINE. FAMILY’ . ccseves csesiexscesssens
FRIENDS sive ance cononns axnossen ana amas nine
GENDER .........ceceescecececeeeenseoees

SELF PAS ......ccccceeeeeeeeeereeeeeeereeee

SAMOAN CONCEPTS ............064
SOMATIC COMPLAINTS............

AFFECTIVE COMPLAINTS ........
TOTAL COMPLAINTS.........00.008.

FREQ HASSLES ...........0:.ceceeeeeee
PRESSURE oo nny tants wascanso0s coopers

status, coffee drinking, tobacco use
(smokers vs. nonsmokers), and alcohol

use (drinkers vs. nondrinkers).

RESULTS

Components

Total number of individuals named on the circle
Number of parent, child, sib, spouse named on the circle
Number of grandparents, uncle, aunt, cousins named on
the circle
Number of other relatives named on the circle

Number of spouse’s family named on the circle
Number of friends or coworkers named on the circle
Gender of each named individual
Sum of eight different kinds of interactions with each individual named
Number of times of emotional support or advice was offered on a regular basis by the named individual
Number of loans, physical assistance, or gifts of items or
food received on a regular basis by the named individual
Number of persons in the inner concentric of the circle
diagram
Number of persons in the intermediate concentric of the
circle diagram
Number of persons in the outer concentric of the circle
diagram

Score on self portion of PAS

Score on kin portion of PAS

Score on peer portion of PAS

Score on 20-item test of American Middle Class concepts
Score on 25-item test of Traditional Samoan concepts
Number of physical complaints on 91 item health symptoms checklist

Number of emotional complaints on 91 item health symptoms checklist

Total complaints on 91 item health symptoms checklist
Number of hassles reported for the last month
Perceived pressure in everyday life

was higher in women than in men, and
Western Samoan values were lower
than those from American Samoa and
Hawaii, the latter being about equal
(Table 1).

ANTHROPOMETRIC VARIABLES

Variation in body mass (BMI) and
blood pressure was examined by analysis of variance. A two-way analysis of
variance indicated significant BMI differences by gender and by site. BMI

The systolic and diastolic blood
pressures of men were statistically
higher than women, but there were no
Statistical differences between locations (Table 1). Although the systolic
and diastolic pressures are within the
ranges described in earlier studies
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 43, No. 3-4 Blood Pressure 177

TABLE 3

PREDICTORS OF SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC BLoopD PRESSURES?

SYSTOLIC PRESSURE

Vanable Effect R2
Men
Western Samoa
CLOSE FAMILY .............008- + 0.08
SELF PAS ..... jeceecstceceseceeee + 0.16
HASSLES. ..........ecccceecceeseves + 0.30
CLOSE ...... ccc cece cceescesveeceeves + 0.44
American Samoa
CLOSE ... occ ccc eeeceesceesscsceenes 4 0.14
AFFECTIVE COMPLAINTS. + 0.22
U.S. CONCEPTS...........cccee0 _ 0.28
SELF PAS .......ccccesseseessueeees — 0.33
Hawaii
BML..........ccccceveesesceeevsseccees + 0.29
SELF PAS .........scsccceescceueees = 0.40
CLOSE .... ccc ceecececcccesseceeeene + 0.57
SOMATIC COMPLAINTS.... + 0.60
SAMOAN CONCEPTS......... - 0.66
U.S. CONCEPTS..............005 + 0.70
Women
Western Samoa
BMIL........cccccececcscecceerecseusers + 0.37
American Samoa
BML.......cccccscccescsvscccenaceucees + 0.13
TOTAL COMPLAINTS ........ + 0.30
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT ..... - 0.44
TIA SSL ES oe isi sas cas 388 tines ceaeons + 0.48
Hawaii
BML........cccccssvsssecccvevscesusees + 0.27
TANGIBLE SUPPORT ........ - 0.31

DIASTOLIC PRESSURE

Vaniable Effect R2
CLOSE FAMILY an. risaseisaseacs tines + 0.40
INSTRUMENTAL SUPPORT ..... —- 0.46
©) EOS) Se + 0.14
SELF PAS ...........cccceesceessveusenens - 0.31
TOTAL COMPLAINTS .............. + 0.42
U.S. CONCEPTS. .........0ccsccecceees — 6.51
BML...........cccccecccccccevecceceverseenns + 0.64
BML.........cccccccccccccsccsacceestecvesens + 0.35
SAMOAN CONCEPTS. .........0000: —- 0.41
U.S. CONCEPTS. .............cceeccees + 0.56
CLOSE FAMILY ...........:.scceeeeeee + 0.28
RIV wasn hears 0a 078s Ian $ane wes aR saa + 0.46
BML...0..........ccceccccnscceecccessceenees - —20
SOMATIC COMPLAINTS .......... + 0.34
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT. ............ - —-43
PRESSURE ..........cccceeeseeveseseveee + 0.25
TOTAL COMPLAINTS .............. + 038
RSIVIE vicacaseei aie 3 a FUG basen 05H =RaRE FETIAS + 0.48

“Variables are listed in order of entry Effect is + or — influence on pressure R* 1s total explained variation in blood pressure

(Bindon and Baker, 1985; McGarvey
and Schendel, 1986; Pawson and
Janes, 1981; Hanna and Baker, 1979),
they show no apparent acculturation or
migration effect. It may be concluded
that the influence of culture contact
and migration are not fully expressed
in these samples. Perhaps they have
not reached an age where these effects
can be observed.

A number of anthropometric variables, including height, weight, body
mass index (BMI), several measures of
skeletal dimensions, skinfold thickness
at six sites and their sum, were then regressed on systolic and diastolic blood
pressures. For men the best single predictor was BMI, but for women BMI
and mid-axillary skinfold thickness
were of similar value. Because BMI

 
re

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

178

has been found to be predictive of
obesity among Polynesians (Evans and
Prior, 1969), it was employed in most
further analysis. There were significant
associations between systolic blood
pressure, diastolic blood pressure, and
BMI in all female samples and in migrant males. Age and blood pressure
correlations were not statistically significant, again reflecting the youth and
limited age range of the samples.

PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS

The effects of smoking, drinking
alcohol, drinking coffee, educational
level, being unemployed, being married, and place of birth yielded no significant differences in blood pressure
when compared by analysis of variance.

A history of pregnancy did not influence blood pressure in a pooled
sample of all women (n=75), nor did
regressions of systolic and diastolic
blood pressure on number of children
show statistical significance. A t-test
contrasting women with children
against those with no children also
yielded no_ statistical differences.
However, among acculturated women
(HI, AS), a history of pregnancy did
seem to have some influence on subcutaneous fat thickness. In American
Samoa and Hawaii, the sum of six skinfold measurements were significantly
greater in women with one or more
children than in women with no children (F=2.4, df 1/46, p<0.05). This
finding was largely the result of differences in the sub-scapular and suprailiac skinfold sites. The values were
36.0 mm vs. 43.2 mm for sub-scapular
and 33.6 mm vs. 40.0 mm for suprailiac. There were no significant age cor
Hanna

 

Social Biology

relations. There was no similar variation among Western Samoan women.
In acculturated women multiple births
had an additive effect on skinfold
thickness, that is, the thickness differential increased with a greater number
of children.

NETWORKS AND SUPPORT

There was a clear association between measures of social support and
blood pressure. In all cases INSTRUMENTAL and EMOTIONAL support
were associated with lower blood pressures. Support associations seem more
characteristic of acculturated (AS, HI)
women (Table 3).

Among men there is a pattern of associations between the number of individuals perceived as being CLOSE
(“I cannot imagine life without them’’)
and elevations in blood pressure. For
Western Samoan men, the association
was with close family members
(CLOSE FAMILY), but 91 per cent of
the CLOSE FAMILY were also
CLOSE, hence these variables are
measuring the same factor. To investigate this association, the CLOSE category was subdivided in three dimensions. First, CLOSE individuals were
divided into the following relationship
categories, (a) parents, (b) spouse and
children, (c) sibs, (d) other family, and
(e) friends and coworkers. This division was based upon the assumption
that different relationships offer differing types of support (Walker et al.,
1994) and could thus influence blood
pressure. A second dimension was the
degree of interaction with each individual who was named as CLOSE. This
subdivision was based upon a concept
that more frequent and varied interaction would distinguish supportive rela
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

tionships. INTERACTION was derived from the eight types of interactions described from the circle diagram. The resulting nine point scale
(8 through 16) was equally categorized
into High, Medium, and Low. The
third dimension was the gender of the
named person. This dimension was included because of the differential influence of men and women as members of
networks (Kessler and McLeod, 1984;
Riley and Eckenrode, 1986; Walker et
al, 1994). These three categories—
relationship, interaction, and gender —
were employed as independent variables in a multiway analysis of
variance. This analysis revealed only
the presence of parents in the CLOSE
category had an influence on blood
pressure. The parent category was
linked to significantly lower blood
pressures than other relationship categories, the values falling more than 4
mmHg for systolic and diastolic pressures. Thus, except for parents, an increasing number of CLOSE individuals leads to increased blood pressure,
regardless of relationship, amount of
interaction, or gender of the named individual.

PERSONAL ADAPTIVE VARIABLES AND
CoPING

There was a general association between complaint behavior (SOMATIC
SYMPTOMS, AFFECT SYMPTOMS, TOTAL SYMPTOMS, HASSLES) and blood pressure (Table 3).
The extensive interviews implicated
many of these complaints resulted
from acculturation § experiences
(Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993). Largely
among women, there were also associations between measures of recent
support (INSTRUMENTAL, EMO
Blood Pressure

 

179

TIONAL) and blood pressure. In all
cases support is related to reduced
blood pressure.

For men, two other personal associations were evident (Table 3). First,
degree of cultural knowledge is related
to blood pressure in those men exposed to American culture. Among
migrant men (HI) a knowledge of Samoan cultural concepts (SAMOAN
CONCEPTS) was associated with
lower systolic and diastolic pressures
(Table 3). Thus, cultural knowledge

‘and identity had a positive effect on

blood pressure in Hawaii. As a contrast, knowledge of American middleclass concepts (U.S. CONCEPTS) associated with higher blood pressure in
migrant men. Assimilation of American cultural knowledge appears to
have been stressful among migrants
(HI). In American Samoa that knowledge yielded lower blood pressures
(Table 3). Second, there was a relationship between men’s employment
of a self-reliant personal adaptive strategy (SELF PAS) and blood pressure.
In Western Samoa SELF PAS was
linked to elevations in blood pressure
while in the other locations it was associated with decreased blood pressure.

Evaluation of status inconsistency
yielded negative results. The discrepancy model, which posits a gap between resources and status, was not
supported. In Western Samoa there
were no significant relationships when
blood pressure was regressed on community status as compared to monetary
income or other resources available. In
the acculturated communities there
was no apparent relationship with community status, job status, income, or
other resources.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

180 Hanna

Thus, several kinds of blood pressure relationships were identified.
Most evident was the importance of
body mass (BMI) in prediction of
blood pressure in women and in migrant men. Of the network variables,
with the single exception of parents, a
larger number of reported close ties related to higher blood pressure. Social
support had a beneficial effect, reducing blood pressures. Personal adaptive
techniques also influenced blood pressures. Complaint behavior was linked
with higher blood pressure, and many
of the complaints by acculturated Samoans (AS, HI) were the results of
interactions with American culture.
For migrant men a Samoan cultural
knowledge was associated with reduced blood pressure, but a knowledge
of American culture yielded elevations
in blood pressure. A self-reliant coping
strategy was important for men in all
locations.

DISCUSSION

Some characteristics of the samples
should be noted in considering blood
pressure relationships. First, this is a
sample of young adults and cannot be
considered representative of all age
groups in the Samoan population. It is
further apparent that the symptoms of
chronic disease are not yet manifest,
nor are the well-documented effects of
alcohol, smoking, and obesity evident.
Yet many of the preconditions for their
development must be present if these
young adults are to develop the previously identified patterns of risk. Second, although the American and Western Samoan samples are probably
representative of young adults in those
communities, the Hawaii sample may

Social Biology

not be so widely representative because they were drawn from public
housing, a subpopulation which has
lower casual blood pressures than migrants living in rural Hawaii (Hanna
and Baker, 1979).

ANTHROPOMETRIC VARIABLES

The most common result of migration or acculturation is an increase in
body mass reflecting an accumulation
of body fat (Prior, 1974; Pawson, 1986;
Bindon and Baker, 1985; McGarvey,
1991). This increase is the primary risk
factor for development of many
chronic diseases and is clearly present
in this study. The traditional villagers
have significantly lower BMI than either the acculturated American Samoans or the migrants to Hawaii (Table
1). Because this is a relatively young
sample, the elevations in blood pressure which accompany higher in BMI
can be anticipated within a few years.

Factors contributing to elevations of
BMI in migrant or acculturating Samoans remain to be identified. A simple
dietary explanation seems unlikely
(Hanna et al., 1986), but a change in
activity levels is possible. Western Samoans daily engage in more strenuous
work than their acculturated peers
and, when the latter are required to
engage in strenuous effort, they secrete
stress hormones at a_ significantly
higher level (Pearson et al., 1990).
Thus, a daily activity differential can
probably account for some of the observed BMI variation.

The work presented here suggests
that the number of pregnancies may
also contribute to higher body mass in
some women. In the acculturated locations (AS, HI), skinfold thickness is
greater in women after childbirth and

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

further increases with the number of
children. Bindon’s (1985) study of Samoan breast feeding practices suggests
an explanation. He reports that only
about 40 per cent of American Samoan
children under five months of age are
breastfed, while in Western Samoa the
percentage is 89. Fitzgerald (1993) further observes that breast feeding is of
longer duration and with less supplementation in the rural villages of Western Samoa. Hence, the active Western
Samoan mothers may be expending
substantially more caloric energy in
lactation than their American Samoan
and Hawaiian sisters. The caloric cost
of lactation can be high, more than 850
Kceal per day (National Academy of
Sciences, 1974), and should have a significant influence on energy balance.
Thus, it can be hypothesized that abandonment of breast feeding may contribute to greater postpartum fat retention, higher BMI, and ultimately to
higher blood pressure in acculturated
women. The process is amplified as the
number of children increases. A similar relationship to blood pressure has
been described by Scotch (1963) in his
classic paper. This hypothesis is further
supported by interview data in which
women in the acculturated sites recognized that pregnancy was an important
source of weight gain. Women in
American Samoa and in Hawaii reported weight gain followed pregnancy, but Western Samoan women
did not (Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993).
There are clearly additional factors involved, but limitation of breast feeding
may be a contributory aspect of the elevation of BMI following acculturation.

McGarvey and Schendel (1986)
have reported a reduced blood pres
Blood Pressure 181

sure among women born in Western
Samoa, when women with fewer than
five children were contrasted with
women with more than five children.
Unfortunately, they also included
women with no children among their
lower group so that equivalent evaluations cannot be made.

SOCIAL SUPPORT AND NETWORKING

There is an extensive literature on
social support, social networking, and
their influence on health (Caplin, 1974;
Gottleib, 1981; Cohen and Syme,
1985; Wasserman and Galaskiewicz,
1994). Much of that literature is concerned with mortality, especially
among the elderly, or employs subjective reports of well being. This study
identifies two areas where networking
and support may have a direct physiological effect upon blood pressure.

In this investigation, the CLOSE
category describes a series of social
ties which are part of an ego-generated
network. While these are a series of dyads rather than a network, the results
are suggestive. Network research has
shown that larger networks may offer
greater social support by virtue of their
larger resource base (Walker et al.,
1994). It would seem to follow that
greater support should favor lower,
rather than higher, blood pressures.
Therefore, the significant relationship
between the number of CLOSE ties
and higher blood pressure presently
observed may seem anomalous. However, it is now recognized that social
ties—especially close ties—are complex relationships. Each contains a
number of dimensions which extend
beyond simple feelings of closeness
or feelings of support (Hall and Wellman, 1985; Walker, Wasserman and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

182

Wellman, 1994; Riley and Eckenrode,
1986). Some close ties are stressful
even within supportive networks. Origins of stress include problematic interactions, unmet expectations for support, and temporal changes in relations
(Rook, 1984; Fiore et al., 1983). According to this view, as network size increases so does the opportunity for a
greater accumulation of stressful interactions. Moreover, network members
develop empathy. Unfortunate events
for one member can cause distress
throughout the network (Eckenrode
and Gore, 1981; Kessler and McLeod,
1984). Thus, larger networks also provide an opportunity for accumulation
of stressful events. Kirchbaum et al.
(1995) have called this a “boomerang”
effect of support.

An important exception to the multidimensional nature of social ties
seems to be the relationship between
parents and adult children. Research in
the United States and the Western
world has suggested that this is a strong
and usually supportive relationship.
Walker et al. (1994, p. 59) conclude the
relationship between parent and adult
child is “the strongest of all intimate
and active ties,’ which provides a
broad range of support unmatched by
other associations. In this study, when
the CLOSE category was subdivided,
only the parent—adult-child category
yielded lower blood pressure. All other
close relationships were similar, averaging more than 4 mmHg higher. The

. magnitude of the difference is physio
logically significant. Thus, a close parental relationship among young Samoans has a strong and beneficial
influence on their blood pressure,
which, if sustained, could ultimately influence health in later years.

Hanna

Social Biology

This investigation has identified an
association between social support,
gender, and variation in blood pressure. The results support the substantial literature suggesting that social
support has a buffering or stressreducing capacity (Caplan, 1974; Cohen and Syme, 1985; Hall and Wellman, 1985; Fiore et al., 1983; Walker
et al., 1994; Wasserman and Galaskiewicz, 1994). Those individuals with
the greatest support should experience
the lower blood pressures in stressful
situations. This association is particularly evident in Table 3 where instrumental or emotional support is associated with lower blood pressures in
acculturating (AS) and migrant women
(HI).

There is also substantial evidence
that men and women differ in their responses to stress, including differing
patterns of response in blood pressure
(James and Pickering, 1993; Allen et
al., 1993; Linden et al., 1993) and in
excretion of stress hormones (Kirschbaum et al., 1995; Hanna, ms.). The
combination of stress, gender differences, and social support make the picture somewhat complex. Women under stress respond more intensely to
their social environment, but they also
benefit more substantially from support than do men (Riley and Eckenrode, 1986; Kessler and McLeod, 1984;
Antonucci and Akiyama, 1987; Stokes
and Wilson, 1984; Flaherty and Richman, 1989). In the present study there
is a clear suggestion that women are
more responsive to perceived support
and those effects are most evident
among women who are potentially exposed to the highest levels of stress.
That is, the associations are clearest
and strongest among acculturating and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

migrant women (Table 3). This finding
supports a hypothesis that social support has a beneficial effect on blood
pressure during culture change, and
that this beneficial effect is most clearly
evident among women. As noted in
Table 3, blood pressure relationships
are evident in traditional men (WS)
and in acculturating (AS) and migrant
women (HI). In each case there is
an inverse association between the
amount of instrumental or emotional
support received and blood pressure.
The more frequent associations among
women underlines their greater sensitivity. There seems to be no overall
pattern to support relationships other
than agreement that accumulation of
such support yielded lower levels of
stress as evidenced by lower blood
pressures. These physiological observations confirm the voluminous support literature (Caplan, 1974; Gottleib, 1981; Cohen and Syme, 1985).

INDIVIDUAL ADAPTIVE STRATEGIES

Several individual coping strategies
have been identified and associated
with variations in blood pressure.
Among men a SELF PAS seems important. It is linked to blood pressure
elevations in Western Samoa and to reductions in Hawaii and American Samoa. Due to the process of Americanization in the latter locations, self
reliance is viewed as appropriate behavior, hence lower levels of blood
pressure follow (Table 3). In traditional Samoa, with its family orientation, self reliance is not a valued behavior (Graves and Graves, 1977).
Elevated blood pressures suggest it
can be a stressful adaptation. Sutter
(1980), who studied Western Samoan
children during their first school year,

Blood Pressure

183

reported adjustment problems for children who were forced to become self
reliant. When required to do their own
school work, some children were unable to adapt. They dropped out of
school rather than engage in individual
problem solving or otherwise work for
themselves in the classroom, although
they had no problems working with
other children toward group solutions.
Their level of stress was clear from elevations in stress hormones excreted
during the school week. James et al.
(1985), who investigated hormone excretion among Western Samoan men,
also found the highest levels of hormone excretion among self-reliant students in a Western Samoan college.
But, some aspects of Samoan life do
require a measure of self promotion,
however stressful it may seem. Movement up the social hierarchy requires a
degree of initiative and self promotion
especially for young men (Janes,
1990a). They are attempting to achieve
status, prestige, and leadership positions within the community. This
movement requires mobilization of self
and family resources, often in competition with other young men within the
family. Thus, the association of high
blood pressure with self promotion in
Western Samoa may reflect the general
stresses in this age group trying to gain
status. As shown in Table 3, it is also
these men who benefit most greatly
from instrumental support.

Another adaptive technique is evident in complaint behavior expressed
by men and women (Table 3). Complaints included SOMATIC SYMPTOMS, AFFECT SYMPTOMS, and
HASSLES. In an earlier paper
(Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993) it was
determined that the expression of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

184

complaints in Western Samoa was
largely a manifestation of overwork or
boredom with village life, while in the
other sites complaints concerned the
stresses of acculturation. There was
a strong element of somatization,
with anxiety displaced into headaches,
joint pains, tiredness, dizziness, and
hyperventilation. A similar pattern of
increased somatization has been observed with urbanization among residents of the United States, but the pattern is more characteristic of women
than of men (Swartz et al., 1989). In his
survey of symptomology in China and
America, Kleinman (1986) suggested
that somatization is common and reflects a variety of physical and psychosocial stressors. In extreme form it may
portend future mental illness, but most
commonly it provides a culturally acceptable mode of communication of
distress. Complaint behavior is common in Samoa (Howard, 1986), in
other migrant Samoan communities
(Janes, 1990a,b; DuBois, 1989), in
China, and in Western culture (Kleinman, 1986), but it has not often been
linked to specific physiolggical response. The present results suggest
that general complaints may also reflect a channeling of blood pressure in
younger adults, which could foreshadow the development of high blood
pressure during the later decades of
life.

McGarvey and Schendel (1986) also
reported complaints associated with
blood pressure in an American Samoa
sample. In contrast to this study, they
reported higher blood pressures were
linked to fewer expressed complaints.
Their instrument was the Cornell Medical Index which ts a simple instrument
providing for limited responses. The

Hanna

 

Social Biology

present investigation employed extensive interviews which required a number of hours of interaction and enabled
a degree of rapport not possible in a
brief survey. Thus, respondents were
more likely to expand responses and to
give a more detailed picture of their
underlying distress.

For migrant men another index of
coping behavior is associated with
knowledge of Samoan culture as determined by the SAMOAN CONCEPTS
test. There is a strong negative relationship with blood pressure among
these men. Retention of cultural identification has been hypothesized to provide a framework aiding in stress reduction during acculturation (Marmot
and Syme, 1976; Cohen, 1978; Hull,
1979; Murphy, 1982) and has been
linked to lower blood pressures during
acculturation. For example, Marmot
and Syme (1976), employing a sample
of Japanese Americans, concluded
those who retained a primarily Japanese orientation showed lower blood
pressures than those who had assimilated elements of American cultural
behavior. Hackenberg et al. (1983)
came to similar conclusions in a Philippine survey. They contrasted four
groups—migrants, sedentary, urban,
and rural Filipinos—to determine the
relative influence of migration and acculturation on blood pressure. Migration was less important than cultural
assimilation in blood pressure variation. Those individuals who assimilated less of the dominant culture also
retained the lower blood pressures,
Thus, among Japanese Americans, Filipinos, and Samoan migrants, retention of an orientation toward the natal
culture may prove beneficial for maintenance of resting blood pressure, per
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

haps also providing a long-term reduction in risk for development of chronic
disease.

The influence of U.S. CONCEPTS
varied according to location. For migrant men (HI), assimilation of knowledge of the dominant, but nonnatal,
culture was associated with elevations.
This effect of assimilation has been observed elsewhere (Marmot and Syme,
1976; Hackenberg et al., 1983). For
young American Samoan men, a
knowledge of American culture elements bears the opposite relationship
to blood pressure. A greater knowledge of AMERICAN CONCEPTS
yielded lower blood pressures (Table
3). While the cause of this relationship
for American Samoans is not immediately clear, there are limited opportunities for employment on the Island of
Tutuila and most of them are related
to contact with American culture.
Working in the fish cannery, the bank,
for the Territorial Government, or in
many of the businesses requires some
knowledge of things American. In addition, during the school years of this
cohort, much of the educational system
was taught over television from programs oriented to the American Mainland. Those individuals with a greater
knowledge of things American may
simply be better adapted to an acculturated lifestyle so long as their culture
of upbringing remains dominant.

Status incongruity was not supported as a predictor of blood pressure
in any research location. These findings contrast with research elsewhere
(Smith, 1967; Dressler, 1985; Dressler
et al., 1987a,b) and with other studies
of Samoans (Janes, 1990a,b; McGarvey and Schendel, 1986; Bindon et
al., 1991). The lack of association in

Blood Pressure

 

185

this work may result in part from either
the relative youth of the sample or
from the status incongruity model
employed. This study examined the
discrepancy between status and resources. Recent work by Dressler
(1991) and by Bindon et al. (1991) has
shown that an accretion model may be
more useful. According to that approach, the stressor is an accretion of
material items and behaviors from the
dominant culture which cannot be supported with the available resources
(Dressler et al., 1987a,b). Appropriate
data to examine this alternative approach are not available.

There is a lack of association between some established risk factors
(smoking, drinking, or education
level) and blood pressure in the
present investigation. While this is not
a unique finding (see Hackenberg et
al., 1983), the strength of such relationships seems well established. It
would appear that the narrow age
range and the relative youth of the
present samples would preclude an expression of these associations. Just as
the morbidity of cigarette smoking may
require twenty years for expression
(Stebbens, 1991), these factors may
also require some time for full expression.

SUMMARY
AND CONCLUSIONS

This investigation has contrasted
three samples of young adult Samoans
living in communities which differ in
their degree of exposure to American
culture. The focus was upon factors
which might lead to future elevations
in blood pressure and to chronic hypertension. The clearest result of acculturation or migration was an increase in

 

 
a

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

186

body mass (BMI), especially among
women. Due to the youth of the sample there was no corresponding elevation in blood pressure, and it was hypothesized that this will occur in the
future as this cohort ages. In agreement with evidence that dietary and
behavior patterns in acculturated locations favor obesity, this study suggests
that number of pregnancies may also
make some contribution. It is suggested that abandonment of breastfeeding contributes to postpartum fat
retention, which then favors elevations
in women’s blood pressure.

Migration and acculturation also
have a potential for modification of
social networks and support relationships. In all locations, emotional and
instrumental support are associated
with reduced blood pressures suggesting a supportive function. This finding
lends some credence to the concept
that social support reduces the level of
stress or offers some stress buffering.
This study did not examine social networking in a comprehensive manner,
but did consider limited social ties.
Among men there was a clear association between the number of close ties
and increases in blood pressure. Larger
networks may yield more problematic
close ties and prove to be more stressful than smaller ones. The important
exception was social ties to parents
which was linked to a significant reduction in blood pressure. The parent-—
adult-child association has often been
identified as supportive for the child,
and according to this investigation,
that association is also found in Samoan communities regardless of their
degree of exposure to American culture.

Hanna

Social Biology

Individual coping behaviors also
reflect aspects of adaptation to the
migrant environment. A_ relatively
greater knowledge of Samoan concepts
yielded reduced blood pressures in migrant men, suggesting a retention of
cultural identity may have favorable
health consequences. On the other
hand, a greater knowledge of American concepts yielded higher blood
pressures. As has been noted in other
investigations, cultural assimilation—
exchange of elements of traditional
culture for those of the dominant
culture—provides for elevated health
risk during acculturation. Another
coping behavior clearly related to acculturation was the employment of self
reliance. For traditional Samoan men,
self reliance was stressful, but perhaps
necessary, while in the acculturated
communities it seems to have been
stress reducing. It was argued that self
reliance is rewarded in American culture, but considered non-Samoan by
traditional villagers.

A final aspect of personal coping
strategies was the expression of complaint behavior. In all locations there
was a positive association between frequency of complaints—physical, emotional, hassles—and blood pressure.
The interesting difference is in the
content of the complaints. In the acculturated environments they largely
concerned contact with American culture, while in traditional Samoa they
concerned village life. The content was
different, but the results were similar.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author expresses thanks to Dr.
M.H. Fitzgerald, Dr. J.D. Pearson, and

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Dr. A. Howard for assistance and advice.
Special thanks to Chief Lilomiava Galai, to
the Samoan participants, and to the Sa
Blood Pressure

187

moan assistants for their help. This work
was supported by a grant from NIMH,
#MH 40675.

REFERENCES

ALLEN, M. T., C. STONEY, J. F. Owens, and K.
MatTtHEws. 1993. Hemodynamic adjustments to laboratory stress: The influence of
gender and personality. Psychosom. Med.
§5:505-517.

ANTONUcclI, T., and H. Akiyama. 1987. An examination of sex differences in social support
among older men and women. Sex Roles
17:737-749.

Baker, P. T., and D. E. Crews. 1986. Mortality
patterns and some biological predictors, p.
93-122. In P. Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker
(eds.) The changing Samoans: Behavior and
health in transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New
York.

Baker, P., and J. HANNA. 1981. Modernization
and the biological fitness of Samoans, p. 1418. In C. Fleming and I. Prior (eds.), Migration, adaptation and health in the Pacific.
Epidemiology Unit, Wellington Hospital,
Wellington, NZ.

Baker, P., J. HANNA, and T. BAKER (eds.). 1986.
The changing Samoans: Behavior and health
in transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

BINnDoN, J. R. 1985. The influence of infant feeding patterns on the growth of children in
American Samoa. Med. Anthrop. 7:183195.

BINDoN, J. R., and P. Baker. 1985. Modernization, migration and obesity among Samoan
adults. Ann. Hum. Biol. 12:67-76.

BINDON, J.R., D.E. Crews, and W.W.
Dresser. 1991. Life style, modernization
and adaptation among Samoans. Collegium
Anthrop. 15:101-110.

BINDON, J. R., and S. Zansky. 1986. Growth
and body composition, p. 222-253. In P.
Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The
changing Samoans: Behavior and health in
transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Cap_an, G. 1974. Support systems and community mental health. Behavioral Publ., New
York.

CouHEN, J. B. 1978. Migration, health, and aging,
or becoming Americanized may be hazardous to your health, p. 214-220. In C.
Macpherson, B. Shore, and R. Franco (eds.),
New neighbors: Islanders in adaptation. Center S. Pacific Stud., U.C. Santa Cruz, Santa
Cruz, CA.

CouHEN, S., and S. L. Syme. 1985. Social support
and health. Academic Press, New York.
Corruccini, R., and S. Kauv. 1983. The epide
miological transition and anthropology of

minor chronic non-infectious diseases. Med.
Anthrop. 7:36-47.

Cow_ey, A. W. 1992. Long-term control of arterial blood pressure. Physiol. Rev. 72:231300.

Dress_er, W. W. 1985. Extended family relationships, social support, and mental health
in a southern Black community. J. Health
Soc. Behav. 26:39-48.

. 1990. Lifestyle, stress and blood pressure

in a southern Black community. Psychosom.

Med. 52:182-198.

. 1991. Social support, lifestyle incongruity, and arterial blood pressure in a southern
Black community. Psychosom. Med. 53:608620.

DressL_er, W. W., A. Mata, A. CHAVEZ, and
F. E. Viteri. 1987a. Arterial blood pressure
and individual modernization in a Mexican
community. Soc. Sci. Med. 24:679-687.

Dresser, W. W., J. E. Dos Santos, P. N. GALLAGHER, and F.E. Vitert. 1987b. Arterial
blood pressure and modernization in Brazil.
Amer. Anthrop. 89:398-409.

DuBois, B. 1989. Hypertension and social support: The medical anthropology of older urban Samoans. Ph.D. Dissertation. University
of Hawaii, Honolulu.

ECKENRODE, J., and S. Gore. 1981. Stressful
events and social supports: The significance
of context, p. 43-54. In B. Gottlieb (ed.),
Social networks and social support. Sage,
Beverly Hills, CA.

Evans, J. G., and I. A. M. Prior. 1969. Indices
of obesity derived from height and weight in
two Polynesian populations. Brit. J. Prev.
Soc. Med. 23:56-59.

Fiore, J., J. BECKER, and B. Coppev. 1983. Social
network interactions: A buffer or a stress.
Amer. J. Commun. Psychol. 11:432-442.

FITZGERALD, M. H. 1989. Modernization and the
menstrual experience among Samoans.
Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Hawaii,
Honolulu.

. 1993. Is lactation nature’s contraceptive?
Data from Samoa. Soc. Biol. 39:55-64.
FITZGERALD, M. H., and A. Howarp, 1990. Aspects of social organization in three Samoan

communities. Pacific. Stud. 14:31-53.

FLAHERTY, J., and J. RicHMAN. 1989. Gender
differences in the perception and utilization
of social support: Theoretical perspectives
and an empirical test. Soc. Sci. Med.
28:1221-1228.

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

188

Gotten, B. J. (ed.). 1981. Social networks and
social support. Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
Graves, T. D. 1967. Acculturation, access and
alcohol in a triethnic community. Amer. An
throp. 69:306-321.

Graves, T. D., and N. B. Graves. 1977. Preferred adaptive strategies: An approach to
understanding New Zealand’s multicultural
workforce. New Zealand J. Ind. Relations
2:81-90.

Graves, T. D., and N. B. Graves. 1985. Stress
and health among Polynesian migrants to
New Zealand. J. Behav. Med. 8:2-19.

HACKENBERG, R. A., B. HACKENBERG, H. MaGALIT, E. CasBrRAL, and S. Guzman. 1983. Migration, modernization, and hypertension:
Blood pressure levels in four Philippine communities. Med. Anthrop. 7:45-71.

Hatt, A., and B. WELLMAN. 1985. Social networks and social support, p. 23-41. In S. Cohen and L. Syme (eds.), Social support and
health. Academic Press, New York.

Hanna, J. Social stressors and hormone excretion among young Samoans. Manuscript.

Hanna, J., and P. Baker. 1979. Biocultural correlates of blood pressure of Samoan migrants
to Hawaii. Hum. Biol. 51:481-497.

Hanna, J., and M. FitzGerap. 1993. Acculturation and symptoms: A comparative study of
reported health symptoms in three Samoan
communities. Soc. Sci. Med. 36:1169-1180.

Hanna, J., D. PELLETIER, and V. Brown. 1986.
The diet and nutrition of contemporary Samoans, p. 275-296. In P. Baker, J. Hanna
and T. Baker (eds.), The changing Samoans:
Behavior and health in transition. Oxford
Univ. Press, New York.

Hanna, J., M. FItzGERALD, J. PEARSON, A.
Howarp, and J. Martz-Hanna. 1990. Selective migration from Samoa: A longitudinal
study of pre-migration differences in social
and psychological characteristics. Soc. Biol.
37:204-214.

House, J.S., and R. L. Kaun. 1985. Measures
and concepts of social support, p. 83-105. In
S. Cohen and L. Syme (eds.), Social support
and health. Academic Press, New York.

Howarp, A. 1986. Questions and answers. Samoans talk about happiness, distress, and
other life experiences, p. 174-202. In P.
Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The
changing Samoans: Behavior and health in
transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Hutt, D. 1979. Migration, adaptation and illness: A review. Soc. Sci. Med. 13:25-36.

James, G., D. JENNER, G. Harrison, and P.
Baker. 1985. Differences in catecholamine
excretion rates, blood pressure, and lifestyle
among Western Samoan men. Hum. Biol.
57:635-647.

Hanna

Social Biology

James, G. D., AnD T. G. PICKERING. 1993. The
influence of behavioral factors on the daily
variation of blood pressure. Amer. J. Hypertens. 6:170S-173S.

Janes, C.R. 19902. Migration, social change
and health. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford.

Janes, C. R. 1990b. Migration, changing gender
roles and stress: The Samoan case. Med. Anthrop. 12:217-248.

JENKINS, C. D. 1982. Psychosocial risk factors
for coronary heart disease. Acta Med. Scand.
Suppl. 660:123-133.

Kanner, A. D., J. C. Coyne, C. SCHAEFER, and
R.S. Lazarus. 1981. Comparison of two
modes of stress measurement: Daily hassles
and uplifts versus major life events. J. Behavior Med. 4:1-39.

Kast, S. V. 1984. Stress and health. Ann. Rev.
Pub. Health. 5:319-341.

KESSLER, R.C., and J.D. McLeop. 1984. Sex
differences and vulnerability to undesirable
life events. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 49:620-631.

KirscHBauM, C., T. KLAuer, S. H. Fizipp, and
H. HELLHAMMeER. 1995. Sex-specific effects of
social support on cortisol and subjective responses to acute psychological stress. Psychosom. Med. 57:23-31.

Kiatsky, A. L., G. D. FReipMan, and M.A.
ARMSTRONG. 1986. The relationships between
alcoholic beverage use and other traits to
blood pressure: A new Kaiser Permanente
study. Circulation 73:628-636.

KLaTsky, A. L., G. D. FREIDMAN, A. B. SIEGELAuB, and M. J. Gerarp. 1977. Alcohol consumption and blood pressure. N. Eng. J.
Med. 296:1194-—1200.

KLEINMAN, A. 1986. Social origins of distress and
disease. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

LINDEN, W., L. CHAMBERS, J. MAURICE, and
J. W. Lenz. 1993. Sex differences in social
support, self-deception, hostility, and ambulatory cardiovascular activity. Hlth. Psychol.
12:376-380.

MacPHERSON, C. 1978. Samoan migration to
New Zealand and Polynesian migration and
settlement, p. 11. Jn C. Macpherson, B.
Shore, and R. Franco (eds.), New neighbors:
Islanders in adaptation. Center S. Pacific
Stud., U.C. Santa Cruz, CA.

. 1979. The Polynesian migrant family: A
Samoan case study, p. 120-137. In P. Koopman-Boyden (ed.), Families in New Zealand
society. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

MarmoT, M., and L. Syme. 1976. Acculturation
and coronary heart disease in JapaneseAmericans. Amer. J. Epidem. 104:225-247.

MarsHaLt, M. 1979. Weekend warriors: Alcohol
in a Micronesial culture. Mayfield, Palo Alto.

. 1991. The second fatal impact: Cigarette

smoking, chronic disease, and the epidemio
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3~4

logical transition in Oceania. Soc. Sci. Med.
32:1327-1342.

Martz, J.M. 1982. Adult blood pressure on
Tutuila, American Samoa: An analysis by
distance to the Pago Pago Harbor area. Masters Paper. Penn. State Univ., University
Park.

McGarvey, S. T. 1991. Obesity in Samoans and
a perspective on its etiology in Polynesians.
Amer. Clin. Nutr. 53:1586S-2594S.

McGarvey, S. T., and P. T. Baker. 1979. The
effects of modernization and migration on
Samoan blood pressures. Hum. Biol. 51:461479.

McGarvey, S., and D. SCHENDEL. 1986. Blood
pressure in Samoans, p. 351-393. In P.
Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The
changing Samoans: Behavior and health in
transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Murpuy, H. B.M. 1982. Blood pressure and
culture: The contributions of cross-cultural
comparisons to psychosomatics. Psychother.
Psychosom. 38:244-250.

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1974. Recommended dietary allowances. NAS, Washington, D.C.

Pawson, I. G. 1986. The morphological characteristics of Samoan adults, p. 254-274. In P.
Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The
changing Samoans: Behavior and health in
transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Pawson, I. G., and C. Janes. 1981. Massive obesity in a migrant Samoan population. Amer.
J. Publ. Hlth. 71:508-513.

PEARSON, J. D. 1989. Stress and daily activities in
three Samoan groups. Ph.D. Dissertation,
Penn. State University, University Park.

PEARSON, J., and J. HANNA. 1989. Selective migration as a bias in modernization studies:
Premigration differences in morphology and
blood pressure among 15-30-year-old American Samoans. Amer. J. Hum. Biol. 1:263269.

PEARSON, J., J. HANNA, M. FITZGERALD, and P.
Baker. 1990. Modernization and catecholamine excretion of young Samoan adults. Soc.
Sci. Med. 31:729-736.

PELLETIER, D.L., and C. A. Hornick. 1986.
Blood lipid studies, p. 327-350. In P. Baker,
J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The changing
Samoans: Behavior and health in transition.
Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Pow es, J. 1992. Changes in disease patterns and
related social trends. Soc. Sci. med. 35:377384.

Prior, I. A. M. 1974. Cardiovascular epidemiology in New Zealand and the Pacific. N. Zea.
Med. J. 524:245-252.

REIstn, E., R. ABEL, M. Mopan, D. S. SILVERBERG, H. Ettanou, and B. Mopan. 1978.

 

 

Blood Pressure

 

189

Effect of weight loss without salt retention in
the reduction of blood pressure in overweight
hypertensive patients. N. Eng. J. Med.
298:1-6.

Ritey, D., and J. ECKENRODE. 1986. Social ties:
Subgroup differences in benefits and costs. J.
Pers. Soc. Psychol. 51:770-778.

Roccuini, A. P. 1990. The influence of obesity in
hypertension. News Physiol. Sci. 5:245-249.

Roccuint, A. P., V. L. Katcu, J. ANDERSON, J.
HINTERLITER, D. BECQUE, M. Martin, and
C. Marks. 1988. Blood pressure in obese adolescents: The effect of weight loss. Pediatrics 82:16-24.

Rook, K. S. 1984. The negative side of social interaction: Impact on psychological wellbeing. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 46:1097-1108.

Scotcu, N. A. 1963. Sociocultural factors in the
epidemiology of Zulu hypertension. Amer.
J. Publ. Hlth. 53:1205-1211.

SmiTH, T. 1967. Sociocultural incongruity and
change: A review of empirical findings. In L.
Syme and L. Reeder (eds.), Social stress and
cardiovascular disease. Milbank Mem. Fund
Quart. 45:23-39.

STEBBINS, K.R. 1991. Tobacco, politics, and
economics: Implications for global health.
Soc. Sci. Med. 33:1317-1326.

STOKES, J. 1983. Predicting satisfaction with social support from social network structure.
Amer. J. Commun. Psych. 11:141-152.

STOKES, J., and D. WILSson. 1984. The Inventory
of Socially Supportive Behaviors: Dimensionality, prediction, and gender differences.
Amer, J. Commun. Psych. 12:53-69.

SuTTER, F. K. 1980. Communal versus individual
socialization at home and in school in rural
and urban Western Samoa. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Hawaii, Honolulu.

Swartz, M., R. LINDERMAN, D. BLAZER, and L.
GeorceE. 1989. Somatization symptoms in the
community: A rural/urban comparison. Psychosomatics 30:44-53.

TayYLor, R., N. Lewis, and §. Levy. 1989. Societies in transition: Mortality patterns in Pacific Island populations. Int. J. Epidemiol.
18:634-646.

TuHreL, H., D. Parker, and T. Bruce. 1973.
Stress factors and the risk of myocardial infarction. Psychol. Res. 17:43-60.

Tuck, M.L., J. Sowers, L. Dornretp, G.
KLeEpDzik, and M. MaxweLt. 1981. The effect
of weight reduction on blood pressure,
plasma renin activity, and plasma adlosterone levels in obese patients. N. Eng. J. Med.
304:930-933.

WALKER, M., S. WASSERMAN, and B. WELLMAN.
1994. Statistical models for social support
networks, p. 53-78. In S. Wasserman and
J. Galaskiewicz (eds.), Advances in social
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

190 Hanna Social Biology

network analysis. Sage, Thousand Oaks, broader networks of social support. Sociol.
CA. Perspect. 32:273-306.

WASSERMAN, S., and J. GALASKIEWICZ (eds.). | Wirsinc, R. 1985. The health of traditional so1994. Advances in social network analysis. cieties and the effects of acculturation. Curr.
Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA. Anthrop. 26:303-322.

WEINER, J.S., and J. Lourie. 1969. Human bi- Zimmett, P. 1982. The medical effects of lifesology: A guide to field methods. F. A. Davis, tyle changes in Pacific populations. J. Food
Philadelphia. Nutrition 39:23-27.

WELLMAN, B., and S. WorTHLEY. 1989. Brother’s keepers: Selecting kinship relations in

 
