Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Intelligence and family size reconsidered

Robert D. Retherford & William H. Sewell

To cite this article: Robert D. Retherford & William H. Sewell (1988) Intelligence and family size
reconsidered, Social Biology, 35:1-2, 1-40, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988685

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988685

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 10
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

Intelligence and Family Size Reconsidered

 

Robert D. Retherford and William H. Sewell

Population Institute, East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii; and Department of Sociology,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin

ABSTRACT: The major purpose of this study is to examine the association between the measured
intelligence and fertility of over 9,000 persons who graduated high school in Wisconsin in 1957.
Various measures of association are considered, including the IQ selection differential, which
provides an estimate of what the generational change in mean IQ would be if, hypothetically,
each child in the birth histories had the same IQ as the mean of its parents’ IQ’s. This is calculated not only for graduates but also, more realistically, for the complete cohort, including
dropouts. The IQ selection differential for the complete cohort is estimated to be eight-tenths of
an IQ point decline in a generation. The contribution of females to this decline is estimated to be
almost five times greater than the contribution of males. The value of eight-tenths may be
viewed as an upper bound of the generational decline in mean genotypic IQ for this cohort and
its offspring. An educated guess, based partly on genetic models and findings from IQ heritability studies as well as on the above estimate of the IQ selection differential, is that the generational change in mean genotypic IQ is about one-third of an IQ point decline for this cohort and

its offspring.

The major purpose of the research
reported in this study is to examine the
association between the measured intelligence and fertility of over 9,000 persons who graduated high school in Wisconsin in 1957. We have information on
measured intelligence from tests taken
when our sample members were in high
school, and on fertility from birth histories collected in the most recent reinterview survey in 1975, when the respondents were approximately 36 years of
age.

Our specific aims are the following:

First, we critically review the research literature on intelligence and
family size, focusing especially on studies appearing in the last 25 years.

Second, we examine the relationship
between the measured intelligence of
our respondents and the number of children born alive to them by age 35. To
achieve this aim, we calculate the mean

number of children ever born, F(35), by
sex and IQ, for IQ deciles. From these
values of F(35) and estimates of agespecific fertility at ages below 35, we use
a demographic model to extrapolate
age-specific fertility after age 35 and
hence to estimate total fertility rates
(TFR) and gross reproduction rates
(GRR) by sex and IQ decile. By making
use of information on sample attrition
between 1957 and 1975, we also estimate age-specific death rates by sex and
IQ decile. From the age-specific birth
and death rates by sex and IQ decile, we
calculate net reproduction rates (NRR),
intrinsic rates of natural increase (r),
mean lengths of generation (7), population doubling times (tz), and relative
fitness (W) by sex and IQ decile. As a
final measure of the relationship between intelligence and fertility, we calculate estimates of the IQ selection differential (S), which provides an estimate

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

2 Retherford and Sewell

of what the generational change in mean
IQ would be if, hypothetically, each
child in the birth histories had the same
IQ as the mean of its parents’ IQ’s.

Third, we estimate the mean IQ, fertility, and mortality of high-school dropouts (all those who never graduated high
school), which the Wisconsin sample did
not include. This is difficult to do, because we lack direct information on
dropouts. We are forced to use estimates of the mean IQ and mortality of
dropouts based on less than adequate information from other studies. Our estimates of the fertility of dropouts are
more satisfactory, since we are able to
use census data to estimate the fertility
of persons of similar ages and dates of
birth in the Wisconsin population who
completed less than 12 grades of school.

Fourth, we use the estimates of intelligence, fertility, and mortality of both
graduates and dropouts to estimate the
IQ selection differential for the complete cohort.

Fifth, we discuss the generational
change in mean genotypic IQ for the
Wisconsin cohort. In this case our
results are highly tentative and imprecise, because of our inability to meet the
assumptions and conditions for adequate estimation of change in mean
genotypic IQ.

We now turn to the first of these objectives, a critical review of previous
studies.

REVIEW OF PREVIOUS STUDIES

It is 32 years since Anastasi published
her classic review, “Intelligence and
Family Size” (Anastasi, 1956). Her review began by noting that early interest
in the relationship between family size
and intelligence grew mainly out of eugenic concerns. The commonly occur
Social Biology

ring negative association between socioeconomic status and size of family led
investigators to postulate dysgenic population effects, based on the assumption
that higher status positions tend to be
occupied by persons of higher intelligence. Investigations relating the measured intelligence of school children to
the socioeconomic status of their parents furnished evidence in support of
this assumption. More direct evidence
came from studies in the United States,
England, France, and Greece, all of
which found a negative correlation,
ranging from —0.17 to —0.32, between
the measured intelligence of school children and the size of their family of origin. From these findings several writers,
using various estimation procedures,
predicted an inevitable decline in the intelligence of the population. These predictions, depending on the sample studied and the estimation procedures used,
indicated declines of 2 to 4 IQ points per
generation. Although there was not
complete agreement on the magnitude
of the predicted decline, there was little
or no dispute about the negative association between family size and measured
intelligence and, hence, the dysgenic effect of negative differential fertility.
Confidence in these predictions was
seriously undermined by the findings of
surveys undertaken by the Scottish
Council for Research in Education
(1933, 1949). These surveys, conducted
in 1932 and 1947 with response rates of
88 and 89 per cent respectively, used
psychometrically equivalent group tests
to measure the intelligence of all Scottish eleven-year-old school children. Although the usual negative relationship
between the measured intelligence of
the students and the size of their sibships
was found in both surveys, there was a
Statistically significant increase of about

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

2 points in mean test score over the 15year period between the two surveys,
rather than the expected decline. Even
after making various psychometric adjustments to the data to take into account possible sources of bias, the most
favorable adjustments produced virtually identical means for the two surveys.
Subsequently, the results of the Scottish
surveys were supported by several other
studies that also failed to substantiate
the expected decline in test scores for
samples drawn from other populations
(see especially Cattell, 1951); however,
none of these were as adequate in coverage as the Scottish studies. The finding
of an increase in the mean IQ of school
children over time was surprising also
because of the increase in the proportion of the school-age population attending school. Presumably schoolgoers are brighter on average than those
who do not attend school, so that an increase in the proportion attending
school should reduce the mean IQ of
school children quite independently of
Other factors.

Needless to say, the results of the
Scottish surveys led to controversy and
speculation in which scholars either
tried to discount the findings because of
methodological inadequacies or took
the findings as evidence that environmental improvements related to social
and education trends had more than offset the dysgenic effects of negative differential fertility by IQ. For a discussion
of this controversy, see Duncan (1952).

After examining the available evidence on intelligence and family size,
Anastasi concluded that because of
complex problems of sampling, measurement, and statistical analysis encountered in investigating the relationship between family size and

intelligence, it was impossible with the

 

 

Intelligence and Family Size 3

data at hand to choose among alternative interpretations based on (1) inherited mental abilities; (2) differences in
environments provided by parents of
varying intellectual levels; and (3) factors inherent in family size itself, such as
the fact that in large families, per capita
resources available for housing, food,
medical attention, parental contact with
children, and education are reduced.
She further argued that more definitive
conclusions about the relationship between family size and intelligence must
await better designed studies that would
begin with the testing of large and representative samples of children or youth
prior to their educational and vocational
differentiation. The subjects should be
followed until their families are completed, with careful recording of the
date of birth of each child, the parents’
ages at marriage, education, and socioeconomic status. She believed that with
these data it would be possible to determine the extent and nature of the relationship between intelligence and fertility, and that ‘“‘this approach would help
to separate the many interrelated variables which are now intricately intertwined and should thus bring us closer to
a causal interpretation of the empirically
observed relationship between intelligence and family size” (p. 206).
Unfortunately, no study reported
since the publication of Anastasi’s 1956
review article has come close to meeting
all the criteria she set forth. Nor, for that
matter, could one be certain that, had
these criteria been met, it would have
been possible to unravel the causal relationships among intelligence, social
background, and fertility. We, too, are
interested in understanding these causal
relationships and intend to study them
in detail in a subsequent paper. In this
paper, however, we are concerned with

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

4 Retherford and Sewell

the prior question of whether there is a
significant relation between the measured intelligence of parents and the
number of children they produce.

RECENT STUDIES OF INTELLIGENCE AND
FAMILY SIZE

Our review of literature published
since Anastasi’s article is limited primarily to studies based on relatively large
samples that purport to be representative of American cities, states, or the nation as awhole. As our review will show,
the question of the extent and direction
of the relationship between intelligence
and fertility is by no means settled.

Interest in the relationship between
intelligence and family size and particularly its possible dysgenic effect seems to
have declined in the years since the
publication of Anastasi’s review, although studies bearing on these questions have continued to appear. Some of
these studies have shown that previous
research based on the relationship between measured intelligence and size of
sibship is flawed and cannot by itself
provide an adequate basis for predicting
trends in population quality.

The first of these studies, which was
carried out at the Dight Institute for Human Genetics at the University of Minnesota, sought a possible resolution of
the paradox that family size (number of
siblings) was consistently found to be
negatively associated with measured intelligence but that predictions of a substantial decline in the IQ of the population had failed to materialize (Higgens
et al., 1962). The investigation employed a sample of families for whom IQ
scores and other information were available for both parents and one or more of
their children from the files of the Institute. This sample consisted of 1,016
mothers, an equal number of fathers,

Social Biology

and their 2,039 children. The IQ scores
of the parents were from tests taken before marriage, in most cases while they
were Still in school. The children’s
scores were from tests given in school.
Like other investigators before them,
the Minnesota group found the expected negative correlation (—0.30) between size of family of origin and the
measured intelligence of the child.
However, when the never-married and
nonreproductive siblings of the mothers
and fathers were included in the analysis, the relationship between IQ in the
parental generation and number of offspring became slightly positive. In other
words, the higher reproductive rate of
those in the lower IQ categories who
were parents was Offset by their siblings
who never married or failed to reproduce if married. On the basis of this evidence, the authors concluded that “‘the
IQ level of the whole population should
remain relatively static from one generation to the next, or at least not drop
rapidly” (p. 199). It must be noted that
the sample in this investigation was not a
probability sample of the Minnesota
population and may not be as representative as the authors believed. Moreover,
nothing is said about the comparability
of various test scores used in the study.
Several investigators during the past
25 years have reported on research in
which persons of known measured intelligence have been followed up over their
childbearing years to determine their
fertility. The pioneering study of this
type was that of Bajema (1963), who obtained life history data on 979 nativewhite individuals born in 1916-17 whose
Terman group intelligence test scores
were available from tests given in the
Kalamazoo, Michigan, public school
system to children in the sixth grade. He
later obtained life history information in

 

 
 

 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

a follow-up survey carried out when the
cohort of individuals born in 1916 or
1917 reached ages 45-46. The survey included questions on date of birth, sex,
number of siblings, marital status, number of offspring, date of death if deceased, and place of residence.
The mean number of children born to
each of five IQ categories was computed
and showed a bimodal distribution; the
=highest means were 2.60 for those with
“IQ = 120 and 2.46 for those with IQ 80894. The difference in mean fertility beotween these two IQ categories was not
statistically significant, but the differcoences between each of them and the IQ
cicategories 69-79 and 95-104 were signicsficant. However, the means for the ex=treme categories were not significantly
chigher than the mean for the 105-119 IQ
Seategory. Further analysis using the inStrinsic rate of natural increase and corre=lation analysis showed that the mean IQ
‘Sof the population under study had in£creased slightly due to the small positive
orelation between parental IQ and the
‘snumber of offspring produced. The
“seeming paradox that the intelligence of
the individual is positively associated
‘with number of offspring but negatively
Sassociated with size of sibship was explained essentially as it was in the study
aby Higgins et al. (1962). In Bajema’s
study, however, two different generations are involved, and there is no reason why the relationship between intelligence and fertility must be the same for
each; that is, the data on IQ and sibship
size reflect, however imperfectly, differential fertility by IQ in the respondents’
parents’ generation. The data on IQ and
number of offspring reflect differential
fertility by IQ in the respondent generation itself.
A minor flaw in Bajema’s calculations of the intrinsic rate of natural in
S

Univ

Intelligence and Family Size 5

crease is that survivorship is measured
from age at IQ testing, which averaged
11.6 years, rather than from age 1. Age
1 should have been used, because Bajema used offspring surviving to age 1 in
place of births in his calculations, apparently because reliable data on births
were not available. It seems unlikely,
however, that correction of this flaw
would alter the study’s general conclusions.

Guided by the findings of Higgins et
al. (1962) and Bajema (1963), Waller
(1971) sought a sample that would include the nonreproducing as well as the
reproducing members of the parental
generation. Using the large data base
developed over a period of sixty years by
the Dight Institute for Human Genetics,
Waller selected a sample of families for
a follow-up study. The sample consisted
of families for whom JQ test scores were
available for both parents and in which
the mother was born in or before December 1927. These criteria yielded a
study population of 529 families. To
these parents were added their reproducing and nonreproducing siblings, if
IQ scores were available for them. If an
IQ score was available for the spouse of
a sibling, that individual was also included. An attempt was made to locate
the qualified families and to obtain information from them using a mailed
questionnaire. After three follow-up
letters were sent, information was obtained on 80 per cent of the sample families. The total sample numbered 1,603
persons, consisting of 846 parents and
757 siblings and spouses of siblings. Information on date of birth, schooling,
and IQ of the subject was obtained from
the files of the Institute. Occupation of
father, subject’s occupation, information on the spouse of the subject, number of children in the completed family,

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

6 Retherford and Sewell

and names and dates of birth of the children were obtained from the questionnaire. The investigator claimed that his
sample was representative of the Minnesota population, but given the unusual
sampling procedures employed, the degree of representativeness must be
viewed as uncertain.

Using the data from these sources,
Waller computed a number of correlation coefficients. Those most relevant
here are the coefficients for subject’s IQ
with size of family of origin and size of
completed family. The results of the
analysis for males revealed the expected
significant negative correlation between
IQ and size of family of origin, but virtually no correlation between IQ and size
of family of procreation. For females,
there was no correlation between IQ
and size of family of origin but a significant positive correlation between IQ
and size of family of procreation. Again
it must be noted that two different generations are involved, and that there is
no reason why the relationship between
intelligence and fertility must be the
same for each.

Following Bajema’s lead, Waller also
computed the intrinsic rate of natural increase for the 699 persons who had completed their fertility. The highest IQ
group in the study had the largest rate of
increase and the lowest IO category had
the smallest rate of increase. After determining relative fitness in relation to
IQ for those persons, he concluded,
“There is no evidence from these considerations in this sample that natural
selection is acting to decrease the average IQ score, and it may in fact be effecting a very slow increase.”’ Thus, the
results of the Waller study support those
of Higgins and associates and of Bajema.

It must be noted that although these

Social Biology

three studies used more sophisticated
analytic techniques and made less naive
assumptions than the earlier studies,
their findings may be faulted on a number of grounds, particularly selection
bias and sample representativeness.
Also, the fact that IQ scores probably
came from a number of different tests
given at varying ages invites doubt about
the comparability of test scores. But
even in these respects, their methods
were superior to those used in most of
the earlier studies that came to opposite
conclusions.

In a more recent study, Olneck and
Wolfe (1980) reported on research in
which they examined the relationship
between intelligence and family size using longitudinal data from two samples:
the Kalamazoo Sample of Brothers and
the National Bureau of Economic Research Thorndike-Hagan (NBER-T-H)
sample of white men. The Kalamazoo
Brothers sample includes 1,200 men
traced and interviewed in 1973 and 1974
by Olneck (1976). The respondents
were drawn from an original sample of
3,000 males, identified as siblings, for
whom sixth-grade test scores from 1928
to 1950 were available in Kalamazoo
public school records. Olneck and
Wolfe’s Kalamazoo findings are based
on 352 weighted independent pairs of
brothers for whom test scores, age, and
self-reported education, earnings, and
marital status were available. The intelligence test scores for the period
1928-1943 are based on the Terman
group test; those for siblings tested after
1943 are from the Otis test. Both tests
are reported to measure similar skills
and to stress verbal rather than quantitative items. The authors assert that in
their data the correlations involving the
two tests are quite similar and that in the
literature there is no evidence that the

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

variances or reliabilities of the two tests
differ significantly (Flemming, 1925;
Cattell, 1930; Ratcliff, 1934; Buros,
1965). However, the Otis test is scaled
to a lower mean than the Terman test.
Therefore, Olneck (1976) adjusted the
mean scores of those who had taken the
Otis test and pooled the subsamples.
The Kalamazoo respondents were virtually all white, Protestant, and of nonfarm origins. Their educational and occupational levels are higher than for
men of their age when compared with
the national sample used in the Occupational Changes in a Generation replication study (Featherman and Hauser,
1977, 1978). The investigators assert
that while caution must be used in viewing results from the Kalamazoo sample,
there are no obvious biases which would
greatly distort the findings in the present
analysis (Olneck and Wolfe, 1980, p.
244).

The NBER sample comprises 5,000
white men, born between 1917 and
1925, who took the U.S. Air Corps Aviation Cadet Qualifiying (ACQ) Examination in 1943 and were followed up
in a 1969 NBER survey. The sample is
relatively homogeneous in measured intelligence and education; all respondents had at least graduated from high
school or had high school equivalency
and scored at or above the median on
the ACO test. The test score used is
based on a pooled composite of a battery of tests and is said to represent general intellectual ability or scholastic aptitude (Thorndike and Hagan, 1962). The
measure of fertility derives from the
NBER follow-up survey in 1969. It is
based on the question, ““How many children do you have?‘‘ Because of the
phrasing of this question and other related questions concerning offspring, it
is thought that the respondents reported

Intelligence and Family Size

 

 

surviving children currently at home
rather than children ever born. Adopted
children may also be included in the responses. Never-married persons and individuals who failed to respond to the
questions on children, education, or income were excluded. The analysis is
based on the 4,826 remaining cases.

The results of the analysis of the Kalamazoo and NBER samples indicate
that the correlation between father’s intelligence test score and number of children is positive but very small (0.06) in
both samples. The coefficients of IQ in
regressions of number of children on IQ
are statistically significant but also very
small, 0.027 for the NBER-T-H sample
and 0.014 for individuals in the Kalamazoo sample. The corresponding withinpairs coefficient for the pairs of brothers
in the Kalamazoo sample is 0.021.
Olneck and Wolfe conclude that “our
evidence, therefore, suggests that intelligence, insofar as it is measured by
standardized tests, is not an important
determinant of fertility.” The authors
further suggest that the characteristics
of the samples and comparisons of their
findings with those of other studies
based on completed families give them
no reason to believe that their results are
due to sample biases.

It must be pointed out, however, that
results based on a sample of brothers
from Kalamazoo may have limited
generalizability regardless of how carefully the analysis was done. The results
from the NBER-T-H sample are more
impressive but are based on a nonrepresentative sample of ever-married male
high-school graduates whose measured
intelligence was relatively high. Moreover, as has already been pointed out,
the measurement of fertility was less
than ideal for a study of this kind. Another problem is that both the Kalama
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

8 Retherford and Sewell

zoo and the NBER-T-H samples suffer
from being restricted to males. As we
shall see later, the relationship between
IQ and fertility for females may be quite
different from that for males.

A mote recent published study on the
relation of measured parental IQ and
fertility by Vining (1982) was based on
data collected as part of the National
Longitudinal Study of Labor Market
Experience (NLS). A national probability sample of 5,172 males aged 14-24
was taken in 1966 and a second sample
of 5,097 females aged 14~—24 was taken
in 1968. Both samples intentionally
over-sampled blacks, in order to equalize to some extent sampling error in the
larger white and smaller black populations; proportional weighting was used
to obtain unbiased estimates for the
population of both races. Resurveys
have been undertaken periodically. The
resurveys On which Vining’s fertility estimates were based were taken in 1976
for males and 1978 for females, when
the respondents were aged 25—34. The
fertility measure for the males was derived from information on the relationship of each member of the household to
the respondent in 1976. As Vining
states, the number of own children living with their father in 1976 is not an adequate measure of biological fertility of
males, although he argues that it is a
good proxy for fertility of white but not
black men. For women, information
was available on the number of children
the respondent had before 1978; the
woman’s statement about the number of
children she expects to have in her lifetime; and the number of children she
considers to be ideal for a family. The intelligence variable was constructed by
members of the NLS staff from “‘test
scores’”’ obtained from the last high
school attended. The scores came from

Social Biology

approximately 30 different measures
that were subsequently pooled by transforming the scores of each test to a mean
of 100 and a standard deviation of 16.
Because test scores were sought only for
students who had completed the ninth
grade, those aged 14 at the time of the
first survey round were excluded from
the analysis. Thus, the study was
confined to those who had completed
ninth grade and who were aged 15-24 at
the time of the initial survey and 25-34
at the time of the last survey. The original sample of males contained 3,275
whites and 1,233 blacks; information
was available on both test scores and fertility for 61.2 per cent of whites but only
26.8 per cent of blacks. For females, this
information was available for 61.1 per
cent of whites and 35.4 per cent of
blacks.

Mean cumulative fertility rates were
computed for six IQ categories separately for white women, black women,
and white men. The results showed that
the mean cumulative fertility rate was
highest for both white females and
males in the middle IQ categories, and
lowest in the bottom and top IQ categories. The sharpest drop-off was in the
highest IQ category. For black women,
there was a monotonic decrease in mean
number of children from the lowest to
the highest IQ category. For both white
and black women, the overall relationship between IQ and number of children
was negative. From these data Vining
calculated the IQ selection differential
(Falconer, 1966) to be ‘“‘around 2
points” decline in IQ per generation for
each of the three race and gender subgroups. After adjusting for the regression of child’s IQ on mid-parent’s IO
(taken to be 0.5), he concluded that the
generational change in mean genotypic
IQ due to differential fertility by IQ was
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

about one IQ point decline per generation.

Vining then regressed the number of
children ever born on the parent’s IQ
score for the 5-year age cohorts 25-29
and 30-34 and for the 10-year age cohort. He found very small negative slope
coefficients that increased slightly (i.e.,
became more negative) across cohorts
for white women aged 25-29, from
—0.014 to —0.017. He also found that
the coefficients of white women in the
older cohort showed a decline over the
previous five years from —0.014 to
—0.012. Despite the fact that the differences in coefficients were negligible and
not statistically significant, he concluded
that for white women, ‘there is evidence of a decline in the severity of the
dysgenic trend !n fertility differentials
with respect to intelligence, both across
cohorts with respect to age and within
cohorts as they move through the childbearing ages” (p. 248). (The conclusion

,that severity decreases across cohorts is

erroneous and seems to reflect a misinterpretation of the above-mentioned
change in regression coefficients from
—0.014 to —0,017.) He argues that the
within-cohort negative relationship between IQ and fertility will not be reduced to zero by the time the sample of
white women has completed its fertility.
On the other hand, he found no evidence of a decline in the negative relationship between IQ and fertility for
black women, either with respect to age
or across time. The data for white men
are not complete enough to allow these
kinds of comparisons.

He also regressed mean expected fertility, as stated by the women, on IQ and
found for white women a “‘substantially
weaker” negative relationship with IQ
for whites than had been found for completed fertility to date and a “moder
Intelligence and Family Size 9

ately weaker” relationship in the case of
blacks. This was taken as evidence that
higher IQ white women, in particular,
intend to have substantially more children in their later years of childbearing
than lower IQ women in this same period. For black women, this catch-up effect was weaker.

Finally, combining the white and
black women’s samples, he predicts a
decline in mean genotypic IQ of oneand-a-third IQ points per generation if
current fertility patterns persist, and a
decline of about three-fifths of an IQ
point if current fertility expectations are
realized (calculated by multiplying the
IQ selection differentials for all women
aged 25~34 in Vining’s Table 4 by 0.5).

Vining suggests that previous findings of a positive association between
parental intelligence and number of
children reported by Higgins, et al.
(1962), Bajema (1963), Waller (1971),
and Olneck and Wolfe (1980) may be
faulted because they are not based on
nationally representative samples but
rather on the white population of the
Great Lakes states. Furthermore, he
suggests that the cohorts studied were
reproductively active during the period
of rising birth rates of the post-war baby
boom, which was possibly the only period in modern times in which there may
have been a eugenic trend in the population. On the other hand, he claims that
because his data are from a national
sample and because his cohorts were reproductively active after the baby

boom, they reflect the dysgenic trend

that he asserts has probably characterized the normal situation over a long
period of time and is likely to represent
the future situation.

Vining’s study suffers from at least
five major weaknesses. First, there was
considerable sample attrition, due ei
 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

10 Retherford and Sewell

ther to failure to reinterview the original
respondents or more importantly to obtain measures of intelligence for a large
number of those who were reinterviewed. The losses from these and other
sources were approximately 39 per cent
for both white women and white men,
65 per cent for black women, and 73 per
cent for black men. From what we know
about the effects of sampling losses of
these magnitudes, one can have little
confidence that parameter estimates
based on the remaining cases truly represent the population originally sampled. Vining notes that only in the case
of black males do the cumulative agespecific birth rates deviate significantly
from those of the comparable subpopulations in the nation as a whole. It is possible, however, that the pattern of fertility by IQ is biased more than the
estimates of overall fertility for all IQ’s
combined. In this regard, evidence is
needed to throw light on the question of
whether the measured intelligence of
those for whom test scores were obtained is representative of the intelligence of the original sample. No attempt was made to answer this question,
nor was any systematic attempt made to
identify the selective factors that account for the losses. Quite plausibly,
one of these selective factors is lower average intelligence among the losses.
Second, the IO scores used in this
study suffer from serious psychometric
weaknesses. They were obtained by
pooling information from 30 different
tests and measures, including a number
of standardized intelligence tests with

‘ varying item content and structure and

with differing validity and reliability
coefficients. Also included are scores on
college entrance tests, such as the ACT,
SAT, and PSAT, none of which was de
 

Social Biology

signed to measure intelligence. When
test scores were lacking, grade point averages in high school were substituted,
despite the fact that the correlation between grade point average and intelligence test score is approximately 0.5, indicating that grade point averages can
account for only about 25 per cent of the
variance in intelligence test scores. No
attempt was made to determine the
equivalence of scores from the various
intelligence tests before combining the
scores, even though the techniques for
doing so and the dangers in not doing so
have been well known for many years
(Gulliksen, 1950; Angoff, 1971).
Merely norming the various scores to a
mean of 100 and a standard deviation of
16 does not address the basic measurement questions; it only converts a melange of scores of unknown equivalence
into a common metric. Thus, we conclude that the measurement of IQ in this
study is very questionable.

Third, there are serious questions
about the measurement of fertility in
this study. As Vining has pointed out,
the questions on which the data on the
fertility of males and females are based
are quite different and provide less adequate information on men than on
women. Another problem is that the
younger women 1n the sample could not
have had more than 10 years and the
older women more than 20 years in
which to have had children, out of a potential period of some 35 years. Thus,
estimates of life-time differences in fertility have varying degrees of reliability,
especially when they are made for various IQ categories. This is particularly
true because both men and women in
higher intelligence categories tend to
delay marriage for higher education and
thus to have their children later than
—|
=
©
N
Some
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
N
av.
om
=
—
CS
‘gt
wO
oN
—
ao
O
=
Cd
©
>
—
—
N
_
oO
>
os
c
=
va)
OQ
co
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

those in the lower intelligence categories. Consequently, the projected
figures based on fertility over shorter
periods may seriously understate the
eventual fertility of those in the higher
IQ categories.

Fourth, Vining’s sample excludes
persons who did not complete ninth
grade. Unpublished tabulations from
one-in-a-thousand public use sample
tapes from the U.S. censuses of 1960
and 1970 indicate that, of persons aged
15-24 at the time of the 1960 and 1970
censuses, 17 per cent in 1960 and 12 per
cent in 1970 had not completed the ninth
grade. Linear interpolation of these
figures yields an estimate of 15 per cent
for 1966. (By race, the estimates are 14
per cent for whites and 26 per cent for
blacks in 1966.) Thus, Vining’s estimates exclude a substantial portion of
the population that probably has an average IQ well below that of the population asa whole. Depending on the fertility of this excluded group, their
omission from the sample may seriously
bias Vining’s estimates of the generational change in intelligence.

Fifth, Vining did not take differential
mortality by IQ into account in his calculation of the IQ selection differential.

Because of these deficiencies, one
must raise serious questions about Vining’s conclusions, particularly those
having to do with estimated generational changes in intelligence.

Another recent study by Van Court
and Bean (1985), based on retrospective
rather than prospective data, examines
the trend in the relation of measured intelligence and fertility by correlating IQ
test scores and the number of children
born in adult cohorts who were respondents to a series of National Opinion
Research Center (NORC) general so
Intelligence and Family Size

cial surveys conducted from 1974
through 1982. The IQ test scores were
based on a vocabulary test consisting of
ten questions selected from a longer test
devised by Thorndike (1942). Low, but
Statistically significant, negative correlations (ranging from —0.05 to —0.23)
were found between the test scores and
the number of children ever born for six
of the nine five-year age cohorts whose
fertility had been completed by the time
of the survey. (The other three correlations were also negative but not statistically significant. Correlations for later
cohorts were more strongly negative,
but the fertility of these cohorts was incomplete when measured, so that the
correlations may be biased in the negative direction, for reasons discussed earlier.) The authors did not publish correlations between fertility and IQ for each
sex separately. On the basis of their findings, Van Court and Bean concluded
that the relationship between intelligence and fertility was predominantly
negative from 1912 to 1982. They believe that previous reports of a neutral
or slightly positive relationship may be
due to the fact that they involved unrepresentative samples and did not include
nonwhites.

More confidence could be placed in
Van Court and Bean’s results had they
reported response rates to the five separate surveys and particularly to the IQ
test and the fertility questions. Also,
one would like to know the validity and
reliability correlations of the specific test
used in the NORC survey, rather than
the evidence the authors provide for
other short tests of intelligence. Finally,
although the surveys may have been
representative of the U.S. population at
the time they were taken, the survivors
in the older age cohorts are not likely to

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

12 Retherford and Sewell

be representative of their original age
cohort; for example, those of higher IQ
may be overrepresented because of
their lower mortality. There is no discussion of these points in their paper.

In asubsequent article, Vining (1986)
reviews further evidence on trends in
differential fertility by intelligence,
mainly for the United States. The evidence consists of comparisons between
the fertility trends of groups known or
presumed to have high intelligence and
the fertility trends of the nation as a
whole. The groups with high intelligence include samples from Who’s
Who, the Forbes 400, Terman’s high IQ
sample, and the American Mensa.
Much of this evidence is weakened by
the fact that the fertility of men in the select groups is usually compared with the
fertility of women in the nation as a
whole. The difficulty here, as we shall
see later in this paper, is that the pattern
of differential fertility by IQ may be
quite different between women and
men. Therefore, the fertility of women
ideally should be compared with the fertility of women, and the fertility of men
should be compared with the fertility of
men. Another problem is the possibility
that small elite groups of very high intelligence may be atypical of the broader
group of intelligent persons. Despite
these difficulties and ambiguities, it
must be noted that these data consistently confirm the pattern noted by Van
Court and Bean and by Vining in his
earlier article, that negative differential
fertility by IQ tended to converge during
the baby boom and diverge again in the
negative direction after the baby boom.

Two further studies are worthy of
note. The first of these shows large gains
in the mean IO of Americans between
1932 and 1978, based on results from IQ
standardization samples used for norm
Social Biology

ing a series of major [QO tests in the
United States (Flynn, 1984). The second
study confirms similar gains in 13 other
countries as well (Flynn, 1987). The
studies show that the increasing trend of
IQ first noted in the Scottish study discussed earlier (Scottish Council for Research in Education, 1933, 1949) and by
Cattell (1951) is widespread and has
continued. Together, these studies suggest that measured IQ ts influenced considerably by environmental factors,
most notably improving trends in education.

From this brief review of studies reported after the appearance of Anastasi’s review paper in 1956, One must conclude that research to date on the
relationship between intelligence and
fertility can be faulted on a number of
methodological grounds, including sampling, measurement of variables, and in
some cases less than adequate statistical
techniques. None of these studies meets
the requirements for an adequate study
of the relationship between intelligence
and fertility. Because of the shortcomings of the studies reviewed, we are convinced that any generalizations about
the trend in intelligence of the U.S. population as a whole, derived from these
studies, must be viewed as highly tentative at best.

One may question the need for still
another paper on the topic of intelligence and fertility that does not fulfill all
of the requirements for a definitive
study. But our research, although not
ideal in every regard, does have better
data on the critica] variables than those
available to the authors of the earlier
studies covered in this review. Our sample, although not designed to be nationally representative, is a large random
sample drawn from the state of Wisconsin, which ranks near the middle of the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

states in many socioeconomic characteristics and has great diversity in its population. Our research, too, has limitations, which we shall clarify in the course
of presenting our analysis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
THE WISCONSIN LONGITUDINAL DATA

The data on which our investigation
is based come from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study of Social and Psychological Factors in Educational and Occupational Aspirations and Achievements,
referred to throughout this paper as the
WLS. The WLS is based on a random
sample of 10,317 high-school seniors in
public, private, and parochial schools in
1957. The questionnaires used in this
study covered the students’ socioeconomic backgrounds, high school experiences, educational and occupational aspirations and plans, and perceptions of
the influence of parents, teachers, and
friends on their plans and aspirations.
From the schools and public sources, additional information was obtained on
parents’ economic status, the students’
measured intelligence and high-school
grades, and the characteristics of their
high schools and communities. Race
was not asked in the WLS, but unpublished tabulations from a 1/1000 Public
Use Sample tape for Wisconsin from the
1960 census indicates that, of persons
aged 15~24 with 12 or more completed
years of education, 98.2 per cent were
white, 0.9 per cent black, and 0.9 per
cent other races. (The age group 15-24
is centered on age 20, which was approximately the average age of the WLS cohort in 1960.) WLS follow-up surveys of
the students were conducted in 1964 and
1975 with response rates of approximately 90 per cent. For a detailed dis
 

Intelligence and Family Size 13

cussion of the 1957, 1964, and 1975 samples, nonresponse bias, and data
quality, see Sewell and Hauser (1975,
1980) and Clarridge et al. (1977).

The 1975 follow-up study is especially
pertinent to the present research because, in addition to detailed information on educational and occupational
experiences and attainments, considerable information was gathered in the interview on family formation and dissolution and fertility history up to the time of
the interview. For a more complete discussion of these data and a review of
results of the many articles and monographs based on them, see Sewell and
Hauser (1977, 1980); Sewell, Hauser,
and Wolf (1980); Hauser, Sewell, and
Clarridge (1982); and Hauser, Tsai, and
Sewell (1983).

THE WLS MEASURES OF INTELLIGENCE
AND FERTILITY

The two main variables used in our
research are measured intelligence and
fertility. Because the measurement of
these variables is crucial to any conclusions drawn from the study, their
sources, characteristics, and limitations
must be carefully examined.

The mental ability measurements are
based on scores on the Henmon-Nelson
Test of Mental Ability (revised 1954),
which was administered to Wisconsin
ninth- and eleventh-grade students in
public, private, and parochial schools in
the spring of 1957. The testing was done
under the supervision of the Wisconsin
Testing Service and machine scored at
its headquarters. The raw scores, percentile ranks, and IQ scores for each student were recorded alphabetically by
name of student for each high school in
the state. Test ‘scores were available
from this source for all students in the
WLS. (In a relatively small but un 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

14 Retherford and Sewell

known number of cases where students
had not taken the Henmon-Nelson
test—usually in cases where they had
transferred from out of state into a Wisconsin high school for their senior
year—psychometrically equivalent
scores on other standardized tests were
substituted for Henmon-Nelson Test
scores.) The Henmon-Nelson IQ scores
are normed to a mean of 100 and a
standard deviation of 15.

The Henmon-Nelson test, which at
the time was one of the most widely used
group tests of intelligence, was designed
to measure the mental ability of students
in grades 7 to 12 inclusive. In the words
of the tests’s authors (Henmon and Nelson, 1954, p. 3), “Tests of this kind have
often been called ‘tests of intelligence’
and perhaps that term is as appropriate
as the term ‘mental ability.’ Actually
both terms leave something to be desired since such tests do not measure all
of ‘intelligence’; neither do they measure all kinds of ‘mental ability.” Rather
they measure the kinds of ability necessary for academic work and it is for this
purpose that they will be found most
useful.”

There are three equivalent forms of
the test, all identical in difficulty and
construction. Each form of the test consists of 90 items arranged in a “spiral
omnibus” pattern in which item types
are mixed together with a steady rise in
the difficulty of the items. The item
types include geometric analogies,
arithmetic problems, proverb interpretations, general information, synonyms,
and antonyms. The test is “‘speeded”’ in
that respondents are given 30 minutes to
complete it. Thus, scores depend in part
on reading skills. Validity coefficients,
reported by Henmon and Nelson (1954,
p. 6), based on the correlation of scores
on their test with scores on other well
Social Biology

known group tests of mental ability, including the Otis Self-Administering
Test, the Terman Group Test, the
Kuhlmann-Anderson Test, and the
American Council Psychological Examination, are in the range of 0.780 to
0.858. Also, the means and standard deviations of the Henmon-Nelson Test
and those of other well-known tests, including the tests mentioned above, are
quite similar. All available evidence indicates that the Henmon-Nelson Test is
highly reliable in the large and diverse
Wisconsin sample. For example, Henmon and Nelson report a split-half reliability of r=0.887 and an alternative
forms reliability of 0.89 for two small
samples of eleventh-grade students.
Hauser et al. (1983, p. 40), taking into
account the variance in IQ in the WLS,
estimate these reliability coefficients to
be 0.916 and 0.953 respectively. We
have computed a test-retest correlation
of 0.814 from data reported in Hauser
and Sewell (1984) for a random sample
of 336 Wisconsin men who took the
Hemon-Nelson test in both their freshman and junior years.

The basic measure of fertility used in
this study is the number of children ever
born alive to the respondent. This is
measured in the same way for males and
females. It is derived from a complete
roster of children born to ever-married
female respondents or fathered by evermarried male respondents and includes
the dates of all live births (including
those born out of wedlock), the age of
the respondent in century months
(months elapsed since January 1, 1900)
at the time of the birth of each child, and
the date of each marriage and each marital dissolution. Never-married persons
(i.e., never-married by age 35) were assigned a fertility of zero. From this information a number of measures of fertility
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

may be computed. The primary measure used in this study is the number of
children born alive to the respondent
before the 35th birthday, which in most
cases is the same as the number of children ever born up to the date of the interview. This measure of necessity does
not represent the ultimate fertility of our
sample members, because the women in
our sample still had, on average, at least
five or six more years during which they
could bear more children. For the men
the possible period is of course even
longer and depends largely on the age of
their mates. What we know with reasonable certainty is how many children our
respondents had up to approximately
age 36. Consequently, to the extent that
we wish to talk about completed fertility, it is necessary to produce estimates
based on the 1975 data and other known
characteristics of the sample and of the
population it represents. These techniques, their assumptions, and their
possible errors and biases will be discussed at the point of which they are
used in the analysis.

It should be pointed out that the sample on which our analysis is based, although randomly drawn from the large
and heterogeneous population of Wisconsin high school graduates, is not a
complete age cohort because it excludes
persons of the same age who did not
graduate high school. We estimate that
approximately 25 per cent of the complete age cohort did not graduate
(Hauser, 1971; Sewell and Hauser,
1975, Appendix D). As a consequence,
when we attempt to extend our findings
to cover all persons in the age group, we
must rely additionally on estimates of
the measured intelligence, fertility, and
mortality of the dropouts. Unfortunately, the available information on
which to base these estimates is not

Intelligence and Family Size

15

nearly as adequate as that for the WLS
sample members.

DIFFERENTIAL REPRODUCTION BY IQ IN
THE WISCONSIN LONGITUDINAL STUDY

As already mentioned, our basic fertility variable is the number of children
ever born alive to the respondent before
the 35th birthday, denoted as F(35). A
minor problem with this variable is that
not all respondents reached age 35 by
the time of the 1975 survey. There were
28 males and 34 females who did not
reach 35 by the time of the survey, and
for some of these individuals F(35) may
be underestimated by one child or possibly even two children in the unlikely
event of multiple births. But the number
of such individuals is so small in relation
to overall sample size that the bias introduced into our aggregate-level estimates
of F(35) is negligible. The 62 individuals
who did not reach 35 by the time of the
survey were retained in the analysis.

Another problem is that fertility information was not collected from nevermarried persons, who constituted 5.0
per cent of women and 5.7 per cent of
men in the 1975 reinterview survey. As
mentioned earlier, we assigned nevermarried persons a fertility of zero. It is
thought that very few persons in this cohort who did not marry by age 35 had illegitimate children, so that the bias introduced by the zero-fertility
assumption for never-married persons is
probably very small, too. (In this regard, it may be noted that in the Wisconsin sample, average intelligence is
slightly higher for never-married persons than for ever-married persons.)

In examining the relationship between fertility and IQ, we have considered F(35) as the dependent variable
and IQ as the independent variable, as

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

16 Retherford and Sewell

shown in Table 1. To tabulate F(35) by
IQ, it is convenient to group respondents into IQ deciles. The decile breaks,
shown in the second column of Table 1,
were obtained from the 1957 survey, using data on all the original respondents.
The numbers of respondents in each
decile are not precisely equal, because
many respondents have the same IQ
scores, and because those with the same
score must be treated as a block when
grouping respondents by IQ. This
makes it impossible to define IQ intervals with precisely the same number of
respondents in each interval. Although
the IQ decile breaks are derived from
the 1957 survey, the sample N’s (number of respondents) in Table 1 are based
on the 1975 survey, in which the fertility
questions were asked. Because of sample attrition from deaths and nonresponse between the two surveys, the
sample N’s in Table 1 are smaller than

Social Biology

the sample N’s in the 1957 survey. Table
2, discussed later, provides the N’s for
each decile for the original respondents
in the 1957 survey.

Table 1 shows values of F(35) by IQ
decile and sex, and these values are
graphed in Figure 1. Figure 1 also shows
values of the total fertility rate and the
intrinsic rate of natural increase, which
will be discussed in more detail later and
can be ignored for the moment. The table and figure show striking differences
by sex. The relationship between IQ
and fertility is negative for both sexes,
but much more so for females than for
males. For females, the highest fertility
is achieved in the second IQ decile, and
fertility falls fairly regularly at higher
deciles. The pattern for males is more
erratic. Overall, the relationship between IQ and fertility for males is only
slightly negative. Fertility is highest in
the fourth decile, with the third and sec
TABLE 1

MEAN NuMBER OF CHILDREN Ever Born BY 35TH Birtupbay, F(35),
BY IQ DECILE AND SEX, DERIVED FROM THE WLS?

IO 10 FEMALES MALES
DECILE RANGE F(35) N F(35) SE N
| 67-81 2.76 0.065 436 2.36 0.058 418
2S wsaenecer 82-87 2.92 0 066 438 2 45 0.064 365
H sreaaa gas 88-92 2.83 0.062 509 2.46 0 057 437
4 lee ceeee 93-96 2.81 0.060 444 2.50 0.060 407
en 97-100 2.73 0 057 515 2.29 0 057 428
6... ee eee 101-103 2.70 0.059 501 2.27 0 062 411
7 avenké es 104-108 2.70 0.066 434 2.26 0.057 438
O samen ne 109-112 200 0.057 542 2.19 0.052 454
D Lecce eee 113-120 2.50 0.056 513 2.37 0.054 488
10 ......... 121-145 2.29 0.057 456 2.07 0.057 470

“WLS denotes the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study SE denotes the standard error of the estimate of F(35) The standard errors
include a finite population correction (fpce) of 0 82, based on a sampling fraction of 1/3 (Cochran, 1963) An F-ratio test of the 10
sample means of F(35) indicates significant differences among IQ categones, p < 0 01 for females and p < 0 05 for males

Although there 1s good reason to believe that the relationship between IQ and fertility 1s intrinsically nonlinear, since fertility
tends to drop off at both the upper and lower ends of the distribution of intelligence, one may nevertheless force a linear fit for the
purpose of further significance testing This 1s done by regressing F(35) on IQ for each sex separately from individual-level data
Results yield coefficients of IQ of —0 00580 (SE =0 00148, one-sided p < 0 0002) for males and —0 01057 (SE=0 00162, onesided p < 10%) for females Both coefficients are highly significant, as 1s the difference between the male and female coefficients

(one-sided p = 0 0143)

The F-ratio test and the significance tests for regression coefficients make no allowance for finite population corrections

 
F(35) and Total Fertility Rates (TFR)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

Females

Intrinsic Rates of Natural Increase (r)

 

IQ Decile

Intelligence and Family Size 17

F(35) and Total Fertility Rates (TFR)
Intrinsic Rates of Natural Increase (r)

 

1Q Decile

Fic. 1.—F(35), total fertility rates (TFR), and intrinsic rates of natural increase (r) by IQ decile and

sex in the WLS.

ond deciles close behind. Fertility declines at higher deciles, except for the
ninth decile, which has fertility not
much lower than the peak fertility of the
fourth decile. For both females and
males, fertility is lowest in the tenth or
highest decile. The observed differences
in fertility by IQ are statistically significant, as discussed in the footnote to Table 1.

Note that there is no decile for either
sex where F(35) drops below two children per woman. Thus, fertility is above
replacement. For females, the mean
number of children by the 35th birthday
ranges from 2.29 in the tenth decile to
2.93 in the second decile, with an average of 2.68. For males, it varies from
2.07 in the tenth decile to 2.50 in the
fourth decile, with an average of 2.32.
The overall fertility of males is lower
than that of females partly because, in
the WLS sample, men tend to marry
about two years later than women, so
that their fertility by age 35 is less complete.

Further measures of differential reproduction by IQ decile and sex are pre
 

sented in Table 2. The first measure of
interest is the total fertility rate (TFR)
for the WLS cohort. The total fertility
rate is defined as the expected number
of live births of both sexes that a woman
or man would have if she or he experienced observed age-specific birth rates
under hypothetical conditions of zero
mortality. In the present context it is calculated by summing age-specific birth
rates in 5-year age groups between ages
15 and 50 and multiplying the sum by 5.
Estimation of the TFR requires extrapolation of the fertility of WLS respondents to ages beyond 35. Our extrapolation procedure required estimates of age-specific birth rates for age
groups 15-19 through 30-34, which
were reconstructed without difficulty
from the birth histories of the WLS respondents. Age-specific birth rates in 5year age groups for women were calculated as the average number of births
per woman per year over the five years
of each age group, and age-specific birth
rates for men were calculated as the average number of births per man per year
over the five years of each age group.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

TABLE 2
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY AND SELECTION BY IQ DECILES AND SEX, DERIVED FROM THE WLS?

IQ DecILeE
SEX AND MEASURE 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Total
Females
TO range ..... ee eee eee 67-81 82-87 88-92 93-96 97-100 101-103 104-108 109-112 113-120 121-145 ne
MeanIQ ............005- 75.30 84.75 90.22 94.44 98.06 102.01 105.55 110.11 116.25 126.68 100.43
| 2 (h) 2.75 2.93 2.84 2.81 2.73 2.71 2.71 2.55 2.50 2.29 2.68
TER woo ccc eee ccc eens 2.85 3.04 3 02 2.93 2.89 2.83 2.88 2.68 2.65 2.42 2.82
GRR on. cee eee ee eee 1.39 1.48 1.47 1.43 1.41 1.38 1.40 1.31 1.29 1.18 1.37
CO ccc cc cccvceveceeeeees 75.00 75.25 725 75.25 75.50 75,50 75.50 75.50 75.75 75.75 75.50
IURER, oi ow bi 84 64 pa od be DE KE 1.36 1.45 1.44 1.39 1.38 1.35 1.37 1.28 1.26 1.16 1.34
MUTE TECETEECCETE CEE ee 0.01198 001475 0.01403 0.01302 0.01232 0.01157 0.01215 9.00951 000901 0.00551 0.01140
T ivccccccccsvccsucucevacs 25.47 25.17 25.79 25.51 26.00 25.81 26.02 25.99 25.98 26.35 25.82
Doubling time (yrs) ........ 57.85 47.00 49,39 53.23 56.26 59.90 57.04 72.87 76.96 125.91 60.81
ee eee 0.931 1.000 0.982 0.956 0.939 0.921 0.935 0.873 0.862 0.788 0.917
N (No. of respondents) ..... 506 505 562 510 569 546 494 583 553 495 5,323
Males

TQ range .......... eee eee 67-81 82-87 88-92 93-96 97-100 101-103 104-108 109-112 113-120 121-145 ses
MeanIQ ..... ec ce ee ee ee 74.45 84.86 90.17 94.50 97.99 101.99 105.56 110.08 116.27 127.18 100.78
Pigs) q gs goanen wy 94 we oo as 2.36 2.45 2.46 2.50 2.29 2.27 2.26 2.19 2.37 2.07 Dobe
TER vince ccc eee ee eee 2.60 2.75 2.68 2.80 2.61 2.57 2.53 2.54 2.80 2.39 2 62
GRR oo. eee eee eee 1.33 1.41 1.37 1.43 1.34 1.31 1.29 1.30 1.44 laze 1.34
en ee 68.30 68.82 69.08 69.34 69.34 69.60 69.86 70.13 70.39 70.92 69.60
NRR .. ee cece ce eee 1.25 1.32 1.30 1.35 1.26 1.24 1.23 1.23 1.36 1.17 1.27
Foc cece nce e tee enceecene 0.00807 0.01013 0.00946 001090 0.00822 0.00777 000733 0.00735 0.01073 0.00544 0.00850
T ccc cc cee cece ee eneees 27.61 27.68 27.34 27.80 28.30 28.10 27.98 28 53 29.03 28.70 28.13
Doubling time (yrs) ........ 85.91 68.40 73.26 63.58 84.30 89,20 94.58 94.25 64.59 127.34 81.55
W lice cece cc ccscnceees 0.923 0.979 0 960 1.000 0.927 0.916 0.904 0.905 0.995 0 858 0.935
N (No. of respondents) ..... 525 427 498 467 501 472 501 522 559 522 4,994

*F(35) 1s defined in Table 1 TFR denotes tota) fertility rate, defined as the expected number of live births of both sexes that a woman or man would have if she or he experienced observed agespecific birth rates under hypothetical conditions of zero mortality GRR denotes gross reproduction rate, defined in the same way as TFR, except that it pertains to births of just one sex (the same as
that of the parent) egdenotes life expectancy at birth NRR denotes net reproduction rate, defined as the expected number of live births of the same sex that a person just born would have if she or he
experienced observed age-specific birth and death rates, 1f observed age-specific birth and death rates remain constant over time and there 1s no migration, the NRR 1s also the long-run multiplicative
growth factor by which the population increases or decreases over each succeeding generation ris the intrinsic rate of natural increase, defined as the population growth rate that would result under
the same long run assumptions about unchanging fertility and mortality and no migration T denotes the length of a generation, defined as the tme required for a population growing at intrinsic rate r
to increase by a factor equal tothe NRR The doubling time is the time required for a population growing at intrinsic rate r to increase by a factor of 2: W1s relative fitness, defined as the ratio of the
generational growth factor for the :th IQ decile to the generational growth factor for the most rapidly growing decile, based on the intnnsic rate of natural increase for each decile separately, for

females and males, respectively, fo ff Mm, m om
wis ef rs) and wm et ( ty)

8T

[leMag pue proproyjoy

Asojorg je10g
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

Fertility after age 35 was extrapolated using a demographic model of agespecific fertility developed by Luther
(1982). Luther’s method fits a truncated
Pearson Type III curve—the incomplete gamma function k x* e-*—to observed age-specific birth rates in 5-year
age groups below 35 years of age. There
is a “half parameter” that utilizes information at later ages, but it assumes only
one of two values, and Luther has indicated which value to use in the case of
developed countries such as the United
States. Luther developed and refined his
model in the process of testing it with 79
observed schedules of age-specific birth
rates taken mainly from a compendium
of demographic data compiled by
Keyfitz and Flieger (1971), and he ultimately obtained excellent fits to the test
data. Details of how the model was applied to fit the WLS data are given in a
pre-publication version of this paper
(Retherford and Sewell, 1986).

We applied Luther’s model to extrapolate fertility beyond age 35, by sex
and IQ decile. The model yielded excellent fits to the WLS data (Retherford
and Sewell, 1986). Errors in the TFR estimates due to fitting errors are probably
very small, since less than 7 per cent of
the total fertility of the WLS cohort, as
determined from Luther’s procedure,
occurs after age 35. (Period fertility estimates from published sources during the
past two decades indicate a percentage
that is 1 or 2 percentage points higher
than 7 per cent, but one expects period
estimates to exceed cohort estimates of
this percentage during times of rapidly
declining period fertility. The period total fertility rate, calculated for each calendar year from age-specific birth rates
for that calendar year, fell substantially
in the United States between 1957 and

Intelligence and Family Size

19

1975 (U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of the Census, 1983, p. 64).)

As shown in Figure 1, the estimated
TFR’s are slightly higher than the values
of F(35), and they vary in much the
same way by IQ decile. Note that the
TFR’s for men are lower than those for
women. As noted earlier, this is also
true for F(35). There is, of course, no
reason why the TFR’s for the two sexes
must be the same, since the wives of the
WLS men are for the most part not in
the WLS sample. Moreover, the wives
of the WLS men are approximately two
years younger, on average, than the
WLS women, since, as mentioned earlier, men tend to marry women about
two years younger than themselves.
Viewed from the perspective of family
fertility, the completed fertility of families of WLS men therefore lags the completed fertility of families of WLS
women by about two calendar years.
Because of this time lag, and because
fertility in Wisconsin (as in the rest of
the nation) declined sharply between
1957 and 1975, one expects the TFR’s
for men to be lower than the TFR’s for
women in the WLS. It is also possible
that reporting of offspring for men may
be somewhat less than complete in the
birth histories, especially births illegitimately fathered who have never lived
with the father.

It is a simple matter to calculate gross
reproduction rates (GRR) from the estimated TFR’s. The GRR for women is
defined as the expected number of live
girl births that a woman would have if
she experienced observed age-specific
birth rates for women under hypothetical conditions of zero mortality. The
GRR for men is similarly defined, except that it is based on boy births and the
age-specific birth rates for men. The

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

20 Retherford and Sewell

GRR for women is estimated by multiplying the TFR for women by the ratio
of female births to all births, i.e., by
0.488 under the assumption that the sex
ratio at birth is 1.05 male births for every
female birth. The GRR for men is estimated by multiplying the TFR for men
by the ratio of male births to all births,
i.e., by 0.512. Gross reproduction rates
are included in Table 2 mainly for comparison with net reproduction rates
(NRR), which will be discussed later.

The NRR and remaining measures in
Table 2 require estimates of mortality by
IQ decile. To estimate mortality we
used data on sample attrition between
the 1957 and 1975 WLS surveys. The
1975 survey identifies respondents who
died between 1957 and 1975. Deaths include 118 men and 56 women. There
were 4,994 men and 5,323 women to
start with in 1957. Therefore, proportions dying between the two surveys are
118/4,994 = 0.02363 for men and
56/5,323 = 0.01052 for women. To a
close approximation, each of these proportions equals the proportion dying between ages 18 and 36, denoted here as
q(18).

There are not enough deaths in the
sample to allow direct estimation of
mortality for each IQ decile. Moreover,
the age range of the deaths, 18-36, is incomplete. Therefore, mortality by IQ
decile had to be estimated indirectly.
The following simple procedure was
used: First, for each sex separately, we
divided the sample into two halves, below and above the median JQ for the
sample. The lower and upper halves had
mean IQ’s of 88.83 and 111.95 for
women and 88.27 and 112.53 for men.
Next we computed the proportion dying
between the 1957 and 1975 surveys for
each of the two halves, as already de
Social Biology

scribed. A complication was that the
lower IQ half of the sample had more
grade repeaters and was therefore
somewhat older on average than the upper IQ half. The lower and upper halves
had average ages in 1957 of 18.00 and
17.81 for women and 18.14 and 17.90 for
men. Thus, the proportions dying between the two surveys are not exact estimates of q(18), which refers to the proportion dying between exact ages 18 and
36. Adjustments for these age discrepancies proved to be negligible (Retherford and Sewell, 1986).

Next, the two-point formula for a
straight line was used to estimate the relationship between g(18) and IQ, for
each sex separately, based on the values
of g(18) and mean IQ for the upper and
lower IQ halves of the sample. The
equation for females is

q(18) = 0.01360 —0.00003IQ = (1)
and the equation for males is
q(18) = 0.03873 — 0.000151IQ. (2)

Estimated standard errors of the IQ
coefficients in these equations are
0.00010 for females and 0.00015 for
males. These estimates assume that the
IQ difference between the upper and
lower IQ halves is constant over repeated samples, and they include a finite
population correction of 0.82 (see note
to Table 1). The standard error of the
difference between the male and female
IQ coefficients is 0.00018. Comparison
of these standard errors with the coefficients themselves indicates that levels
of statistical significance of the coefficients and of the male-female difference between them are low. Our estimates of mortality differences by IQ and
by sex are accordingly somewhat imprecise.

 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

From Equations (1) and (2) and the
values of mean IQ for each IQ decile,
values of g(18) were generated for each
IQ decile, for each sex separately. The
values of qg(18) were then matched to
Coale-Demeny West model life tables
(Coale and Demeny, 1966) to obtain estimates of complete model life tables, in
which the tables for males and females
are presented at intervals of 0.25 year of
female life expectancy. In each case the
life table chosen was the one with a
value of q(18) closest to the observed
value, as estimated from Equation (1) or
(2). Thus, the values of life expectancy
in Table 2 are accurate only to within
0.25 year, sufficiently accurate for our
purposes. The estimated mortality differentials by IQ are small, especially for
females. The difference in life expectancy between the first and tenth IQ dec
- jles is about 0.8 year for females and 2.6

years for males.

Given age-specific birth rates and a
life table for each IQ decile, it is a simple
matter to calculate the net reproduction
rate. For each sex separately, the NRR
is defined as the expected number of live
births of the same sex that a person just
born would have if she or he experienced observed age-specific birth and
death rates over a lifetime. If observed
age-specific birth and death rates remain
constant over time and there is no migration, the NRR is also the long-run
multiplicative growth factor by which
the population increases or decreases
over each succeeding generation. The
NRR is similar to the GRR, except that
age-specific mortality is taken into account in the calculations. Thus, the
NRR is somewhat smaller than the
GRR. Given the negative association of
mortality with IQ, the relationship between the NRR and IQ is less negative

Intelligence and Family Size 21

than the relationship between the GRR
and IQ. But because mortality is so low
in this population, this difference is
small.

From the age-specific birth rates and
the life table for each IQ decile, one may
also calculate the intrinsic rate of natural
increase, r (not to be confused with the
product-moment coefficient of correlation). This is the population growth rate
that results hypothetically in the long
run if observed age-specific birth and
death rates remain constant over time
and the population is closed to migration. A property of r is that it does not
depend on the age distribution of the
original population as long as some persons in the original population are of reproductive age. The variation in r with
IQ resembles the variation of fertility
with IQ, as shown in Figure 1. Values of
r by sex for the whole sample are
0.01140 for females and 0.00850 for
males (calculated from individual-level
data, not by averaging decile values).
The difference between the sexes arises
because of the one-sex demographic
model that underlies the calculations. In
real populations, of course, the two
sexes have the same long-run population growth rate. Thus, the one-sex calculations are not entirely consistent.

From r, one can calculate the length
ofa generation, 7. Once the growth rate
converges to r under hypothetical conditions of constant age-specific birth and
death rates, the population becomes stable. A constant growth rate, 7, is one of
the attributes of a stable population.
The growth factor over a time period of
length ¢ is then e”. The generation
length T is defined as the time required
for the population to increase by a factor
equal to the NRR under hypothetical
conditions of stability. Thus, T is ob
 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

22 Retherford and Sewell

tained by solving the equation
eT = NRR, so that T = (1/r)In NRR.
T tends to increase slightly with IQ, but
the variation is small and erratic. For the
entire sample, Tis 25.8 years for females
and 28.1 years for males.

One may also calculate population
doubling times from r, and these are also
shown in Table 2. The doubling time is
calculated by solving the equation
e”" = 2 for t, so that tg = (1/r)In 2. The
doubling time varies inversely with r.

Following Bajema (1963), we may
compute another measure of interest,
relative fitness, W, which compares
growth over a generation in the various
IQ deciles. A difficulty here is that the
generation length, 7, varies from one
decile to the next. This difficulty 1s overcome by arbitrarily taking T to be the
generation length over all deciles combined. Again, each sex is considered
separately. Let r* denote the value of r
for the most rapidly growing IQ decile,
which in Table 2 is the second decile for
females and the fourth decile for males.
From the standpoint of reproduction,
the second decile for females, or the
fourth decile for males, is the most “‘fit,”
and its growth rate 1s referred to in the
literature (Somewhat inappropriately in
this case) as the ‘‘optimal” growth rate.
Decile-specific indices of relative
fitness, W;, are then defined as e’;7/
e’*T = elT(r—r+)], which is the ratio of the
growth factor for the ith decile to the
growth factor for the most rapidly growing decile. An overall index of mean relative fitness, W, is defined as ef7"—™/,
For both females and males, it is evident
that the tenth IQ decile, with IQ 121 and
over, is the least “‘fit” in the Darwinian
sense, with values of W of 0.788 and
0.858 for females and males respectively. Again, the one-sex model yields
results that are in some respects incon
Social Biology

sistent and unrealistic, but they do provide useful indices of sex differences.

THE IO SELECTION DIFFERENTIAL
FOR GRADUATES

One of the objectives of our research
was to obtain an estimate of the IQ selection differential from the WLS data.
The IQ selection differential, S$, is
defined as what the generational change
in mean IQ would be if, hypothetically,
each child in the birth histories had the
same IQ as the mean of its parents’ IQ’s.
Because we know the IQ of only one
parent, we estimate § first for each sex
separately and then average male and
female values. (For further discussion of
the general concept of the selection differential for any trait, see Falconer,
1966, 1981, or Crow, 1986.) In the calculation of S, the assumption of equality of
IQ between child and parent is introduced because we have no information
on the IQ’s of respondents’ children.
This assumption is, of course, unrealistic, a point to which we shall return
later. The calculation of the IQ selection
differential is done first just for graduates in the WLS sample. Later it is redone with school dropouts added in.
The data for dropouts are much weaker
than the data for WLS graduates, and
that is why graduates are first treated
separately. The separate treatment of
graduates in calculating the IQ selection
differential is, of course, quite artificial,
since they are by no means a breeding
population that is separate from dropouts.

Our method of calculating the IQ selection differential makes use of the intrinsic rate of natural increase. As already mentioned, calculations are done
separately for each sex. Let JQ; denote
the mean IQ of the ith IQ decile. If N; is
the population size of the ith IQ decile to

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

begin with, then, if each decile grows at
the intrinsic rate 7; in Table 2, the population size of each decile at the end of
one generation is K; = Nje’;7. Then the
IQ selection differential is calculated as

S = (2K;1Q;)/(2Ki)
— (2N;1Q;)/(2N)) (3)

where the summation ts across IQ deciles. The first of the two terms on the
right is the estimated mean IQ of the offspring generation, and the second is the
estimated mean IQ of the respondent
generation. Note that the first and second terms on the right are the same, except for the factors e’;7 embodied in
K; = N;, e’;. The factors e’;! differ only
slightly from the net reproduction rates
NRR; = e’;/;. The difference is that 7;
in the formula for NRR;is replaced by T
for the total sample (calculated as the
average of the male 7 and the female T
in the total column of Table 2), so that
the length of generation is the same regardless of the category under consideration.!

Table 3 shows results. Our base estimates of the IQ selection differential,
which are shown in the first row, are
—0.79 for females and —0.25 for males.
The selection differential is small, less
than one IQ point decline in a generation, and about three times as rapid for
females as for males. Of course, these
are One-sex calculations, except that a
common value of T is used. Given sexual reproduction, one expects that in reality the IQ selection differential would
be about the same for either sex, except

'In the pre-publication version of this paper
(Retherford and Sewell, 1986), sex-specific values
of T were erroneously used in the calculaiion of S$
for each sex. This error has been corrected in the
present published version, which uses the average
of the male 7 and the female Tin the calculation of
S for each sex.

Intelligence and Family Size 23

for aspects of intelligence that are sexlinked. The IQ selection differential for
both sexes combined is calculated as the
simple average of the female and male
values—about one-half of an IQ point
decline in a generation, as shown in the
table. The purpose of doing the calculation for each sex separately is not only to
circumvent the difficulty that we know
IQ for only one parent, but also to get
some sense of the relative importance of
female differential fertility by IQ and
male differential fertility by IQ to the
overall IQ selection differential.

The entire sequence of calculations
to this point can be based alternatively
on IQ quartiles. This was done in order
to assess roughly the impact of alternative groupings of respondent IQ’s. The
results of the calculation based on quartiles, shown in the second row of Table
3, are virtually identical to those based
on deciles. Thus, the estimates of the IQ
selection differential do not appear to be
sensitive to the way in which the data are
grouped.

We also tested to see how much the
results for males depend on how
Luther’s age-specific fertility model is
fitted. As mentioned, Luther’s model is
a truncated Pearson Type III exponential curve. Luther applied it to agespecific fertility of women and truncated
the curve at age 43 or 45, depending on
the level of certain parameters. This cutoff age is denoted by u in the model. For
the United States, a value of 43 is found
to be the appropriate value of u, and this
is the value that underlies the value of
the IQ selection differential of —0.25 for
males in the first row of Table 3. However, this value may not be appropriate
for males. The third and fourth rows
show the effect of basing Luther’s fit on
larger values of u for males. We tried
u=45 andu=50. The higher cutoffs had

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

24 Retherford and Sewell Social Biology
TABLE 3
ESTIMATES OF THE IQ SELECTION DIFFERENTIAL, 5, FOR GRADUATES ONLY,
DERIVED FROM THE WLS

METHOD

Based on IQ deciles?

Based on IQ quartiles? ........2.. 00... eee ee eee

Based on variants of Luther’s fitting procedure‘

a: Se

oreeteraaveeor eee e eee nevoeven

Selection Differential ¢

Based on hypothetical assumption of no mortality differ
ences between IQ deciles?

1960 mortality level ..........0csceseeescanes
1970 mortality level 20.4 062 csasnasce esase cass

Females Males Totalf
eaae —0.79 —0.25 —0.52
sees —0.77 —0.21 —0.49
eee se —0.26
ees oe —0.27
amas —0.81 1.33 —U37
sues —0.81 —0.33 —0.57

* This 1s the base estimate to which all the others are compared Each of the other estimates differs from the base estumate in
the manner indicated by the row heading See text for explanation of how the base estimate was calculated

’1Q quartile breaks are 67-90 for Quartile 1, 91-100 for Quartile 2, 101-110 for Quartile 3, and 111-145 for Quartile 4

© The base estimate 1n the first row of the table was calculated with u = 43

41 ife tables by sex for Wisconsin for 1959-61 (whites only) and 1969-71 (all races) were used alternatively See U S Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1965) and National Center for Health Statistics (1975)

¢The IQ selection differential, 5, 1s defined as what the generational change in mean IQ would be, 1f, hypothetically, each
child in the birth histones had the same IQ as its parent in the WLS sample

f Values in the total column are simple averages of values in the previous two columns for males and females separately

the effect of slightly increasing the estimate of the selection differential for
males, from —0.25 to —0.26 or —0.27.
Hence our base estimate of —0.25, obtained by applying Luther’s methodology without alteration, errs slightly on
the conservative side.

We also tested for sensitivity to mortality estimation errors by redoing the
calculations under the assumption of no
mortality differences by IQ. We used a
single life table for all IQ deciles. In the
first simulation, the Wisconsin life table
for 1959-61 was used, and in the second
simulation, the Wisconsin life table for
1970 was used. Since mortality is inversely associated with IQ, the artificial
suppression of mortality differences increases the IQ selection differential. But
this effect is very small for females, for
whom S increases from —0.79 to —0.81.
The effect is larger for males, for whom
S increases from —0.25 to —0.33.
Whether the 1960 or 1970 life table is
used makes virtually no difference in the
results. The results for males are more

sensitive to elimination of mortality differentials by IQ than the results for females, mainly because mortality differences by IQ are larger for males than for
females.

One can also assess the accuracy of
the estimate of the IQ selection differential from the point of view of sampling
variability and statistical precision. This
cannot be done directly, because of the
complicated estimation procedure, part
of which involves extrapolation to older
ages and the use of demographic
models. For purposes of exploring statistical precision, it is useful to consider
an alternative approach to calculating
the IQ selection differential that could
have been used had the data been more
complete, as follows:

Let F denote the number of surviving
offspring in a respondent’s completed
family. Then S may be calculated alternatively as

S = [3(F1Q)]/[ZF] —[Z1Q/N (4)

where summations range over individ
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

ual adults of both sexes with the total
number of adults denoted by N. As a
rough approximation, we may use F(35)
in this formula, which is about 93 per
cent of F(50). When this is done, S turns
out to be —0.72, compared with the
value of —0.52 for both sexes combined
in the first row of Table 3. The finding
that S is more negative than before is expected, because differential mortality
by IQ is no longer taken into account,
and because the fraction of fertility occurring after 35 may be greater among
more intelligent persons, who tend to
start childbearing at a later age.

If one is willing to treat SF as a constant in Formula (4), the variance of S,
Var(S), can be approximated without
difficulty as 0.36.7 This must be regarded
as a minimum estimate, since fertility is
truncated at 35, XF is treated as a constant, and variability in the mortality estimates is necessarily ignored. The tratio for S is then —0.73/0.36 = —2.03,
yielding a one-sided p-value of 0.02. Assuming a standard error of 0.36, a value
of S of 0.52, as in Table 1, yields a onesided p-value of 0.07. This is only
slightly higher than the usual 5 per cent
level.

2The calculation formula for Var(S) was derived as follows: Let M denote XF. Then Equation
(4) becomes

S = [8(FIQ)/M] — [SIOQ]|/N
= 3(FIQ/M — IQ/N)

Then

Var(S) = Var [2(FIQ/M — IQ/N)}
= 2[Var(FIQ/M — IQ/N))
= N Var(FIQ/M — IQ/N)

In this last formula, the expression within parentheses, which we may denote by Z, can be evaluated for each individual in the sample, with M now
approximated by the sample value of 2F. It is then
a simple matter to calculate Var(Z) directly from
the sample data. Finally, the estimate of Var(S)
from the last formula is multiplied by a finite population correction of 0.82 (see note to Table 1).

Intelligence and Family Size

25

IQ SELECTION DIFFERENTIAL FOR
GRADUATES AND Dropouts TOGETHER

Henceforth we shall use the term
“dropouts” to mean all persons who
failed to graduate high school, regardless of whether they ever went to school
in the first place. We shall use the phrase
“graduate cohort” to mean the graduates in the WLS, and the phrase ‘“‘complete cohort” to mean graduates and
dropouts together, where the dropouts
include all nongraduates who, by virtue
of their year of birth, were potential
classmates of the graduates.

Incorporation of dropouts into the
calculation of the IQ selection differential involves several preliminary steps:
(1) estimation of the proportion of dropouts in the complete cohort; (2) estimation of the fertility and mortality of
dropouts; and (3) estimation of the
mean IQ of dropouts.

Proportion of dropouts.—Our estimate of the proportion that dropouts are
of the complete cohort is derived from
the 1960 census of population. The average age of the graduate cohort at the
time they were first studied in April,
1957, was 17.98 for females and 18.09
for males. For the present purpose, we
consider for simplicity that they were
18.0 years of age. In the census, age is
recorded in completed years of age, so
that 18.0 is the average of 17 and 18
completed years of age. Those who
were 17 and 181n April 1957 were 20 and
21 three years later at the time of the
census in April, 1960. Table 4 shows the
percentage of dropouts among 20-yearolds and 21-year-olds by sex in the 1960
census for the state of Wisconsin. Average values for these two ages are 21.5
per cent for females and 28.0 per cent
for males. These are our estimates of the
proportion that dropouts are of each sex
in the Wisconsin cohort. These dropout

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

26 Retherford and Sewell

percentages for Wisconsin are comparatively low. Comparable figures for the
United States as a whole, also derived
from the 1960 census, are 34.0 per cent
for females and 37.8 per cent for males
(Hauser, 1971, Table 4).

TABLE 4

PERCENTAGE Not COMPLETING AT LEAST
Four YEARS OF HIGH SCHOOL BY SEX AND
SELECTED AGES: WISCONSIN, 1960

Age Females Males
TD va eeces anus oa ws 99.7 99.7
BG se cscsnsacnan a0 99.4 99.6
DY on wanes e554 oa 28 92.6 95.3
TB ce ceivsnavs asus 44.6 57.0
TD awe te cswcnna ws 225 30.8
20! 20 20 we oememee ae 21.8 27.4
21 cece ee eee eee 21.2 28.6
re 21.8 29.4
20) vidya rere res 2504 30.4
24 eweaus vues ee eas Zax 30.7

Source Denved from US Department of Commerce,
Bureau of the Census (1960), Tables 101, 102

It should be noted that the census
data pertain only to the noninstitutional
population, so that the census probably
underestimates the proportion of dropouts because of the omission of institutionalized persons, who probably have
higher dropout rates than noninstitutionalized persons. But institutionalized
persons in 1960 for the United States as
a whole were well under 1 per cent of the
population (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1983, pp.
31, 56), so that their omission introduces
only a very slight bias in our results.
Moreover, this bias is negligible when
compared with the crudity of our estimates of the mean IQ of dropouts, discussed later. Therefore, we have ignored institutionalized persons in our
calculations. Since the institutionalized
population includes, among others,
mentally retarded persons of below
 

Social Biology

average fertility, the effect of ignoring
institutionalized persons is probably to
exaggerate slightly our estimate of the
IQ selection differential for the complete Wisconsin cohort, which is also
discussed later.

Census data also allow a rough assessment of the racial composition of the
dropouts. For this purpose, we used
1970 census data, since the 1960 data
were not ideally suited. As mentioned,
the Wisconsin cohort was approximately aged 30 in 1970. To base our estimates of composition on larger numbers, derived from a 1/100 Public Use
Sample tape for Wisconsin from the
U.S. 1970 census, we considered persons aged 28-32 in 1970. Among such
persons, dropouts are defined as those
with less than 12 completed years of education. The dropouts are 91.6 per cent
white, 6.5 per cent black, and 1.9 per
cent other races. These estimates, insofar as they pertain to the complete WLS
cohort, may be biased by migration in
and out of Wisconsin between 1957 and
1970, to the extent that this migration
was Selective by race. This bias is probably small, but we have not investigated
it.

Fertility of dropouts.—The fertility of
dropouts was estimated by applying the
own-children method of fertility estimation (Cho, 1973; Choet al., 1986), which
Is a reverse-survival technique, to 1970
and 1980 census data for the State of
Wisconsin. A 1/100 Public Use Sample
tape was used for 1970, and a 1/1000
Public Use Sample tape was used for
1980.

Fertility estimates derived by the
own-children method may be tabulated
by characteristics of women, and in particular by number of completed years of
education, which was asked in the 1970
and 1980 censuses. As already menDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

tioned, dropouts are defined as those
with less than 12 completed years of education. The application of the ownchildren method is straightforward in
the case of women. To estimate the fertility of male dropouts, however, it was
necessary to modify the method to obtain age-specific birth rates for men instead of women. This was necessary in
order to be able to tabulate the fertility
estimates by men’s characteristics, the
characteristic of interest being completed years of education. The modification of the method involves matching
children to fathers instead of mothers
within the same household. The ownchildren fertility estimates for men are

- less precise than those for women,

mainly because children of divorced
parents are more likely to be living with
their mothers than their fathers, so that
matching 1s less complete and less accurate for men than for women.

The own-children method is usually
used to estimate age-specific birth rates
for a particular year or time period. In
the present instance, however, we are
interested in estimating birth rates for a
real cohort. If the time depth of the period estimates is long enough, the period
estimates can be spliced together to
yield estimates of age-specific birth rates
for real cohorts. Our strategy was to
consider a cohort centered at age 17 in
1957, 20 in 1960, 30 in 1970, and 40 in
1980. (Actual computations were based
on persons aged 15~18 in 1957, 18-21 in
1960, 28-31 in 1970, and 38-41 in 1980.)
Applications of the own-children
method to the census of 1970 for Wisconsin yielded estimates of age-specific
birth rates for this cohort for ages 15-19
during 1955-59, 20-24 during 1960-64,
and 25-29 during 1965-69. Application
to the census of 1980 for Wisconsin
yielded estimates of age-specific birth

Intelligence and Family Size

Zi

rates for this cohort for ages 25-29 during 1965-69, 30-34 during 1970~74, and
35-39 during 1975-79. The two overlapping estimates of the age-specific
birth rate at ages 25-29 during 1965-69
were averaged to yield a final estimate
for this age group and time period. For
reasons of computational convenience,
these estimates are centered on a cohort
that is about one year younger than the
WLS cohort, but this discrepancy introduces only very small errors in the fertility estimates, as will be seen shortly.
Further details of how the own-children
fertility estimates for the Wisconsin cohort were constructed are given elsewhere (Retherford and Sewell, 1986).
A difficulty is that the own-children
method, as applied here, provides fertility estimates only through ages 35-39. It
is necessary to estimate fertility also at
ages 40—44 and 45-49. A simple ratio
method was used to do this. The method
involves a standard age-specific fertility
schedule, which we somewhat arbitrarily chose to be the set of age-specific
birth rates for the United States in 1970.
This schedule indicates that the percentage of total fertility accounted for by
age-specific fertility after age 40 is only
1.74 per cent, so in fact very little fertility is being extrapolated. In the standard
schedule of age-specific birth rates,
which we denote simply as f(x), the ratio
f(40-44)f(35-39) = 0.2555 and the ratio
f(45-49)/f(35-39) =0.0158. We multiplied the own-children estimate of the
age-specific birth rate for dropouts at
ages 35-39 by each of these ratios in
turn to obtain estimates of age-specific
birth rates at ages 40-44 and 45-49.
The procedure just described for estimating age-specific birth rates for dropouts in the Wisconsin cohort is indirect
enough that it seemed worthwhile to apply it to other education categories as

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

28 Retherford and Sewell

300 <12 Years of Education

200 Census

100

Age-specific Birth Rates (ASBR)

 

Age

300 12 Years of Education

200

Age-specific Birth Rates (ASBR)

 

20 30 40 50
Age

Social Biology

13-15 Years of Education

8 8

Age-specific Birth Rates (ASBR)
3

 

16+ Years of Education

Census

Age-specific Birth Rates (ASBR)

 

20 30 40 50
Age

Fic. 2.—Estimates of age-specific birth rates by education for females in the Wisconsin cohort, derived alternatively from the WLS and from census data.

well, in order to compare the ownchildren estimates of age-specific birth
rates to parallel estimates derived earlier from the WLS birth histories. The
comparisons also provide a check on
possible bias from migration in and out
of Wisconsin between 1957 and 1980.
Figures 2 and 3 show the results of these
comparisons. The first panel in each
figure shows the results for dropouts, for
which there are no comparable estimates from the WLS. But for the other
education categories, comparisons can
be made for age groups 15-19,. . . ,30
34. The agreement between estimates
based alternatively on the own-children
method applied to census data and the
birth history method applied to WLS
data is quite good. The comparisons
suggest that our fertility estimates for
dropouts in the Wisconsin cohort are
reasonably accurate. The comparisons
also suggest that migration in and out of
Wisconsin introduces only minor distortions in the fertility estimates.
Table 5 shows a substantial sex differential in the fertility of dropouts. The
TFR for female dropouts is about three15

a

of Michi

°
A

n] at 13:42 08 December 20

wnloaded by [University

 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

<12 Years of Education

Census

Age-specific Birth Rates (ASBR)

12 Years of Education

ates (ASBR)

Age-specific Birth

20 30
Age ‘

alternatively from the WLS and from census data.

quarters of a child higher than that for
male dropouts. Moreover, comparison
with Table 2 shows that the TFR for female dropouts is considerably higher
than the TFR for female graduates, regardless of IQ decile, whereas the TFR
for male dropouts is only slightly higher
than the TFR for male graduates. A
plausible explanation of this sex differential in the fertility of dropouts is that
girls frequently drop out of school to
have children. This happens less frequently for boys, partly because children tie down women more than men,

Intelligence and Family Size

 

 

40 50

29

13-15 Years of Education

N

\
wis 7

Census

Age-specific Birth Rates (ASBR)

 

Age

16+ Years of Education

Age-specific Birth Rates (ASBR)

 

20 30 40 . 50
Age

Fic. 3.—Estimates of age-specific birth rates by education for males in the Wisconsin cohort, derived

and partly because boys tend to become
fathers at an older age than that at which
girls tend to become mothers.
Mortality of dropouts.—Kitagawa
and Hauser (1973, p. 17) have estimated
mortality by education for whites by sex
in the United States in 1960. From their
data we computed the proportion dying
between ages 25 and 45 for graduates
and dropouts, by sex. For a given sex,
we denote these proportions as g,(25)
and q,(25), respectively. Similarly, we
denote the proportions dying between
ages 18 and 36 for graduates and drop
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

30 Retherford and Sewell

outs in the Wisconsin cohort as q,(18)
and q,(18). With values of q,(18),
gg(25), and qa(25) prespecified, qa(18)
for the Wisconsin cohort was estimated
as

qa(18) = qg(18)[qa(25)/q,(25)] (5)

where the quantities with argument 18
pertain to the Wisconsin cohort and the
quantities with argument 25 pertain to
U.S. whites in 1960 from Kitagawa and
Hauser. Equation (5) assumes that the
known ratio q4(25)/q,(25) from the Kitagawa and Hauser data closely approximates the unknown ratio qqa(18)/q,(18)
for the complete Wisconsin cohort.

The value of ¢,(18) for the Wisconsin
cohort estimated from Equation (5) was
then matched to a Coale-Demeny
Model West life table, which was taken
as an estimate of the life table for dropouts. These calculations were done separately for each sex, with results shown
in Table 5. Comparison with life expectancy values in Table 2 shows that life expectancy of dropouts falls short of life
expectancy for persons in the lowest IQ
decile by 1.25 years for females and 2.3
years for males.

TABLE 5

ESTIMATES OF INTELLIGENCE,
REPRODUCTIVITY, AND SELECTION

FOR DROPOUTS

Measure? Females Males
MeanIQ ........... 86.00 86.00
F(35) oo. cceecceeeee 3.35 2.48
TFR .... 2. eee ee eee 3.49 2.76
GRR ,.........006- 1.70 1.41
ee ee 73.75 66.00
NRE. a icscaeegs bs es 1.65 1.30
Foxwowncnwe camps xe we 0.02119 0.00985
T icccccccccvcececes 23.68 26.79
Doubling time (yrs) .. 32.71 70.39

$5 ON ARE pee ane 1.181 0.971

“For definitions, see notes to Table 2. W exceeds unity for
female dropouts only because the second JQ decile of graduates 1s retained as the basis of comparison for females

 

 

Social Biology

Mean IQ of dropouts.—Our estimates of the mean IQ of dropouts are by
far the weakest link in the chain of data
necessary for calculating the IQ selection differential for graduates and dropouts together in the complete Wisconsin
cohort. In fact we have virtually no data
at all on IQ of dropouts in Wisconsin.
Our estimates of mean IQ of dropouts
are culled instead from a number of
studies of other populations. All of
these other populations comprise some
segment of the U.S. population, but
none pertains just to Wisconsin.

The best estimates of mean IQ of
dropouts relative to mean IQ of graduates that we have been able to find are
derived from Project TALENT (Wise et
al., 1977; Wise and Steel, 1980, p. 115),
The TALENT samples included over
400,000 men and women from the highschool classes of 1960 through 1963 in
the United States, covering grades 9-12
in 1960. A battery of tests was given to
the respondents, and the results of these
tests were summarized in a measure
called general academic aptitude
(GAA). Subsamples from these large
samples are of particular interest to us
here. Two subsamples, 101,777 ninthgraders and 99,849 tenth-graders, were
followed up eleven years later (Wise et
al., 1977, p. 4). Dropouts were identified in the follow-up survey, making it
possible to calculate mean GAA score
for both graduates and dropouts.

The eleven-year follow-up response
rate, however, was only 20 per cent in
each case. It is highly likely that nonrespondents tended to be selected for low
IQ, so that results based on a 20-per cent
response rate may be severely biased.
The authors of the study were aware of
this problem and attempted to solve it
through an intensive study of a sample
of the nonrespondents. In order to corDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

rect for nonresponse bias, a representative sample of 4,029 nonrespondents in
the ninth grade sample, which is the one
in which we are interested, was selected
for intensive follow-up. Of these, 87 per
cent were found, and of these 90 per
cent provided usable information, yielding an overall response rate of 78 per
cent. On the basis of this sample of nonrespondents, a set of weighting factors
was derived and applied to the original
sample of ninth graders. The weights
were designed to make the original sample representative on two variables,
general academic aptitude and socioeconomic index. For our purposes, this
choice was fortunate, since GAA is the

- variable in which we are interested.

Results showed that male dropouts
scored 1.09 standard deviations below
male graduates, and female dropouts
scored 0.95 standard deviations below
female graduates on the GAA measure
(Wise and Steel, 1980, p. 115). The
greater difference between graduates
and dropouts for males than for females
is consistent with the fertility differences
between males and females among
dropouts, noted earlier. It was found
earlier that female dropouts have much
higher fertility than male dropouts. We
hypothesized that the main reason for
this sex differential in fertility among
dropouts was that girls were much more
likely than boys to drop out of school because of the birth of a child. This means
that girls are more likely than boys to
drop out of school for reasons other than
low academic ability. Therefore, the IO
difference between graduates and dropouts should be smaller for women than
for men. The Project TALENT data
confirm this expectation, but the sex differential in the IQ difference between
graduates and dropouts is small. It
seems that girls who drop out of school

Intelligence and Family Size

31

because of pregnancy tend to have
about the same average IQ as male
dropouts.

Another national-level study of interest is the study on Youth in Transition,
which yielded data on dropouts between
the tenth and twelfth grades (Bachman,
1970; Bachman et al., 1971). A sample
of 2,519 tenth-grade boys was identified
in 1967 and followed up again in 1970.
There were 1,949 graduates and 326
dropouts, yielding a dropout rate of 17
per cent between the tenth and twelfth
grades. This compares with a dropout
rate between tenth and twelfth grades of
10.5 per cent in the Wisconsin cohort
(calculated from Hauser, 1971, Table
6). The QUICK test, with a mean score
of 108.5 and a standard deviation of
12.5, was used to measure intelligence.
Dropouts scored 0.47 standard deviations below the graduates on this test
(calculated from data in Bachman etal.,
1971, Table C~3-6, p. 202). This difference is considerably smaller than the
gap of about one standard deviation derived from the TALENT data for ninthgrade dropouts discussed earlier. One
expects the gap between tenth-grade
dropouts and graduates to be less than
the gap between ninth-grade dropouts
and graduates, but the observed difference is larger than we anticipated.

An earlier study reported by Wolfle
(1954) is also of interest. Wolfle presents
results for a cohort of 14-year-olds in
1949. The mental test scores are from
the Army General Classification Test
(AGCT), which apparently was administered to a large national sample of 14year-olds in 1949, Unfortunately, the
details concerning the original sample
are not given, and it appears that various
kinds of indirect estimates may have
been used to fill gaps in the data. For example, regarding rates of progression to

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

32 Retherford and Sewell

higher grades of school, Wolfle states
that “the rates shown are estimated for
the year 1953 and have been derived
from special studies conducted by the
Commission [on Human Resources and
Advanced Training] supplemented by
census data and a number of reports of
school dropout studies conducted by
others” (Wolfie, 1954, p. 311). But most
of these special studies and studies conducted by others are not cited, nor are
the details of the methodology elaborated. Thus, it is not possible for us to assess the quality of these results.

Wolfie’s results include a table that
classifies persons by AGCT score (with
scores grouped in 5-point intervals) and
educational attainment, from which one
can calculate mean AGCT scores for
graduates and dropouts (Wolfle, 1954,
p. 314). As in the Project TALENT
study, dropouts are defined as those
who leave school between the ninth and
twelfth grades. The AGCT is designed
to have a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 20. When the mean AGCT
scores are converted into standard
scores, by subtracting the mean score
and dividing by 20, it is found that dropouts score 1.12 standard deviations below graduates. There is no breakdown
by sex. The estimate of 1.12 is in rough
agreement with the corresponding estimates derived from the Project TALENT data.

None of the national-level studies
says anything about dropouts who did
not advance as far as the ninth grade.
According to the 1 per cent Public Use
Sample tape for Wisconsin in 1970,
based on census data on number of completed years of education of persons
aged 28-32 (average age of 30), about
28 per cent (24 per cent for females and
33 per cent for males) of dropouts in the
Wisconsin cohort did not complete

Social Biology

ninth grade. Since those who did not
complete ninth grade probably had
lower mean IQ than those who dropped
out after ninth grade, the differences in
mean IQ between dropouts at all levels
and graduates are very likely greater
than the estimates derived from the
studies just reviewed.

A conservative estimate of the difference in mean IQ between high school
graduates and dropouts (those in an age
cohort who do not graduate from high
school) would seem to be about one
standard deviation, and we take this as
our base estimate. In the 1975 WLS
sample, graduates have a mean IQ of almost 101, with a standard deviation of
15. Thus, our base estimate of the mean
1Q of dropouts is 86. This estimate is obviously very rough.

Table 5 summarizes the estimates of
intelligence, reproductivity, and selection for dropouts. The results in this table may be compared with those in Table 2 for graduates.

The IQ selection differential for graduates and dropouts combined for the
Wisconsin cohort.—The IQ selection
differential, S$, for graduates and dropouts combined, can now be calculated in
the following way: Let subscript i denote
IQ decile in the WLS, and let subscript d
denote dropouts. For each sex separately, define N as

N=(%;Ni)+Na (6)

where N; denotes the number of WLS
graduates in the ith IO decile, and Nz
denotes the estimated number of dropouts that one would have obtained in the
WLS had the survey sampled all persons
of graduation age instead of just highschool graduates.

For each sex separately, Ng was estimated as follows: First, we computed,
 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

for Wisconsin, the ratio of high-school
dropouts to high-school graduates
among 20-year-olds in the 1960 census
(from data in Hauser, 1971, Table 4).
These ratios are 0.279 for females and
0.375 for males. Multiplying this ratio by
the first of the two terms on the right side
of (6) yielded an estimate of N,. The IQ
selection differential for graduates and
dropouts combined was then calculated
‘- by Equation (3), as before, the sole difSiference being that the summations
9 ranged over eleven terms instead of ten,
Ethe eleventh pertaining to dropouts.
© The term for dropouts utilizes the value
= of Na calculated as just described, and N
<1s redefined in accordance with Equa>. tion (6).
— Results are shown in Table 6, which
“can be compared with earlier results in
Table 3 for graduates only. In order to
‘Gassess the sensitivity of S to possible er‘Sror in the estimate of the mean IQ of
+3 dropouts, we have based the calculation
pot only on a mean IV of dropouts of 86
but also on 81 and 92. Adding dropouts
-Zinto the calculation of the IQ selection
~ differential, S, increases the estimate of
2S (ie., makes it more negative) substangtially for females but very little for
‘gmales. The reason for the greater effect
‘Zon females is that female dropouts have
= considerably higher net fertility than female graduates, whereas male dropouts
have only marginally higher net fertility
than male graduates, as seen from Tables 2 and 5. Table 6 also shows that the
estimate of S for graduates and dropouts
together is sensitive to errors in the estimate of mean IQ for dropouts, especially for females. With the mean IQ of
dropouts estimated at the middle value
of 86, the average value os S for males
and females together is —0.81, or about
eight-tenths of an IQ point decline in a
generation.

Intelligence and Family Size 33

TABLE 6

ESTIMATES OF THE IQ SELECTION
DIFFERENTIAL, 5, FOR GRADUATES
AND DROPOUTS TOGETHER, BY SEX,

DERIVED FROM THE WLS
Mean IQ SELECTION DIFFERENTIAL
ASSUMPTION Both
FOR DROPOUTS” Females Males Sexes?
IQ,=81..... —1.61 —0.31 —0.96
I1Q,=86..... —1.33 —0.28 —0.81
IOg=91..... —1.05 —0.25 —0.65

“IQ 4 denotes the mean IQ assumed for dropouts. Our
preferred alternative isIQ 4 = 86.

> Values in the total column are simple averages of values
in the previous two columns for males and females separately.

The value of S$ for both sexes combined can be written S=0.5(S/+5”)
=0.5 SF+0.5 S"™=—0.67 —0.14=—.0.81, where superscripts f and m denote
females and males respectively. This decomposition of S$ into two sex-specific
components indicates that the contribution of females to the IO selection differential is almost five times greater than
the contribution of males [(—0.67)/(—
0.14) =4.8}].

GENERATIONAL CHANGE IN MEAN
GENOTYPIC IQ

The phenotypic IQ of an individual
(or phenotypic value, in the vocabulary
of quantitative genetics) is, by definition, the same as measured IQ. The individual’s genotypic IQ is the value that
he or she would have, hypothetically, if
reared in the average environment of
the population from which the individual came. The genic (or additive) IQ is
the transmissable component of IQ; animal breeders call this the breeding
value. The expected genotypic and phenotypic IQ’s of a child, if reared in the
average environment, are the same.
The expected genotypic IQ of a child is
the average of the genic IQ’s of its parents.

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

34 Retherford and Sewell

The IQ selection differential is not
the same as the generational change in
mean genotypic IQ. Individuals with
higher than average phenotypic IQ typically have this higher value not only because of higher genotypic IQ but also
because of being reared in better environments. Therefore, genotypic IQ
tends to be lower than phenotypic IQ
and genic IQ lower yet, although both
still tend to be higher than the average
IQ. The same principle works in reverse
for individuals whose IQ is below average; in this case genotypic and genic IQ
tend to be above phenotypic IQ but still
below average IQ. Since only the genic
value is biologically transmitted, children tend to be closer to the population
mean than their parents. This tendency
is called regression toward the mean.

As explained earlier, the IQ selection
differential is the generational change in
mean IQ if, hypothetically, the child’s
IQ is the average of its parents’ IQs. It is
computed as the difference between the
mean IQ of reproducing individuals,
weighted by the number of their children, and the unweighted mean IQ of
reproducing individuals to begin with. If
the selection differential, as estimated
here, is —0.81 IQ point, then the expected reduction in genotypic IQ over
the next generation will be somewhat
less than 0.81 because only the genic values of the parents are biologically transmitted. Unfortunately it is difficult to
say how much less.

Under conditions of artificial selection, as in plant and animal breeding experiments with randomized environments, the generational change, R, ina
measured trait is estimated as

R=hS (7)

where S is the selection differential for
that trait and h? is the narrow-sense heri
Social Biology

tability. This heritability is the ratio of
the genic value to the phenotypic value,
both scaled as deviations from the population mean. In practice it is estimated
from correlations between relatives (often half-sibs) reared in controlled or
randomized environments. In the case
of human beings, however, the environments of close relatives tend to be similar, so that human correlations typically
confound genetic and environmental
causes. Therefore, simple h* estimates
tend to be biased; corrections of this bias
require additional assumptions and introduce additional uncertainties.

With randomized environments the
predicted phenotypic IQ of a child is the
same as its predicted genotypic value.
When there is genotype-environment
correlations, as in human populations,
this is no longer true. Ironically, because
of positive genotype-environment interactions and covariances, the phenotypic
IQ of a child is more predictable from
the parental average IQ than its genotypic value; it can be estimated from direct measurements.

Empirically based estimates of h? for
IQ, based on midparent-offspring regressions, vary between 0.4 and 0.6
(Plomin and DeFries, 1980; this range
excludes estimates based on Burt’s
questionable data, which have been reviewed by Goldberger, 1979). Rao et al.
(1982) more recently arrived at an estimate in the range of 0.31 to 0.34, based
on a highly sophisticated statistical
model but less than ideal data. Our educated guess is that h? for IQ is about 0.4,
and that the generational change in
mean genotypic IQ is accordingly about
0.4 times as large as the IQ selection differential, i.e., in the neighborhood of
one-third of an IQ point decline for the
Wisconsin cohort [(0.4)(—0.81)=
—0.32]. It could, however, be consider
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

ably smaller or larger, within the range
between zero and eight-tenths of an IQ
point decline.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

Previous studies of intelligence and
family size provide a mixed picture of
the relationship between these two variables. Many early studies based conclusions on the commonly observed negative correlation between measured IQ
and sibship size. But this correlation has
been shown to be biased (insofar as it
captures the relationship between IQ
and fertility), because sibship size,
which measures the fertility of the parental generation, contains no information about childless persons in the parental generation. The few studies that

investigated this question found that the

negative correlation between IQ and
family size disappeared when childless
persons in the parental generation were
taken into account. These studies were
based on samples that may not have
been representative of the entire population, but they nevertheless indicate
methodological reasons, having to do
with biased correlations, for basing conclusions about the relationship between
IQ and fertility on information on number of offspring by IQ rather than number of siblings by IQ.

Studies that have analyzed data on
number of offspring by IQ show varying
results. These studies may be divided
into two groups, those that examined
cohorts whose reproductive experience
overlapped the post—World-War-II
baby boom, and those that examined
cohorts whose reproductive experience
began toward the end or after the baby
boom.

Most of the studies of cohorts whose
reproductive experience overlapped the

Intelligence and Family Size

35

baby boom show a slight positive relationship between IQ and number of offspring; however, none of these studies is
based on a probability sample. One
other study, however, is based on a series of NORC probability samples designed to be nationally representative of
the United States. This study showed a
negative relationship between IQ and
number of offspring for all 5-year birth
cohorts considered, both before, during, and after the baby boom. It also
showed that differential fertility tended
to converge during the baby boom (the
correlation became less negative but
never positive) and diverge again in the
negative direction after the baby boom.
Unfortunately, results from this study
contain an unknown amount of bias due
to nonresponse, which is probably concentrated among persons of less than average IQ. Moreover, the IO measure is
of unknown quality, and there may be
problems of selectivity having to do with
the retrospective nature of the data collection, which takes no account of differential mortality by IQ.

Studies of cohorts whose reproductive experience began toward the end or
after the baby boom show a more
sharply negative correlation between IQ
and number of offspring. One of these
studies was the one just mentioned that
used NORC data. Another was based
on the U.S. National Longitudinal
Study of Labor Market Experience.
However, the intelligence measure in
this latter study is questionable, and
there is a serious problem of nonresponse. Another set of studies compared fertility trends of elite groups
known or presumed to have high intelligence (samples from Who’s Who, the
Forbes 400, Terman’s high IQ group,
and the American Mensa) with the fertility of the nation as a whole. These
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

36 Retherford and Sewell

studies, which suffer by not being based
on representative samples as well as
some other difficulties, also tend to
confirm the pattern of convergence of
negative differential fertility by IQ during the baby boom followed by divergence in the negative direction after the
baby boom.

Taken singly, none of the earlier
studies is very convincing. Taken together, however, they present a fairly
consistent picture: Differential fertility
by IQ in the United States appears to
have been negative in this century. It
probably became less negative during
the baby boom (and positive for some
samples). It seems to have diverged
again in the negative direction after the
baby boom. It is worth noting that fertility differentials by education in the
United States have shown a rather similar trend (see, for example, Rindfuss
and Sweet, 1977; Sweet and Rindfuss,
1983). However, educational level is an
inadequate substitute for measured intelligence since most studies show the
two variables to be correlated only at
about 0.5 (Sewell et al., 1970).

Our own empirical results, based on
the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study
(WLS), confirm a small but statistically
significant negative relationship between fertility and IQ for a large representative sample of the cohort of Wisconsin high school graduates in 1957,
whose reproduction commenced at the
end of the baby boom. Results are based
on fertility to age 35, which was extrapolated by means of a demographic model
to the end of the reproductive ages. A
combination of sample data and demographic models was also used to compute mortality by IQ. The estimates of
fertility and mortality by IQ allowed estimation of the intrinsic rate of natural

Social Biology

increase by IQ and a number of derived
measures. One of these derived measures is the IQ selection differential,
which is what the generational change in
mean IQ would be if, hypothetically,
each child had the same IQ as the mean
of its parents’ IQs.

We calculated the IQ selection differential for each sex separately and for
graduates and the complete cohort
(graduates plus dropouts) separately. In
reality, of course, given sexual reproduction, one expects the IQ selection
differential to be about the same for either sex. The purpose of doing the calculation separately for each sex was not
only to circumvent the difficulty that we
know IQ for only one parent, but also to
get some sense of the relative importance of female differential fertility by
IQ and male differential fertility by IQ
to the overall IQ selection differential.
The rationale for the separate examination of graduates and the complete cohort is similar. An additional reason for
examining graduates separately was that
the results just for graduates are based
on comparatively good data, whereas
the results for graduates and dropouts
together are based on a mix of comparatively good data and comparatively
weak data. Our two-step procedure allowed a rough assessment of how much
the results based on the comparatively
good data for graduates were affected
by addition of the comparatively weak
data for dropouts. The effects of adding
dropouts were substantial for females
but slight for males.

In this regard, an unexpected finding
from our analysis is that differential fertility by IQ is much more negative for
women than for men. In retrospect, this
finding is perhaps not surprising, given
the ubiquitous finding in demographic
Vol. 35, No. 1-2

studies that in modern populations fertility varies more sharply and negatively
by wife’s education than by husband’s
education (Cochrane, 1979). Nevertheless, we did not anticipate such a large
sex difference. The magnitude of the IQ
selection differential is about three
times larger for females than for males
in the WLS cohort of graduates only,
and almost five times larger for females
wthan for males in the complete cohort of
graduates and dropouts together. Re5garding possible explanations of this sex
edifference, we have two hypotheses:
OFirst, childbearing gets in the way of
Shigher education and careers much
Smore for bright women than for bright
Smen. And second, dull women are more
“likely than dull men to start having children at an early age, whether by inten‘Stion or because of an accidental out-of-zwedlock birth. We have not tested the
hypotheses, which remain speculative.
+s For both sexes together, we estimate
sthe IQ selection differential to be about
“Zone- -half of an IQ point decline in a genzeration for graduates only, and about
Seight- -tenths of an IQ point decline in a
pgeneration for graduates and dropouts
together. Both estimates must be
viewed with considerable caution, because they are based partly on the use of
=demographic models for estimation of
Qmissing data, and because some of the
data on dropouts are weak and imprecise.

Subject to these limitations, our estimate of the IQ selection differential of
about eight-tenths of an IQ point decline in a generation may be viewed as
an upper bound of the generational
change in mean genotypic IQ for the
complete Wisconsin cohort. Genotypic
IQ is defined as the expected value of
measured JQ for an individual of a given

 

Intelligence and Family Size 37

gene configuration, or genotype, under
the hypothetical assumption that the individual is raised in the average environment obtaining in the population. The
generational change in mean genotypic
IQ is less than the IQ selection differential, mainly because of regression toward the mean, which means that in actuality children of extremely bright or
extremely dull parents tend to have
genotypical IQ’s closer to the mean IQ
of the population than their midparent
genotypic IQ, and because of environmental influences on measured IQ. We
cannot estimate the generational change
in mean genotypic IQ from our data, but
an educated guess, based on findings
from IQ heritability studies, is that it is
about four-tenths as large, or about onethird of an IQ point decline in a generation in the complete Wisconsin cohort.

Our finding that mean genotypic IQ
may be declining is at variance with several earlier studies, based on time series
of cross-sections, that indicate that
mean IQ has been increasing over time.
A possible explanation is that mean
genotypic IQ has been declining very
slowly, at a pace well below one IQ
point per generation, but that phenotypic, or observed, IO has been increasing because of offsetting environmental
improvements, especially in the general
educational level of the population. But
this explanation is speculative, and
more research is needed to resolve this
puzzle. In this regard, it would be desirable to undertake longitudinal studies,
based on large, nationally representative samples, in which detailed demographic information and comparable IQ
measurements for both parents and children are obtained. To our knowledge,
such a study has never been done.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

38 Retherford and Sewell

 

Social Biology

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Carl J. Bajema, Raymond B. Cattell,
James F. Crow, Otis Dudley Duncan, Robert A. Gordon, Robert M. Hauser, Newton E. Morton, and Daniel R. Vining provided helpful comments on earlier drafts.
We are also grateful to Judith Tom and Victoria Ho for computer programming and to
Robin Loomis for research assistance. Support for the research reported in this paper
was provided by a grant from the National

Institutes of Health (SSP 1 RO1 HD2004901). Support for the Wisconsin Longitudinal
Study of Social and Psychological Factors in
Educational and Occupational Aspirations
and Achievements, which provided the data
for this paper, came from grants from the
National Institutes of Health (MH-06275)
and the National Science Foundation (SES
83-20140).

REFERENCES

ANASTASI, A. 1956. Intelligence and family
size. Psychol. bull. 53:187—209.

ANGOFF, W. H. 1971. Scales, norms and equivalent scores. Jn R. L. Thorndike (ed.), Educational measurement. 2nd ed. American
Council cn Education, Washington, D.C.

BACHMAN, J. G. 1970. Youth in transition. Vol.
II. The impact of family background and intelligence on tenth-grade boys. Institute for
Social Research, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACHMAN, J.G., S. GREEN, and I. D. WirTANEN. 1971. Youth in transition. Vol. ITI.
Dropping out—problem or symptom? Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BaAJEMA, C. J. 1963. Estimation of the direction
and intensity of natural selection in relation
to human intelligence by means of the intrinsic rate of natural increase. Eugen.
Quart. 10:175—187.

Buros, O. 1965. The sixth mental measurements yearbook. Gryphon Press, Highland
Park, N.J.

CaTTELL, P. 1930. Comparability of IQ’s obtained from different tests and different IQ
levels. School and Society 31:437—442.

. 1951. The fate of national intelligence:
Test of a thirteen-year prediction. Eugen.
Rev. 42(3):138-148.

Cuo, L. J. 1973. The own-children method of
fertility estimation: An elaboration. Jn International Union for the Scientific Study of
Population, International Population Conference, Liege 1973, Vol. 2, pp. 263-278.

Cuo, L.J., R.D. Retrnerrorp, and M. K.
CHoE. 1986. The own-children method of
fertility estimation. An East-West Center
Book. East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii.

CLARRIDGE, B.R., L.L. SHEEHY, and T.S.
Hauser. 1977. Tracing members of a panel:
A 17-year follow-up. Jn K. F. Schuessler

 

(ed.), Sociological methodology, 1978.
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.

CoaLE, A. J., and P. DEMENy. 1966. Regional
model life tables and stable populations.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Cocuran, W.G. 1963. Sampling techniques.
John Wiley, New York.

CocHRANE, S. H. 1979. Fertility and education:
What do we really know? Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, Md.

Crow, J. F. 1986. Basic concepts in population,
quantitative, and evolutionary genetics.
W. H. Freeman, New York.

Duncan, O. D. 1952. Is the intelligence of the
general population declining? Amer. Sociol. Rev. 17:401-407.

FALconerR, D.S. 1966. Genetic consequences
of selection pressure. Jn J. E. Meade and
A.S. Parkes (eds.), Genetic and environmental factors in human ability. Oliver and
Boyd, Edinburgh.

. 1981. Quantitative genetics. 2nd ed.
Longmans, New York.

FEATHERMAN, D. L., and R. M. Hauser. 1977.
The process of stratification: Trends and
analyses. Academic Press, New York.

. 1978. Opportunity and change. Academic Press, New York.

FLEMMING, C. W. 1925. A detailed analysis of
achievement in the high school: Comparative significance of certain mental, physical,
and character traits for success. Columbia
University, Teachers’ College, New York.

FLYNN, J. R. 1984. The mean IO of Americans:
Massive gains 1932 to 1978. Psychol. Bull.
95:29-51.

. 1987. Massive IQ gains in 14 nations:
What IQ tests really measure. Psychol.
Buil. 101:171-191.

GOLDBERGER, A.S. 1979. Heritability.
Economica 46:247-327.

GULLIKSEN, J. 1950. Theory of mental tests.
John Wiley and Sons, New York.

 

 

 

 
Vol. 35, No. 1-2

Hauser, R. M. 1971. Some notes on school retention and enrollment in Wisconsin. Memorandum N. 50 to Sewell-Hauser Project
Staff, Feb. 17, 1971. Dept. of Sociology,
University of Wisconsin, Unpublished.

Hauser, R.M., and W.H. SEwELL. 1984.
Family effects in simple models of education, occupational status, and earnings:
Findings from the Wisconsin and Kalamazoo studies. CDE Working Paper 84-29.
Center for Population and Ecology, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Hauser, R., W. H. SEWELL, and B. R. CrarRIDGE. 1982. The influence of family structure on socioeconomic achievement: A progress report. CDE Working Paper 82-59.
Center for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

SHauser, R. M.,S. L. Tsat, and W. H. SEWELL.

1983. A model of stratification with re
sponse error in social and psychological var
iables. Sociol. Educ. 56:20—46.

S'Henmon, V.A.C., and M. J. Netson. 1954.

cr) The Henmon-Nelson Tests of Mental Abil
4
—
S
a

an
2

E

08 De

"_ ity, Manual for administration, Grades 7S 12. Houghton Mifflin, Cambridge, Mass.
‘SHiccens, J. V., E. W. REED, and S. G. REED.
£6 1962. Intelligence and family size: A paraS__ dox resolved. Eugen. Quart. 9:84—90.

iS MEVEITZ, N., and W. FLiEGer. 1971. Popula
tion: Facts and methods of demography.

6 Freeman and Co., San Francisco.
2XKiracawa, E.M., and P.M. Hauser. 1973.
¥ Differential mortality in the United States:
2 A study in socioeconomic epidemiology.
‘= Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass.

~ Luter, N. Y. 1982. Fitting age-specific fertil& ity with a truncated Pearson Type [II curve.

Asian Pacif. Census Forum 8(4):5-12.

NATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS.
1975. U.S. decennial life tables for 1969-71,
Vol. IT, State life tables: Wisconsin. DHEW
Publication No. (HRA) 75-1151. Washington, D.C.

OLNECK, M. R. 1976. The determinants of education and adult status among brothers: The
Kalamazoo study. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Mass.

Oxnetck, M., and B. Wo FE. 1980. Intelligence
and family size: Another look. Rev. Econ.
Statist. 62:241-247.

PLoMIN, R., and J. C. DEFrigs. 1980. Genetics
and intelligence: Recent data. Intelligence
4:15-24.

RatcuirF, J. M. 1934. An analysis of results obtained from different intelligence tests and
from repeated examination with particular
reference to the effect of practice. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.

Downloaded

 

Intelligence and Family Size 39

Rao, D.C., N. E. Morton, J. M. LALOuEL,
and R. Lew. 1982. Path analysis under generalized assortative mating II: American
IQ. Genet. Res. 39:187--198.

RETHERFORD, R. D., and W. H. SEWELL. 1986.
Intelligence and family size reconsidered.
Working papers of the East-West Population Institute, No. 39. East-West Center,
Honolulu. Also issued as CDE Working Paper 86-3. Center for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Rinpruss, R. R., and J. A. SwEET. 1977. Postwar fertility trends and differentials in the
United States. Academic Press, New York.

SCOTTISH COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN EpucaTION. 1933. The intelligence of Scottish
Children. Publications of the Scottish Council for Research in Education, V. University
of London Press, Ltd., London.

. 1949. The trend of Scottish intelligence. University of London Press, Ltd.,
London.

SEWELL, W.H., A.O. HALLER, and G. W.
OHLENDORF. 1970. The educational and
early occupational attainment process: replication and revision. Amer. Sociol. Rev.
35:1014-1027.

SEWELL, W.H., and R. M. Hauser. 1975. Education, occupation, and earnings:
Achievement in the early career. Academic
Press, New York.

SEWELL, W.H., and R. M. Hauser. 1977. On
the effects of families and family structure
on achievements. Jn P. Taubman (ed.),
Kinometrics: Determinants of socioeconomic success within and between families.
North-Holland, Amsterdam.

SEWELL, W. H., and R. M. Hauser. 1980. The
Wisconsin Longitudinal Study of Social and
Psychological Factors in Aspirations and
Achievements. In A.C. Kerckhoff (ed.),
Research in sociology of education and socialization, Vol. 1. JAI Press, Greenwich,
Conn.

SEWELL, W.H., R.M. Hauser, and W. C.
Wo tr. 1980. Sex, schooling and occupational status. Amer. J. Sociol. 86:551-583.

SWEET, J. A., and R. R. Rinpruss. Those ubiquitous fertility trends: United States, 194579. Soc. Biol. 30:127-139.

THORNDIKE, R. L. 1942. Two screening tests of
verbal intelligence. J. Appl. Psychol.
26:128-135.

THORNDIKE, R. L., and E. HaGan. 1962. Ten
thousand careers. Wiley and Sons, New
York.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, BUREAU OF
THE CENSUS. 1960. U.S. census of population, 1960, Vol. 1, Characteristics of the
population, Part 51, Wisconsin. Washington, D.C.

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

40 Retherford and Sewell

. 1983. Statistical abstract of the United
States, 1984. Washington, D.C.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION,
AND WELFARE. 1965. Life tables 1959-61.
Wisconsin state life tables 1959-61. Vol. 2,
No. 50. Public Health Service Publication
1252. Washington, D.C.

VAN Court, M., and F. D. BEan. 1985. Intelligence and fertility in the United States:
1912-1982. Intelligence 9:23-32.

Vininc, D. R. 1982. On the possibility of the
reemergence of a dysgenic trend with respect to intelligence in American fertility
differentials. Intelligence 6:241-264.

. 1986. Social versus reproductive suc
cess: The central theoretical problem of hu
man sociobiology. Behav. Brain Sci. 9:167
187.

 

 

Social Biology

WALLER, J. 1971. Differential reproduction: Its
relation to JQ test score, education, and occupation. Soc. Biol. 18:122-136.

Wise, L.L., D.H. McLaucuuin, and K. J.
GILMARTIN. 1977. The American citizen 11
years after high school. Vol. H. American
Institutes for Research, Palo Alto, Calif.

Wise, L. L., and L. STEEL. 1980. Educational
attainment of the high school classes of 1960
through 1963: Findings from Project TALENT. In A. C. Kerckhoff(ed.), Research in
sociology of education and socialization,
Vol. 1. JAI Press, Greenwich, Conn.

WoL ELE, D. 1954. America’s resources of specialized talent. Harper & Brothers, New
York.

 
