Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Further notes on dizygotic twinning-rate changes

Amram Scheinfeld

To cite this article: Amram Scheinfeld (1976) Further notes on dizygotic twinning#rate
changes, Social Biology, 23:1, 82-85, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988206

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988206

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

Further Notes on Dizygotic
Twinning-rate Changes

Amram Scheinfeld

Seminar on Genetics and the Evolution of Man
Columbia University
New York, New York

The article by Grace Wyshak, “Some
Observations on the Decline in the United
States Dizygotic Twinning Rate” (Social
Biology, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 167-172), begins with the statement, “The observed
decline in the United States twinning rate
over the period 1922-58 .. . has not so far
been adequately explained by examination
of vital statistics data.” The fact is that
such an examination was made in detail,
and the observed decline in dizygotic twinning rates related to changes in maternal
ages and parities, in a two-part paper presented at the Second International Congress of Human Genetics, in Rome, 1961.
Under the title, ““Bio-social effects on twinning incidences” (Part I, Scheinfeld and
Schachter; Part IJ, Scheinfeld, 1963), the
papers examined data for multiple births
and the monozygotic:dizygotic ratios in
the United States, 1918-58, and reached
the conclusion that the more than 10 per
cent decline in twinning incidences—primarily dizygotic—during that period could
be correlated with a decrease in the proportionate births among the most twinningprone, older, high-parity mothers and with
a relative decrease in births among the
younger, least twinning-prone mothers.
Data were also presented indicating that

82

 

for the same reasons and causes, a decline
in twinning incidences had been occurring
in a number of European countries whose
variations in twinning rates and DZ:MZ
ratios had been attributed previously to
genetic differences.

Further, it was noted in the aforementioned papers that inasmuch as the proportionate shifts in maternal parities and
reproductive rates could be related to specific socioeconomic-cultural factors and
religious attitudes with respect to childbearing—and with the assumption that the
most twinning-prone mothers would then
be found as a rule in the least advanced
groups and in the most orthodox religious
groups—it could be postulated (farfetched
as it might seem, offhand) that a given
mother’s chances of producing twins could
be influenced by her social level, education,
family income, and religious beliefs.

Taking the latter factor, for example,
devout followers of religions which discourage contraception and encourage maximum
reproduction would be expected to have a
high incidence of twins. As evidence, in
Catholic Ireland where, according to the
1956-57 data, women tended to marry late
—at an average age of almost 26—and
then to average about six births per mother,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 1

the twinning incidence was 15 pairs per
1,000 births, the highest in Europe (Scheinfeld, 1963). Additional evidence has been
provided with respect to the later-marrying
and highly fertile Amish, whose twinning
incidences have been reported (Cross and
McKusick, 1970) as ranging from 15 to 20
pairs per 1,000 births.

Dr. Wyshak has presented some pertinent twin data from Mormon records of
their progenitors in the 1800’s, well before
the church came into being in the 1830's.
It should be interesting to check—if it
hasn’t already been done—on Mormon
twinning incidences after many members
of the church began heeding the precept
to “be fruitful and multiply.”

The most potent influence by far on DZ
twinning rates are racial factors, apparently
largely genetic, although other variables
may be involved. Highest in twinning are
African Blacks, with up to 45 twin pairs
per 1,000 births, and a zygosity ratio of
40 DZ to 5 MZ. Lowest in twinning are
the Japanese (and probably other Mongolian peoples), with 6.3 pairs per 1,000
births, and a reversed zygosity ratio of 4
MZ to 2.3 DZ twins, while somewhere in
between are the white twinning rates
(Scheinfeld, 1963). In the United States,
natality figures for 1964 showed the twinning incidences (down from the 1958 figures) to be, for Blacks, 13.7 pairs per 1,000
births, with a DZ:MZ ratio of 9.8 to 3.9,
and for whites, 9.5 pairs, with a DZ:MZ
ratio of 5.7 to 3.8. Specific statistics for
twinning among the then relatively small
population of American Japanese and
Chinese were not given, but it may be assumed that the recent greatly increased
influx of these and other Asian Mongolian
peoples will make their low twinning incidences more significant for the country’s
total.

It must always be kept in mind that
twinning differences among racial, ethnic,

Brief Reports 83

or social groups, or the major changes in
twinning incidences, relate preponderantly
to the dizygotics. The monozygotic differences among all groups are fractional, and
only slightly influenced by maternal ages
and parities, suggesting that genetic factors
Jargely determine the extent and approximate constancy of this twinning in the
human species, as they do in various other
mammalian species. Among American
whites, for instance, the least twinningprone, young mothers may produce 3.5 MZ
pairs per 1,000 births, but only 2.5 DZ
pairs, whereas the most twinning-prone
mothers, the 5-plus multiparas aged 35-39,
may produce 4.6 MZ pairs and 17 DZ pairs
—only one-third more MZ’s, but almost
seven times as many DZ’s, as the minimal
twin-bearing mothers. Even more dramatic
are the racial DZ differences as shown in
previously cited figures: the Yoruba MZ
twinning rate only 25 per cent higher, but
the DZ incidence over seventeen times
greater than that of the Japanese.

It is not inconceivable that both genetic
and social selection over very long periods
in the past may have played some part in
differentiating twinning incidences among
racial groups and various isolates. This
possibility is suggested by a degree of correlation between long-standing attitudes
toward twinning in given groups and their
DZ rates. For example, among the very
high-twinning Yorubas and other (although
not all) Black African groups, twins have
been greatly revered and their mothers
honored; but among the very low-twinning
Japanese, twins and their mothers have
been viewed with marked disfavor or even
contempt, with multiple human births being
likened to litters in lower animals. Among
some other low-twinning Mongolian peoples, including the Ainus of Japan, the
Eskimos, and many American Indian tribes,
the practice of killing one or both twins
had been widespread (Scheinfeld, 1967).
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

84. Brief Reports

Obviously, many complex factors have
been involved in the varying attitudes toward twins. Some attitudes have had a
rational basis, such as the fact that twins
presented special problems (being more
often prematurely born, defective, in need
of unusual care, and less likely to survive),
while other primitive or folk attitudes have
arisen from superstitions, erroneous notions,
or religious beliefs which have ascribed to
twins supernatural and unique qualities,
desirable or undesirable. Ironically, in our
modern world, although most persons regard twins joyfully, many psychologists
have fostered a dim view of twinship, holding that it interferes with “ego identity and
development,” and have urged that twins
be reared as separately as possible.

In sum, although genetic factors (however they may have evolved) appear largely
responsible for the marked differences in
dizygotic twinning among major racial
groups, and for the relative constancy of
monozygotic twinning in all groups (with
allowances for genetic familial tendencies
for twinning of both types), it seems quite
clear that the significant recent declines in
dizygotic twinning rates have been in large
measure attributable to the socioeconomiccultural influences which have affected reproductive patterns. Moreover, unless new
and unforeseen contrary variables assert
themselves, some further—but smaller—
decline in DZ twinning may be anticipated
for a while, to the extent that the aforementioned social factors continue to decrease
the proportionate births among the more
twinning-prone mothers and to increase
them among the least twinning-prone
mothers.

Contributing to these trends have been
the following developments: the availability and growing use of the “pill” and other
new and more effective contraceptive means
and devices; legalization of abortion; the

Social Biology

“women’s lib” movement which tends to
encourage limitation or curtailment of childbearing; the lessened observance within all
orthodox religious groups (Catholic, Protestant, Jewish) of injunctions regarding contraception; the economic crisis, accelerating
the movement of wives into the work force,
and with it, inflation, which has enormously
increased the cost of rearing and educating
children. All of these social influences have
acted to curtail childbearing before the most
twinning-prone maternal ages. It is especially noteworthy that this trend has been
relatively greater among the higher-twinning American Blacks—who have had
much farther to go in social advancement
—than among the whites.

At the opposite maternal-twinning extreme, earlier biological maturation of
young people (again due to socially-conditioned environmental factors), with marriages at younger ages for many and
increasing sexual freedom for others, has
brought a marked increase in the proportion of births (legitimate or illegitimate)
among the least twinning-prone mothers,
those from under age 15 to under age 20.
Thus, at both ends of the reproductive
spectrum there has been a continuing trend
toward lowered twinning incidences. The
only contrary influences, toward slightly
increasing the twin population, have been
these two factors: (1) improved chances
for twins to achieve birth and to survive,
as a result of better prenatal, perinatal,
and postnatal care and medical attention
(particularly with respect to the prematurely born, who constitute more than half
of all twins); and (2) the fertility drugs.
So far, the spectacular and publicized effects
of the drugs have been in producing unexpected numbers of the higher multiples
—triplets, quadruplets, and quintuplets—
upsetting the MHellin-Zeleny hypothesis
which was based on the ratios of these
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 1

higher multiples under natural conditions.
All of the drug-induced higher multiples, it
should be noted, seem to have been multiovular dizygotic sets. As to how much the
fertility drugs may have done to increase
the production of simple twin pairs, no
statistics are yet available. But in any case,

1 According to the Hellin-Zeleny hypothesis,
the expected incidence of triplets should be the
square of the incidence of twins; that of quadruplets, the cube; and that of quintuplets, the twin
figure carried to the fourth power. It may be
added that until the drug-induced higher multiples began appearing, even greater proportions of
multiovular triplets, quadruplets, and quintuplets
than of DZ twin pairs were born to mothers aged
35-44, and to Black mothers compared with white
ro (Metropolitan Life Insurance Company,
1950).

Brief Reports

85

with the probability that the effects of these
drugs will be better controlled in the future,
it is unlikely that the drug-induced multiples will very significantly affect the total
twin picture.

We by no means have all the explanations for the causes of twinning, the differences in twinning rates and DZ: MZ ratios
among human groups, and the changes in
incidences which have been occurring. However, the evidence on these points already
available provides us with one of the most
striking examples of how social and cultural influences can inter-operate with genetic tendencies to determine biological
results.

REFERENCES

Cross, H. E., and V. A. McKusicx. 1970. Amish
demography. Soc. Biol, 17(2):83~101.

METROPOLITAN Lire Insurance Company. 1950.
Statistical bulletin. April. New York.

. 1972. Statistical bulletin. April. New York.

NATIONAL CENTER FOR Hearts Statistics. 1967.
Multiple births, United States, 1964. Series 21,
No. 14. Rockville, Md.

Nystanver, P, P. S. 1970. Twinning in Nigeria.
Acta Genet. Med. (Rome) 19:457.

SCHEINFELD, AMRAM. 1967. Twins and supertwins.
J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia and New York.
(Also, 1973, Penguin Books, New York.)

 

SCHEINFELD, AMRAM, and JosepH SCHACHTER.
1963. Bio-social effects on twinning incidences:
I. (Scheinfeld and Schachter.) Intergroup and
generation differences in the United States in
twinning incidences and MZ:DZ ratios; II.
(Scheinfeld) The world situation with respect
to twinning incidences and ratios and observations regarding genetic influences, p. 300-305. In
Proceedings of the Second International Congress of Human Genetics (Rome, 1961), Vol. I.
Instituto G. Mendel, Rome.
