Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Alternative models of counseling for genetic
disorders

Verle E. Headings

To cite this article: Verle E. Headings (1975) Alternative models of counseling for genetic
disorders, Social Biology, 22:4, 297-303, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988186

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988186

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali} Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 5 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Alternative Models of Counseling for

Genetic Disorders

Verle E. Headings

Division of Medical Genetics

Department of Pediatrics and Child Health
Howard University College of Medicine
Washington, D.C.

Heredity clinics of the type currently
in operation in North America were first
established in the early 1940’s (Neel,
1967). This activity served to bring the
geneticist into contact with the subject of
his research interest, but the practical
value to either the individual counseled or
to society was poorly defined and not
quantified. During the intervening years,
the cumulative experience in genetic counseling has demonstrated need for a more
comprehensive view of both genetic counseling and training of counselors. While
there is much heterogeneity of goals among
counselors, the mere fact that a broad
range of goals has been recognized suggests
that this vehicle for enhancing human welfare deserves critical assessment and development.

Since these goals now clearly include a
constellation of related counselee needs,
which are generated by a genetic fact but
are fundamentally of a psychosocial nature, it seems appropriate to expand the
term “genetic counseling” to “counseling
for genetic disorders.” Although slightly
more cumbersome, this term is factually
more adequate, is less misleading, and may
avoid considerable misunderstanding and

 

suspicion concerning the supposed narrow
intent of genetic counseling which this
counselor has encountered among a crosssection of professional persons and laypersons.

Another fact contributing to a changing
view of genetic counseling is the awareness
that occurrence of a substantial proportion
of major disease entities in medically advanced civilizations are heavily contingent
on genetic susceptibility. Approximately 20
per cent of all pediatric hospitalizations in
referral centers are estimated to involve
diseases of demonstrated genetic etiology
(Day and Holmes, 1973).

Still another impetus for comprehensive
development of genetic counseling is a
rapidly developing diagnostic capability
at cellular and biochemical levels. A consequence of this capability is an enlarging
array of therapeutic or preventive modes
for inherited disorders.

DEFINITION OF COUNSELING

Several recent efforts have been made
to define genetic counseling, the conditions
under which it is optimally done, and
needed counselor qualifications (WHO,
1969; Fraser, 1974; Ad Hoc Committee,

297
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

298 Headings

1975). In brief, the objective of genetic
counseling is to provide accurate information in a manner enabling individuals or
families to make decisions that optimize
their sense of well-being in relation to the
occurrence or potential occurrence of an
inherited disorder.

ASSESSMENTS OF COUNSELING

In recent years, the need for assessment
of counseling became apparent, and the
areas investigated reflect the usual areas

of professional concerns, i.e., content and

consequence. A sampling of studies in these
two areas, concerned with transfer and retention of information and with reproductive attitudes and behavior in response to
counseling, includes: Tips and Lynch,
1963; Carter et al., 1971; Smith et al.,
1971; Sibinga and Friedman, 1971; Emery
et al., 1972; Leonard et al., 1972; Reiss et
al., 1972; Pearn 1973; Emery et al., 1973;
McCrae et al., 1973; Murray et al., 1974.
The psychological consequences of genetic
disorders have received limited inquiry
(Kallmann, 1956; Tips et al., 1964; Lynch
et al., 1964; Sorenson, 1974). A beginning
has been made on research into moral consequences of decisions based on genetic information (Fletcher, 1972).

A recurring impression gained from such
studies is that counseling as currently practiced frequently has either relatively low
or ambiguous effectiveness in eliciting
change in knowledge or behavior of the
counselee, which could be a reflection of
Inadequate measurement of the intended
parameters, of significant deficiencies in
counseling process or content, or of the
fact that the measurements principally
reflect counselor goals rather than counselee goals.

One area of counseling assessment conspicuously absent from the literature is that
of the psychosocial dynamics between
counselor and counselee. This lack of at
Social Biology

tention to process is a common feature of
many product-oriented enterprises.

A MEDICAL THERAPY MODEL OF
COUNSELING FOR GENETIC
DISORDERS

The traditional patient-physician relationship most commonly is one in which
the patient is a relatively passive recipient
of a treatment selected and principally implemented by the physician. Insofar as
psychosocial dynamics are concerned, it is
of key significance that the physician sets
the goals, makes decisions, initiates therapy, and is the principal actor’in the relationship. Clients are prone to bring to the
genetics doctor the same set of role expectations that they bring to any other doctor.
The geneticist who allows these expectations to persist can expect less than optimal
results, measured either as _ sustained
change in behavior or as counselee satisfaction. The client who concludes that the
geneticist did nothing for him is frequently
assuming that the doctor must take the
initiative for changing his situation.

The relationship between doctor and
patient has been explored in several contexts. Communication is clearly less effective than is generally assumed by the physician (Francis et al., 1969; Joyce et al.,
1969; Charney, 1972). The role of physician empathy is also seen as a significant
element in effective therapy (Wilmer,
1968). Three types of doctor-patient relationships have been defined: active-passive,
guidance-cooperation, and mutual participation (Szasz and Hollender, 1956). These
different types of relationships imply different concepts of disease, treatment, and
cure. Different relationships are appropriate for different circumstances. Thus, the
mutual participation relationship is appropriate in psychoanalysis and treatment of
chronic disease. As will become apparent,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 4

this relationship is also most appropriate
in the genetic counseling situation.

PSYCHOSOCIAL PRINCIPLES RELEVANT
TO COUNSELING FOR GENETIC
DISORDERS

Concepts which have been applied in
such diverse areas as reality therapy, organization development, and the helping relationship offer insights relevant to the
counselor-counselee relationship if optimal
behavior and counselee satisfaction are to
be achieved. These insights will be summarized here.

The concepts of reality therapy postulate that individuals must learn how to fulfill their needs without denying the reality
of the world around them. Learning how to
fulfill one’s needs responsibly depends on
a caring relationship with at least one
other person, whereby one is brought to
the point of making decisions and judging
the quality of one’s own behavior (Glasser,
1965). The person in the therapist role
poses questions about a plan of action and
affirms the client in each reality-based decision and action which the latter initiates.
This relationship moves the client toward
self-fulfillment more surely than does a
detailed discussion of the client’s unfortunate experiences.

One component of effective organization
development concerns a strategy for introducing change based on a conviction or
diagnosis shared by members of the organization (Sherwood, 1971). This component
focuses on both the element of a shared
understanding of a situation by all persons
concerned and of a shared development of
a strategy for effecting desired change.

The family or individual with a major
inherited disorder who visits a counselor
is in effect seeking help in coping with a
multifaceted problem. The helper (counselor) must necessarily be attuned to the
dynamics of the helping relationship if the

Genetic Counseling Models 299

desired consequences of the relationship
are to be realized. At least some of these
consequences are: (1) The person being
helped experiences affirmation of self respect. (2) His/her motivation to work on
the problem is strengthened. (3) He/she
receives insights on methods of solving
problems and gains self-confidence in
coping with difficulties (Jenkins, 1951).

The beliefs of clients appear to be a
significant determinant in health-seeking
behavior. The achievement of behavior
that conflicts with prior beliefs must be
accompanied by reduction in conflict or
dissonance, which can in principle be accomplished by changing earlier beliefs.
Recognizing this powerful need to minimize cognitive dissonance, both the practice of and research into counseling can
focus on the conditions which might allow
for more health-sustaining behavior (Festinger, 1957; Rosenstock, 1966). In a
larger health-systems sense, the optimal
utilization of genetic counseling still awaits
a better understanding of the process by
which perceived need for such service
evolves (Boulding, 1966).

A PROCESS ORIENTED MODEL OF
COUNSELING FOR GENETIC
DISORDERS

The value of a model is in clarifying the
outline of a promising and testable direction or endeavor based on a body of information in the area of interest as well as in
areas containing related experience.

If the goals of genetic counseling for a
specific counselee are to be both credible
and attainable, special attention must be
given to the process by which they are
identified and pursued. A model of counseling for genetic disorders to be proposed
here consists of four significant components
as well as crucial interactions between
them in each counseling experience. These
components are goals clarification, content,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

300 Headings

process, and assessment of goal attainment.
Professionals are generally oriented toward content and desired consequences,
and consequently research and development tends to be focused on questions pertinent to these areas. It is less frequently
appreciated that the process employed in
a professional activity can be a critical determinant of the result. In considering
counseling, we will be concerned with psychosocial dimensions of process.

GOALS

The general goals or desired consequences that apply to a counseling situation are derived through sensitivity to the
totality of those counselee needs arising
from knowledge about an inherited entity
affecting the self. Through cumulative exPerience, the counselor develops goals
which he/she perceives as being essential
to the counselee’s achieving his/her personal goals. Goals of the individual counselee will be dealt with subsequently when
considering counseling process. In a large
proportion of counseling situations, the
following goals (consequences) would seem
to be desirable.

1. The counselee feels affirmed as being
the most significant person involved in the
counseling process and as the principal decision-maker concerning the task jointly
entered into with the counselor.

2. The counselee acquires an accurate
concept of the inherited entity, its biological basis and prognosis, and the psychosocial adjustments which may have occurred as a consequence of the disorder.

3. Misconceptions held by the counselee or in his/her social grouping are corrected.

4, The counselee’s anxiety is brought
under control. In some instances this is a
consequence of correcting misconceptions;
in others, it involves a conscious assessment
of anxiety-provoking facts and perceiving

 

Social Biology

them as a realistic component of personal
experience.

5. The counselee acquires a clear understanding of available options for modifying prognosis and/or preventing intergeneration transmission, as well as the
means by which he/she can achieve the
desired results from the option chosen.

6. The counselee develops confidence
in his/her coping skills, which may be
called for in adapting to the biological and
psychosocial properties that characterize
his/her situation.

CONTENT

The content details of genetic counseling
are of course subject to variables which
characterize the counselee at a given time,
such as receptivity to factual details, degree of cognitive sophistication, and the
desired consequences of the counseling.
However, a set of content information
areas can be defined which are congruent
with the commonly desired consequences
of counseling identified above and with
the counseling process mode which facilitates these consequences. Such content
areas have been proposed for the specific
case of counseling persons who are carriers
for genes specifying sickling disorders
(Headings and Fielding, 1975). A more
general and extended statement of proposed content areas for counseling would
include: (1) the counselee’s knowledge
about the inherited entity in question;}
(2) the psychosocial adjustments which
the counselee may perceive to have occurred within self or the family; (3) the
biological basis and range of prognosis for
the entity; (4) genetic recurrence risks;

1 At one level, this area deals with the element
of recording medical history, both the symptoms
and the natural history of the entity in the self
and in family members. At an equally important
level, this area calls for the counselee to consciously identify his/her perceptions and expectations about the entity.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 4

and (5) options for dealing with risk and/
or reducing morbidity.

PROCESS

The process ought to begin with goal
clarification in which the counselee articulates his/her presently felt desired consequences from the counseling experience.
The counselor’s role in this phase includes
clarifying their meaning and helping to
cast them in as specific terms as possible
so that both counselor and counselee can
subsequently gauge progress toward them.
Also, the counselor at this stage affirms the
counselee’s goals as fully legitimate and
establishes a mutually recognized social
contract between counselor and counselee
as a basis for achieving these goals.

This contract means placing the counselee in the ‘‘driver’s seat” as the information gatherer, decision maker, and implementer of his/her decisions. The counselor’s role in the contract is that of resource person, consultant, and facilitator.
It seems that the social contract should
frequently be explicit about these counselor—counselee roles since most counselees
bring to the counseling experience a passive
role expectation for themselves as a result
of their earlier medical therapy experiences.

On close examination, the general goals
of counseling enumerated earlier will be
seen to be either components of the counselee’s goals or process goals which the
counselor realizes to be an important ingredient in achieving the counselee’s goals.

The key process principles of reality
therapy would dictate that the genetic
counselor next enters into being an active
listener to the counselee’s stream of
thought about his/her situation, clarifying
and reflecting back what is being heard. At
the appropriate time, the counselor engages
in analytical facilitation whereby information and insight is offered in a manner that

Genetic Counseling Models 301

allows the counselee to share in developing
the logic of the situation. For example, it
has been shown repeatedly that the concept
of probability is particularly difficult for
counselees to comprehend. Designing brief
experiments whereby the counselee discovers experientially the probability basis
on which a given sperm and egg, and
therefore genetic alleles, combine allows
room for a discovery experience and attendant significant meaning. This model contrasts with the medical therapy model
where the medical practitioner ‘usually
assumes a didactic or actor role while the
client either passively receives somewhat
mystery-shrouded information or has something done to or for him.

The professional self-image of the counselor requires specific attention in relation
to the role just outlined. It requires a
move from a traditional image of principal
actor in the counseling drama to one of
coprincipal with the counselee in which there
is a shared search for healing and wholeness, exemplifying a quality of the servant
leader eloquently presented by Robert
Greenleaf (1970). That the counselee can
experience caring and empathy from the
counselor in this role seems to be underestimated by most counselors, as judged by
a paucity of discussion about it in the
literature. This level of identification between counselee and counselor may serve
to minimize a feeling of stigmatization
which counselees sometimes experience.

ASSESSMENT OF GOAL ATTAINMENT

It is proposed that satisfaction with a
counseling experience is a function of
whether counselee and counselor jointly
identify the degree of goal attainment. If
attainment falls short of expectation, it
provides an occasion for counselee and
counselor to identify restraining forces to
attainment as well as countering driving
forces toward attainment. This reassess
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

302 Headings

ment may lead either to more creative
effort toward attaining the initial goals or
else to redefining more realistic goals in
light of information the counselee received
during earlier phases of counseling.

Options for prevention of inherited disease either by reproductive engineering or
by early detection and preventive management of morbidity may require repetitive
actions and life-style changes of the counselee. Periodic assessment of goal attainment is particularly germane in this
circumstance since failure in sustained
implementation of the counselee’s decision
about prevention is a point at which goal
achievement frequently is thwarted.

The process outlined here assumes that
counseling frequently will entail more than
a single session with the counselor. If both
counselee and counselor highly value their
identified goals, there should be no hesitancy about engaging in a series of counseling sessions as needed.

RESEARCH ON CONTENT, PROCESS, AND
CONSEQUENCE

A form of clinical research in larger hospitals occurs at the level of periodically
reviewing or monitoring the results of a
given treatment. In the case of counseling
for genetic disorders, the need for this review is especially pressing because goal
attainment is less readily apparent unless
it is systematically measured. Areas of
content, process, and consequence of counseling in which additional information is
likely to enhance the quality of counseling
are the following:

1, Characteristics of counselor and counselee which influence information transfer and retention.

2. Development of content formats tailored
to education, socioeconomic status, and
other counselee variables.

3. Psychosocial adjustments experienced
by individuals and families, especially
those unique to major categories of in
Social Biology

herited disease. For example, retardation
and mental illness appear to elicit more
such adjustments than do hypertension
or diabetes mellitus.

4. Factors which determine whether decisions are made and which types of decisions are made pursuant to counseling.

5. Restraining and driving factors in decision implementation.

6. Development of instruments by which
the counselee routinely “feeds back” to
the counselor regarding the utility of the
counseling, creating a standardized measure of goal attainment. There is no
justification for less professional accountability in this area than is expected
for systematically quantifying the degree
to which a antihypertensive drug achieves
the goal of a specified reduction in blood
pressure.

IMPLICATIONS OF THE COUNSELING
MODEL FOR TRAINING MEDICAL
GENETICISTS AND
COUNSELORS

Three facts must be dealt with in the
current training of genetic counselors:
(1) Currently, among counselors, there are
highly variable goals for genetic counseling.
(2) Goals are commonly defined by the
counselor with the whole process proceeding on this basis. (3) Both training and
practice regarding the counselor-counselee
relationship is generally based on the medical therapy mode.

If the focus of decision-making and action is to be effectively shifted to the domain of the counselee, then the counselor
must be trained in counseling process skills
that facilitate goal clarification, decisionmaking, and action by the counselee. The
counselor must be taught that an apparently shorter route to a goal via counselor
directiveness and action increases the risk
that the sustained effort which is frequently
required from the counselee will not materialize. Potential gratification for the
counselor must be shown to derive from
the successes of the counselee.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 22, No. 4

Genetic Counseling Models 303

REFERENCES

Ap Hoc CoMMITTEE ON GENETIC COUNSELING.
1975. Genetic counseling. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
27:240-242.

Bovutpinc, K. 1966. The concept of need for health
services. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 44 (No. 4,
Part 2):202~221.

CarTER, C. V., K. A. Evans, J. A. Fraser RosERTS,
and A. R. Buck. 1971. Genetic clinic: A followup. Lancet (Feb. 6):281-285,

CHARNEY, E. 1972. Patient-doctor communication:
Implications for the clinician. Ped. Clin. North
Amer. 19:263-279.,

Day, N., and L. B. Hotmes. 1973. The incidence
of genetic disease in a university hospital population. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 25:237-246.

Emery, A, E. H., M. S. Watt, and E. R. Crack.
1972. The effects of genetic counselling in
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Clin. Genet.
3:147~150.

. 1973. Social effects of genetic counselling.
Brit. Med. J. 1:724-726.

FEesTINGER, L. 1957. A theory of cognitive dissonance, Row Peterson, Evanston, II].

FLETCHER, J. 1972. The brink: The parent-child
bond in the genetic revolution. Theolog. Stud.
33:457-485.

Francis, V., B. KorscnH, and M. Morris. 1969.
Gaps in doctor-patient communication: Patients’
response to medical advice. New Engl. J. Med.
280: 535-540.

FRASER, F. C. 1974, Genetic counseling. Amer. J.
Hum. Genet. 26:636-659.

GLASSER, W. 1965. Reality therapy. Harper and
Row, New York.

GREENLEAF, R. K. 1970. The servant as leader.
Center for Applied Studies, Cambridge, Mass.

Heapincs, V., and J. Frerpinc. 1975. Guidelines
for counseling young adults with sickle cell trait.
Amer. J. Publ. Hith., 65:819-827.

Jenkins, D. 1951. The helping relationship. School
of Education Bulletin 22, No. 5 (Feb.). University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Joyce, C., G. Capre, M. Mason, E. ReyNotps,
and J. MatTHews. 1969. Quantitative study of
doctor-patient communication. Quart. J. Med.
38: 183-194.

KatyMAnn, F. J. 1956. Psychiatric aspects of
genetic counseling. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 8:
97-101,

Lreonarp, C. O., G. CHASE, and B. Cups. 1972.
Genetic counseling: A consumer’s view. New
Engl. J. Med. 287:433-439.

 

 

 

Lyncu, H. T., T. P. Krusu, M. A. Krusu, and
R. L. Ties. 1964. Psychodynamics of early
hereditary deaths. Amer. J. Dis. Child. 108:
605-610.

McCraz, W. M., A. M. Cutt, L. Burton, and
J. Dopcr. 1973. Cystic fibrosis: Parents’ response to the genetic basis of the disease.
Lancet 2:141-143.

Murray, R. F., Jr., R. Botpen, V. E. HEApINGS,
B. A. Quinton, and R. B. Surana. 1974. Information transfer in counseling for sickle cell
trait. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 26:63A.

NEEL, J. V. 1967. The heredity clinic of the department of human genetics. Univ. Mich. Med.
Ctr. J. 33:257-258.

Pearn, J. H. 1973. Patient’s subjective interpretation of risks offered in genetic counselling. J.
Med. Genet. 10:129-134.

Reiss, J. A., and V. D. MenasuHeE. 1972. Genetic
counseling and congenital heart disease. J.
Pediat. 80:655-656.

Rosenstock, I. 1966. Why people use health
services. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 44 (No. 3,
Part 2):94-124,

SHERWOOD, J. 1971. An introduction to organization development. Experimental Publication
System, No. 11. American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.

SrB1ncA, M. S., and C. J. Frrepman. 1971. Complexities of parental understanding of phenylketonuria. Pediatrics 48:216-224.

SmiTH, C., S. Hotztoway, and A. Emery. 1971.
Individuals at risk in families with genetic disease. J. Med. Genet. 8:453-459,

SORENSON, J. R. 1974. Genetic counseling: Some
psychological considerations. Zn Genetics and
Man. Plenum Press, New York.

Szasz, T., and M. Hotrenper. 1956. A contribution to the philosophy of medicine. Arch. Int.
Med. 97:585-592.

Tres, R. L., and H. T. Lyncw. 1963. The impact
of genetic counseling upon the family milieu.
JAMA 184:183-186.

Ties, R. L., G. S. Smarts, H. T. Lyncu, and
C. W. McNutt. 1964. The “whole family” concept in clinical genetics. Amer. J. Dis. Child.
107:67-76.

Wortp HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 1969. Genetic
counseling. WHO Expert Committee. WHO
Tech. Rep. 416:1-23.

Wier, H. 1968. The doctor-patient relationship
and the issues of pity, sympathy, and empathy.
Brit. J. Med. Psychol. 41:243-248.
