Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The biological and social meaning of race, 1971

Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne

To cite this article: Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne (1999) The biological and social
meaning of race, 1971, Social Biology, 46:3-4, 228-231, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1999.9989004

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9989004

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 10

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

 

The Biological and Social Meaning of Race, 1971

Richard H. Osborne?
Barbara T. Osborne?

 

 

*Editor, Social Biology, 1961-1977; 1982-1999; Professor Emeritus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
’Technical Editor, Social Biology, 1966-1976; Managing Editor, 1977-1999

1129 East Eighth Street, Port Angeles, WA 98362

During the 1960s, the journal published a series of invited essays from recognized authorities in the biological and
social sciences on the meaning of race.
Several of these essays were brought together and additional information added
to form The Biological and Social Meaning of Race (Richard Osborne, ed., Freeman Press, 1971).

The Preface stated:

Recognized authorities in those academic areas relevant to race questions were
asked to prepare the essays presented here
in order to cover the topic from many different angles and disciplines.

All of the essays, except the introduction “The Meaning of Race,” by William
W. Howells and the appendix, “The History and Nature of Race Classification,” by
Richard H. Osborne, were first published
in the Eugenics Quarterly, now called Social Biology.

The essays were then ’modified with
permission of the authors and that journal,
for publication here in order to improve
their suitability for students and lay readers.

The purpose of these essays is to present in a factual but nontechnical way the
essential biological and social foundation
of race and the consequences of these
foundations.

Each essay is preceded by a brief abstract by the editor.... By reading the
preface, instruction, and abstracts in sequence, the reader can easily grasp the
main messages of both the individual essays and the book as a whole.

Because prejudice and fear are usually
based upon misunderstandings, which in
turn are often the result of mere semantics,

a glossary of the terms employed in the
discussion of race has been included.

The appendix gives a brief overview of
the history and implications of race studies
and racial classifications.

The inclusion of references with each
essay makes it possible for the reader to
examine the literature and draw his own
conclusions about various aspects of this
increasingly important topic.

The contents of the volume and the
abstracts of the essays follow:

INTRODUCTION
The Meaning of Race

William W. Howells
Department of Anthropology
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts

BIOLOGICAL FACTORS
Race Equality

Theodosius Dobzhansky
The Rockefeller University
New York, New York

Biological species are genetically closed
systems; races are genetically open ones.
Mankind has existed as a single species
since at least the middle of the Pleistocene epoch, some half a million years
ago. This unity has been maintained by
the continuous, sometimes slow, but unfailing gene flow between neighboring
clans, tribes, nations, and races. Further
228

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

more, the genetic oneness of mankind has
been growing steadily since the development of material culture has made travel
between different parts of the world progressively easier and more rapid. Nonetheless, every human being is in some respects unlike any other. This diversity,
whether of individuals or of groups such
as races, should not be confused with inequality. Equality is a sociological, not a
biological, ideal. In actuality, man’s diversity is a blessing, not a curse, since it
permits the full exploitation of all his
possible environments.

Human Biological Diversity as an
Adaptive Response to the Environment

Paul T. Baker

Department of Sociology and
Anthropology

The Pennsylvania State University

University Park, Pennsylvania

A successful animal species, one that has
been capable of surviving through time,
is adapted to its environment. Man’s environment is cultural as well as physical,
and he therefore has “more environments” to which he is adapted than any
other animal. One important factor in
man’s ability to adapt to so many environments is his phenotypic plasticity—
the capacity to change his physiological
and behavioral responses to wide ranges
of environmental fluctuation. Although
this ability is an inherited characteristic
of the species and as such may vary in
some respects from population to population, racial differences in psychological
accommodation and in physiological or
developmental acclimatization may be
due to stress experience as well as to
genetic differences. At present, only the
simplest adaptive responses with the

Meaning of Race

229

fewest links have been traced to specific
genetic or environmental influences.

Ethnic Differences in Growth and
Development

Jean Hiernaux

Centre de Biologie Humaine
Universite Libre de Bruxelles
Brussels, Belgium

The rate of human growth and the pattern
of development, like those of most biological traits, are the result of genetic and
environmental interaction. Certain kinds
of environmental factors have a predictable effect upon growth; but the extent of the effect depends in part upon
the developmental state at which these
influences are experienced and in part
upon the inheritance of the individual.
The growth-rate averages of populations,
like those of individuals, differ. Rates of
growth may be more rapid at an earlier
age in one population than in another;
this may or may not be compensated for
in the second population by a later
growth spurt. Differences such as these
can probably be explained by both genetic and environmental factors, although
thus far the role of environment has been
easier to demonstrate. Also, such differences may vary in each of the various
measures of growth: skeletal, dental, and
sexual. Studies such as those on growth
further emphasize how complex and variable the interrelationships can be between
hereditary potential and environmental
influences.

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease

Albert Damon

Department of Anthropology
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

230

Disease has been a major selective factor
in human evolution, and racial or ethnic
groups differ in many of the diseases to
which they are either susceptible or relatively resistive. The existence of these
differences is of great assistance in discovering the causation of certain types of
disease, and is even an aid in the management or prevention of many diseases. No
racial group is free of its own distinctive
pattern of disease, and, consequently, no
group can be considered either pathological or free of pathology. Study of group
differences in disease is neither racist nor
discriminatory, but rather serves to benefit the health care of all people.

SOCIAL FACTORS

Social Behavior and Human Diversity

Frederick S. Hulse
Department of Anthropology
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona

The human population has changed
through time and will continue to do so.
This is also true for its component parts,
the so-called races. The physical variability of different groups and their constant
change through time has existed as far
back as man’s record can be traced.
Equally ancient is man’s possession of
culture. In fact, culture is older than our
species; it is even older than our genus. It
has constituted the prime adaptation of all
forms of mankind to the terrestrial environment for nearly two million years.
Viewed across this time span, the improvement in the capacity for culture has
been the most outstanding characteristic
of human evolution.

Race, Mental Illness, and Intelligence:
A Social Psychological View

Meaning of Race

 

Social Biology

Thomas F, Pettigrew
Department of Social Relations
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts

Improperly compiled statistics, prejudicially interpreted, have provided a formidable base for many misconceptions
concerning race, mental illness, and intelligence. Most certainly differences exist
between the races, the inescapable consequence of the kinds of social and environmental factors that correlate with race
in our complex society and which serve
to hinder individuals from reaching their
maximum inherited potential for both intelligence and mental health. All indications are that racial-group I.Q. scores
would be equalized in the absence of social and environmental inequities. The
real challenge is to provide an environment in which members of all racial
groups can reach their maximum capabilities, to the benefit of the entire society as
well as themselves. In this respect it
should be noted that even with the present forms of I.Q. testing, the range of individual differences within each racial
group far exceeds the differences cited as
existing between the groups.

The Disadvantaged Child:
His Education and Life Chances

Frances P. Purcell and Maurie Hillson
Graduate School of Education
Rutgers University

New Brunswick, New Jersey

Poverty and inferior education are so
interrelated as to form a single problem.
And so long as poverty correlates with
race, racial groups will differ in educational opportunity and thereby in
education-based achievement. Motivation
is also a prerequisite to success, and mo
 
 

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

tivation for increased education requires
an orientation toward the future and the
rewards such education will eventually
bring. As long as low-income people are
oriented mainly to the present—often by
necessity because of the daily problems
their poverty poses—even equal opportunities for education will fail to remove inequalities in achievement.

—|
S Nonwhite Fertility and Family

+ Planning

& Arthur A. Campbell

© National Center for Health Statistics
oo Public Health Service

2 Washington, D.C.

© Clyde V. Kiser

c& Milbank Memorial Fund
Ss New York, New York

oN

b

3 The birth rate of the nonwhite population
< of the United States is higher than that of
o the white population at all socioeconomic
Zz levels except the highest, where it drops
S below the white birth rate. Further data
‘5 from the 1960 census also indicate that
‘>, the fertility differentials are tied to age
7 at marriage, housing, and education; the
3 lower the level of any of the three, the
8 ¢ higher the birth rate. The Growth of
2 American Families Study of the attitudes,
A behavior, and background of couples that
determine the number of children they
desire, expect, and actually produce
showed that the family-size ideals of
nonwhite couples were actually lower
than those of whites. Within the nonwhite
population, those couples who live in the
rural South or who have southern farm
origins were found to have unusually
high fertility, which tended to obscure the
fact that nonwhite couples with no southem farm background had about the same
number of births as white couples of sim
Meaning of Race

231

ilar education and socioeconomic status.
Low educational levels were again found
to correlate with higher birth rates among
nonwhites.

Races and the Future of Man

Frederick Osborn
The Population Council
New York, New York

In modern societies it is the social environment rather than the physical environment that determines which members of
the population will increase or decline.
Public health measures and medical services have lowered death rates for all segments of society. However, where there is
poverty and where standards of education
are low, the birth rate stays high. To deprive any part of the population of employment opportunities and high education is to foster that group’s increase in a
continuing cycle of poverty and low education.

APPENDIX

The History and Nature of Race
Classification

Richard H. Osborne

Department of BioBehavioral Sciences
University of Connecticut

Storrs, Connecticut

Glossary

Index

The edited volume proved useful as a
reference for teaching undergraduates
and interested laymen about the biological and social factors, and the historical
background, involved in the concept of
“race.”
