Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Seasonality of first coitus in the United States

Joseph Lee Rodgers , David F. Harris & Karen Bradley Vickers

To cite this article: Joseph Lee Rodgers , David F. Harris & Karen Bradley Vickers
(1992) Seasonality of first coitus in the United States, Social Biology, 39:1-2, 1-14, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1992.9988800

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988800

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 17
bh
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 4 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

 
 

Seasonality of First Coitus
in the United States

 

 

“Joseph Lee Rodgers, “David F. Harris, and “Karen Bradley \ Vickers

“Department of Psychology, University. of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma; °’Department of
Psychology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; and Department of
Sociology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma

ABSTRACT: Recent attention to causes of seasonality of births leads to an interest in seasonality
‘© patterns in the antecedents to birth, including gestational length, conception, and coital activity.

N

© In this paper we study the beginning of the process: first intercourse among adolescents and

' young adults. Analysis of a small and local dataset is suggestive that loss of virginity is
5 particularly likely during the summer. A test of this “Summer Vacation Theory” using a large
© national dataset supports the generality of the phenomenon. Further, a prediction that season® ality patterns will change during the transition from high school to work and college is tested

and supported. The existence of both biological and psycho-social mechanisms is suggested.

© Policy implications are reviewed.

at 13:44

The patterns and causes of birth sea= sonality in the United States have rera ceived considerable recent attention
3 from social scientists (Ehrenkranz,
1983; Kallan and Udry, 1989; Kesten= baum, 1987; Lam and Miron, 1986;
‘S Land and Cantor, 1983; Rodgers and
£ Uadry, 1988; Seiver, 1985, 1989). Rodgers (1986) presented an organiza‘= tional framework of the various factors
— preceding birth which are subject to
& seasonal variation, including coital ac© tivity, conception, gestation, risk of
S spontaneous abortion, and birth. SeaEs sonality in each of these separately or
© in combination can lead to the consistent birth seasonality patterns that
have been observed in U.S. birth data.

The first “link in the chain” of
events leading to a birth is coital activity. The current paper is concerned
with seasonality of first coitus among
adolescents and young adults in the
United States. We use two different
sources of sexuality data. The first contains suggestive patterns related to loss
of virginity. The second is used to
cross-validate results from the first and

ichiga

y [Uni

 

to test a mechanistic hypothesis developed to help explain the process.

The literature on seasonality of coitus is sparse. Udry and Morris (1967b)
used a small sample of high-SES
women to study adult intercourse.
They found significant seasonality,
with a peak rate in June/July, a minor
peak in March/April, and a valley in
September. Naeye (1980) used data on
coital activity in late pregnancy from
36,000 patients at 12 medical-school
hospitals across the United States and
observed coital rates 26 per cent higher
during May/June than in the valley in
January/February. Reinberg and Lagoguey (1978) studied the sexual activity—both intercourse and miasturbation—of five French males who were
aged 26 to 31 during a 14-month period. The peak sexual activity across
these five subjects occurred between
July and October, with a valley in January to April. These three different
studies combine to suggest an increase
in adult coital activity during the hot
part of the year and reduced levels in
cooler and cold periods.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

2 . Rodgers et al.

There are several reasons to be interested in the seasonality of loss of virginity. First, since many adolescent
pregnancies occur soon after onset of
sexuality (Zelnick, 1980), patterns of
birth may potentially mirror seasonality patterns built into onset of coital behavior. Second, seasonality patterns of
coital activity may link with other seasonal factors (e.g., weather, school,
holidays), providing mechanistic information for the development of more
complete theories of adolescent and
early adult sexuality. Third, to the extent that seasonality patterns are the
same or different across demographic
subgroups, the causes of differences
between these groups are further specified. Finally, there are policy implications for certain seasonality outcomes;
knowledge of these patterns can inform those teaching sex education
classes or planning contraceptive and
pregnancy-prevention programs.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
DATA

The data for our study come from
two sources, the Adolescent Sexuality
(ADSEX) dataset, and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY). The ADSEX project collected data from 1,405 adolescents at
four junior high schools in Tallahassee,
Florida in 1980; a follow-up survey was
conducted in 1982. In the second
round, questionnaires included an “intercourse calendar” in which respondents marked the months in which they
had had intercourse during the previous two years. Of the respondents, 502
were non-virgins in 1982 and filled in
the calendar. Of these, 293 had been

Social Biology

virgins in 1980; for this subset, the first
listing on the intercourse calendar indicated loss of virginity. Two years of
complete data were collected, from
February, 1980 to January, 1982.

The second dataset that we will use
is the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (NLSY). The NLSY is a national probability sample of households containing adolescents aged
14~21 in 1979, followed longitudinally
for the past decade. In 1984, the
women in the sample were asked the
question “In what month and in what
year did you first have intercourse?”’
For those who did not respond, the
question was re-asked in 1985. Responses provided retrospective indicators of month and year of first intercourse for 4,013 women between the
ages of 19 and 25. These responses may
be dis-aggregated by race, by year, and
by age.

We first analyzed the ADSEX data
and observed several interesting and
suggestive trends in those data. Because this dataset was small, nonrepresentative, and because we had no
previous theoretical expectations to
guide our analysis, this study was considered an exploratory exercise. From
it, we developed theoretical propositions that we then tested by using the
NLSY dataset, a large probability sample that supported both powerful statistical tests and generalization to a
broad national population.

STATISTICAL ANALYSES

Our descriptive analyses consist of
graphical portrayals of seasonality patterns. The ADSEX results will only be
presented descriptively. The 293 adolescents who first had sexual intercourse during the period assessed by

 
 

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

the calendar have‘an expected monthly
frequency of around 25 per month under a uniform distribution. To test for
stable seasonality requires an estimate
of variance defined across multiple
years of data. A relatively low expected ceil frequency and only two
years of information precludes serious
Statistical testing.
The NLSY data, on the other hand,
‘° contain both many years of informa& tion and large expected cell frequen8 cies. These results are first presented
& descriptively and then analyzed statis© tically as follows: First, frequencies of
A onset are adjusted by NLSY sampling
S weights (which reflect both oversam=. pling and attrition across rounds) so
— that results correspond to national patterns. Next, national estimates of onset
Sin a given month are adjusted by the
-€ length of the month and annualized to
Sa norm of 100 (Shryock et al., 1976, p.
‘= 277). Finally, rates across age and year
are smoothed with a 12-month moving
“average to eliminate contamination
-< due to trend (see Seiver, 1985).
These adjusted monthly rates are
then submitted to a dummy variable
regression procedure used in recent
$ birth seasonality research (Rodgers
< and Udry, 1988; Seiver, 1985, 1989). In
= this procedure, monthly frequencies
A are predicted from dummy variables
that specify the way the frequencies enter the model. For example, the first
dummy variable indicates whether the
frequency is for one of the January observations or not, the second whether
the frequency is for February, etc. A
test of the coefficient associated with
the January dummy variable tests
whether the frequencies in January are
statistically different from those during
the rest of the year. In addition, dum
by [Un

Seasonality of First Coitus 3

my variables may be defined so that
sets of months or years may be compared, and interaction terms to test for
different monthly seasonality patterns
across time periods may be defined as
well. (We note that the results of statistical analyses were virtually identical
when they were run on the raw frequencies and on the weightedannualized-smoothed frequencies described above.)

RESULTS
ADSEX DatTa

We begin with results from analysis
of the ADSEX data. Figure 1 shows
the seasonality of onset of coitus as reported in the ADSEX intercourse calendars. The global peak in both years
is in June. A continuation of this peak
is also apparent in July and August: 29
per cent of the sample reported first intercourse during June and July (compared to an expectation of 17 per cent
under a uniform model); 46 per cent
reported first intercourse in the middle
third of the year, between May and
August (compared to an expectation of
33 per cent). In additional analyses we
separated the patterns in Figure 1 by
race-sex categories. The summer peak
obtained for both whites and blacks,
and for both males and females. The
obvious interpretation of this result is
that summer vacation is a period when
adolescents are particularly “at risk” of
losing their virginity.

The logical question that follows is
whether the ADSEX results are due to
local idiosyncracies or whether the
processes generating them occur in
broader settings. For example, in a single community a few influential adoles
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

  

20

tS

10

SC re

s4—ZCAanN <O2zmconwn
a
too

OmMwUDE
OmnvD
OMDx<D=
QOzcn.
oorceu
OwMOcD
Omwmnu

Rodgers et al.

    

Social Biology

|
es

———

JF MAMI JS AS OND J
A £€ A P AUUUJU E C OE A
N 6 RR Y¥ NL GP TV CN
6 8 8 8 8B 6 8 BB 8B 8 B B
1 tt dod 2 2 4 £ 2 1 1 2

MONTH OF FIRST INTERCOURSE

Fic. 1.—Frequencies for each month of first reported intercourse, total ADSEX sample

cents might contribute disproportionately to onset of sexuality. Or, these
patterns might be specific age-related
patterns, since the ADSEX respon
dents were fairly restricted in their age
range. Thus, to take the ADSEX patterns seriously we should observe the
patterns in an unrelated and more gen
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

eral dataset. Ideally, the dataset will

permit tests for stability across time, ©

will support observation of subgroup
differences, and will be nationally representative.

Further, if the patterns are general
ones, the specific mechanisms causing
them are of importance. Is the summer
a time of increased biological drive, so
that the effect can be attributable to libido? If so, is this increased drive triggered by light patterns, heat patterns,
or other external factors? What hormonal processes are involved? Alternatively, are there psycho-social mechanisms at work, so that opportunity
and decision-making processes are involved? Or is the effect artifactual,
caused by a tendency for respondents
to over-report (mis-report) first coitus
during the summer. Both the generality of the findings and some tentative
hypotheses about their cause can be
tested using the NLSY data.

NLSY Data

Figure 2 shows the seasonality patterns in first intercourse among the
NLSY women, averaged across all of
the years. There is a clear and obvious
peak during June and July, as there
was for the ADSEX data. However,
the stability of this peak across years is
of considerable relevance, and treating
the NLSY data across years supports
statistical analysis of these effects.

The critical test of the “Summer Vacation Theory” suggested by the ADSEX findings is provided in Figure 3,
where the NLSY frequencies making
the transition to non-virginity are disaggregated by year for the 4,013
women responding to the month and
year of onset questions. Clearly, the
NLSY data show the same basic pat
 

Seasonality of First Coitus 5

terns as the ADSEX data, with remarkable temporal consistency. In every single year, without exception, the
peak in the distribution is in June or
July; in fact, in every year but two
(1973 and 1982), June has the highest
frequency. May and August are often a
part of this peak as well. Overall, 25
per.cent of the respondents indicated
transition to non-virginity during June
or July, and 43 per cent reported the
transition during May-August. An
overall test of stable seasonality
(equivalent to the census’ X-11 test) is
significant (p <0.0001), strongly rejecting an interpretation of uniform
onset across months.

Next, we define dummy variables to
test deviations in specific months and
parts of the year within the weightedsmoothed-annualized frequencies. Statistical tests of both the two months
(June and July) individually and for the
whole middle third of the year show
significant seasonality (all at p<
0.005). Thus, the full 12 years of the
NLSY data support the importance of
summer vacation as a time when disproportionate numbers of adolescents
and young adults lose their virginity.

When the monthly frequencies were
separated into the three female race subgroups—whites, blacks, and Hispanics—the patterns for whites and blacks
were virtually identical to those in Figure 3. Hispanics also had the summer
peak, but somewhat earlier, in MayJune instead of June-July; further, an
additional peak occurred in November
and December that was as strong as
their summer peak. Hispanics may be
responding to vacations more generally (i.e., both summer and Christmas
vacation), and somewhat earlier than
blacks and whites.
682

w— 550

—

oS

N

H 508

Ss

&

9 450

O

a

00

oO 409

=

i F

oO r 358

_ e

3 9

Ss u 3ee ~

GD 2 =

= n 8
ob

"9 ¢ 250 A
w~A

= y S

Cem

° 200 £2,

— »

—

N

o 158

>

=

5

— 1028

a

Oo

3S 50

cv

3

©

a

| 8 °
| 6 Jan Feb March April May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec

Month of First intercourse

ASOpOIg [B1I90

Fic. 2.—Frequencies for each month of first reported intercourse, total NLSY women

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

      

75 7 ; : ; ;

: ' ; : : : :

0 ‘ : ‘ : ‘ ;

‘ : ; ' ; ‘ : e . ' 4

: 3

65 ' ; ‘ : : ‘ :

a . ' ' ’ , a

: : ; ‘ : , ‘ :

4 ' t . s ‘ ’ ®

60 : ‘ ‘ ‘ : :

: : ' :

58 ; ‘

50 ; ; ; : ;

' t ‘ 1 t ’ ’

‘ ‘ ‘ ' '

F 45 : : , ' ‘ ' : ' ‘ :

r : , ' ' ; ‘ . :

e ’ 4 e a ; : : :

40 ‘ : : ' ; ' : ' :

q ‘ ’ s 4 ' ? t ' ¢
u ‘ : : : :

t 4 4 4 t t s ‘
€ 35 ; [
n : : : : {
c ‘ f ‘ : ~ ft '
y 30 ; ;

i : ' ‘ i :

25 ' ' , : .
20 ; : '
1§ i ‘ ? ' :
10 . ! : ¢
OTE TUE | ; : ;

      

rvryvTrrTy
UE MAMI IASOND JF MAM.IJASOND JFMAMJJASOND JF MAMS JASOND JFMAMJJASOND JFMAMJJASOND JFMAMJJASOND JFMAMJJASOND JFMAMJJASOND JFMAMJJASOND JFMAMJJASOND JFMAMS JASONO

P= 1972-11 = 19718 -- HN ae 1974 RH He 19 8-H FH 1976 == I 197 Pan 19-1978 --~ 1 =~ 1979 --- 1 1 - 1980 -~ Hf t= 1 9B tH -- t= 198 2--~ 1 1 --~ 198 3---)

Yeor & Month of First Intercourse

Fic. 3.—Frequencies of first reported intercourse by year, total NLSY women

Z-T “ON “6E “IOA

SNJIOZ ISALY JO Ayeuoseasg
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

8 Rodgers et al.

A purely biological explanation—
based, for example, on increasing
libido as the temperature increases—
could explain these results. Consistency across years and across race subgroups supports the existence of some
type of general biological process (e.g.,
seasonality in testosterone production). However, we hypothesized that
psycho-social mechanisms may be at
work as well. To test this hypothesis,
we predicted a change in the seasonality patterns during the shift from high
school to college. Specifically, we expected that summer vacation effects
would weaken after high school, when
jobs and summer school would make
the summer less salient. Since the transition from pre- to post-high school is a
cultural rather than a_ biological
marker, such a shift would support the
existence of non-biological mechanisms. To formally test this idea, we
dis-aggregated the data in Figure 3 by
age instead of by year. The standard
graduation age is somewhere between
17.5 and 18.5, so that age 19 is the first
summer in which a post—high-school
pattern is established and in which free
time is limited by work and summer
school. Thus, our prediction was that
the summer vacation peak should be
substantially weaker in ages = 19 than
in ages = 18.

In Figure 4, we show the NLSY patterns across ages at first intercourse.
Again, the summer peak is consistent.
The peaks in this figure correspond to
June (and other summer months) at
each age. Further, visual inspection of
Figure 4 shows that, indeed, the summer effect dampens past age 18. For
ages 19 to 23, the peak becomes decidedly less extreme (although it is still
there). The statistical test of our pre
 

Social Biology

diction supported the visual inspection: Seasonality in ages 13-18 is significantly different from seasonality in
ages 19-23 (p < 0.005), supporting our
hypothesis that socio-cultural processes can help account for the summer
seasonality patterns.

DISCUSSION

The “Summer Vacation Theory”
suggested by the ADSEX data was
more formally tested and supported by
analysis of the NLSY. June, especially,
and the summer months in general are
a period during which loss of virginity
is likely to occur among U.S. adolescents. Hispanics are at equal risk later
in the year, and the overall effect
dampens substantially past high-school
age. The NLSY results can be interpreted as national patterns and are robust to age, period, and race divisions.

Given cross-validation of this pattern, the next task is to develop an explanatory model defining the causal
mechanisms underlying this pattern.
We suggest three types of mechanisms
that can explain summer onset of coitus. First, the result may be artifactual,
caused by mis-remembering and/or
mis-reporting by respondents. Second,
the summer peak may reflect biological
processes. Third, psychosocial mechanisms may underlie the summer peaks
in loss of virginity. We will consider
each explanation in turn.

An artifactual explanation is plausible on the surface. Summer vacation
has particular salience for school-aged
adolescents, and many summer activities (e.g., beach parties, summer dating, picnics) have a sexual component
that shows up routinely, for example,
in movies and books. The responses in

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

both the ADSEX and NLSY surveys
were retrospective. If respondents either mis-remember or mis-report the
month of first intercourse and move remembered behaviors disproportionately to the summer, then the pattern
in both ADSEX and NLSY could be
explained.

There are several reasons to discount such an explanation, however.
First, loss of virginity is of such social
import within the U.S. culture that it
seems likely most respondents do remember when they first had intercourse (as well as where, with whom,
etc.). If not, however, we would expect
retrospective reports of recent events
to be more accurate than those from
many years before. Such an expectation would lead to different patterns in
the NLSY data for those who more recently lost their virginity compared to
those who did so many years before.
We found no such effect in the NLSY
data. Further, the ADSEX respondents were at most two years past first
coitus, and around half were within
one year. The second summer coitalonset peak in Figure 1 reflects first intercourse experiences that occurred
only six to nine months before the interview. It seems unlikely that memory
of such a salient event would degrade
so quickly. That retrospective reports
from recent events (in ADSEX) match
those with much longer lags (in NLSY)
adds credence to the existence of substantive (rather than artifactual) explanations.

A second argument against an artifactual explanation is one that recognizes the salience of summer vacation
for adolescents. There are many activities of summer that explicitly mark its
occurrence. Summer vacations, trips to

 

Seasonality of First Coitus 9

summer camp, particular sport activities, and outdoor parties and picnics
are all explicitly linked to the summer.
Such activities define the social background against which respondents remember events like loss of virginity.
Since the patterns of life and social
structure differ while school is in and
when it is out, we might expect respondents to have fairly good memories of
whether events occurred during the
school year versus in the summer. This
line of reasoning would predict misreporting between the summer months
(e.g., moving a June event to July) or
during school months (e.g., moving a
January event to March), but does not
explain the strong general summer
trend that we observed in both datasets.!

We have suggested two different
process explanations, biological and
psychosocial. Several more specific
mechanisms can be posited for each of
these two types of processes. Biological processes that could help account
for these findings include seasonality in
hormonal processes, leading to increased libido, seasonality in the onset
of puberty, or biological responses to

‘A whole body of research literature exists considering the way autobiographical events are reported (and mis-reported). This research suggests
that school and work “impose a pattern on a person’s activities and affect the distribution of memories drawn from an individual year” (Bradburn et
al., 1987, p. 159). Thus, while we view it unlikely
that such artifacts could be the sole explanation for
the effects observed here, given the robustness of
the effect across race, sex, and, especially time since
onset of coitus, we nevertheless take seriously the
possibility of systematic mis-reporting biases. In
fact, few validation studies considering the quality
of responses about sexual behavior have been published in the literature (but see Catania et al., 1990;
Rodgers et al., 1982; Udry and Morris, 1967a).
Blending the type of research reported by Bradburn
et al. (1987) with a consideration of the validity of
responses about sexual behavior would be a fruitful
endeavor.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

10 Rodgers et al.

the overall ‘“‘sexuality climate” of the
summer (e.g., beach parties, outdoor
athletic competition, etc.). Reinberg
and Lagoguey (1978) documented a
late summer peak and a late winter/
early spring valley in testosterone in
their five French males. There is evidence that sperm quality — measured in
terms of sperm count, volume, and
motility—actually decreases in hot
months, and disproportionately for
those involved in jobs in the heat (e.g.,
Levine et al., 1988; Saint Pol et al.,
1989). But, as Levine et al. (1988)
note, “Summer heat is known to diminish semen quality, but not libido, in
several nonhuman mammalian species” (p. 906). Thus, there is slight support for the belief that hormones may
play a role in increased levels of sexual
activity in the summer. This research
needs replication, however, and
should be demonstrated in pubertal
and immediately post-pubertal adolescents before we would be confident of
its application to explaining our patterns.

At a more general level, there has
been considerable recent attention to
the role of light in triggering various
seasonal responses (e.g., Rosenthal
and Blehar, 1989). Terman (1989) reported a survey in New York showing
that summer is associated with increased mood and social activity and
with decreased sleep and weight. He
ties these results to vulnerability to seasonal affective disorder (SAD), which
has been shown responsive to phototherapy (intensive light stimulation).
Ehrenkranz (1983) suggested that the
pineal gland in the brain is the mechanism by which light patterns are distinguished. This line of research suggests that light—as well as or instead of

Social Biology

heat—may be the trigger to which hormonal levels respond. Since the hght/
dark ratio and seasonal temperature
are highly confounded, it is difficult to
distinguish their separate effects. Phototherapy research can do so, however,
by artificially varying light input. Alternatively, responses to heat can be studied by separating those who work in
heat-controlled environments from
those who don’t, although there are
other confounds created by such an approach. In any case, the current research adds support for the belief that
humans—both adolescents and adults
—are more sexually active in the summer (although not more likely to
conceive—in fact, the opposite); this
increased sexual activity is probably
caused at least in part by hormonal
peaks, which in turn may be responsive
to light and/or heat triggers to which
the body naturally responds.

The idea that summer onset may be
tied to seasonality in puberty is applicable only to those who lose their virginity in early adolescence. Since Figure 4 demonstrates clearly that the
pattern is far more general than this,
such a link would only explain a small
piece of the process, Valsik (1965) reviewed European menarche data and
found a number of different seasonality patterns. It appeared that seasonality of menarche responded more to
geography—and especially to elevation above sea level—and not very
much to climatic differences. This review further suggested that age may be
involved; younger ages at menarche
lead to first menstruation early in the
year, and older ages to starting later in
the year. Separate research by the first
author of this article found a strong
summer peak in retrospective report of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

  

130 a a a a i

120 ;
118 : ;
102 ; ;

ve PE GE EEE

; ;

F  8e |
r ; : :

s ' 1 t ‘ ' 4 {
e ; ;
q :
U ; ;
e@ 60
n

Cg ‘ l
y ; ‘
40

:
30

: ; i : |

2@ ; |

‘ |

‘ {

   

So

    

 

   

‘ballin Lh ARAL att th

t ‘ , ? 4
TUTE TT EEO TTT EE eter erreecer

JFMAMJ JASONDJ FMAMJ J ASONDJ FMAMJ JASOND J FMAMJ JASOND.J FMAMJ JASONDJ FMAMJ JASOND J FMAMJ J ASOND J FMAMJ JASONDJ FMAMJ JASONDJ FMAMJ JA SONDJ FMAMJ JA SOND

 

J—Age 13—|]—Age 14—||—Age 15—||—Age 16—||—Age 17—||—Age 18~—]|—Age 19—[|—Age 20—||—Age 21—|[—Age 22—||—Age 23—|
Age & Month of First intercourse

Fic. 4,—Frequencies of first reported intercourse by age, total NLSY women

ZT “ON *6€ “19A

SN}IOD 3SILZ Jo AppeUuOsBas

IT

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

12 Rodgers et al.

menarche among the women in the
NLSY survey. Whether this links to
first intercourse in any systematic way
requires a bivariate distribution of menarche and first intercourse information, which will be developed and explored in future work. Even if such a
link can be defined, however, there is
still much of the summer peak in first
coitus that remains to be explained.
Hormonal influences seem to be much
more promising than seasonality in puberty for providing a broad biological
explanation of the patterns we have
observed.

Social mechanisms also can be implicated in explaining increased sexual
activity in the summer, especially for
adolescents. Summer activities include
more frequent parties and dating; free
time in which to plan, discuss, fantasize, and conduct sexual activity; seasonality in peer pressure; and media attention to the link between summer
and sexuality (e.g., several movies during the past decade have focused on
loss of virginity at summer camp). Terman’s (1989) survey showing positive
mood and less sleep occurring in the
summer can certainly be translated
into expectations for increased sexual
activity. Certainly the biological and
social factors can operate together, and
they may also interact in complicated
feedback systems. For example, if hormonal surges increase libido naturally
during the summer, an adolescent may
more actively seek summer socializing,
which may further stimulate libido,
etc.

We have found support for both
socio-cultural and biological components as critical links in any explanatory model. The shift in patterns between high-school-age and college
Social Biology

age females in the NLSY supports the
existence of psycho-social mechanisms. It is difficult to imagine a purely
biological model that would successfully account for what appears to be a
discrete shift between ages 18 and 19.
But biological processes are implied by
the presence of a summer peak—even
if dampened—into adulthood and for
all race/sex groups investigated. Our
findings also match earlier work on
seasonality of coitus within marriage.
A statement and test of more complete
theoretical explanations of how the different biological and psycho-social
mechanisms combine is the next logical
step in the investigation of this phenomenon.

Our data are incomplete to address
the seasonality of continuing intercourse. In the ADSEX calendars,
there was a smaller and later summer
peak in continuing intercourse as well,
although we do not know if this would
be stable across years and periods as
the onset patterns were. The seasonality of continuing adolescent intercourse is an important topic that will
also await future investigation.

We note several additional linkages
between this seasonality finding and
other variables of interest to social scientists, physiologists, and biologists.
What is the relationship between seasonality of onset of coitus and seasonality of conception and birth, especially
among young adolescent women who
get pregnant shortly after they become
sexually active? What is the link between seasonality of first coitus and
marriage? What particular hormonal
processes have seasonality that might
explain such behavioral outcomes? Is
testosterone the primary hormone? In
both males and females? What are the

 
Vol. 39, No. 1-2

particular correlates that predict coital
onset during the summer, compared to
other times during the year?
There are some useful policy implications of our results. First, programs
directed toward sex education, contraceptive use, and pregnancy prevention
should account for these seasonal patterns. A program at the beginning of
the school year, for example, would be
in less relevant to virgin adolescents than
& the same program toward the end of
6 the school year in April. (However,
the rest of the year should not be ignored; more than half of the respon© dents in both datasets reported loss of
= virginity during non-summer months.)
* Second, programs might account for
= — slight differences between Hispanics
® and other races. Third, the activities of
summer might be given particular attention within such programs relative
to the activities of the school year, at
least in relation to the onset of intercourse.

Our results suggest that theories of
sexuality can add an interesting com
ecember

8

Brapsurn, N.M., L.J. Rips, and S. K. SHevELL. 1987. Answering autobiographical questions: The impact of memory and inference on
surveys. Science 236:159.

Catania, J. A., D.R. Gipson, D.D. Cuitwoop, and T. J. Coates. 1990. Methodological problems in AIDS behavioral research:
Influence of measurement error and participation bias in studies of sexual behavior. Psychol. Bull. 108:339~362.

EHRENKRANZ, J. R. 1983. A gland for all seasons. Nat. Hist. 6:18-23.

KALLAN, J., and J. R. Upry. 1987. Demographic
components of seasonality of pregnancy, J.
Bio. Sci. 21:101.

KESTENBAUM, B. 1987. Seasonality of birth: Two
findings from the decennial census. Soc. Biol.
34:244-248.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at

‘plaining loss of virginity.

Seasonality of First Coitus 13

ponent in describing the social, psychological, and biological processes exPrevious
studies have investigated the psychological responses, location, age structure, friends’ characteristics, contraceptive use, etc. associated with loss of
virginity. Our results add understanding of the temporal context associated
with onset of intercourse.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors express their appreciation
to J.R. Udry, Brent Miller, Jeff Kallan,
and Allan Parnell, who contributed ideas,
discussion, and general support to this research. Jacci Rodgers predicted the shift in
seasonality patterns between high school
and college as a test of psychosocial influence, which led to one of the central analyses in this paper. Karen Bradley Vickers is
now a graduate student in the Department
of Rural Sociology at the University of Missouri. This research was supported financially by NICHD Grant #RO1-HD21973.

REFERENCES

Lam, D., and J. Miron. 1986. Weather, fecundity, and the seasonality of births. Paper presented at the annual meetings of the Population Association of America, San Francisco.

Lanpb, K.C., and C. Cantor. 1983. ARIMA
models of seasonal variation in U.S. birth
and death rates. Demography 20:541-568.

LevinE, R. J., B. L. Borpson, R. M. MaTHEw,
M.H. Brown, J. M. Sraniey, and T.B.
Starr. 1988. Deterioration of semen quality
during summer in New Orleans. Fertil. Steril.
49:900-907.

NaEYE, R. L. 1980. Seasonal variations in coitus
and other risk factors, and the outcome of
pregnancy. Ear. Hum. Dev. 4:61-68.

REINBERG, A., and M. Lacocuey. 1978. Circadian and circannual rhythms in sexual activity
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

and plasma hormones (FSH, LH, Testosterone) of five human males. Arch. Sex Behav.
7:13-30.

Ropcers, J. L. 1986. The seasonality of successful pregnancy. Paper presented at the annual
meetings of the Population Association of
America, San Francisco.

Ropcers, J. L., J. O. G. Bitty, and J. R. Upry.
1982. The rescission of behaviors: Inconsistent responses in adolescent sexuality data.
Soc. Sci. Res. 11:280-296.

Ropcers, J.L., and J.R. Upry. 1988. The
season-of-birth paradox. Soc. Biol. 35:171185,

RoseNnTHAL, N.E., and M.C. Brenar. 1989,
Seasonal affective disorders and phototherapy. Guilford Press, New York.

SAINT Pot, P., R. BEuscart, B. LERoy-Martin,
E. HERMAND, and W. JaBLonskr. 1989, Circannual rhythms of sperm parameters of fertile men. Fertil. Steril. 51:1030-1033.

Seiver, D. A. 1985. Trend and variation in the
seasonality of U.S. fertility. Demography
22:89-100.

Rodgers et al.

Social Biology

 

. 1989. Seasonality of fertility: New evidence. Pop. Environ. 10:245-257.

SHRYOCK, H. S., J. S. SIEGEL, and E. G. StockWELL. 1987. The methods and materials of
demography. Academic Press, New York.

TERMAN, M. 1989. On the question of mechanism in phototherapy for seasonal affective
disorder: Considerations of clinical efficacy
and epidemiology. In N. E. Rosenthal and
M. C. Blehar (eds.), Seasonal affective disorders and phototherapy. Guilford Press,
New York.

Upry, J.R., and N.M. Morris. 1967a. A
method for validation of reported sexual
data. J. Marr. Fam. 29:442-446,

. 1967b. Seasonality of coitus and seasonality of birth. Demography 4:673-679.

Vatsik, J. A. 1965. The seasonal rhythm of menarche: A review. Hum. Biol. 37:75-89.

ZELNICK, M. 1980. Sexual activity, contraceptive
use and pregnancy among metropolitan area
teenagers: 1971-1979. Fam. Plan. Persp.
12:69-76.

 
