Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Assortative versus selective mating: Is the
distinction worthwhile?

Hamish G. Spencer

To cite this article: Hamish G. Spencer (1992) Assortative versus selective mating: Is the
distinction worthwhile?, Social Biology, 39:3-4, 310-315, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1992.9988827

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988827

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:45

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

Assortative Versus Selective Mating:

Is the Distinction Worthwhile?

Hamish G. Spencer

 

Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, and Department of Zoology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand

ABSTRACT: The study examines the distinction between assortative and selective mating made
by Lewontin, Kirk, and Crow in 1968 and finds it unproductive. Not only has the difference been
ignored on many occasions even as it was invoked, but maintaining it obscures several useful
properties of both nonrandom mating schemes and some formally equivalent systems such as
fertility selection. The elucidation of these similarities could have accelerated the work of

population biologists.

Some twenty-four years ago in this
journal (Vol. 15, pp. 141-143, 1968)
Richard Lewontin, Dudley Kirk, and
James Crow published a note on the
definitions of various sorts of nonrandom mating. The note comprised a
summary of a committee report to the
Fourth Princeton Conference on Population Genetics and Demography.
Lewontin et al.’s (1968) taxonomy has
been extremely influential, and most
biologists today follow it, distinguishing selective mating, assortative mating, and inbreeding. Inbreeding occurs
in a population when the relatedness of
mates is different from what it would
be if they had been chosen at random.
It does not lead to a change in gene frequency and is not considered further in
this note. In contrast to inbreeding,
both assortative mating and selective
mating are character specific. They can
differ in intensity and direction for
different characters in the same population. They are distinguished from
each other in Lewontin et al.’s schema
in that assortative mating does not

change gene frequency, whereas selective mating does. In other words, with
assortative mating all genotypes make
the same average genetic contribution
to the next generation.

In this note 1] shall focus on the distinction Lewontin et al. made between
selective and assortative mating. I shall
show that their definitions are often ignored (even when the definitions are
specifically cited). Moreover, I shall argue, if the distinction is not maintained, parallels between nonrandom
mating and other population genetic
phenomena become evident. Such similarities have been very productive in
population genetic theory. Bodmer
(1965) was able to show that his multiplicative fertility selection scheme
was formally equivalent to Owen’s
(1963) two-sex viability system, thereby showing the dynamics were identical. More recently, Pearce and Spencer
(1992) showed that certain forms of genetic imprinting lead to identical equations to different systems with standard
Mendelian inheritance. In the case of

310
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

selective mating, noting the parallels
would have permitted the anticipation
of one famous result by some twentyone years. Throughout this note I will
make use of single-locus Mendelian
models so as not to obscure the argument in needless algebra, but it should
be noted that none of the points I raise
depend on this feature of my examples.

One well-known problem with
Lewontin et al.’s definition of assortative mating is its narrow applicability.
Consider as a simple example, the onelocus two-allele model of assortative
mating without dominance, where
each genotype has a certain fraction
that mate with their own genotype, the
rest mating at random (see, e.g., Crow
and Kimura, 1970, p. 144). In most
published work, this fraction is the
same for all genotypes, but this restriction is not necessary. What is critical,
however, is that the assorting individuals (i.e., those who mate only with
their own genotypes) produce the same
average number of offspring as those
mating at random. Thus, irrespective
of their frequency, the assorters have
no trouble finding a mate, or if they do,
this problem doesn’t affect the number
of offspring they produce. In other
words, the probability of finding a suitable mate remains constant, or, alternatively, if it is frequency-dependent
then there is compensating frequencydependent fertility selection. This behavior is in contrast to the random maters, where the frequency of mating
types is directly proportional to the frequency of the genotypes involved. The
assumption that assorting individuals
have no trouble finding mates is quite
restrictive and probably not met very

often in practice. Hence, assortative.

Brief Reports

311

mating is a rather special case of nonrandom mating.

Frequency-dependency may also be
seen when negative assortative mating
is considered, According to Lewontin
et al.’s (1968) criteria, we want this to
cover situations in which individuals
are more likely to mate with individuals of different genotypes, but where
the gene frequency does not change.
This requirement, however, is often
impossible. Consider, for example, the
above model, with complete dominance added (see, e.g., Crow and
Kimura, 1970, p. 144). Let allele A be
completely dominant over allele a so
that we have only two phenotypes.
Suppose further that there is a fraction
r of the population that mates only with
the other phenotype, the rest mating at
random. In order that the gene frequency not change, the negative assorters must produce progeny with the
same gene frequency as the whole population. The only matings that occur
here, however, are those between the
homozygous recessives, aa, and the
AA and Aa individuals. No change in
the frequencies of A and a thus requires that the frequencies of these two
types of matings depend on the allele
frequencies.

Indeed,

p=0.5[AA X aa] + 0.25{Aa x aa] and
q=0.5[AA x aa] + 0.75[Aa x aa},

in which

Pp is the frequency of the A allele,

q is the frequency of the a allele (=1-p),

[AA xX aa] is the frequency of the matings between AA and aa individuals
among the negative assorters and

[Aaxaa] is the corresponding frequency for Aa and aa individuals.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

312

These equations give

(Aa x aa| =2(q-p) =2(1-2p) and
[AA x aa] =3p-q=4p-1,

which for p > 0.5 or p < 0.25 is impossible, not just frequency dependent.
This argument can be modified to remove the assumptions of dominance
and equal r for all genotypes, but the
conclusion is the same. For negative
assortative mating, the frequencies of
the matings depend on the gene frequencies, not just the genotype or phenotype frequencies. For monogamous
species, the restrictions on mating-type
frequencies may be impossible for all
allele frequencies.

It can be noted that the problems
arising from Lewontin et al.’s definition of assortative mating are a general
feature of problems of filling cells of a
contingency table where conditions are
imposed on the marginals. Often these
problems are only soluble if certain
symmetries exist; otherwise, the conditions lead to contradictions. Avoidance of incest in a finite population, for
example, leads to an increased probability that an individual will not find a
mate (MacCluer, 1974).

A consequence of these problems
with the Lewontin et al. definition is
that many supposed models of negative
assortative mating are in fact really selective mating because they result in a
change in gene frequency. For instance, in Crow and Kimura’s (1970)
standard population genetics text, both
the one-locus two-allele examples of
disassortative mating (p. 168) directly
contradict the definition (p. 142). Indeed, Crow and Kimura seem to be
aware of the problem, noting (p. 166)
that disassortative mating is ‘“‘typically accompanied by gene frequency

Brief Reports

 

Social Biology

changes.”’ The first of Crow and Kimura’s examples corresponds to r = 1 of
the above example and converges to a
stable p =0.5 polymorphism, whatever the initial p value. The second
does away with dominance, puts r =1
and assumes permitted matings occur
at random among the negative assorters (i.e., the whole population). With
initial values of P (the frequency of
AA’S) of 0.7, H (the frequency of Aa’s)
of 0.2 and R (the frequency of aa’s) of
0.1, p changes from 0.8 to 0.6304 in the
first generation.

The distinction between selective
and assortative mating is, I believe,
no more important—indeed probably
less important—than the demonstration that there are viability selection
schemes that result in genotype frequencies in apparent Hardy-Weinberg
proportions, as if no selection were acting (Lewontin and Cockerham, 1959).
We could use a special name (say,
“Hardy-Weinberg filtering’) for this
last type of selection, but what purpose
would it serve? Indeed, treating this
kind of selection as a distinct phenomenon could obscure the obvious parallels with other standard selection
schemes. |

The only situations which conform
to the definition of negative assortative
mating appear to be somewhat unnatural ones in which there are two rounds
of mating. In the first round, pairs form
at random and a proportion of couples
consisting of unlike individuals mate,
the rest going on to the second round.
In the second round, pairing again
occurs at random, among the so-far unmated individuals, and mating then
occurs within these pairs. Since all individuals contribute equally to the offsprings’ gene pool, allele frequencies
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 39, No. 3-4

will not change. A similar scheme can
also be described for positive assortative mating. Here again, however, we
require the additional assumption that
there is no cost to rejecting a mate. It
is also doubtful if such a situation is of
real biological interest.

I would like to suggest, therefore,
that the distinction between assortative
mating and selective mating is not particularly useful. The former are just
special (and often artificial) cases of
the latter, and I will use the term selective mating for both henceforth. If
the most serious consequences of the
distinction between assortative and selective mating were that it overemphasized special cases and was inconsistently applied, not much harm would
result. I would merely be suggesting a
semantic change. Unfortunately, as I
have suggested could occur with the
use of the term “Hardy-Weinberg filtering,” the distinction hides important
properties of selective mating.

One parallel that has been overlooked historically is that between selective mating and fertility selection
(but see Karlin, 1978). In fact, Crow
and Kimura’s model of positive assortative mating with selection (p. 164) is
formally equivalent to fertility selection with random mating. The probability of a mating between two individuals is a function of their phenotypes
(or genotypes) and thus is identical in
its effect to fertility selection. Instances
in which gene frequency does not
change (what Lewontin et al. call assortative mating) are merely special
cases analogous to those in viability selection, e.g., when the genotypic viabilities are inversely proportional to
the frequencies. The first case of assortative mating (in the sense of Lewontin

Brief Reports

313

et al.) described above is better understood as frequency-dependent fertility
selection, where the frequencies are
genotype frequencies (from which the
allele frequencies can be derived). The
second case of supposed negative assortative mating is also equivalent to
frequency-dependent fertility selection, but here the frequencies involved
in determining the selection pressures
are those of the alleles.

Observing the similarities between
selective mating and fertility selection
implies that several properties of fertility selection will also apply to this
sort of nonrandom mating and viceversa. For example, Fisher’s famous
result that under viability selection
mean fitness increases does not hold:
Kempthorne (1957) noted this for nonrandom mating, but that the same
property also applied to fertility selection was not realized for another 21
years (Pollak, 1978). Indeed, it is not
difficult to construct examples of selective mating in which the mean viability,
w, of the population decreases. A numerical instance of one locus with two
alleles is given by the matrices in Table
1, Example t. When the initial (preselection) frequencies of the AA, Aa and
aa zygotes are 0.3, 0.3 and 0.4 respectively, ¥# decreases monotonically from
0.64 to a polymorphic equilibrium at
0.5030. (The ijth element of the
mating-probability matrix gives the relative probability of a mating between
individuals with genotypes i and j.) Table 1, Example 2, gives a similar result
with heterozygote advantage. With initial genotype frequencies of 0.2, 0.5
and 0.3, w decreases monotonically
from 0.85 to 0.7655. The change in w
need not be monotonic, however. The
corresponding matrices in Example 3

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

314 Brief Reports

 

Social Biology

TABLE 1

VIABILITY MATRIX AND MATING PROBABILITY MATRIX: THREE EXAMPLES

Examples Viability Matrix

1. spas wae jenna swe igvewind iy A a
A 1.0 0.6
a 0.6 0.4

2 cecucsecveeteseuseeseees A a
A 0.7 1.0
a 1.0 0.7

3 leesceceeccecececeeeers A a
A 1.0 0.8
a 0.8 :

of Table 1 with the same initial genotype frequencies as Example 1 result in
oscillations of # to a polymorphic equilibrium.

A further advantage in treating selective mating similarly to fertility selection is the observation that only
symmetric mating-probability matrices
need be considered. This simplicity
arises because of fertility selection’s
sex-symmetry property (Feldman et
al., 1983), and remains true when there
is viability selection as well. In other
words a system with equal male and female mating preferences will exhibit
the same dynamics and Structure as
one with unequal preferences, but the
analysis of the former system is computationally simpler.

In summary then, I suggest that the
distinction between assortative and se
Mating Probability Matrix

AA Aa aa

AA 0.2 0.2 0.2
Aa 0.2 0.6 0.8
aa 0.2 0.8 1.0

AA Aa aa

AA 0.2 0,2 0.2
Aa 0.2 0.6 0.8
aa 0.2 0.8 1.0

AA Aa aa

AA 0.2 0.5 1.0
Aa 0.5 0.5 0.5
aa 1.0 0.5 0.2

lective mating made by Lewontin, Kirk
and Crow in 1968 is unproductive. Not
only has the difference been ignored
on many occasions even as it was Invoked, but maintaining it obscures
several useful properties of both nonrandom mating schemes and some
formally equivalent systems such as
fertility selection. The elucidation of
these similarities could have accelerated population biologists’ work significantly.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank Joe Felsenstein,
Kurt Fristrup, Dick Lewontin, Lisa Lloyd,
Diane Paul, and Rosemary Redfield for
their comments. This work was supported
in part by National Institutes of Health
Grant No. GM-21179 to R. C. Lewontin.

REFERENCES

Bopmer, W.F. 1965. Differential fertility in
population genetics models. Genetics 51:
411-424,

Crow, J. F., and M. Kimura. 1970. An introduction to theoretical population genetics. Burgéss, Minneapolis.

FELDMAN, M. W., F. B. CurisTIANsEN, and U.

LIBERMAN. 1983. On some models of fertility
selection. Genetics 105:1003-1010.

Karin, S. 1978. Comparisons of positive assortative mating and sexual selection models.
Theor. Pop. Biol. 14:281-312.

 
Vol. 39, No. 3-4

KEMPTHORNE, O, 1957. An introduction to genetic Statistics. Wiley, New York.

Lewontin, R. C., and C. C. CockerHamM. 1959.
The goodness-of-fit test for detecting natural
selection in random mating populations. Evolution 13:561-564.

Lewontin, R. C., D. Kirk, and J. Crow. 1968.
Selective mating, assortative mating, and inbreeding: Definitions and implications. E. Q.
15:141-143.

MacC uer, J. W. 1974. Avoidance of incest:
Genetic and demographic consequences,

—|
=
©
N
Samed
5
=
oO
oO
oO
A
CO
CO
CY
v.
oN
=
—
3
‘gt
3
ON
—
ao
oO
5
Cem
©
>>
—
—
N
~
oO
>
os
c
=
ra)
O
vo
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

 

Brief Reports

315

197~220. In B. Dyke and J. W. MacCluer
(eds.), Computer Simulation in Human Population Studies. Academic Press, New York.

Owen, A. R. G. 1953. A genetical system admitting two distinct stable equilibria under natural selection. Heredity 7:97-102.

Pearce, G. P., and H. G. Spencer. 1992. Population genetic models of genomic imprinting.
Genetics 130:899~907.

Potiak, E. 1978. With selection for fecundity
the mean fitness does not necessarily increase. Genetics 90:383-389,

 

 
