Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Biosocial models of adolescent problem behaviors

J. Richard Udry

To cite this article: J. Richard Udry (1990) Biosocial models of adolescent problem behaviors,
Social Biology, 37:1-2, 1-10, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988742

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988742

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 20

N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 3 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Biosocial Models of Adolescent Problem Behaviors

J. Richard Udry

Carolina Population Center
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

 

 

ABSTRACT: This paper develops a biosocial model of adolescent age-graded norm violations
(“problem behaviors’’), combining a traditional social control model with a biological model
using steroid hormones. Subjects were 101 white boys drawn from the 8th-, 9th-, and
10th-grade rosters of selected public schools, and ranging in age from 13 to 16. Subjects
completed self-administered questionnaires and provided blood samples which were assayed
for the behaviorally relevant hormones. Boys’ problem behavior shows strong hormone effects.
Social and biological variables have both additive and indirect effects. Using a biosocial model
leads to conclusions which are different from those which would have been drawn from the

sociological model alone.

Social control theory is concerned
with the fundamental question of how
social processes control social behavior,
and how institutional ties affect who
abides by the rules of society and who
breaks them. Liska and Reed (1985)
point out that, contrary to some other
theories of deviance:

Social control theories assume that norm
violation can frequently be so pleasurable
and profitable that many if not most people are motivated to violate them. Thus is
it not necessary to study the origins and
distributions of deviant motives; rather it
is necessary to study what constrains or
controls most people most of the time
from acting on their deviant motives.

Another approach to deviant behavior, which has coexisted with social control theories, concentrates on explaining
deviant behavior by characteristics of individuals that are primarily nonsocial in
origin. These theories look to the physical characteristics of individuals (S.
Glueck and E. Glueck, 1956), hormonal
characteristics (Kreutz and Rose, 1972),
or global genetic sources (Rowe and Osgood, 1984). These theories identify biological processes which predispose in
dividuals to types of behavior which are
likely to be norm violations. They are
concerned with the biological origin of
variance in deviant motivation, which is
excluded by postulate from social control theories.

Social contro] theory assumes that
everyone is motivated to do the deviant
behaviors of interest to the theory and
tries to explain what constrains those
who do not. Biological theory assumes
that motivation to do the deviant behavior is what is problematic and needs to
be explained. On the face of these statements, it would seem that since each
theory tries to explain what the other
leaves out, the two theories should be
complementary rather than opposing.
The purpose of this paper is to show how
these two theories are not only not contradictory, but actually illuminate one
another.

The behaviors I choose to explain are
the age-graded norm violations of adolescence. These behaviors are in general
not norm violations for adults, but are
for various reasons not considered by
adults to be appropriate for early ado
 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

2 Udry

lescents. Jessor and Jessor (1977) cali
them “problem behaviors.” Parents,
schools, and other adult institutions discourage these behaviors in young adolescents. Examples of such age-graded
violations are having sex, drinking alcohol, and smoking cigarettes. These behaviors are distinguished from offenses
with victims, such as vandalism and robbery, which are socially disapproved irrespective of age.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
THE SOCIOLOGICAL MODEL

My sociological model encompasses
two existing theories: social control theory as represented by Hirschi’s (1969)
conceptualization, and ‘“‘problem behavior” theory from Jessor and Jessor
(1977). The problem behavior framework provides a rationale for the dependent variable and the concept of transition proneness. Jessor and Jessor
document that during the high-school
years adolescents experience the following changes. They complete puberty,
lower academic achievement values, increase values of independence, increase
tolerance for violation of adult standards, decrease religiosity, decline in
church attendance, increase reported alcohol and drug use, and increase sexual
activity. All these changes are thought
of as normal transitions. The problem
behaviors are represented by the last
changes and are predicted by the presence of the other things. These transitions are expected age-graded changes
and are only defined as problem behaviors when they occur too early.

Hirschi’s framework is based on the
proposition that norm violations are inhibited by emotional attachment to conventional people and institutions, com
Social Biology

mitment to conventional means of
achievement, and holding conventional
beliefs. It is easy to see the substantial
overlap of problem behavior theory
with Hirschi’s theory when applied to
adolescents. Moreover, Hirschi (1969,
p. 34) explicitly rejects a motivational
component:

The question, ‘““Why do they do it?” is

simply not the question the theory is de
signed to answer. The question is, “Why

don’t we do it?”’ There is much evidence
that we would if we dared.

THE BIOLOGICAL MODEL

My biological theory seeks to identify
biological factors which predispose adolescents to violate age-graded behavior
norms, that is, to engage in the behaviors before others of the same age cohort, and before they are supposed to.
Rowe anc Osgood (1984) have demonstrated that the bulk of variance in adolescent deviance (using somewhat more
serious violations than problem behaviors) is attributable to genetic factors.

Through what biological processes
do these behavior predispositions come
about? I have chosen to examine steroid
hormones, and specifically, testosterone, the most behaviorally potent male
hormone. Testosterone has been the focus of attention of much behavioral endocrinology. It has been complicated in
aggression, dominance, sexual behavjor, and anti-social behavior (Olweus et
al., 1980; Monti et al., 1977; Kreutz and
Rose, 1972; Ehrenkrantz et al., 1974).

Zuckerman (1984) has developed a
theory of sensation-seeking behavior
which is biologically based in the concept of optimum arousal, mediated by
central nervous system neurotransmitters of the catecholamine group. Daitzman and Zuckerman (1980) have shown
that testosterone is related to measures

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

of sensation-seeking in college males.
Their sensation-seeking scale taps predispositions for behavior which substantially overlap the concept of problem behavior.

Steroid hormones are known to function in the brain as regulators of the
genes that control the production of
neurotransmitters. Since sensationseeking has been shown to be correlated
with most of the items identified by Jessor and Jessor as problem behaviors, it is
reasonable to hypothesize that the increase in problem behaviors in early adolescence may be a function of increases
in testosterone. Males experience a tento twenty-fold increase in testosterone
during adolescence. Twin studies have
shown that both testosterone and
sensation-seeking have surprisingly high
heritability, with genetic factors accounting for half or more of the variance
for each (Meikle et al., 1988; Fulker et
al., 1980).

Testosterone is also the hormone responsible for all aspects of pubertal development in males, including hair
growth and musculature, The Gluecks
may have been indexing testosterone in
their body typology.

Gove (1985) faults the main sociological theories of deviance for their inability to explain the sharp rise of deviant
behavior in adolescence. Hirschi and
Gottfriedson (1985, p. 567) argue that
“efforts to explain the age effect with
the theoretical and empirical variables
currently available to criminology are
doomed to failure.” Gove proposes testosterone (and its sharp rise in adolescent boys) as an explanation which merits examination. Perhaps it is the
testosterone (T) through which the genetic variance found by Rowe and Osgood (1984) is expressed. Furthermore,
age at onset of puberty has a strong ge
Adolescent Problem Behavior 3

netic component (Fischbein, 1977),
which means that the age at which T begins to increase is genetically controlled.
This observation is particularly important when studying age-graded behaviors.

It is generally agreed that the only T
that is available for biologic activity at
the cellular level is that which is not
bound to sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG), a large protein molecule incapable of passing through cell membranes. Nine-tenths or more of T is so
bound. Therefore in all models containing T, SHBG must simultaneously be
taken into account when assessing the
physical and behavioral effects of T.

A simple biosocial model is presented in Figure 1. Path A indicates that
hormones increase with age. Path B
states that hormones are the proximate
cause for pubertal development. Pubertal development may work as a socialpsychological variable. Boys vary by as
much as four or five years in the timing
of puberty. If behavioral expectations
are tied to the appearance of maturity,
then those maturing earlier may experience pressures, motivations, and opportunity for problem behaviors at earlier
ages. On the other hand, pubertal development may only be a consequence of
testosterone with no direct effect on behavior. Path C represents the lag in the
effect of hormones on pubertal development. Path D stands for the direct effect
of hormones on problem behavior. Path
E controlled for Path D indicates the effect of pubertal development on problem behavior that is independent of the
direct effect of hormones on behavior.
Path F stands for the effect of any other
age-graded determinants not included
in the model. The concept “‘social controls” stands for the sociological components of the model. Path H summarizes
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

4 Udry

Social Biology

Hormones ——_&-—-» Social
Controls
I
B
D
Pubertal H
Development

C

Age ———_______—_———__ Problem

Behavior

Fic. 1.—Theoretical biosocial model of problem behavior.

the effects of the sociological components. Path G indicates that there may
be hormone effects on the sociological
components. Path J draws attention to
the possibility that the effects of the sociological variables may be conditioned
by hormone levels.

STRATEGY FOR ANALYSIS

I first construct a simple sociological
model of problem behavior, representing Path H in Figure 1. Next, I construct
a model excluding Paths G, H, and I. I
then combine the models and simplify
the consequent model. In this way, we
can illuminate the changes which come
about through combining the models.

RESEARCH METHODS

This research uses cross-sectional
data from a nonclinical representative
sample of white eighth-, ninth-, and

tenth-grade boys in a public school system of a medium-sized southern city. In
1982, a random sample of 101 males was
drawn from a list of pupils in selected
schools provided by the school district.
The school district was selected on the
basis of availability of a list of pupils.
The original purpose of the study was to
determine the biological and social antecedents of sexual behavior. About 70
per cent of those eligible agreed to participate and completed the study.
Questionnaires were self-administered at home with the interviewer
present. Signed informed consent was
first obtained from a parent, then from
the respondent. Ninth- and tenthgraders donated serum samples an average of three-and-a-half months after
completing the questionnaire, while
eighth graders completed the questionnaire and donated blood at approxiDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

mately the same time. Blood samples
were collected in the subjects’ homes
between 3 and 7pm by a nurse, using a
catheter which remained in place for
about 30 minutes. Because there are
short-term pulsatile releases of certain
hormones into the blood, three 5 ml
samples were collected at 15 minute intervals and pooled to provide an average
hormone level over a 30-minute period.
Subjects were paid $25 per session in
which blood was drawn. Blood samples
were allowed to clot, the clot removed,
and the remainder centifuged. Serum
was then stored at —20 C until assay. T
and SHBG were measured by radioimmunoassay, using standard kits. For
purely exploratory purposes, several
other weaker androgenic hormones
were measured, but no additional
power in my analysis was expected from
these hormones, and none was found.

Social variables.—There is at least
one measure for each dimension of
Hirschi’s model. For attachment there is
a measure of liking for church, homework, and household chores (“good
child’). For involvement there are
sports participation and church attendance. For commitment, there are importance of college and school grades.
For beliefs there is importance of religion.

Concepts measured from problem
behavior theory are the dependent variable (described below), age, pubertal
development, grades, religiosity,
church attendance, and selected theoretically relevant personality scales from
the Adjective Check List (dominance,
aggression, self-control). Age and pubertal development are included to capture the age-graded nature of the controls. Also included are measures of
socioeconomic status and family composition because both Hirschi and Jessor

Adolescent Problem Behavior 5

and Jessor include such variables in their
analyses. The independent variables
used are as follows:

Age.—Age was calculated to two decimal
places by subtracting reported birth date
from interview date.

Pubertal development.—Respondents
rated themselves on level of pubertal development as registered through a battery of discrete items. These included a
set of Tanner-type line drawings (Tanner, 1962) representing the degree of pubic hair and breast or genital development. Each person also indicated on
separate items the development of body
hair, facial hair, voice change, body
shape change, and menarche, as appropriate by sex. These items were factor analyzed separately by sex, and a single factor was extracted. Factor scores were
assigned to individuals on the basis of the
factor weightings of the items. This score
has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. The self-measurement of pubertal development was validated in a
separate study (Morris and Udry, 1980),
in which pediatricians rated adolescents
on a battery of nearly identical items for
which adolescents had already rated
themselves. Factor scores from physicians and adolescents correlated r = 0.74
for males and 0.82 for females.

Parental marital status.—Respondent
was scored 1 if living with both biological
parents, and 0 if not.

Mother’s education.—Mother’s report of
her years of completed education, or if
missing, adolescent’s report of mother’s
education.

Father’s occupation.—Adolescent’s report of father’s occupation, classified on
the following metric: (4) professional/
technical, manager, official, or proprietor; (3) clerical, sales and kindred; (2)
skilled workers; and (1) unskilled workers.

Grades.—Adolescent was asked, “‘What
grades do you usually get?” Responses
were coded: (1) below average; (2) average; and (3) above average.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

6 Udry

Church attendance.—Adolescent was
asked, “How often have you gone to
church services in the last year?” Responses were coded: (1) less than once a
month; (2) about once a month; (3) about
once a week; and (4) more than once a
week.

Importance of religion —Adolescent was
asked, “How important is religion to
your daily life?” Responses were coded:
(1) not important; (2) slightly important;
(3) important; and (4) very important.
Number of siblings.—Respondent indicated on a list, who lived in the house
hold. Number of brothers and number of
sisters were summed.
Sports.—Respondent was asked, “Do
you play any sports or participate in any
organized physical activities outside of
gym class?” 1 = yes,0 =no.

Importance of college.—Respondent was
asked, “How important is it to you that
you go to college?” Six boxes were provided, with (1) marked not important,
and (6) marked very important.

Good child.—Respondent was asked,
“How much do you like: doing chores
around the house?” “‘. . . doing homework?” “going to church?” Responses
were: (1) do not like at all to (4) like a lot.
Responses were summed.

The dependent variable.-—The dependent variable, problem behaviors,
was first constructed by factor analysis
from a list of 14 mild to serious deviant
behaviors, in which respondents were
asked to indicate whether they have
ever done the behavior. Responses
were subjected to principal components
factor analysis. Varimax rotation produced three factors with eigen-values
greater than one. The first factor was selected as the problem behavior scale because of its close similarity to the concept of Jessor and Jessor. Items and
their loadings are got drunk (0.65),
smoked cigarettes (0.55), cut school
(0.52), had sex (0.51), and used mari
 

Social Biology

juana (0.67). However, a simple additive index of the items produces empirical results which are virtually identical
to those using the scores resulting from
the factor analysis as the dependent variable. Therefore in the interest of parsimony, I present the results using the additive index.

RESULTS
DaTA ANALYSIS

All statistical models were constructed using ordinary least squares regression and path analysis. The criterion
for statistical significance was set at an
alpha of 0.05, in spite of the small sample. Since all hypotheses specify the sign
of the coefficient, one-tailed tests were
used throughout. All R squares are adjusted for degrees of freedom.

Constructing a sociological model.—
The original plan for a sociological
model called for constructing one model
consisting of SES and family structure
variables, then adding to it another
model consisting of the remaining social
variables. As it turned out, no SES or
family structure variables were significant. The sociological model was therefore constructed by identifying all the
sociological variables with zero-order
correlations with the dependent variable significant at the 0.10 level, and entering them into a backward-deletion
OLS multiple regression, deleting variables until all remaining were significant
at the 0.10 level. Each deleted variable
was then re-entered singly with the remaining variables to see if it met the entry criterion. Table 1 shows the model so
derived.

None of the theoretically relevant
personality variables qualifies for the
model, and none of the SES or family
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No. 1-2 Adolescent Problem Behavior 7
TABLE 1
OLS MobELs OF PROBLEM BEHAVIORS?
SOcIoLOGICAL MopeEL Brosoctat Moper
VARIABLES b* P b* SE P

Testosterone ........... 0.19 (0.28) 0.06 0.00
SHBG ............050- wee a wae —0.03 (-0.26) 0.01 0.00
AZO cece cece cee eens 0.64 (0.29) 0.20 0.00 Lee wae vee
Church attend .......... —0.24 (-0.14) 0.16 0.06 tae aw sion
Goodchild ............ —0.23 (-—0.24) 0.09 0.00 —0.20 (-0.21) 0.08 0.01
Grades pesenns gaya cy ce —0.46 (-0.16) 0.26 0.04 —0.59 (-0.20) 0.25 0.01
ASQUALE 60 os penseasess 0.24 943 0.30 ‘ 284
| 101 101

*Standardized coefficients in parentheses.

structure variables qualifies. Age is the
most important contributor to the
model, suggesting the contribution of
age-graded effects on problem behavior
from unavailable social variables. Good
child (likes household chores, homework, and going to church) and grades
are inversely related to problem behaviors. Church attendance is left in the
model because of its theoretical interest
and the fact that it only marginally
misses the 0.05 significance level. The
model explains 24 per cent of the variance in problem behaviors.

A simple biosocial model.—I next
fitted the path model of Figure 1 without
Paths G, H, and I. The trimmed model
is displayed in Figure 2. While the zeroorder correlation of age with problem
behavior is 0.32, and the correlation of
pubertal development with problem behavior is 0.25, both significant at beyond
the 0.01 level, in the path model neither
Path E nor Path F is significant. This
means that once hormones are in the
model, it is shown that the effect on
problem behavior of being more physically mature is a spurious consequence
of the causal relationship between testosterone and pubertal development.
Furthermore, the age effect on problem
behavior is shown to be a spurious con
sequence of the causal relationship between age and testosterone. This provides a nonsociological explanation of
the age effect. At least with respect to
the age-graded norm violations of interest here, the sociological variables that
Greenberg (1985) proposes to explain
the age effect are unnecessary. Testosterone (together with TEBG) emerges
as the only predictor of problem behavior, with a combined R square of 0.24.
An integrated model.—I next combined the two models additively. By
combining the two models, interesting
things happen. Age drops out of the
model, as expected from Figure 2, because it is only a cause of T, and has no
direct effect on problem behavior after
T is in the model. A separate path model
(not shown) indicates that in addition to
the direct effect of T on problem behaviors, T has an indirect effect through
Good Child. Church attendance is further weakened because of its significant
inverse relationship to T, and now must
be dropped from the model. The final
model contains only inverse effects of
good child and grades in addition to T
effects, with an R square of 0.30.
Biosocial interactions.—As a final
step, Path I in Figure 1 is explored. In
separate models, all interactions be 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

   
 

8 Udry Social Biology
Hormones
40T
-.20 SHBG
OT
49 T
36 SHBG -.383 SHBG
Pubertal
Development
24
a Problem
ge Behavior

Fic. 2.—Trimmed simple biosocial model of problem behavior. (All paths significant at 0.01 level.
Trimmed paths not significant at 0.05 level. N = 101.)

tween the sociological variables and either T or SHBG were examined, this
time using two-tailed tests. A significant
interaction was found between SHBG
and number of siblings. When added to
the integrated model with number of
siblings, the interaction was significant
with little change in the other variables
(not shown). The interaction can be interpreted as follows. Those boys with
low unbound T are not much affected by
the number of siblings. For boys with
high unbound T, the more siblings they
have, the fewer problem behaviors. The
“control” exercised by the number of
siblings has no effect on those with low
unbound T, since they are not predisposed in any case.

IT examined a large number of interactions and found only one significant.
The significant interaction is for a family
structure variable for which I find no
previous literature and no obvious intui
tive explanation. The number of interactions examined would be expected to
produce at least one significant by
chance. I follow a conservative strategy
and attribute the interaction to chance. I
am therefore not able to show any conditioning effects of T on the sociological
variables, as represented by Path I in
Figure 1.

DISCUSSION

The sociological model in this analysis is a good explanatory model and
would by itself have led to the conclusion that we had reached a satisfactory
understanding of the roots of the problem behaviors. Since about a fourth of
the variance in the dependent variable is
explained, the results compare favorably with most similar published analyses. But the integrated model shows
how including hormone effects trans
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

forms our understanding of the processes involved. If we treat the biological
model as exogenous to the sociological
model, then most of the variance in the
integrated model is accounted for by T
and SHBG. But no doubt other sociological variables not available here
could be added to the model which
would shift this balance more in favor of
the sociological variables. The important point is not the relative contribution
of biological and social variables, but
the additional insight provided by the integration of the biological variables.

Several problems with the analysis
need to be raised. Most sociologists
would be loath to undertake such an
analysis with so few cases. Yet the relationships are clear with this sample size.

A second issue is the causal direction
of effects. Liska and Reed (1985) presented evidence for boys from panel
data that there are nonrecursive relationships among delinquency, attachment to parents, and attachment to
school. Involvement in deviance may
loosen commitment to and involvement
in conventional institutions. I do not
doubt that this is the case. But such findings do not change the implications of
the present paper in any way. If we can
assume that the hormone-behavior relationship is nonrecursive and works from
hormones to behavior, then we know
that leaving the hormones out of the
model will produce misspecification in
any Case.

What about the causal direction of
the hormone/problem behavior relationship? Sociologists often argue that
the hormone levels are a consequence
rather than a cause of behavior. No
doubt this is the case, using short time
frames, for certain behaviors. But
smoking, marijuana use, and alcohol
use have all been shown to reduce T lev
 

Adolescent Problem Behavior 9

els (Barnett et al., 1983; Bertello et al.,
1986). Only sexual behavior has been
shown to increase T levels, and then
only for periods of a few hours at most.
The strong genetic determination of T
undermines the attractiveness of the
behavior-to-hormone hypothesis.

IMPLICATIONS

I realize that by current sociological
standards, this is a very simple analysis.
Liska and Reed, for example, have
panel data and present three nonrecursive models with more than 1,800 cases
using LISREL. This study would be
much more convincing with panel measures of hormones and sociological data
on asample ten times as large. The logistics and cost of such a study are so formidable that until justification is available
from small cross-sectional samples, such
studies are never likely to be done. Even
at the present level, this study casts a
shadow of doubt over even the most
methodologically sophisticated models
that omit the biological variables examined here.

From a more general perspective on
social control models, these analyses
demonstrate four ways in which biological variables may enhance the social
control paradigm. (1) Hormones may
have direct, main effects beyond the social control components. (2) Hormones
may have indirect effects by affecting
behaviors which in turn affect normviolating behavior. (3) Hormones may
identify for whom the social controls are
necessary and effective. (4) Hormones
may help to identify which variables in
the model are truly sociological in their
effects.

In this paper, I have shown that biosocial theories are not difficult to construct and that integration of wellknown and easily measurable biological

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

10 Udry

characteristics into sociological models
can provide new insights into sociological processes. Other sociologists working in biologically-contested areas of research may find that incorporation of
the biological theory into biosocial research designs may provide more convincing defense against competing theory than mere argument against it. At
the same time, they may find that their
sociological understanding is enhanced,
even when this means conceding variance to biology.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported under Grant
No. HD 12806 from the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development.
Thanks to Freda Cameron for the computer
analysis.

REFERENCES

Barnet, G., C. W. CuHIana, and V. Licxo.
1983. Effects of marijuana on testosterone
in male subjects. Theor. Biol. 104:685-692.

BERTELLO, P., L. Gurioul, G. GATTE, G.
Pinna, and A. ANGELL. 1986. Short-term
ethanol ingestion can affect the testicular response to single-dose human chorionic gonadotropin in normal subjects. J. Endocrinol. Invest. 9:249-252.

DaITZMAN, REID, and MARVIN ZUCKERMAN.
1980. Disinhibitory sensation seeking, personality and gonadal hormones. Personal.
Individ. Diff. 1:103-110.

EHRENKRANTZ, J., E. Biiss, and M.H.
SCHEARD. 1974. Plasma testosterone: Correlation with aggressive behavior and social
dominance in man. Psychosom. Med.
36:469-—475.

FiscHBEIN, S. 1977. Intra-pair similarity in physical growth of monozygotic and dizygotic
twins during puberty. Annals Hum. Biol.
4:417-430.

FuLkEr, DAvip W., Sysit B. G. EysENck, and
MARVIN ZUCKERMAN. 1980. A genetic and
environmental analysis of sensation seeking. J. Res. Personal. 14:261-281.

GLUECK, SHELDON, and ELEANOR GLUECK.

Social Biology

1956. Physique and delinquency. Harper,
New York.

Gove, WALTER R. 1985. The effect of age and
gender on deviant behavior: A biopsychosocial perspective, p. 115-144. In Alice S.
Rossi (ed.), Gender and the life course. Aldine Publishing Company, New York.

GREENBERG, Davin. 1985. Age, crime, and social explanation. Amer. J. Sociol. 91:1—21.

Hirscut, Travis. 1969. Causes of delinquency.
Univ. of California Press, Berkeley.

Hirscut, TRAVIS, and MICHAEL GOTTFRIEDSON.
1983. Age and the explanation of crime.
Amer. J. Sociol. 89:552—584.

JessoR, RICHARD, and Suimtey Jessor. 1977.
Problem behavior and psychosocial development. Academic Press, New York.

KREUTZ, L. E., and R. M. Rose. 1972. Assessment of aggressive behavior and plasma testosterone in a young criminal population.
Psychosom. Med. 34:321~332.

LisKA, ALLEN E., and Mark D. REED. 1985.
Ties to conventional institutions and delinquency: Estimating reciprocal effects.
Amer. Sociol. Rev. 50:547—560.

MEIKLE, A. WAYNE, JoHN D. StRINGHAM, D.
Tmortny BisHop, and DEE W. WEsT. 1988.
Quantitating genetic and nongenetic factors
influencing androgen production and clearance rates. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabol.
67:104—-109.

MontTl, P. M., W. A. Brown, and D.D.
CorRIVEAU. 1977. Testosterone and components of aggressive and sexual behavior in
man. Amer. J. Psychiat. 134:692~694.

Morris, NAomM! M., and J. RicHaRD Upry.
1980. Validation of a self-administered instrument to assess stage of adolescent development. J. Youth Adol. 9:271-280.

NrescHaG, E. 1979. The endocrine function of
the human testes in regard to sexuality. Jn
Sex hormones and behavior, 183. Exerpta
Medica. Ciba Foundation Symposium 62,
Amsterdam.

OLtweus, Dan, Ake Mattsson, Dairy SCHALLING, and Hats Low. 1980. Testosterone, aggression, physical, and personality dimensions in normal adolescent males. Psychosom. Med. 42:253-269.

Rowe, Davip C., and D. Wayne Oscoon.
1984. Heredity and sociological theories of
delinquency: A reconsideration. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 49:526—540.

TANNER, J. M. 1962. Growth at adolescence.
2nd ed. Blackwell, Oxford, England.

Ubry, J. RicHarp, and Joun O.G. BILLy.
1987. Initiation of coitus in early adolescence. Amer. Social. Rev. 52:841-855.

ZUCKERMAN, Marvin. 1984. Sensation seeking:
A comparative approach to a human trait.
Behav. Brain Sci. 7:413-—471.

 
