Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Sex control, sex preferences, and the future of the
family

Gale Largey

To cite this article: Gale Largey (1972) Sex control, sex preferences, and the future of the
family, Social Biology, 19:4, 379-392, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.998801 1

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9988011

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 11 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Sex Control, Sex Preferences, and the

Future of the Family

Gale Largey

Department of Sociology
Mansfield State College
Mansfield, Pennsylvania

Included in the so-called ‘Biological
Revolution” is a projection that within the
next twenty-five years parents will be able
to choose the sex of their children. They
will be able to engage in sex preselection
or what is sometimes referred to as “sex
control.” Needless to say, the potential
development, diffusion, and social impact
of such an innovation has evoked a great
deal of serious discussion (Taylor, 1968;
Fleming, 1966; Rosenfeld, 1969; Francoeur, 1970; Jost, 1970; Markle and Nam,
1971). In this paper, the author will review
the basis of that discussion.

SEX CONTROL

Five different sex control? methods have
been proposed. The first method would
involve the use of rhythm and douching by
the wife. Landrum Shettles (1960; Rorvik,
1970a, 19706) has already developed and
tested this method with five hundred
couples and claims that it is 80% effective.

1In a previous article in this journal Markle
and Nam (1971) used the term “sex predetermination” when they discussed techniques that
would enable parents to choose the sex of children.
This writer prefers the terms “sex control” or “sex
preselection,” because the former term is also used
to describe techniques for determining the sex of
an embryo or fetus that is already being carried
by a female.

 

Basically, it entails two interrelated procedures: (1) the proper timing of intercourse during the menstrual cycle—for
male children, intercourse should be timed
as closely to the moment of ovulation as
possible, while for a female intercourse
should cease two or three days before ovulation; and, (2) douching in order to create
an environment in the reproductive tract
which is conducive to the preferred sperm
—acidic douche, gynosperm; alkaline
douche, androsperm.

The Shettles method coincides with the
findings of Kleegman who reported that
“with exposure to pregnancy 2 to 24 hours
before ovulation, the babies were predominantly males (78 percent); with exposure
to pregnancy 36 or more hours before
ovulation, the babies were predominantly
female (Rorvik, 1970a:89).”

Shettles and Kleegman accounted for the
success of their method by arguing that
androsperm are incapacitated by acid secretions in the reproductive tract, and gynosperm by alkaline cervical fluid. They
observed that the pH balance of the reproductive tract changes during the menstrual
cycle with alkalinity increasing greatly
during ovulation. Furthermore, Shettles
(1960) contended that androsperm swim

379
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

380

faster than gynosperm. Accordingly, if
intercourse occurred shortly after ovulation
(when the egg was high in the fallopian
tube), there would be impregnation by a
Y sperm.?

Special type of diaphragm or prophylactic. E. James Liebermann (1968, p. 27)
has predicted “the time when couples will
determine the sex of their children in
advance through a special type of diaphragm.” His prediction is based on evidence that gynosperm are larger than
androsperm and the notion that they may
be selectively separated prior to entering
the reproductive tract. He has suggested
that diaphragms, or perhaps prophylactics,
may be designed to act as filters rather than
as contraceptives. In addition, it has also
been pointed out that foams and jellies may
be developed to affect the motility of one
or the other type of sperm and that they
could be used in combination with the
special type of diaphragm or condom
(see also Ramsey, 1970; Rosenfeld, 1969).
Still, while the filtering of sperm may seem
like a rather simple process, the difficulty
must be emphasized. After all, sperm are
microscopic in size, and the material needed
to filter them has yet to be developed.

Pill. A third projected method of sex
control was forecasted by Charles Birch
(Brody, 1968, p. 28). He contended that
“parents may soon decide the sex of their
children by taking pills.” As a geneticist,
Birch suggested that through the use of
pills we soon may be able to control a

2 Supporting Shettles’ position, O’Ferrall, Meacham, and Foreman (1968) added a further suggestion regarding sex preselection. They argued
that the androsperm move faster because they
carry less genetic materia], but more significantly,
they have a shorter life span. Thus, if coitus
occurs within very short intervals, the sperm
population are “young,” and the faster moving
male spermatazoa have a greater chance of reaching the ovum first. On the other hand, after a
long period of continence, the short-lived, Ybearing spermatazoa are considerably reduced,

making it more likely for one of the gynosperm
to fertilize the ovum.

Largey

Social Biology

male’s generation of either the andro- or
gynosperm. Furthermore, he suggested that
we may be able to induce biochemical conditions within the reproductive tract of a
female, making her receptive to one or the
other type of sperm.

Birch’s basic notion is supported indirectly by recent studies. Schuster and
Schuster (1969, and unpublished paper)
have shown that stress significantly affects
the biochemical condition of a potential
parent in such a way as to determine the
sex of the offspring. They (1969, p. 336)
concluded: “the male parent when under
stress inhibits the motility or viability of
androsperms, while the female parent under
stress inhibits the motility or viability of
gynosperm prior to fertilization.”

Other evidence which has indicated the
influence of biochemical changes includes
the following: Shearer, Davidson, and
Finch (1967), Taylor (1969), and Taylor
and Levine (1970) found that women who
developed schizophrenia within one month
of conception delivered only females,
whereas women who developed postpartum
schizophrenia tended to deliver males;
Toivanen (1970, p. 188) reported that
“mothers with toxemia of pregnancy had
boys significantly more often than the
control mothers, and that the sex ratio of
males to females increased with the severity
of toxemia”; Rubin (1967) found a declining sex ratio with sibling birth order
and plural deliveries, suggesting that a
biochemically changed intrauterine environment was responsible; A. C. Guyton (1966)
in his study has shown that the motility
of sperm is affected by female body
temperature, with an androsperm impregnation more likely at higher body temperatures; and, Healy and Van Houten (1970)
found that of ten women who ingested
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) within
one month of conception, all gave birth to
females,

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

~

Vol. 19, No. 4

Sperm treatment-artificial insemination.
A fourth projected method to preselect the
sex of children would require a special
treatment of the husband’s semen followed
by an artificial insemination of the wife. A
medical practitioner would take the male
semen and separate the andro- and gynosperm through one of three techniques:
centrifugation, electrophoresis, or agglutination. Then the preferred sperm would be
used to fertilize the female egg. Cederqvist
and Fuchs (1970, p. 64) have contended:
“In the not too distant future this procedure will undoubtedly become available.”

The centrifugation method of separation
is based on the notion that spermatazoa
may be separated at high speeds because
gynosperm are heavier than androsperm.
Using centrifugation, Lindahl] (1958) reported effective separation of bull semen
and found that by artificially impregnating
cows with the more readily sedimented
portion of the bull spermatazoa fertility
was decreased, but the number of male
calves was relatively high. The gynosperm
were apparently more sensitive than the
androsperm and were incapacitated by the
high gravitational forces (see also Branham,
1970).

Electrophoresis has received more attention than centrifugation (Gordon, 1958;
Koltzoff, 1933; Lewin, 1956; Schilling,
1966; Sevinc, 1968). It involves separation
of the semen by use of an electric field. It
is contended that by taking a diluted solution of semen and passing an electric current through it, the androsperm tend to
drift to the cathode; the gynosperm, to the
anode. Gordon (1958) found that rabbits
artificially inseminated with sperm from
around the anode produced 71% females,
while from the cathode, 64% males. His
results were supported by Sevinc’s experiments (1968).

The third technique for separating
spermatazoa is agglutination. It is premised

Sex Control, Preferences, and the Family

 

381

upon the finding that gynosperm have a
greater density than androsperm, and therefore sediment more rapidly in a gravitational field (Bhattacharya, 1966; Keynes,
1967; Rowson and Moore, 1966; Schilling,
1966). In his experiments with rabbits,
Bhattacharya found that sperm from the
bottom of a sedimentation column, which
had settled fastest and which presumably
had the highest density, gave about 75%
females in artificial insemination tests, while
sperm from the top of the column gave only
25% females. Schilling (1966) had similar
results using the technique on cattle, but
Rowson and Moore were unable to replicate
them.

In short, sperm treatment followed by
artificial insemination appears to be a
feasible method of sex control. Nonetheless,
in view of its procedures, one may be
skeptical that it will be widely accepted
among prospective parents.

Selected abortion. Finally, it has been
suggested that sex control may be possible
by removing or aborting embryos of an
unwanted sex. In this regard, R. D. Keynes
(1967, p. 46) concluded:

I am far from confident that it will eventually prove possible to separate X- and
Y-sperm. I must therefore mention an entirely different approach to the pre-selection
of sex, which is more promising in the sense
that attainment of the goal seems much
closer, though perhaps less so in that it involves technically more complex processes
than the centrifugation or equivalent treatment of semen. This is the idea . . . that if
one could remove the blastocyst or early
embryos from the mother and determine
their sex without harming them, one might
then replace in the uterus only the embryos
of the desired sex.

Keynes’ position derived from the work
of Gardner and Edwards (1968). Using
microsurgical methods, they reported removal and reimplantation of rabbit blastocysts and found that while only 20% of the
reimplantations developed, all of them were
of the predicted sex. Improvement of this
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

382

technique appears likely and Weatherbee
(1968, p. 119) has described it as “the
first step toward controlling or eradicating
sex-linked hereditary disease.”

Coinciding with blastocyst removal and
reimplantation methods are the rapid advances in sex predetermination techniques
(Grumbach, 1969; Abbo, 1970; Sloves,
1970; Khudr and Benirschke, 1971). Recently, blood test procedures have been
developed for determining fetal sex six
months prior to birth. As further studies
assure earlier predetermination of sex, one
may anticipate rationalizations for aborting
a very young fetus because it is an “unwanted” sex. The attractiveness of this
preselection method would be improved as
techniques for abortion are developed
which will enable abortion to be biochemically induced, instead of requiring an
operation (see Culliton, 1970).

In short, we may anticipate the development of a variety of sex control methods.
These include: rhythm and douching; the
use of a special type of diaphragm or
prophylactic; a pill; sperm treatment followed by artificial insemination; and, selective abortion. While the first three methods
would probably be most acceptable to
prospective parents, it appears that the
latter are the most immediately feasible.
Moreover, despite claims about the rhythmdouching method, the latter two methods
would appear to be the most effective.

SEX PREFERENCES

As sex contro] methods are developed,
their impact on society will depend on the
extent to which they are utilized to fulfill
sex preferences. Accordingly, one must
consider current sex preferences, and their
importance in fertility dynamics. If indeed
sex control is widely adopted while current
sex preferences remain constant, then it
may generate significant social changes.

Largey

Social Biology

Studies of sex preference among college
students. Responses largely from unmarried
college students regarding their sex preferences for children are necessarily biased
because of the hypothetical nature of the
responses; nevertheless, studies by Dinitz,
Dynes, and Clarke (1954), Markle (1969),
Markle and Nam (1971), and a study by
this writer (1970) supported the assumption that there is a strong preference for a
male first child and a significant number of
persons desire families whose sex composition is “more boys than girls.”

Regarding preference for the sex of the
first child, Dinitz, Dynes, and Clarke reported that 60% of their sample (185 male
and 195 female students of Ohio State
University) preferred a boy, while only 5%
preferred a girl, and 34%, either. Markle
and Nam (1971) recorded similar findings:
79% preferred a boy; 8%, a girl; and 13%
had no preference (of 105 male and 160
female students). Likewise, in the author’s
study of 222 State University College at
Buffalo students: 63% preferred boys; 7%,
girls; and 30%, no preference.

When asked about an only child: 92%
of the males and 66% of the females
wanted a boy (Dinitz, Dynes, and Clarke,
1954). In terms of desired sex-composition
of future family, Dinitz, Dynes, and Clarke
reported that over 55% (compared with
53% in the author’s study) wanted an
equal number of male and female children.
Over 4% (author’s study, 4%), however,
desired an “all male family” compared to
less than one-half per cent (author’s study,
0.5%) who wanted an “all female family.”
In addition, over 34% (author’s study,
37%) of the respondents desired a predominantly male family in contrast to only
6% (author’s study, 5%) who expressed
a preference for a predominantly female
family. In short, respondents expressed a
male preference for the first child, the only

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 4

child, and the sex composition of the
family.®

In the Dinitz, Dynes, and Clarke study,
of all the variables which were assumed to
be related to sex preference, only religious
affiliation appeared to be statistically significant. As hypothesized, Catholic and
Jewish respondents showed a much stronger
male preference than did Protestants. Significantly fewer Protestants had a definite
male preference for either the first child
or the sex composition of the family. Again,
the author’s pilot study findings concurred
with those of Dinitz, and it was particularly
interesting that sex preferences had not
changed over the sixteen year period.

Studies of sex preferences of married
couples. Several sociological studies have
attempted to assess the importance of
parental sex preferences: How does the
actual, ideal, or planned sex composition of
a family relate to fertility dynamics and
family size? How strong are parental
preferences to bear a child or children of
a particular sex? What are some of the
underlying social-psychological factors contributing to sex preference?

In the first of these studies, Winston
(1931, 1933) assumed the preference for
male offspring, and he hypothesized that
upon having a male child, families were
less likely to have more children. To test

3 These findings are remarkably similar with
those of New Delhi school children. E. Pohlman
and K. Rao (1969) found that 93% preferred the
first child to be a boy; and 68% wanted “more
boys than girls” in their future family.

4It is unfortunate that many of the sociological
speculations about the potential effects of sex
control are based on studies of the expressed sex
preferences of largely unmarried college students.
A far more adequate basis would be the preferences of married couples. It must be recognized
that the decision to use sex control, and the
further decision to select children of a particular
sex will necessarily be a joint or couple decision.
By couple preferences this author means ascertaining that of the husband as well as the wife—
not assuming, as some studies do, that the wife’s
response is consistent with the husband’s.

Sex Control, Preferences, and the Family

383

this, sex ratios were computed for the lastborn children and for all children ever born
as recorded for 5,466 families in the
Abridged Compendium of American Genealogy. He found that generally higher sex
ratios prevailed for the last-born children
(117.4:100) than for all children ever born
(105.6:100). He also found that more twochild families had two sons than two
daughters and that of those with two children of the opposite sex, more had as the
last child a son than a daughter.

Winston (1933, p. 231) concluded from
his findings:

The prevalence of the desire for male
offspring on the part of socially superior
parents, together with their knowledge of
methods of birth control, appears to be sig
nificant in relation to the higher sex ratio
at birth of the last-born children.5

Harper (1936) also found a relatively
high sex ratio for the last-born children of
11,937 families in Burke’s Peerage and
Who’s Who in America. She contended,
however, that preference for children of
both sexes was more prevalent than favoritism toward a given sex.

In his study of a group of U.S. Army
Corps officers and their wives, Flanagan
(1942) asked: “If pre-selection of the sex
of children were made possible by medical
science what affect would this have upon
the size of your family?” About 89% of
the officers and 82% of wives answering
stated that such a condition would have
made no difference in the size of their
family or plans for additional children.
Interestingly, about 11% of the officers
and 17% of the wives replied that such a

5 Winston’s conclusion has special sociological
significance since biologically the sex ratio appears
to decrease with birth order. After a study of
158,000 families, Renkoken (1961, 1963) concluded that male pregnancies can immunize certain
mothers, and this immunization can be harmful
to following male fetuses, thus reducing the sex
ratio.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

384. Largey

condition might have caused them to have
one to three more children, while less than
1% of either husbands or wives declared it
would have meant one child less.®

Since the study was post factum, the
responses may have been biased rationalizations; nevertheless, it suggested an important point, i.e., that preselection of sex
may serve as an incentive for larger
families, rather than limiting the size of
families, particularly if parents are unwilling to use sex-control innovations to determine the sex of their first two children but
are willing thereafter. In short, one must be
cautious about making the quick assumption that acceptance and use of sex-control
will necessarily reduce average family size.

In another post factum study (Clare and
Kiser, 1952), sex composition of completed
families was correlated with sex preferences, and the authors concerned themselves with the effects of sex preference on
family size. On the basis of the data, they
rejected Winston’s position that preferences
for males generally lead to larger families;
and they concluded (p. 483):

Preference regarding the sex of children
is not a major determinant of family size
except among a small proportion of couples.
. .. most couples tend to be satisfied with
the sex of the children they have and sex

preference is an important determinant
among relatively few couples.”

€ One must be careful of generalizing from one
specific subgroup to the total population. It is
quite possible, for instance, that military and nonmilitary value orientations may differ.

7Clare and Kiser’s conclusion seems to be
inconsistent with their findings. Forty-nine per
cent of the wives in their study, who had children
of each sex at the time of the study, offered
“already having a child of each sex” as one of
the three most important factors for not having
another child (p. 666).

Furthermore, Pohlman has pointed out that
ex post facto statements of sex preference by the
parents are largely rationalizations; and, thus it
is not surprising that sex preference does not
appear as a Significant influence in fertility dynamics, Analyzing Clare and Kiser’s own data,
PohIman reported that statements of preference-—
“if you could have only two children”—correlated
highly with the actual sex of children. For ex
Social Biology

Though interesting, the conclusions of
Clare and Kiser have drawn criticism from
Jater investigators. Using the 1954 edition
of Who’s Who in America as a source of
data, Fancher (1956, p. 322) concluded
that “parents with two children of like-sex
are more likely to have a third child than
are those with one of each sex.” In a related
finding, Sears, Macoby, and Levin (1957,
p. 39) reported that the sex of existing
children affects the attitude of mothers
toward pregnancy:

There was a tendency for the mother to
be happier about a new pregnancy if her
existing children were girls only rather than
boys only, or both boys and girls. Indeed,

she was very likely to be least enthusiastic
if she already had children of both sexes.

Analyzing data from the 1955 Growth of
American Family Study, Freedman, Freedman, and Whelpton (1960, p. 141) concluded:

Preference for at least one child of each
sex has a minor, yet significant influence in
determining whether couples expect to have
an additional child. Moreover its importance increased with the number of children
of identical sex.

Whelpton, Campbell, and Patterson
(1966) arrived at the same conclusion; and
Westoff et al. (1961, p. 295) argued:

The Clare-Kiser conclusion seems to imply that sex-preference is not an important
enough motivating factor to affect the pattern of fertility for more than a few couples.
There is evidence to the contrary. Sex of
the first offspring affects at least the length
of the subsequent birth interval. . . . sex
preference is an important motivating factor to affect fertility patterns, including
perhaps, family size .... Desired size of
family is not independent of a preference
for a particular sex composition.

At this juncture one may ask: Which
position is correct? The Clare-Kiser interpretation or the Westoff interpretation?
This writer would argue that the evidence

ample, of fathers with two boys, 41% said they

wanted two boys compared with 3% of the
fathers who had two girls.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 4

from various national samples supports the
latter. In American society, sex preference
does appear to be a factor in fertility dynamics; and, while a male preference for
the first child has been demonstrated, one
should recognize that many American
parents prefer a balanced sex ratio in their
families.

What about other societies? Studies of
sex preference in other societies suggest
that they may be stronger and more
definite than those of American society,
and hence sex preference may be an even
more critical factor in fertility dynamics.§

Data collected by Dahlberg in Sweden
(1948), Freedman in Taiwan (1963),
Agarwala in India (1961), The Population
Council in Turkey (1964), Bernstein
(1951), Gini (1956), and Giurovich
(1956), in Italy, and Prachuabmoh in
Thailand (1967) support the position that
sex preference is indeed a significant factor
in the fertility dynamics of some societies.
In each study it was concluded that the
desire for more children is closely correlated with the number of living sons; and
it was reported that parents decided to
limit the number of offspring most often
after a desired family sex composition had
been achieved. For example, Freedman
(1963) questioned Taiwanese parents with
3 or more children: of parents without
sons, 79% wanted another child; of parents
with 3 sons, only 8% wanted another child.

In their analysis of fertility dynamics in
India, May and Heer (1968, p. 77) observed that son survivorship is a commonly
expressed motive for having a large family.
Couples have many children in order to be
sure that they will have at least one son

8In her unpublished study of “Son Preferences
Around the World,” Williamson offered the following: Strong preference for sons in rural areas
of North America, India, and Pakistan; moderate
preference for sons in Subsaharan Africa, Turkey,
Lebanon, Israel, Korea, Taiwan, and China; and
slight or no preference for sons in the United
States, Europe, and Japan.

 

Sex Control, Preferences, and the Family

385

who will survive them to their old age.
Consequently, the desire for sons may at
times be as significant as the ignorance of
family planning methods in the fertility
dynamics of Indian families.

Fertility research by Morrison (1957,
p. 81) supports the foregoing position. He
found that the willingness to use contraceptive devices increased with the number
of living sons. Likewise, Pohlman (1967,
p. 274) reported that “among Indian males
having vasectomies, the proportion with
less than two daughters is significantly
larger than the proportion with less than
two sons.”

At this point the reader may ask: Are
there any other factors, besides son
survivorship, which are related to sex
preference? Are sex preferences related to
ethnicity, race, religion, class, education,
occupation, or community background?

With regard to the foregoing question,
Gini (1956) compared sex preferences of
Italians with those of Americans. He found
that the male sex preference was indeed
stronger in Italy. Moreover, he generalized
that son preference in any society is probably related to the status of men and
women within it. In other words, the higher
the male status and/or dominance within a
society, the greater is the male sex preference.

Several attempts have also been made to
relate sex preference with religion. Unfortunately, the findings have been somewhat
unclear. In their study of college students,
Dinitz, Dynes, and Clarke (1954) reported
that 72% of the Catholic and Jewish respondents, as compared with 50% of the
Protestants, indicated a male preference
for the first child. Yet, when Westoff
(1959) examined variables related to the
desire for a third child, he reported that
sex preference was important to Protestants
but not to Catholics and Jews. Accordingly,
one may speculate that Catholics and Jews
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

386 Largey

are most concerned about the sex of the
first child, whereas Protestants are more
concerned about the sex composition of
their family.

In relation to class, Rainwater (1965,
p. 131) found that “concern about the sex
of children seemed to be at its low point
in the upper-middle class and at its high
point in the white upper-lower class.”
Overall, and outside of the highest status
groups, Rainwater observed that at least
one-third of the couples interviewed expressed an unsolicited, spontaneous concern
about their children’s sex, with a very
slight tendency for men to be concerned
more often than women. Rainwater’s findings coincided with Giurovich’s (1956)
study of Italian couples; and he concluded
that the concern of lower class couples to
have sons may be a function of their belief
that sons are a greater asset and provide
greater opportunity to facilitate the family’s
upward mobility.

Another factor often thought to affect
sex preference is rural-urban background.
This notion was examined cross-culturally
by Williamson (unpublished). On the basis
of her studies, she established that ruralites
have a stronger male preference than urbanites, probably because of the greater
importance of the male in an agricultural
situation. Moreover, Williamson suggested
that the rural-urban factor has a more pronounced influence on sex preference than
the religious factor.

Finally, there have been some efforts to
understand sex preferences in terms of ideas
such as “boys are easier to raise than girls,”
or “it costs less to raise a boy than a girl,”
or “it is important to have a son to carry
on the family name.” Examining these notions in the pilot study, this writer found
that while approximately 67% felt “one sex
was no easier to raise than the other;” of
the remaining 33%, twice as many felt

Social Biology

boys, rather than girls, to be easier to raise.
This finding coincides with an earlier AIPO
poll of parents and prospective parents in
which 42% said boys were easier to raise,
and 23% said girls were easier (Strunk,
1947). In terms of cost, only 2% felt “girls
cost less than boys to raise,” while 35%
felt the opposite. The motive “‘wanting a
son to carry on the name” seems widespread, particularly in patrilineal societies
(see Dahlberg, 1948).

In sum, there is scattered evidence which
indicates that sex preferences are commonly
held by parents. In some societies (such as
India), and in some subgroups within societies (such as the Jews, ruralites, lower
class, and Italians), there appears to be a
marked preference for male children. However, the extent to which the sex preferences influence fertility dynamics in general
is widely debated and rather uncertain.
Nonetheless, let us now turn to some of
the recent speculations about the potential
impact of sex control on society if an effective and widely acceptable method of sex
control is developed, and if current sex
preferences remain constant.

SEX CONTROL AND SEX PREFERENCE:
SOCIETAL CONSEQUENCES

It is conjectured that the widespread
acceptance and use of sex control to fulfill
existent parental sex preferences may generate changes in the sex ratio, the average
family size, and the birth order patterns of
most societies, particularly in those societies with a very strong sex preference. It
is feared by some scientists that such
changes may sequentially produce changes
in the nature of social relationships and
ultimately in the social systems themselves.
In this regard, two prominent sociologists,
Meyer Nimkoff (1951a, 19516, 1962) and
Amitai Etzioni (1968), have offered some
scenarios.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 4

In his essay “Technology, Biology, and
the Changing Family,” Nimkoff (1951a,
p. 26) noted:

Sociologists recognize no deterministic
influence of biological factors in the behavior of man but emphasize instead the creative role of the learning process. Up to
recent times, however, they have been dealing with man as a relatively stable animal.
Now a new dynamism is being introduced
by the notable biological discoveries, and
biological man may be subject to greater
change. This invites a fresh orientation to
biological man. While sociologists are not
interested in biology per se, sociologists
will need to acquaint themselves with the
biological nature of man and the new developments in biology if they are to deal
intelligently with the probable social effects
of the new developments.

In assessing the impact of sex control on
the family and society, Nimkoff (1951,
p. 22) cautioned that “dictatorial governments in particular may find sex control
appealing and may derive an advantage
from the reluctance of democratic states to
adopt the practice and/or to favor male
birth.” He also suggested that an unbalanced sex ratio may necessitate changes in
marriage and courtship patterns, as well as
familial relationships.

Etzioni, like Nimkoff, assumed that the
acceptance and use of methods for preselection of sex would at least temporarily upset
the sex ratio. In exploring what the societal
consequences may be, Etzioni speculated
from the position that most forms of social
behavior are sex correlated and hence the
changes in sex composition are very likely
to affect most aspects of social life.

For instance, Etzioni (1968, p. 1109)
argued:

Women read more books, see more plays
and in general consume more culture than
men in contemporary United States. Because women are greater consumers of culture a significant and cumulative male
surplus will thus produce a society with

some of the rougher features of a frontier
town.

Sex Control, Preferences, and the Family

387

Etzioni (p. 1110) also contended that
“interracial and interclass tensions are
likely to be intensified” because some
groups, lower classes and minorities specifically, seem to be more male-oriented than
the rest of society. Hence, while the sex imbalance in a society-wide average may be
only a few percentage points, that of some
groups is likely to be much higher.®

The political ramifications of the use of
sex control were also given consideration.
Etzioni noted that men vote the Democratic
party significantly more than women; and,
he suggested that a 7% increase in male
voters (which he projected would occur if
sex control were used to fulfill current
United States sex preferences) could undermine the two-party system to a point where
Democratic control would be uninterrupted
(see Brody 1968, p. 57).

It was also suggested that there may
occur some delay in the marrying age of
the males, some rise in prostitution and
homosexuality, and some increase in the
number of males who never marry. It is
also possible that polygamy would be instituted as it was among the Mormons and
other groups where the sex ratio became
unbalanced.

In short, as the demographer H. L.
Greenberg (1950, p. 1) has noted:

All social life is affected by the proportion of the sexes. Wherever there would be
a considerable predominance of one sex
over the other, there would be less prospect
of a well-ordered social life. Unbalanced
numbers inexorably produce unbalanced
behavior.

Though quite interesting, the speculations of Nimkoff, Etzioni, and others war
® Meier (1968) speculated that the upper-classes
will be the first to use sex control methods, and
thus they will be the first to have a shortage of
females. Subsequently, the upper-class males will
be forced to marry lower-class females, thus
generating an upward social mobility for lowerclass females.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

388

rant scrutiny on several grounds. First, it
is highly questionable that an unbalanced
sex ratio would necessarily generate “rough
male-like” conditions analogous with those
of the frontier towns. There are many social
institutions, such as monasteries, which
have quite unbalanced sex ratios without
“roughness.” Societies can cope with an
unbalanced sex ratio.

Secondly, Nimkoff and Etzioni failed to
recognize the role of government other than
suggesting that totalitarian governments
might use sex control to build up their
military power. This writer would suggest
that if a balanced sex ratio is as critical as
they suggest, then it is most probable that
legislation would be enacted to prevent or
curb an imbalance. Thus, families of the
future may be planned (under government
influence) in terms of the sex as well as the
number of children.

Thirdly, the analyses of Nimkoff and
Etzioni suggest that the norms and patterns
of behavior will change to accommodate an
altered sex ratio, while at the same time
current sex preferences would remain constant. It is quite probable that sex preferences will not remain constant, and that sex
preferences themselves would change since
an overabundance of males would initiate
a demand for females. Furthermore, it is
possible that if sex role differentiation continues to be de-emphasized, then current
male sex preferences will become increasingly less pronounced. Perhaps, therefore,
a market model is more appropriate in
considering the societal effects of sex control. It seems more likely that sex preference will change than sexual and marital
norms.

Finally, one must bear in mind that sex
control has potentially differential social
effects in terms of the various class, racial,
ethnic, and religious groupings. As mentioned earlier, these groupings do differ in
their sex preferences; and, it may well be

Largey

Social Biology

that sex control would upset the sex ratio
more significantly among the Jews, for instance, than the Protestants, or the Italians
but not the British.

While the speculations of Etzioni and
Nimkoff are quite thought provoking, some
less sensational considerations have been
afforded by others. For example, it has
been argued by Markle and Nam (1971)
that the availability of sex control would
significantly contribute to a reduction in
the birth rate, the reason being that couples
would not bear additional children in order
to have one or the other of a preferred sex.
In this regard it must first be recognized
that there are some parents (as indicated
by Flanagan, 1942) who would bear additional children if they were sure of the sex;
and, secondly, that the birth rate would be
potentially greater in those groups and societies in which a surplus of females would
be produced (see Serow and Evans, 1970).

Another consideration relates to birth
order. Philip Handler (1970, p. 22) has
pointed out that “since the position in the
birth order has an effect on both physical
and personality traits of developing offspring, the consequences of the first-born
being all boys and the second-born all girls
might well be reflected in behavioral shifts
of the population.” For example, the firstborn tend to be more anxiety-prone, more
dependent, and form more friendships (see
Schachter, 1959; Forer, 1969). The potential significance of such behavioral shifts is
unclear at this time. Certainly research is
needed.

On the positive side, Pohlman (1968)
and Uddenberg, Almgren, and Nilsson
(1971) have argued that sex control may
have some potentially beneficial effects for
the family. They have noted that some
children have defective or confused identities because they are of the “wrong sex.”
Parents sometimes treat their actual offspring as if they were their preferred off
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 4

spring; they treat “little girls like little
boys” and vice versa. Furthermore, the
problems of having a child or children of
the “wrong sex” often have ramifications
in the context of the whole family constellation.

In sum, if current sex preferences continue, then it is speculated that the acceptance and adoption of sex control may have
any or all of the following social consequences: (1) a temporarily unbalanced sex
ratio generating change in norms, behavioral patterns, and perhaps current sex
preferences themselves so as to rebalance
the sex ratio; (2) a reduction in the average family size generating a reduction in
the total birth rate; (3) an accentuation of
first-born characteristics in the male population; and, (4) a satisfaction of parental
sex preferences leading to a greater acceptance of offspring generating beneficial
psychological effects within children and
the family constellation itself.

FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

We have reviewed the literature concerning sex control techniques, sex preferences,
and projected societal consequences of sex
control. In concluding, it seems appropriate
to raise some of the pertinent questions
that might be considered in further research,

Concerning sex control: Are there any
natural mechanisms of sex control? Why is
there an increase in the number of male
births following war? Why do certain geographic areas have a much higher sex ratio
of births than other areas? What kinds of
medical research on sex control should be
supported by the government and/or foundations? Which types of sex control methods would be most acceptable to parents?
What are the legal and ethical implications
of sex preselection, particularly if selective
abortion is made available? Would abortion
be justified if it led to the prevention of a

Sex Control, Preferences, and the Family

389

sex-linked disease? Should it be compulsory?

Concerning sex preferences: What are
the underlying motives? Do they originate
with childhood wishes? To what extent do
sex preferences vary among social classes
and religious and ethnic groups? What
effects will the female liberation movement
have upon female sex preferences? Is the
preference for males an anachronistic reflection of the traditional patriarchal, rural
society? To what extent does the sex of the
first child affect parental sex preferences
for other children? Will spouses argue
about which sex they prefer a child to be?
Why do adopting parents prefer girls?

To what extent do parents resent or
reject a child of an “unwanted sex?” How
much psychological harm is suffered by
children who are born of the “wrong” sex?
Are “sissies” and “tomboys” the products
of a parental want for a child of the opposite sex? Are familial tensions precipitated by children of an undesired sex? Is
familial stability associated with any particular sex composition?

How influential is the sex preference
factor in fertility dynamics in this and
other societies? Do parents bear additional
children in order to have one or more of a
particular sex?

Concerning the social effects of sex control: Would sex control lead to an unbalanced sex ratio in societies having very
strong sex preferences? If so, would sex
preferences then change? To what degree
are norms governing sex contingent upon
the “valued” or preferred sex in a society?
Would an excess of males cause an upward
social mobility of females?

What rationalizations would emerge to
socially legitimate the use of sex control?
Simply parental preferences or arguments
that it would provide “happier families,”
“help alleviate sex-linked diseases,” or
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

390

“provide the government with more males
to build up its army?”

Who is to say how many girls there
should be and how many boys? Parents?
Society? If it is determined that sex control
threatens the well-being of society, should
it be curbed?

Finally, there are some very challenging
but perhaps unanswerable questions: Is
technology that enables men to control the
sex of their children beneficial to the evolution of man? Would the control of sex
upset man’s delicate relationship with the
life process? Would the control of sex create other quite uncontrollable conditions?
These questions continue to challenge men
in their risky struggle to control their life
conditions.

From a more general outlook, one might
recognize that sex control is just one of the
many medical innovations that will undoubtedly revolutionize the family. In
recent years, scientists have been predicting
that not only will sex control soon become
available, but also a further prolongation of
life, genetic engineering, and even cloning
(asexual reproduction). Thus, there is an
urgent need for not only historical, crosscultural, and present-time studies of the
family, but also serious analyses of the
future family. It seems quite clear that
social scientists studying the family and
marriage must reconsider many of their
conceptualizations in light of the so-called
“Biological Revolution.”

REFERENCES

Asso, G. 1970. Prenatal determination of fetal sex
and chromosomal complement. Lancet 1:216217.

Acarwata, S. N. 1961. A family planning survey
in four Delhi villages. Pop. Stud. 15:110~115.

Brarracnarva, B. C. 1966. An attempt to predetermine the sex of calves by artificial insemination with spermatazoa separated by sedimentation. Nature 211:863-864.

BranHAM, J. M. 1970. Separation of rabbit semen
into two populations of spermatazoa by centrifugation. J. Reprod. Fertil. 22:469-482.

Bropy, JANe. 1968. Political imbalance is foreseen

 

Largey

Social Biology

if sex of offspring is controlled. New York
Times, September 15, p. 57.

CepERQvIsT, Lars L., and Fritz Fucus. 1970.
Antenatal sex determination. Clin. Obstet.
Gynec. 13:159-177.

Ciare, JEANNE, 1951. Preference regarding the sex
of children and its relation to size of family.
Master’s thesis, Department of Sociology,
Faculty of Political Science, Columbia University (June).

CLarE, JEANNE, and Crype V. Kiser. 1952. Social
and psychological factors affecting fertility preference for children of a given sex in relation to
eae Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 29:621
os

CULLITON, BARBARA J. 1970. Prostaglandins: Something for everyone. Sci. News 98:306-307,

DAHLBERG, GunNAR. 1948. Do parents want boys
or girls? Acta Genet. Statist. Med. 1:163-167.

Drinirz, Sruon, Russet R, Dynes, and ALFRED C.
CrarKE. 1954, Preferences for male or female
children: Traditional or affectional? J. Marr.
Fam, Liv. 16:128-131,

Etzion1, Amitai, 1968. Sex control, science, and
society. Science 161:1107-1112.

Fancuer, Harrret L. 1956. The relationship between the occupational status of individuals
and the sex ratio of offspring. Hum. Biol. 28:
316-322.

Franacan, Jonn C. 1942. A study of factors determining family size in a selected professional
group. Genetic Psychology Monographs 25:50
Freminc, Donarp. 1966. On living in a biological
revolution. Atlan. Month. 123:64-70.

Forer, Lucite. 1969. Birth order and life roles.
Thomas Company, New York.

FRANCOEUR, RosertT T. 1970. Utopian motherhood. Doubleday, Garden City.

FREEDMAN, DeEsorAH S., RONALD FREEDMAN, and
PascaL K. WHELPTON, 1960. Size of family and
preferences for children of each sex. Amer. J.
Sociol. 116:141-146.

FREEDMAN, Ronarp. 1963. Changing fertility in
Taiwan, p. 106-149. In Roy Greep (ed.),
Human fertility and population problems.
Schenkman, Cambridge, Mass.

Garpner, R. L., and R. G. Epwarps. 1968. Control of the sex ratio of full term in the rabbit
by transferring sexed blastocysts. Nature 218:
346-349,

Gm, C. 1956. Esame comparativo di alcuni
risultati di inchieste italiance e straniere sul
desiderio dei genitori di avere figli dell’uno o
piuttosto dell’alto sesso (Comparative analysis
of some results of Italian and foreign studies on
the parents’ sex-preference for their children).
Atti Della 16 Riunione Scientifica Della Societa
Italiana Di Statistica. Roma:319-332.

Grurovico, G, 1956. Sul desiderio dei coniugi di
avere digle e di avere figle di un dato sesso (On
the wish of married couples to have children
and to have children of a specified sex). Atti
Della 16 Riunione Scientifica Della Socicta
Italiana Di Statistica, Roma:287-317.

Gorpon, J. 1958. The control of sex. Sci. Amer.
199:87-94.

ov

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 4

GREENBERG, JosePH H. 1950. Numerical sex disproportion. Univ. of Colorado Press, Boulder.
GRUMBACH, M. M. 1969. Big step in sex predic~

tion. Sci. News 96(July 26): 76-77.

Guyton, A. C. 1966. Textbook of medical physiology. 3d ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.

HANDLER, Pott (ed.). 1970. Biology and the
future of man. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Harper, Marian. 1936. Parental preference with
respect to the sex of children. Master’s thesis,
Department of Sociology, University of Chicago
(December).

HEAxy, Joan, and Patricia L. Van Houten. 1970.
Effect of psychotomimetric agents on sex ratio.
Lancet 2:574.,

Jost, ALFRED. 1970. Reproduction: Human control of reproductive processes. Impact of Science
on Society 20 (October-December): 267-279.

Keynes, R. D. 1967. The predetermination of sex.
Advancement of Science (London)24:43-46.

Kaupr, GABRIEL, and Kurr BenirscHxe. 1971.
Fluorescence of the Y chromosome: A rapid
test to determine fetal sex. Amer. J. Obstet.
Gynec. 110:1091-1095.

Kotrzorr, N. K., and V. N. ScHroeper. 1933.
Artificial control of sex in the progeny of mammals, Nature 131:329.

Lewy, S. 1956. Artificial sex regulation of mammalian offspring. Brit. Veterin. J. 112:549-552.

LIEBERMAN, E, JAMES. 1968. A doctor forecasts
determining of sex of child in advance. New
York Times, November 27, p. 27.

LinpABL, Per. 1958, Separation of bull spermatazoa carrying X and Y chromosomes by
counter-streaming centrifugation. Nature 181:
784-785.

MarKLeE, GERALD E. 1969. An analysis of attitudes
and issues concerning the future prospect of sex
predetermination. Master’s thesis, Department
of Sociology, Florida State University (December).

Marke, Gerarp E., and Cuarres B. Nam. 1970.
The impact of sex predetermination on fertility.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
Population Association of America (April 18).

. 1971, Sex predetermination: Its impact on
fertility. Soc. Biol. 18:73-83.

May, Davi A., and Dav M. Heer. 1968. Son
survivorship motivation and family size in India: a computer simulation. Pop. Stud. 22:199210,

Metre, RICHARD. 1968. Sex determination and
other innovations, p. 408. In Louise B. Young
(ed.), Population in perspective. Oxford Univ.
Press, New York.

Morrison, W. A. 1957. Attitudes of females
toward family planning in a Maharashtrian
village. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 35:67-81.

Nimxorr, MevER F. 1951a. Technology, biology,
and the changing family. Amer. J. Sociol. 57:
20-26.

. 1951b. Will parents pick the sex of child?

Sci. Dig. 30:65-67.

. 1962. Biological discoveries and the future
of the family: a reappraisal. Soc. Fore. 4:121127.

O'Ferratt, G. J.. T. N. Meacuam, and W. E.
Foreman. 1968. Attempts to separate rabbit

 

 

 

Sex Control, Preferences, and the Family

391

spermatazoa by means of froth flotation and
the sex ratio of offspring born. J. Reprod.
Fertil. 16:243-244,

POHLMAN, EDWARD. 1967. Statistical evidence of
rationalization: Preference for sex of child.
Psychol. Rep. 20:1180.

. 1968. Some effects of being able to control

sex of offspring. Eugen. Quart. 14:274~-280.

. 1969. The psychology of birth planning.
Adeline, New York.

PoHLMAN, Epwarp, and K. Roa. 1969. Why boy
babies are preferred for adoption or procrea~
tion. J. Fam. Welfare (India) XV (June):
45-62.

Popuration Councit, THe. 1964. Turkey: Naeee survey on population. Stud. Fam. Plan.

71-8.

PRACHUAMBOH, Visip. 1967. Desire for progeny,
p. 364-407. In Donald Bogue (ed.), Sociological
contributions to family planning research. Univ.
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

RAINWATER, LEE. 1965. Family design. Aldine,
Chicago.

RAMSEY, PAUL. 1970, Fabricated man: The ethics
of genetic control. Yale Univ. Press, New
Haven.

Renxoxen, K. O. 1961. Factors affecting the
human sex ratio. Ann. Med. Exper. Biol. 39:
1743~1784.

. 1963. Decreasing sex ratio by birth order.
Lancet 1:16.

Rorvix, Davm M. 1970a. How to choose your
baby’s sex. Look 24(April): 88-98.

Rorvix, Davy M. (with Lanprum SHETTLES).
1970b. Your baby’s sex: Now you can choose.
Dodd, Mead, New York.

RosENFELD, ALBERT. 1969. The second genesis:
The coming control of life. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs,

Rowson, L. E. A., and R. M. Moore. 1966. Development of the sheep conceptus during the
first fourteen days. J. Anat. 100:777-778.

Rosin, E. 1967. The sex ratio at birth. Amer.
Statist. 21:45-48.

ScHACTER, STANLEY. 1959. The psychology of affiliation. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford.

SCHILLING, E. 1966. Experiments in sedimentation
and centrifugation of bull spermatazoa and the
sex ratio of born calves. J. Reprod. Fertil. 11:
469-470.

ScHusTer, Donatp H., and Locxy ScHusTER.
1969a. Study of stress and sex ratio in humans,
p. 335~336. Proceedings, 77th Annual Convention, American Psychological Association, Volume 4,

 

 

 

. Speculative mechanisms affecting sex
ratio. Unpublished paper.

Sears, Rosert R., E. E. Macosy, and Harry
Levin, 1957. Patterns of child rearing. Harper
and Row, New York.

Serow, W. J., and V. C. Evans. 1970. Demographic effects of pre-natal sex selection. Pop.
Index 36:319.

Sevinc, A. 1968. Experiments on sex control by
electrophoretic separation of spermatazoa in
the rabbit. J. Reprod. Fertil. 16:7-9.

Surarer, M. L., R. T. Davison, and S. M.
Fincn. 1967. The sex ratio of offspring born to

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

392

state hospitalized schizophrenic women. J.
Psychiat. Res. 5:349-350.

SHETTLES, LANDRUM B. 1960. Reply to Rothschild. Nature 187:254-255.

. 1961. Conception and birth sex ratios. J.
Obstet. Gynec. 18:122-130.

SLoves, RoperT B. 1970. Determining prenatal
sex. Sci. News 95(April 12): 355.

STRUNK, Mirprep. 1947. The quarter’s poll: Children. Pub. Opin. Quart. 11:641.

TayLor, Gorpon Rattray. 1968. The biological
time-bomb. World, New York.

TayLor, M. 1969. Sex ratios of newborns: Associated with prepartum and postpartum schizophrenia. Science 164(May 9): 723-724.

TAYLoR, MICHAEL, and Rosert Levine. 1970. The
interactive effects of maternal schizophrenia
and offspring sex. Biol. Psychiat. 2:274-284.

TOIVANEN, P. 1970. Sex ratio of newborns: Preponderance of males in toxemia of pregnancy.
Science 170(October 9): 187-188.

UpDpDENBERG, N., P. E. ALMGREN, and A. Nitsson.
1971, Preference for sex of the child among
pregnant women. J. Biosoc, Sci. 3:267~280.

 

 

Largey

 

Social Biology

WEATHERBEE, CHRISTOPHER. 1968. Toward preSelected sex. Sci. News 94:119-120.

WESTOFF, CHARLES F. 1959. The social-psychological structure of fertility, p. 335-366. In
International Population Conference, International Union for the Scientific Study, of Population, Vienna.

WestTorrF, C. F., R. G. Potter, Jr., P. C. Sact,
and E. G. MisHier. 1961. Family growth in
metropolitan America. Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, N.J.

WHELPTON, Pascat K., ARTHUR A, CAMPBELL,
and JoHN E. PATTERSON. 1966. Fertility and
family planning in the United States. Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

Wirrramson, Nancy E. Son preferences around
the world. Library of the Harvard Center for
Population Studies. Ms.

Winston, SANFORD. 1931. The influence of social
factors upon the sex ratio at birth. Amer. J.
Sociol. 37:1-21.

. 1933. Birth control and sex ratio at birth.

Amer. J. Sociol. 38:225-231.
