Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Government support of genetic services
Philip Reilly
To cite this article: Philip Reilly (1978) Government support of genetic services, Social Biology,

25:1, 23-32, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988315
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988315

 

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 2
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Government Support of Genetic Services

Philip Reilly

School of Medicine
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut

 

ABSTRACT: The 1976 enactment of the National Sickle Cell Anemia, Cooley’s Anemia, TaySachs, and Genetic Disease Act may mark the emergence of a national policy on mass genetic
screening. The law includes provisions intended to protect persons who are tested for genetic
traits in screening programs operated with government funds. Two key features are (1) guaranteed access to competent genetic counseling and (2) strict confidentiality of test results. Because
genetic screening will be conducted through state public health departments, I surveyed the states
to determine how they were currently providing access to genetic counseling and protection of
genetic data. The responses indicated that (1) there is an extreme heterogeneity of counseling
services, and (2) that most states have not developed programs to safeguard genetic data.

The enactment in 1976 of the National
Sickle Cell Anemia, Cooley’s Anemia,
Tay-Sachs, and Genetic Disease Act
(Public Law 94-278; hereinafter, the National Genetic Disease Act) was a milestone in government support of services intended to reduce suffering caused by genetic disorders. Until then, most Congressional interest had been provoked by
lobbyists working to gain special attention
for a single disease. For example, shortly
after the National Sickle Cell Anemia
Control Act (Public Law 92-248) became
law in 1972, Congressmen of Mediterranean heritage guided the National
Cooley’s Anemia Control Act (Public Law
92-414) into existence. In 1975 federal
lawmakers gave special attention to persons with Huntington’s chorea and
hemophilia.

The primary purpose of the National
Genetic Disease Act is to “establish a national program to provide for basic and
applied research, research training, testing, counseling, and information and education programs with respect to genetic
disease .. . .” The Secretary of the De
partment of Health, Education, and Welfare is authorized to make grants and enter
into contracts “for projects to establish
and operate voluntary genetic testing and
counseling programs” primarily in conjunction with existing health programs
(especially those supported by Title V of
the Social Security Act, designed to aid
maternal and child health). Further, the
Secretary is directed to “carry out...a
program to develop information and educational materials relating to genetic diseases” and to disseminate such information as widely as possible. Although
the law authorized expenditures of
$90,000,000 over three years for testing,
counseling, and education, so far only
$4,000,000 has been appropriated. Guidelines for spending this money should be
complete in the spring of 1978.

The second major aim of the law is to
support projects for: (1) basic and applied
research into genetic disease; (2) developing programs for the training of genetic
counselors and other health professionals;
(3) developing programs to educate physicians, health professionals, and the public

23
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

24 Reilly

about genetic disordets and the methods
available to diagnose, control, counsel,
and treat them; and (4) developing counseling and testing and other programs for
the diagnosis, control, and treatment of
genetic diseases. Projects concerned with
sickle cell anemia and Cooley’s anemia,
which were initiated under other federal
laws, have a priority claim on funding.

The balance of the law, of special relevance to this article, describes the requirements that must be met by a party
who wishes to use federal money to provide genetic services. The National Genetic Disease Act requires that participation by any individual in any program
shall be “wholly voluntary.” Further, each
grant or contract applicant must promise
that he will “directly supervise” the program for which he is funded, that he will
“provide strict confidentiality of all test
results, medical records, and other information regarding testing diagnosis, counseling, or treatment of any person,” and
that he will provide for “community representation” (where appropriate) in the
development and operation of voluntary
genetic testing and counseling programs.
Where community-wide testing and counseling is to be offered, the supervisor must
consider the needs of “high risk” population groups, especially those entering their
“child-producing years.” Finally, he must
provide counseling “to persons found to
have a genetic disease and to persons
found to carry a gene or chromosome
which may cause a deleterious effect in
their offspring.”

The care with which the architects of
the National Genetic Disease Act enumerated fundamental principles to which
grant and contract applicants must
adhere—voluntary participation in testing
programs, strict confidentiality of medical
data, community representation, and the
guarantee of genetic counseling for persons discovered to be affected with a ge
Social Biology

netic disorder or to be carriers of a genetic
condition that could have a deleterious effect on their children—reminds us that for
fifteen years controversy has surrounded
the proper role of the state in the provision
of genetic services to the people. The
major purpose of this article is to compare
the manner in which public genetic services are being delivered to the principles
now embraced by federal and some state
laws which purport to guide that delivery.
First, however, the evolution of these
principles should be put in perspective.

GENETIC SCREENING LEGISLATION:
A BRIEF HISTORY

The era of high-quality low-cost mass
genetic screening began soon after the development of a bacterial inhibition assay
for phenylketonuria (Guthrie, 1961). Less
than two years later Massachusetts became the first state to require that the
PKU test be performed on all newborns so
that affected infants might be placed
promptly on dietary therapy. Within five
years forty-two states enacted similar
laws. Although there is considerable variation in these laws, most simply require
that the attending physician make sure
that a blood sample is taken from the infant and sent to the responsible laboratory. Few PKU laws require that parents
be informed about the tests, that genetic
counseling services be offered to parents of
affected infants, that the screening records
be kept confidential, or that children with
phenylketonuria be guaranteed competent
care. This situation reflects the haste with
which the laws were written. In fact,
many lawmakers were not even aware
that phenylketonuria was a genetic disease
(Swazey, 1971).

During the mid-sixties minor political
controversy did swirl around PKU laws.
However, it was largely limited to arguments, not- altogether unpersuasive, that
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 1 Genetic
lawmakers should not delineate the diagnostic approach to any disorder. For example, Bessman (1966) argued that a low
phenylalanine diet could be dangerous
for infants with transient hyperphenylalanemia, (or persistent mild elevation of blood phenylalanine) rather than
classical PKU. Because false positives
outnumber true positives by about 19 to 1
(Committee for the Study of Inborn Errors
of Metabolism, 1975), this objection was
quite valid.

As a recent study by the National Research Council Committee for the Study of
Inborn Errors of Metabolism (1975) makes
clear, there are still serious weaknesses in
the manner in which PKU screening is
conducted in the United States. The rapid
unreflective process by which mandatory
PKU screening laws were passed contributed to the deficiencies that have persisted
for more than a decade. To this day, adequate counseling and medical services for
families with PKU infants remain unavailable in some states, and little attention has yet been devoted to the need for
protecting screening data against misuse
(Riskin and Reilly, 1977).

The rapid rise of sickle cell anemia from
medical obscurity to a “politically prominent” disease fostered the second round of
genetic screening laws. Dr. Robert Scott
(1970) was among the first to sharply
criticize the low level of private donations
and tax dollars allocated to basic research
into a disease that afflicted 50,000 Americans. Dr. Scott made a strong plea that
genetic screening and counseling should be
provided to the Black population. An
editorial in the Journal of the American
Medical Association (1970) also made a
strong pitch for community-based sickle
cell screening programs. In 1971 President
Nixon, heading into an election campaign,
urged more funding for sickle cell research
in his annual health message (Culliton,
1972) and drew unprecedented public in
Services 25
terest to the disorder. A few months later
Massachusetts became the first of thirteen
states to write mandatory sickle cell anemia screening laws during 1971 and 1972.
Like the phenylketonuria laws, the sickle
cell statutes were enacted rapidly and with
little reflection. However, unlike PKU
testing, the benefits of sickle cell screening
did not sustain poorly drafted legislation.

The object of the sickle cell anemia laws
was not to identify and to treat prophylactically persons burdened with serious disease; it was to alert healthy individuals to
a possible risk they faced in childbearing.
One or both of two statutory approaches
was adopted: (1) admission to public
schools was made contingent on submission to a test for sickle cell trait; (2) application for a marriage license was accepted
only if both parties had been tested (Reilly,
1973).

Even before the wave of sickle cell
screening legislation had subsided, the
laws were attacked. Although some critics
aimed at technical deficiencies in testing
methods, most argued that failure to provide high quality genetic counseling and
careful protection of screening data could
lead to substantial harm to persons who
carried the gene for sickle cell anemia
(Pearson and O’Brien, 1972; Bowman,
1973). Fortunately, some of the most detailed criticisms of ill-considered sickle cell
screening were offered in hearings on a
proposed federal law (U.S. Congress,
Senate Committee on Labor and Public
Welfare, Subcommittee on Health, 1972).

Thus, the enactment of the National
Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act was highly
significant for two reasons: (1) For the first
time substantial funding ($80,000,000)
was authorized, even though much less
was actually spent, to develop comprehensive genetic services, including
screening, counseling, and public education. (2) Guidelines were included to reduce the risk of stigmatization in genetic
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

26 Reilly

screening. Of these guidelines, the most
important were voluntariness, strict confidentiality of test resluts, community
representation in the provision of genetic
services, and guarantee of genetic counseling to persons found to have sickle cell
trait. The federal law closely followed
guidelines that had been advocated by
a multidisciplinary group of concerned
physicians, ethicists, and lay persons
(Lappe et al., 1972).

The federal law altered the operation of
mandatory state screening laws. Federal
funds would go only to states that embraced the principle of voluntariness and
met other requirements. Yet, despite the
emergence of a set of screening principles,
disturbing evidence of harm suffered by
persons found to carry the sickle cell gene
(including self-stigmatization, disruption
of marriage, higher insurance costs, and
discrimination in hiring) continued to accumulate (Sinnette and Smith, 1972). During the winter of 1972—73 several Black
physicians, notably Dr. James Bowman,
led the attack to expose discrimination by
insurance companies and industry. Today, although the mandatory laws have
been repealed, the threat of discrimination
against sickle cell carriers has not yet
abated (Bowman, 1976).

In the past few years lawmakers have
again focused on screening newborns, this
time for a host of inborn errors of metabolism. The laws of New York and Maryland illustrate two different approaches to
implementing such programs. In 1974,
well after the sickle cell anemia controversy, New York amended its phenylketonuria law to expand the scope of testing. Infants are now also tested for
galactosemia, homocystinuria, branched
chain ketonuria, histidinemia, adenosine
deaminase deficiency, and sickle cell
anemia (New York, 1976). The law still
makes no explicit provision for genetic
counseling, confidentiality of test results,

Social Biology

or educating the public about genetic disorders. Cost considerations probably controlled the decision not to guarantee the
delivery of comprehensive genetic services
by statute.

In contrast, Maryland, troubled by the
delicate ethical and social issues involved
in delivering genetic services, created a
Commission on Hereditary Disorders in
1974. In creating the Commission, the
Maryland legislature chose six guiding
principles that are even more far-reaching
than those in federal laws: (1) public consultation before the adoption of screening
regulation, (2) consideration of the ethical,
social, and economic effects of proposed
programs, (3) informed consent by all individuals tested, (4) voluntariness in participation (5) guarantee of counseling services where needed, and (6) availability of
unambiguous test results to the person
screened and a guarantee of strict
confidentiality (Report of the Maryland
Commission on Hereditary Disorders,
1974, unpublished). If these requirements
are seriously followed, screening for
phenylketonuria and similar disorders
could become considerably more expensive.

Since the enactment of the laws in New
York (1976) and Maryland (1976), several
states have considered genetic screening
bills. In 1977, Washington rejected the
“Maryland model” because it was too
costly. California has seen the most activity. In the spring of 1977 the State Senate
Select Committee on Genetic Disease authored four pieces of legislation which embody the spirit of the Maryland approach
(Victoria Jee, personal communication,
1977).

But most public health departments are
expanding neonatal screening to cover
other disorders without seeking explicit
legislative approval. While this approach
secures important new screening tests at
minimal costs, it is, for some states, only a

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. I

temporary solution. In many states, however, phenylketonuria screening laws are
so broadly worded, mandating testing for
PKU and “other causes of mental retardation,” that special laws are not necessary
for expanding the scope of screening.

CURRENT GOVERNMENT SUPPORT OF
GENETIC SERVICES

During the past five years federal support of mass genetic screening has rapidly
expanded. Federal dollars are flowing
mainly to support screening intended to
identify adolescent and adult carriers of
several common autosomal recessive disorders. Although some federal support has
been given to the highly successful TaySachs programs, more explicit support
was provided to test persons for the gene
that determines Cooley’s anemia and especially to identify carriers of sickle cell
anemia. Between July 1, 1973 and June
30, 1975 at least 442,000 persons were
screened for the sickle cell gene; about
29,500 persons were provided with genetic
counseling, and as many as 2,000,000
people were provided with some information pertaining to sickle cell disease
through the twenty-five sickle cell screening and education clinics funded under
federal law (Third Annual Report of the
Administration of the National Sickle Cell
Anemia Control Act, July 1, 1974—-June
30, 1975, 1976). Presumably all such
clinics operate pursuant to federal guidelines.

Although it is possible that the federal
government could move to exert great
influence over the conduct of neonatal
screening programs, presumably through
significant expansion of the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment Program (EPSDT), such action is
not likely. The performance record of
EPSDT, which was created by amendment to the Social Security Act in 1967, is

 

Genetic Services

 

27

not encouraging (Folz, 1975). Only a small
fraction of eligible children have been
screened for the vision, hearing, and dental problems on which the program is focused (Folz and Brown, 1975). But some
states have used EPSDT funds to help
support PKU or sickle cell screening programs. With the principle of federal involvement in delivery of genetic services
established, the possibility of future activity cannot be foreclosed.

The states continue to focus their attention on mass neonatal screening. In February, 1975, I surveyed their departments
of public health to determine if PKU programs had expanded. The results indicated that at least nine states were screening infants for disorders other than
phenylketonuria (Reilly, 1975). Responses
to other questions in the survey indicated
that public health officials generally favored the expansion of screening efforts.
In November, 1976, I again polled the
states, this time to determine whether
screening programs were continuing to
expand and to learn what genetic counseling services were available to parents of
affected children identified by screening. I
eventually obtained written answers from
forty-four states. Thus, the following
compilation excludes six unresponding
states (Alabama, California, Kansas, New
Hampshire, South Carolina, and Tennessee) and the District of Columbia.

There have been considerable developments during the past two years. The
number of states screening for galactosemia has risen from six to at least sixteen. At least nine states now screen for
histidinemia; eleven, for homocystinuria;
twelve, for maple syrup urine disease; and
ten, for tyrosinimia, At least eleven states
screen some newborns for sickle sell anemia, and eight of these also test for betathalassemia. (Reilly, 1977).

The most important development has
been the rapid introduction of screening

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

28 Reilly

for congenital hypothyroidism based on
low-cost radioimmunoassay for thyroxine
(T-4) levels. In the past two years, twelve
states have begun to screen for this disorder, four more were hoping to begin in
1977, and at least two others are considering such programs. The speed with which
mass screening for hypothyroidism has
caught on since pioneering efforts in
Pittsburgh (Klein, et al. 1974) and Quebec
(Dussault, et al. 1975) is impressive. Given
that about one in every 7,000 newborns
may be affected, the case for mass screening to detect neonatal hypothyroidism and
to prevent retarded development is quite
compelling. For example, in Oregon
(which also screens blood samples for
Alaska, Idaho, and Montana), eighteen affected children have been identified and
treated in eighteen months (Dr. Rhesa
Penn, personal communication, 1976).
The most thorough consideration of
how to deliver genetic services on a large
scale was made by the National Research
Council Committee for the Study of Inborn Errors of Metabolism which published a detailed study and extensive recommendations in 1975. It gave cautious
approval to genetic screening “as an appropriate form of medical care” when certain criteria are met. These include evidence of public benefit and acceptance and
evidence that benefits outweigh costs, that
public education can be carried out, that
the technology is satisfactory, and that
“vyesources exist to deal with counseling,
follow-up and other consequences of
testing” (emphasis added). Further, the
Committee urged that an investigative
pretest should show, among other things,
that costs are acceptable, education is effective, informed consent is feasible, and
that “qualified and effective counselors are
available in sufficient number and adequate provision for effective services has
been made.” Among several “legal recommendations,” the Committee objected

Social Biology

to mandatory programs and advocated
confidentiality of genetic information (emphasis added).

Although the Committee offered an excellent overview of mass genetic screening
and a thorough survey of state PKU regulations, it did not publish information on
the availability of other genetic services.
The operation and impact of private TaySachs screening programs have been carefully evaluated (Childs et al., 1976), but
there has been no systematic study of public state-supported screening programs. In
an effort to discover whether the state
neonatal screening complied with the
principles embraced by the National Genetic Diseases Act and by the National
Research Council Committee, I asked the
various states about (1) the availability of
genetic counseling services to parents of
infants affected with phenylketonuria or
other genetic diseases, and (2) the measures being taken to guarantee the strict
confidentiality of test results gathered by
genetic screening.

More specifically, to learn about genetic
counseling, I asked (1) whether the state
offered any counseling services to parents
of children with phenylketonuria and the
nature of those services if they existed, and
(2) whether the state directly employed
persons known as “genetic counselors.”
The results (Table 1) indicate that thirtyfive of the forty-four states responding
provide some kind of genetic counseling to
parents of infants with phenylketonuria.
The nature of these services is extremely
heterogeneous. The two most common
sources are personnel working at medical
schools within the state (11) and stateoperated clinics (9).

Seventeen states claimed that they employed one or more “genetic counselors.”
There was much variation in the description of such persons. For example, Maine
has retained fifteen pediatricians dispersed
throughout the state to provide primary

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 1

Genetic Services

29

TABLE 1

STATE SUPPORT OF GENETIC COUNSELING SERVICES*

Is There an Active State
Program for Counseling

States Families with PKU?
Alaska... cc ccc ccc cnc essccccece Yes
Arizona...... jam xeeanuwewarene No
Arkansas........ ccc cece ee eeee No
Colorado .. iiss ct secesnsnsstnns Yes
Connecticut ............002 eee Yes
Delaware ..........ccccsceeees No
Florida ........ cc. cece ee eee eee Yes
Georgia ......... cece eee eee Yes
TAGS 6 os pc te on peed ee ea Oe pes Yes
Idaho... .... eee eee ce ee eee Yes
Tiinois ... 2.0... . ccc eee ee ee eee Yes
Indiana ........... cece eee eees No
LOWE 56nd 65 bo heehee od BE wd Yes
Kentucky ..............0e ences Yes
Louisiana ........... 0.00 eaee Yes
Maine ......... ccc cece eee eee Yes
Maryland ..........0.ce eee eeee Yes
Massachusetts ......-...--0000- Yes
Michigan............ cee eee eee Yes
Minnesota..........ccceeeeeces Yes
Mississippi ............00e00008 No
Missouri ........... 2000 ee eee Yes
Montana ........... 0. cece eee No
Nebraska ...............000005 Yes
Nevada .....-..ccccceucceeeees Yes
New Jersey........2.c0ceceeees Yes
New Mexico..............2.00. Yes
New York ...........ccceccees Yes
North Carolina ................ Yes
North Dakota ................. No
©) 6) Ce Yes
Oklahoma.............cceceees Yes
OYERON acaemoag ge xo ne ceees omnes e Yes
Pennsylvania. <6 cccseas vv cecces Yes
Rhode Island .................. Yes
South Dakota.................. No
> ¢: Yes
Utah wo... ce eee ccc eee teen Yes
Vermont ......... ccc cece eee Yes
Virginia ...... 0. cee cee ee eee Yes
Washington ................45. Yes
West Virginia................6. No
Wisconsin .............00e 0 eens Yes
Wyoming ............ cee ee eaee Yes

Does the State Employ Any
“Genetic Counselors”?

No
No
State pays one-half salary of a medical geneticist

0
One social worker for beta-thalassemia
No

No
Several persons with Master’s degrees
No
One cytogeneticist, one pediatrician
Some in Crippled Children’s Services

Oo
Five counselors to be employed next year
Public health nurses
Not explained
Fifteen physicians on retainer
No

Yes
Six counties employ sickle cell counselors
Two Ph.D. geneticists
No

Sickle cell counselors

At least eleven counselors distributed around the
state
Ten sickle cell counselors

One nurse
No
No
One genetic ae worker
Oo

* Six states (Alabama, California, Kansas, New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Tennessee) and the District of Columbia did not respond to

the questionnaire.

diagnosis and counseling; Connecticut
employs one social worker to counsel families burdened with beta-thalassemia; and
Arkansas pays one-half the salary of a
geneticist at the University of Arkansas
Medical School. Although most states only
pay for the services of one or two individuals, several (Kentucky, New York,
North Carolina, Michigan, and Rhode Is
land) seem, like Maine, to have retained
an adequate number and distribution of
genetic counselors. Although the responses
were often vague, the answers make it
clear that no consensus on the best way to
counsel families burdened with phenylketonuria or other disorders has yet
evolved.

The response to inquiries pertaining to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

30 Reilly

the protection of data obtained by genetic
testing (Table 2) was not encouraging. The
questionnaire asked (1) whether data were
stored and, if so, (2) whether they were
provided with any special protection to
guarantee confidentiality. Twenty-seven
states claimed that they do maintain some

Social Biology

kind of genetic registry; sixteen do not
store records; and one did not reply to this
question. For the vast majority, record
keeping only applies to PKU test results;
eight states have files on sickle cell screening, and at least one, New York, keeps a
chromosome registry. The general practice

TABLE 2
STATE PROTECTION OF GENETIC SCREENING DATA*

Does the Department of
Public Health Store the
Results of Mass Genetic

State Screening in Data Files?
Alaska... 0... cee ec eee eee eee No
Arizona .. 0... ce eee cece eee No
ArKanSaS ...... cece cece eee neee No
Colorado ..... 0.0... cece eee ete No
Connecticut ....... ..... 0c. ee Yes
Delaware ............ececceeee Yes
Florida .......... cece eee eues Yes
Georgia ........- 0. cece eee eee Yes
Hawaii 0... 00... cc eee eee ee Yes
Idaho... 2... cee ee cee eee Yes
Tilinois .... 0.0... c eee eee ee eee Yes
Indiana .......... ccc ee eee ee eee Yes
TOWS 2c end ceed ct bide pedi a ee as No
Kentucky ......-.....--00ee ees Yes
Louisiana .......... 0... c ee eee Yes
Maine ............cc ce eee eeee Yes
Maryland ...........0eeeceaeee No
Massachusetts ...............0. Yes
Michigan.........-....-0..000- Yes
Minnesota .........- 0c cece enue Yes
Mississippi ...........0eeeeenee No
Missouri ............000ecceees No
Montana ........--..ceceeeeees No
Nebraska ............0eeeeuees Yes
Nevada ........-0. cece eee eres Yes
New Jersey...........20eee eee Yes
New Mexico.............00008- Yes
New York ..... .....ceeeecce: Yes
North Carolina . .............. Yes
North Dakota .. .............. No
Ohio ... cc eee eee eee No answer
Oklahoma.............0-.0000e Yes
Oregon ...... ccs eee eee eee Yes
Pennsylvania ...........00.0005 No
Rhode Island .................. Yes
South Dakota.................. No
Texas.......... Ce eee eeeeeeenes No
Utah oo. ccc eee ee eee Yes
Vermont ........ 0c cece cc eee No
Virginia... 0... cee ee ee eee ee Yes
Washington .............-0000- Yes
West Virginia.................. No
Wisconsin .......-...0cceeeeees Yes
WYOMING ois os ge a oe os eee aws No

What Special Precautions Are Taken to Protect the
Confidentiality of Genetic Data?t

N.A.
Locked files
None

None
Asserted, but not explained
None
Locked files
Did not answer
Asserted, but not explained
N.A

Patient consent required for release of sickle cell data
Locked files
None

Coded; storage by hospital record number, not
patient name
Locked files
None
N.A.
N.A
N.A.
Statutory guarantee on confidentiality
Asserted, but not explained
None
None
Statutory protection; results coded
Statutory protection of sickle cell; results coded in
some counties
N.A.
No answer
None
Locked files
N.A

Asserted, but not explained
N.A.
N.A
Asserted, but not explained
N.A.
Did not answer
Protection asserted for sickle cell, not PKU

N.A
Locked files
N.A

* Six states (Alabama, California, Kansas, New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Tennessee) and the District of Columbia did not respond to

the questionnaire
+NA = not applicable

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Genetic

Vol. 25, No. 1

is to store PKU test results in a single
location for a period varying from two to
five years and then to destroy them.

Seventeen of the twenty-seven states
claimed to take some special precaution to
protect genetic testing data; for example,
nine states store their data in “locked
files.” Only three states (Massachusetts,
New York, and North Carolina) acknowledged use of a coding system to guarantee
the anonymity of the screenee. Generally,
efforts to protect the confidentiality of
sickle cell data seemed somewhat more
significant than those for PKU data. While
it is clear from the responses that some
effort is made to restrict access to genetic
records, only a few states indicated that
they had given special consideration to
this problem. On the basis of the responses
to my questionnaire I concluded that the
quality of neonatal screening programs in
the United States is not matched by development of systems sufficient to guarantee
access to genetic counseling or to protect
the confidentiality of genetic data.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Mass neonatal screening to identify and
to treat infants burdened with genetic or
congenital disorders is rapidly becoming
established as a valid public health enterprise in the United States. Problems generated by programs to identify carriers of
the gene for sickle cell hemoglobin
strongly indicate the need to provide access to genetic counseling and to protect
genetic data collected pursuant to screening. So long as the various states, rather

31

Services

than the federal government, retain control of neonatal screening, physicians and
other interested persons should seriously
consider passage of a comprehensive law
that embraces principles like those enumerated in the Maryland law, the National
Genetic Disease Act and the report of the
Committee for the Study of Inborn Errors |
of Metabolism (1975).

Specifically, I suggest:

1. Access (at reasonable cost) to competent genetic counselors should be guaranteed to parents of infants with genetic diseases who are identified through a state
screening program.

2. Explicit measures should be taken to
protect the confidentiality of screening
data. States might follow the lead of Kansas (1975) and Iowa (1976) where unwarranted disclosure of sickle cell test results
is a criminal misdemeanor. In addition,
the law might provide for civil damages
against the state or its employees for injuries flowing from disclosure.

3. Explicit measures should be taken to
protect persons who carry the gene for or
who are burdened with a disorder from
“senetic discrimination.” In North Carolina (1975), carriers of the gene for
sickle cell hemoglobin or hemoglobin C
are protected from employment discrimination by statute. Maryland law (1976)
directs the Attorney General to investigate
such events. Such a law may have only
token force, but it may also stimulate appropriate educational efforts.

We must remain vigilant lest the benefits inherent in mass genetic screening
be outweighed by harm caused by abuse of
data derived from such programs.

REFERENCES

BESSMAN, S. 1966. Legislation and advances in medical knowledge. J. Pediat. 69:334-337.

BowMaN, J. E. 1973. Sickle cell—a survey of legislative problems and economic effects. In C. Sinette
and J. Smith (eds.), Legislative and _ socioeconomic aspects of sickle cell disease. Harlem

 

Hospital New
York.

. 1976. Genetic screening programs and public policy. Presented at the W. E. B. Dubois Conference on the Health of Black Populations, At
lanta, December 15, 1976.

Center-Columbia University,

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

32 Reilly

CuHILps, B., L. Gorpis, M. KasBack, et al. 1976.
Tay-Sachs screening: Social and psychological impact. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 28:550-558.

COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF INBORN ERRORS OF
METABOLISM. 1975. Genetic screening: Programs,
principles and research. National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D. C.

CULLITON, B. 1972. Sickle cell anemia: The route
from obscurity to prominence. Science 178:138.
DUSSAULT, J. H., P. COULOMBE, C. LABERGE, et al.
1975. Preliminary report on a mass screening program for neonatal hypothyroidism. J. Pediat.

86:670-674.

EDITORIAL. 1970. Sickle cell anemia. J. Amer. Med.
Assoc. 214:749.

Foutz, A. M. 1975. The development of ambiguous
federal policy: Early and periodic screening, diagnosis and treatment (EPSDT). Milbank Mem.
Fund Quart. 53(1):35-64.

Fouz, A. M., and D. Brown. 1975. State response
to federal policy: Children, EPSDT, and the
Medicaid muddle. Med. Care 13(8):630-642.

GUTHRIE, R. 1961. Blood screening for phenylketonuria. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 178:863.

Iowa. 1976. Iowa Code Ann. § 141.6 (Supp. 1976).

Kansas. 1975. Kansas Statutes Ann. § 65-1, 105, and
106 (Supp. 1975).

KLEIN, A. H., A. V. AGUSTIN, and T. P. FOLEY.
1974. Successful laboratory screening for congenital hypothyroidism. Lancet 2:97-79.

LApPE, M., J. M. GUSTAFSON, R. ROBLIN, et al.,
1972. Ethical and social issues in screening for
genetic disease. New Eng. J. Med. 286:11291132.

Maryland. 1976. Maryland Ann. Code, Article 43,
Sections 814-821 (Cum. Supp. 1976).

 

 

Social Biology

Maryland Commission on Hereditary Disorders.
1974. Report. Unpublished.

NATIONAL SICKLE CELL ANEMIA ACT ADMINISTRATION. 1976. Third annual report, July 1,
1974-June 30, 1975. Available from the Public
Health Services, Washington, D.C.

New York. 1976. New York Public Health Law
§ 2500-a (McKinney’s Supp. 1976).

North Carolina. 1975. North Carolina General
Statutes 95-28.1 (Cum. Supp. 1975).

PEARSON, H. A., and R. T. O’BRIEN. 1972. Sickle
cell testing programs. J. Pediat. 81:1201-1204.
REILLY, P. R. 1975. Recent developments in state
supported genetic screening. Amer. J. Hum.

Genet. 27:691-693.

. 1973. Sickle cell anemia legislation. J. Legal

Med. 1(4):39-48.

. 1977. Mass neonatal screening programs in
1977. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 29:301-303.

RISKIN, L. L., and P. R. REILLY. 1977. Remedies
for improper disclosure of genetic data. RutgersCamden L. J. 8:480-506.

ScoTT, R. B. 1970. Health care priority and sickle
cell anemia. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 214:731-734.

SINNETTE, C., and J. SMITH. (eds.) 1973. Legislative and socioeconomic aspects of sickle cell disease. Harlem Hospital Center-Columbia University, New York.

SwaAZEY, J. 1971. Phenylketonuria: A case study in
biomedical legislation. J. Urban Law 48:883:931.

U.S. CONGRESS, SENATE COMMITTEE ON LABOR
AND PUBLIC WELFARE, SUBCOMMITTEE ON
HEALTH. 1972. Hearings on the National Sickle
Cell Anemia Prevention Act, S. 2676, 92nd Cong.,
Ist Sess. November 11 and 12, 1971. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

 

 
