Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Does genetic variance for cognitive abilities
account for genetic variance in educational
achievement and occupational status? A study of
twins reared apart and twins reared together

Paul Lichtenstein & Nancy L. Pedersen

To cite this article: Paul Lichtenstein & Nancy L. Pedersen (1997) Does genetic variance for
cognitive abilities account for genetic variance in educational achievement and occupational
Status? A study of twins reared apart and twins reared together, Social Biology, 44:1-2, 77-90,
DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1997.9988935

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1997.9988935

 

fm Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 54

»
Q View related articles @

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

Does Genetic Variance for Cognitive Abilities
Account for Genetic Variance in Educational

Achievement and Occupational Status? 6 eae
re ree

A Study of Twins Reared Apart and ele

Twins Reared Together pe ae

Paul Lichtenstein and Nancy L. Pedersen

Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Institute of Environmental Medicine, The Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden S-17177; and Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Institute of Environmental Medicine, The Karolinska Institute and Center for Developmental and Health Genetics, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802.

ABSTRACT: Studies of brothers and twins have shown that about 50 per cent of the variance in educational achievement and 40 per cent of the variance in occupational status reflects between-family
variance. About half of the between-family variance for educational achievement and even more for
occupational status is due to genetic effects and the remainder is due to sharing the same environment. With data on 35 pairs of male twins reared apart and 56 pairs reared together we investigated
the extent to which genetic variance in SES can be attributed to genetic variance for cognitive abilities. For both educational achievement and occupational status there was significant genetic variance both in common with and independent of genetic variance for cognitive abilities. Thus, there
are genetic effects contributing to familial similarity for SES that are not the same as those of importance for cognitive abilities. Candidate traits that may account for this remaining genetic variance
in SES are personality, interests, or talents not represented in standard cognitive tests.

An interesting result from large sibling larity can be explained by genetic effects
studies of socioeconomic status (SES) is for SES (Behrman et al., 1980; Lichtenthat about half of the variance in educa- _ stein et al., 1992; Tambs et al., 1989; Teastional achievement and occupational sta- dale and Sgrensen, 1983; Scarr and Weintus is of between-family origin, that is, it berg, 1994). Table 1 displays the results
contributes to similarity among siblings from some of the most relevant studies
in the same family (Hauser and Feather- on brother resemblance for educational
man, 1976; Olneck, 1977; Hauser and achievement and occupational status. As
Sewell, 1986). However, only a portion of _ can be seen, there is considerable congruthis between-family variance in SES is ence among studies of non-twin siblings
explained by measures of socioeconomic and twins in estimates of total variation atbackground such as the occupational and _ tributable to between-family variance. In
educational status of fathers. Thus, there spite of the differences in samples with reis an excess in sibling similarity (or gard to countries, age groups, and meabrother similarity, which is what has been _ sures, about 50 per cent of the variance in
analyzed) that is not accounted for by so- educational achievement and about 40 per
cioeconomic status of the parents. cent of the variance in occupational status

Several studies have shown that at is due to between-family variation and thus
least part of this excess in sibling simi- contributes to sibling (familial) similarity.

77
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

TABLE |!

BETWEEN- AND WITHIN-FAMILY VARIANCE IN EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT AND OCCUPATIONAL STATUS
IN MAJOR STUDIES OF BROTHERS

 

 

 

__EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT __ a OEHEATIONAL SATE
Between- Within- Between- WithinNuMBER TYPE OF Family Family Family Family
STUDIES OF PAIRS SIBLINGS Variance Variance Vartance Variance
Hauser and Featherman (1976)? .......c.sscscssssscessseeeee aseneeaces 15,817 brothers 56%" 44% a a
Olneck (1977)? ..cssecsssessssessceressecsesseeens saneatesaneeeaeesees cesvenensees 346 brothers 55% 45% 31% 69%
Hauser and Sewell (1986)°.......scscssccsssssscsssscesees peenseesescvecees 928 brothers 46%! 54% 38%! 62%
Erikson (1987)4...ccccsscsscsssseesees sueneneeusescauenteesens nosssnenenanitinend 2,208 brothers 47%! 53% 41%! 59%
Heath et al. (1985)° .cccccsesscsescsssessssssssssssesessssesssseescsenes sesveus 1,447 _ twins reared together 569 hb 44% _— wee
% due to genetic effects oo... ceccccccsseccseeeeeseereeneeees covecenvene . ae tae (55%) a Lee eas
% due to shared environmental effects........... deeteseeseneenee . was _ (45%) 184 ana a
Tambs et al. (1989) ..sscscccssseescsreees sesuyessusseasnesscenessssceseses ves 1078  twinsrearedtogether 48%" 52% 28% 72%
To Ge (6 POMS CTTCCHIS), ssescascsassessareserarqnecansaqreapranmeaneaes 209 eee 48% oe 75% eae
% due to shared environmental effects ............000 sevteenee oe Lae 52% Lee 25% ee
Lichtenstein et al. (1992)8...... ee sveessneevenscnssasaesnecneanssenees 148 twins reared apart 38%! 62% 39%) 61%
% due to genetic effects .....ccsccccccseceseessers beveeeteoneeeasesseees wee — 45% ea 771% nak
% due to shared environmental effects ...........csccseees sins ae awe 55% Te 23%

 

§Data from the Occupational Changes in Generations (OCG) study.

‘Data from the Kalamazoo Brothers Study.

‘Data from Wisconsin Longitudinal Study.

‘Data are for brothers in the Level of Living Survey in Sweden.

‘Data for men from the Norwegian Twin Registry.

Data from a record linkage between the Norwegian Twin Registry and the Army files,
&Data for men <60 years in the Swedish Adoption/Twin Study of Aging (SATSA),
"Data pooled over age-groups.

‘Data adjusted for reliability.

4Computed as the variance due to shared environment plus half of the genetic variance,

 

SL

UIS1IPIg PUL UId}sUas VT

ABojo1g [eLD0g
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 44, No. 1-2

The twin studies have the advantage of
being able to decompose the betweenfamily variance into genetic and shared
environmental variance.! As Table 1 reveals, about half of this similarity in educational achievement is due to genetic
factors and about half is due to sharing
the same environments. For occupational
status, genetic effects seem to be more
important than shared rearing environments for between-family variation.

It has been suggested that genetic variation for educational achievement and occupational status can be explained, at least in
part, by genetic differences in cognitive
abilities (e.g., Herrnstein and Murray,
1994; Scarr, 1995). Most researchers now

IStudies of twins have estimated that about 50 per
cent of the variance in educational achievement and 60
per cent of the variance in occupational status are due
to genetic effects (G), while shared environments (S)
account for about 25 per cent of the variance for educational achievement and 10 per cent in occupational status. It is important to remember when studying ordinary familial relationships, such as those between
fathers and sons or siblings, that genetic effects contribute to both familial similarity and differences. Siblings as well as parents and their offspring share, on average, SO per cent of their genes. Hence, even if a
phenotype was totally due to genetic effects, the siblings would only be correlated 0.50. First degree relatives share 50 per cent of their genes and the shared environment. Hence, the correlation between first degree
relatives reflects both genetic similarity (degree of relatedness times genetic influence for a trait) plus shared
environmental influences. The similarity for ordinary
first degree relatives would therefore be computed as
0.5*G + S. Thus, about 50 per cent of the variance in
educational achievement [(0.5*0.50) + 0.25] and 40 per
cent ((0.5*0.60) + 0.10] of the variance in occupational
status contribute to resemblance between first degree
relatives. ,

Similar findings were found in a study of adult
adoptees where the estimate of the genetic effects was
44 per cent (the intraclass correlation for siblings reared
apart was 0.22) and the estimate of the shared environmental effects was 13 per cent (correlation for unrelated
siblings reared together was 0.13). However, this study
includes both men and women and is therefore not included in Table 1 (Teasdale and Owen, 1981).

Cognitive Abilities

79

accept that cognitive abilities are heritable
(Snyderman and Rothman, 1987). However, the degree to which genetic variation
in SES is in common with genetic variation
in cognitive abilities is not well documented and is crucial for any conclusion
concerning the importance of genetic effects for cognitive abilities for predicting
success in life. In a Norwegian twin sample, Tambs and coworkers investigated the
covariation structure of occupational status,
educational achievement, and cognitive
abilities. They found that a common genetic factor was responsible for covariation
in the measures, but that there was substantial genetic variation for both occupational
status and cognitive abilities independent
of genetic variation for the other measures
(Tambs et al., 1989). Although not conclusive, this study suggests that there is
unique genetic variation for occupational
status as well as genetic variation in common with cognitive abilities and educational achivement.

The present study will extend earlier
work investigating the origins of variation
in SES measures using the powerful
method of twins reared apart. More specifically, this paper will explore whether genetic variation in educational achievement
and occupational status is in common with
the genetic variation in cognitive abilities
or whether the genetic influences are
unique to the socioeconomic measures and
thus independent of genetic influences for
cognitive abilities.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

SAMPLE

This study is part of the ongoing
Swedish Adoption/Twin Study of Aging
(SATSA) which is based on a sample of

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

80 Lichtenstein and Pedersen

591 pairs of twins reared apart and 627
twin pairs reared together identified in the
population-based Swedish Twin Registry
(for details about the Twin Registry, see
Cederléf and Lorich, 1978). The average
age of separation was 2.8 years; 48 per
cent were separated before their first
birthday and 82 per cent before their fifth.
The main reasons for separation were illness or death of one or both parents or
economic problems. The twins reared together were matched to the separated
twins on the basis of age, gender, and
county of birth. The procedure for identifying the reared apart twins and the evidence for comparability of this sample
with the entire Twin Registry are described in Pedersen et al., (1984).

The SATSA study began in 1984 with
a two-part mailout questionnaire. The
first part (Qla) included items concerning
education. Responses were received from
both members of 758 twin pairs. The second part (Q1b) was mailed directly after
receipt of part one and included questions
about occupational status. Further, an extensive cognitive test battery was administered to a subsample of the SATSA
twins in which both twins in the pair responded to Qla (Pedersen et al., 1991).

For the present purpose, data from male
twin pairs only were considered for analyses. The reason for this is partly because
the previous literature almost exclusively
deals with men and partly because there is
a lack of variability in SES measures for
women in these age groups. One hundred
sixty-seven pairs of male twins pairs participated in the cognitive testing session.
Because the analyses of twin data require
that both twins in a pair have information
on all three measures, a listwise deletion
of pairs with missing data resulted in a final sample of 91 twin pairs for the present

Social Biology

analyses. The majority of pairs were
deleted due to missing occupational information or because of exclusion due to the
occupational scaling procedure (see below). The rearing and zygosity status of
the pairs included in the present analyses
are shown in Table 2. The average age of
the men was 52.6 years at the time of
mailout, ranging from 27 to 80 years.
Zygosity diagnoses (identical and fraternal) were made by comparing serum
proteins and red cell enzymes. This procedure gives a 99 per cent probability of
correct diagnosis (Pedersen et al., 1991).

MEASURES

Education achivement.—In Qla the respondents were asked to report all types of
education they had received. The answers
were coded into four categories according
to the highest level achieved: (1) elementary school, (2) secondary school or vocational school, (3) junior college, and (4)
university (Lichtenstein et al., 1992).

Occupational status——Two questions
conceming occupation were included in
the Qib questionnaire: occupation during
greatest part of the respondent’s working
life and respondent’s current occupation.
Occupation was measured with the SEI
scale (Swedish abbreviation for socioeconomic classification), a standard Swedish
scale that was developed by Statistics Sweden (1983). Four categories were generated
which have been ranked in the order: (1)
unskilled and semiskilled workers, (2)
skilled workers and assistant nonmanual
employees, (3) intermediate nonmanual
employees, and (4) employed and selfemployed professionals, higher civil servants, and executives (Lichtenstein et al.,
1992).

The SATSA sample is comprised of
older people with many of the participants

 
Vol. 44, No. 1-2

Cognitive Abilities

TABLE 2
ZYGOSITY AND REARING STATUS FOR THE TWIN PARTICIPATING IN THIS STUDY

Identical twin pairs
Fraternal twin pairs

already retired. Hence, in this study the

response to the question about principal
in occupation during adulthood was used.
= If this item was left blank, the descrip“tion of the current occupation was used
© instead. In order to obtain a more uni5 dimensional scale, farm workers and selfA employed nonprofessional persons (inco cluding farmers) were excluded (cf.
S Domanski and Sawinski, 1987). This ex7 clusion reduced the number of pairs
<3 where both answered the item concerning
r= their own occupations from 167 to 97 and
Soresulted in a loss of power. Perhaps a
5 more important limitation is that only the
2 portion of the population that was gaino fully employed by others was investi= gated.

General cognitive abilities —The

‘= cognitive battery was comprised of 13
= tests selected to provide representation
© both of the domains of fluid and crystal2 lized intelligence (Horn, 1982) and of
S specific cognitive abilities (Nesselroade
get al., 1988). Individuals’ scores on the
A first principal component of the 13 tests
were obtained and used as the measure
of general cognitive ability (Pedersen et
al., 1992).

Both occupational status and educational achievement are positively skewed
variables with many individuals in the
lower categories. For use in the modelfitting analyses, logarithmic transformations of the scales were performed. Because age can inflate twin correlations,
scores were corrected by residualizing

Reared apart Reared together

14 28
21 28

out the age effect from the scales
(McGue and Bouchard, 1984).

ANALYSES

Univariate and multivariate modelfitting of the data from four different
twin/adoption groups simultaneously were
used to explore the etiology of the relationship between SES and cognitive abilities.
The path diagram in Figure 1 specifies how
each type of environmental and genetic
factor contributes to the within pair covariance for a measure in the adoption/twin design, using education as an example (Neale
and Cardon, 1992). The genetic and environmental factors are not measured directly and are referred to as latent factors.

Identicial twins share all their genes
while dizygotic twins share, on average,
50 per cent of their segregating genes
with additive effects. This is represented
in Figure 1 by the correlation of 1.0 between the genetic factors (G) for the identical twins and a correlation of 0.5 for the
fraternal twins. Rearing environmental effects (Er) refer to influences that create
similarities among twins reared together.
Therefore, the model specifies that the
correlation between the Er factors is 1.0
for twins reared together and 0 for twins
reared apart. Shared environmental experiences that are not exclusively due to
the rearing home (e.g., adult contact with
cotwin or shared perinatal or postnatal
environment) but which also contribute
to twin resemblance are called correlated environments (Ec). These effects may

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

82 Lichtenstein and Pedersen

contribute to similarity in all twins regardless of rearing status and are represented in Figure | by the same latent factor for both twins in a pair.> Finally, there
are environmental effects unique to individuals that make members of twin pairs
in all rearing and zygosity groups different from each other (nonshared environmental effects, En), depicted by a lack of
correlation between the En factors for the
two twins in a pair in Figure 1. Nonshared environmental effects thus refer to
experiences that are unique to only one of
the twins in a pair.

Figure 2 is the Cholesky model used in
order to explore how environmental and
genetic factors contribute to the covariation between SES and cognitive abiliteis
(Neale and Cardon, 1992). The model decomposes the variance in occupational
status into variance in common to all three
variables (G_,, En,, Er,, and Ec,), variance
in common with educational achievement
(G,, En,, Er,, Ec,), and finally variance
unique to occupational status (G,, En_,
Er,, Ec,). For the bivariate analyses a similar model was used, with the difference
that only two variables were included in
the model.

The data for each twin pair were summarized in variance-covariance matrices
for monozygotic twins reared apart, monozygotic twins reared together, dizygotic
twins reared apart, and dyzygotic twins

3Correlated environmental effects are not distinguishable from another type of environmental effect referred to in the adoption literature as selective placement. Resemblance of adopted-apart twins may arise, in
part, from similarities in their rearing homes, as would
be the case, for example, if members of reared-apart
twin pairs were adopted into families with similar socioeconomic statuses.

 

Social Biology

reared together. The LISREL VII program
(J6reskog and Sérbom, 1989) was then
used to obtain maximum-likelihood estimates of the different parameters.

RESULTS

Table 3 presents the phenotypic correlations between the variables studied. The
correlations between all of the measures are
substantial and significant at the 0.05 level.

UNIVARIATE ANALYSES

Table 4 gives the parameter estimates,
standard errors, and per cent of variance
explained by genetic and environmental
effects for cognitive abilities and the two
socioeconomic measures. These estimates
are generally in agreement with earlier
reports from the SATSA study, where
slightly different samples have been used
(Lichtenstein et al., 1992; Pedersen et al.,
19920. The only difference is that genetic
effects for educational achievement are estimated to be more important in this sample and that the correlated environmental
effects are less important. However, rearing environmental effects continue to be
important for educational achievement.

Because there is no evidence for correlated environmental effects in any of the
measures, these parameters were not included in the models in the multivariate
analyses.

MULTIVARIATE ANALYSES

Educational achievement.—The parameter estimates and standard errors for
the bivariate model with educational
achievement and cognitive abilities are
presented in Table 5. The model fits the
data (x’(33) = 35.06; p = 0.37).

As can be seen in Table 5, genetic effects contribute to the association between

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

MZ = 1.0 DZ =0.5

TRA=0 TRT=1

en

     
  

   
      

   
 

Educational
Achievement,

Educational
Achievement,

Fic. 1.—Path diagram depicting how twin similarity is modeled for genetic and environmental effects. (Note: G = genetic factor; g = genetic loading; En = nonshared environmental factor; en = nonshared environmental loading; Er = shared rearing environmental factor; er = shared rearing environmental loading; Ec = correlated environmental factor; ec = correlated environmental loading; MZ = monozygotic twins; DZ = dizygotic twins; TRT = twins reared together; TRA = twins
reared apart.)

7-I ‘ON ‘bp 'IOA

SanIqy aanuso)

€8

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

General
Cognitive
Abilities

Educational Occupational
Achievement Status

 

(Ge) Ere) Eee) Eng

Fic. 2.—Path model depicting common and unique factors for genetic and environmental sources of variance and covariance for general cognitive abilities, educational achievement, and occupational status. (Note: The figure is simplified, and contains only one of the twins in the pair. G = genetic factors; g = genetic loadings; En = nonshared environmental factors; en = nonshared environmental loadings; Er = shared rearing environmental factors; er = shared rearing environmental
loadings; Ec = correlated environmental factors; ec = correlated environmental loadings.)

v8

uaslapag pue UTa}sSuazYoI]

ABoj0Ig [e10S
 

Vol. 44, No. 1~2 Cognitive Abilities 8

wn

TABLE 3

PHENOTYPIC CORRELATIONS AMONG OCCUPATIONAL STATUS, EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT,
AND GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITY?

Educational General Cognitive
Variables Achievement Ability
Occupational status ..........ccssescesessesseteeseesees 0.57 0.56
Educational achievement............sccssssecoscscereees wee 0.43

“With N = 176, all correlations are significant at the 0.05 level.

 

 

—Z

—

©

N

oO

2 TABLE 4

& UNIVARIATE MODEL-FITTING ANALYSES FOR GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITIES,

A EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT, AND OCCUPATIONAL STATUS?
os Per Cent of Variance

tm Parmeter Estimate + Standard Error Fit of Model
=z ———_—
on VARIABLES G En Er Ec dp x? P
= o. = eget

General cognitive abilities .............. 83 I? * * 8 7.31 0.50
— 0.80+0.06 0.36+0.04

SEducational achievement ............4... 58 30 13 * 8 5.31 0.72
2p 0.39+0.06 0.28+0.03  0.18+0.10
SOccupational status... 61 28 11 * 8 4.19 0.84
S 0.38+0.05 0.26+0.03 0.16+0.10
5 9G = genetic variance; En = nonshared environmental variance; Er = rearing environmental variance; Ec = correlated environmental vari> ance; * = parameter not identified

—
—

N


oO

>
—

S
=

>

 

 

 

Oo

3 TABLE 5

oO

= MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD MODEL-FITTING PARAMETER ESTIMATES (P.E.), STANDARD ERRORS (S.E.),

AND PER CENT OF VARIANCE FROM THE BIVARIATE ANALYSES OF GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITIES

s AND EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT?

°.

A GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITY EDUATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT

Per Cent
FAcToR LOADINGS PE. S.E. PE. S.E. OF VARIANCE
Common factor loadings
Genetic ....eccccscccscsesesssescsnscssosscsessssececsenneses 0.812 0.06 0.178 0.05 12%
Nonshared environmental ...................6 keene 0.36” 0.04 0.10° 0.04 4%
Rearing environmental ...........ccessccseceeersceee
Unique factor loadings .
GeMNCtiC .......ceeescssceccessceseesseeeee Scceserscesatenecces ae Lee 0.30 0.06 36%
Nonshared environmental ...........:.:.c:cecs0e0- a a 0.26 0.03 27%
Rearing environmentl.........escesecseseeesesees bes nad 8 0.23° 0.08 21%
“df = 33; x? = 35.06; p = 0.37.
bn<0.01.

&p<0.05.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

86 Lichtenstein and Pedersen

cognitive abilities and educational
achievement because the parameters for
the paths to the common genetic factor are
significant. Non-shared environmental
effects also contribute significantly to the
association. Of interest here is that the
unique genetic parameter is significant,
indicating that there is variation among
individuals in educational achievement
due to genetic effects that are independent of genetic variation for cognitive
abilities. In addition, non-shared and
shared environmental effects also contribute to variation in educational
achievement that are independent of cognitive abilities.

Occupational status —Table 6 gives
the fit statistics, parameter estimates, and
standard errors for the model with occupational status. The table displays a pattern for occupational status similar to that
demonstrated for educational achievement. The covariation is mediated by genetic and non-shared environmental effects, but there is significant genetic
variation in occupational status that is independent of genetic variation for cognitive abilities. In addition, there are independent rearing as well as non-shared
environmental effects for occupationnal
status.

Table 7 shows the results from the analyses with all three measures. Even when
educational achievement is added as a covariate, there is still unique genetic variation in occupational status that is independent of genetic variation for cognitive
abilities or educational achievement. There
is also independent non-shared environmental variance, but variance due to rearing environmental effects for occupational
status, on the other hand, is completely in
common with rearing environmental effects for educational achievement.

Social Biology

DISCUSSION

The primary aim of the present study
was to investigate the importance of genetic differences in cognitive abilities for
individual differences in SES. First, it can
be noted that the univariate results for educational achievement and occupational
status fit well into the previous literature
summarized in Table 1. As already mentioned, about 50 per cent of the total variation in educational achievement and
about 40 per cent of the total variation in
occupational status is betweeen-family
variance and thus contributes to resemblance among brothers. In this study, 42
per cent of the variance in both educational achievement and occupational status is between-family variance.* Empirical
data thus seem to converge on substantial
familial similarity in SES, where about
half of the between-family variance in
educational achievement is due to genetic effects and the other half is due to
shared environmental influences. For occupational status, genetic effects seem to be
responsible for an even greater part of the
between-family variance.

Data have suggested that in industrialized countries one’s own achievement is
most important for status attainment
(Treiman and Yip, 1989). The importance

4In a separate publication we investigated the dimensions of occupation by using a multidimensional
scaling technique (Lichtenstein et al. 1995). This
method included the data from all occupational classes
(i.e., even farm workers and self-employed non-professional persons). The results showed that a status dimension of occupation exists. Further, the importance of genetic and environmental influences for that status scale
is nearly identical to the one presented here. Thus, it is
not likely that there have been any substantial biases
from the exclusions of occupational categories in this
study.

 
 

Vol. 44, No. 1-2 Cognitive Abilities 87

TABLE 6

MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD MODEL-FITTING PARAMETER ESTIMATES (P.E.), STANDARD ERRORS (S.E.),
AND PER CENT OF VARIANCE FROM THE BIVARIATE ANALYSES OF GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITIES
AND OCCUPATIONAL STATUS?

 

 

 

 

 

GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITY OCCUPATIONAL STATUS
a TT PER CENT
Factor LOADINGS PE. S.E. PE. S.E. OF VARIANCE
Common factor loadings
Genetic............ Seesecseeevenss Secaucctseeceuesseese 0.818 0.06 0.25° 0.04 25%
Nonshared environmental .............. venees 0.36" 0.04 0.10¢ 0.04 4%
Rearing environmental...........sesssesee ‘ae se
—/ ‘ .
— Unique factor loadings
= Genetic .....cccccccsrcccssonsssccvsccssssecerssesennsers _ a_i 0.28° 0.05 34%
3 Nonshared environmental ...........01-.0 a ee 0.24° 0.03 24%
Rearing environmental........... éraeuennisnans me eas 0.18° 0.08 13%
a @df = 33; x’ = 25.91; p =0.80.
Oo 5<0.01.
A ss *p<0.05.
CO
Oo
tm
av.
cn
=
—
o
ra
oS
6D
—_
aos
oO
S
6
ee TABLE 7
—
a MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD MODEL-FITTING PARAMETER ESTIMATES (P.E.), STANDARD ERRORS (S.E.)}, AND
a
v PER CENT OF VARIANCE FROM THE ANALYSES OF GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITIES, EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT,
Ss AND OCCUPATIONAL STATUS?
_
>. GENERAL EDUCATIONAL OCCUPATIONAL
Oo COGNITIVE ABILITY ACHIEVEMENT STATUS
oO PER CENT
“ Factor LOADINGS PE. S.E. PE. S.E. PE. S.E, OF VARIANCE
S Common factor loadings
‘= All three measures
e Genetic............. Senecsessecressvencesecees 0.81° 0.06 0.18 0.05 0.25 0.04 26%
OQ Nonshared environmental........... 0.36° 0.04 0.09 0.05 0.09" 0.04 4%
Rearing environmental.............. wae Lee Lee Loe wee eee as
Two measures
GeNEHIC ......cceeccescccsevcesccseeeeceeeeenees vee eae 0 Lae 0 Lae Lae
Nonshared environmental........... re Lae 0.31° 0.03 0.01 0.03 0%
Rearing environmental................ Lee ee 0.34° 0.04 0.21° 0.04 19%
Unique factor loadings
GeNETIC.......ccccesscccsccccerescccercssesssousees a Lae wae a 0.23° 0.04 23%
Nonshared environmental..........-... ees cee Lae see 0.26 0.03 28%
Rearing environmental................0.. bee Lae eee re 0

 

df = 69; x” = 69.48; p = 0.46,
bp = 0.01.
“p = 0.05.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

88 Lichtenstein and Pedersen

of achievement versus ascription for occupational status has typically been tested
by examining the relative influence of the
subject’s educational achievement and the
father’s occupation on current occupation. However, if genetic effects are of
importance for status attainment, fatherson similarity will in part be affected by
genetic effects. We suggest that an alternative evaluation of the relative importance
of achievement versus ascription should
involve a comparison between genetic and
shared environmental effects for occupational status. Twin studies, including the
present one, indicate that genetic effects
are more important than shared environmental effects for sibling resemblance in
occupational status. In the multivariate
analyses, the rearing environmental effects
for educational achievement and occupational status were completely overlapping.
This finding means that the same factors in
the rearing home are making family members similar to each other for both educational achievement and occupational status. Non-genetic familial transmission of
occupational status seems thus to be mediated by education. Educational policy is,
therefore, probably important for the distinction between ascribed and achieved
status in a society.

Nearly all of the non-shared (withinfamily) environmental effects for the SES
measures were independent of those for
cognitive abilities. This can be due to the
inclusion of measurement error in the
non-shared environmental parameters, but
it is likely that non-shared environmental
effects include the idiosyncratic events
that happen to people and that affect their
choices of an education or occupational
path. An obvious example could be that
one sibling is offered a job after finishing
high school while the other sibling con
 

Social Biology

tinues on to higher education. Another
example is that an accident or disease affects one of the siblings, limiting his educational or occupational possibilities. It is
important to note that non-shared effects
of this type account for nearly one-third
of the variation in status attainment.

The anlyses revealed that genetic variation for cognitive abilities contributes
significantly to genetic variation in the
SES measures. However, there is genetic
variance in both educational achievement
and occupational status that is independent of genetic variance for cognitive
abilities. Furthermore, in the multivariate
analyses, including educational achievement, significant independent genetic variance for occupational status was demonstrated. These results are in agreement
with an earlier Norwegian study based on
twins reared together only (Tambs et al.,
1989). Because Tambs and coworkers
presented this data only from a multivariate model with a single common genetic
factor, the best comparison is made with
results from occupational status in this
study.> When the data were pooled over
age-cohorts, they found that 14 per cent
of the variance was genetic variance in
common with cognitive abilities and educational achievement, but that 26 per cent
of the variance in occupational status was
independent of genetic effects on the
other two measures (Tambs et al., 1989).
The corresponding figures in this study,
given in Table 7, are 26 per cent (common) and 23 per cent (independent).

5Because of the type of model in the Norwegian
analyses, it is not possible to make comparisons with the
bivariate analyses reported here for education.
Vol. 44, No. 1-2

Currently, there is a debate concerning
how important genetic factors for IQ are
for the class structure in Western societies,
publicized recently because of the book
The Bell Curve (Herrnstein and Murray,
1994). The data in this study show that genetic influences for cognitive abilities are
important for SES, indicated by significant
portions of genetic variance in common

in with the cognitive factors in Tables 5 and
= 6. On the other hand, it should be noted
that even greater portions of the genetic
variance in the SES measures were inde® pendent of genetic variance for cognitive
A abilities. Over 30 per cent of the variance
cc in both educational achievement and occut; pational status was independent of genetic
cs variance for cognitive abilities. Thus, IQ is
~ not the only reason for genetic variation in
=’ SES and, as already has been discussed,
& rearing environmental factors are also im"S portant for variation in SES.

= The challenge presented by the current
is to identify other sources of fa
O
o
”
c
eet
—_
wm

BEHRMAN, J. R., Z. HRUBEC, P. TAUBMAN, and T. J.
WALES. 1980. Socioeconomic success: A study
of the effects of genetic endowments, family environment, and schooling. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

CEDERLOF, R., and U. Loricu. 1978. The Swedish
Twin Registry, p. 189-195. In W. E. Nance, G.
Allen, and P. Parisi (eds.), Twin research: Biology and epidemiology. Alan R. Liss, New York.

DoMANSKI, H., and Z. SAWINSKI. Dimensions of occupational mobility: The empirical invariance.
Europ. Sociol. Rev. 3:39-53.

Erikson, R. 1987, The long arm of the origin: The
effects of family background on occupational
and educational achievement, p. 58-76. In U.
Bergryd and C-G. Janson (eds.), Sociological
miscellany: Essays in honour of Gunnar Boal.
Univ. of Stockholm Press, Stockholm.

Hauser, R. M., and D. FEATHERMAN. 1976. Equality
of schooling: Trends and prospects. Sociol.
Educ. 49:99-120.

Downloaded by [University

Cognitive Abilities 89

milial similarity and genetic variation for
SES (Hauser and Featherman, 1976; Olneck, 1977; Hauser and Sewell, 1986).
Plausible candidates responsible for the
genetic mediation, which should be considered in future studies, are personality
(cf. Jencks et al., 1979), health (cf. Lichtenstein, et al., 1993), interests, or talents
(like musicality or handiness) that are not
assessed in standard cognitive tests.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Swedish Adoption/Twin Study of Aging (SATSA) is an ongoing study conducted at
the Division of Genetic Epidemiology within
the Institute of Environmental Medicine at the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, in collaboration with the Research Center for Developmental and Health Genetics at the Pennsylvania State University. SATSA was supported
by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation Research Network on Successful
Aging, the National Institute of Aging (Grants
AG-04563 and AG-10175) and a grant from
the Swedish Council for Social Research.

REFERENCES

Hauser, R. M., and W. H. SEWELL. 1986. Family effects in simple models of education, occupational status, and earnings: Findings from the
Wisconsin and Kalamazoo studies. J. Labor
Econ. 4:§83-S 120.

Heat, A. C., K. BerG, L. J. Eaves, M. H. SOLaas,
L. A. Corey, J. SUNDET, P. MAGNus, and W. E.
NANCE. 1985, Education policy and the heritability of educational attainment. Nature 314:734—
736.

HERRNSTEIN, R. J., and C. Murray. 1994, The bell
curve: Intelligence and class structure in American life. The Free Press, New York.

Horn, J. L. 1982. The theory of fluid and crystallized intelligence in relation to concepts of cognitive psychology and aging in adulthood, p.
237-278. In F. 1. M. Craik, and E. E. Trehub
(eds.), Aging and cognitive processes. Plenum
Press, New York.

Jencks, C., S. BARTLETT, M. Corcoran, J. CROUSE,
D. EAGLESFIELD, G. JACKSON, K. MCCLELLAND,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

90 Lichtenstein and Pedersen

P. MUESER, M. OLNECK, J. SCHWARTZ, S. WARD,
and J. WILLIAMS. 1979. Who gets ahead?: The
determinants of economic success in America.
Basic Books, New York.

JORESKOG, K., and D. SORBom. 1989. LISREL VII:
Estimation of linear structural equation systems.
Computer programs. National Educational Resources, Chicago.

LICHTENSTEIN, P., J. R. HARRIS, N. L. PEDERSEN, and
G. E. McCLearn. 1993. Socioeconomic status
and physical health, how are they related? An empirical study based on twins reared apart and
twins reared together. Soc. Sci. Med. 36:441-450.

LICHTENSTEIN, P., S. L. HERSHBERGER, N. L. PEDERSEN, and G. E. MCCLEARN. 1995. Dimensions of
occupations: Genetic and environmental influences. J. Biosoc. Sci. 27:193-206.

LICHTENSTEIN, P., N. L. PEDERSEN, and G. E. McCLEARN. 1992. The origins of individual differences in occupational status and educational
level: A study of twins reared apart and together.
Acta Sociol. 35:13-31.

McGueE, M., and T. J. BOUCHARD, JR. 1984. Adjustment of twin data for the effects of age and sex.
Behav. Genet. 14:325-343.

NEALE, M. C., and L. R. CARDON. 1992. Methodology for genetic studies of twins and families.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.

NESSELROADE, J. R., N. L. PEDERSEN, G. E. McCLEARN, R. PLOMIN, and C, S. BERGEMAN. 1988.
Factorial and criterion validities of telephoneassessed cognitive ability measures: Age and
gender comparisons in adult twins. Res. Aging
10:220—234.

OLNECK, M. R. 1977. On the use of sibling data to
estimate the effects of family background, cognitive skills, and schooling: Results from the
Kalamazoo brothers study. /n P. Taubman (ed.),
Kinometrics: Determinanats of socioeconomic
success within and between families. NorthHolland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PEDERSEN, N. L., L. FRIBERG, B. FLODERUSMyYRHED, G. E. MCCLEARN, and R. PLOMIN.
1984. Swedish early separated twins: Identification and characterization. Acta Genet. Med.
Gemellol. 33:243-250.

Social Biology

PEDERSEN, N. L., G. E. MCCLEARN, R. PLOMIN, J.
NESSELROADE, S. BERG, and U. DE FAIRE. 1991.
The Swedish Adoption/Twin Study of Aging:
An update. Acta Genet. Med. Gemellol. 40:
7-20.

PEDERSEN, N. L., R. PLOMIN, J. NESSELROADE, and
G. E. McCLEARN. 1992. A quantitative genetic
analysis of cognitive abilities during the second
half of the life span. Psychol. Sci. 3:346-353.

ScarR, S. 1995. Behavior genetic and socialization
theories of intelligence: Truce and reconciliation. Jn R. J. Sternberg and E. L. Grigorenko
(eds.), Intelligence: Heredity and environment.
Cambridge Univ. Press, New York.

SCARR, S., and R. A. WEINBERG. 1994, Educational
and occupational achievements of brothers and
sisters in adoptive and biologically related families. Behav. Genet. 24:301-325.

SNYDERMAN, M., and R. ROTHMAN. 1987. Survey of
expert opinion on intelligence and aptitude testing. Amer. Psychol. 42:137-144.

STATISTICS SWEDEN. 1983. Meddelanden i samordningsfragor: Socioekonomisk indelning (SEI)
1982:4. [Reports on statistical co-ordination:
Swedish socioeconomic classification]. SCB,
Stockholm.

TAMBS, K., J. M. SUNDET, P. MAGNUS, and F, BERG.
1989. Genetic and environmental contributions
to the covariance between occupational status,
educational attainment, and IQ: A study of
twins. Behav. Genet. 19:209-222.

TEASDALE, T. W., and D. R. OweEN. 1981. Social
class correlations among separately adopted siblings and unrelated individuals adopted together.
Behav. Genet. 11:577-588.

TEASDALE, T. W., and T. I. A. SORENSEN. 1983. Educational attainment and social class in adoptees:
Genetic and environmental contributions. J.
Biosoc. Sci. 15:509-518.

TREIMAN, D. J., and K. B. Yip. 1989. Educational
and occupational attainment in 21 countries, p.
373-394. In M. L. Kohn (ed.), Cross-national
research in sociology. Sage, Newbury Park.

 
