Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Commodity aspirations in easterlin's relative
income theory of fertility

Dennis A. Ahlburg

To cite this article: Dennis A. Ahlburg (1984) Commodity aspirations in
easterlin's relative income theory of fertility, Social Biology, 31:3-4, 201-207, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1984.9988575

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1984.9988575

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 4

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Commodity Aspirations in Easterlin’s
Relative Income Theory of Fertility

Dennis A. Ahlburg

Industrial Relations Center,
University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota

    
 

Novas aMeMorem McRae! Sat
; er 3. 2

ABSTRACT: This paper presents the preference ordering that underlies Easterlin’s relative income theory of fertility. Commodity aspirations are a key component of the theory and the
paper explores how the introduction of commodity aspirations into the utility function affects
the consumption of commodities and bearing of children. The formation and empirical specification of commodity aspirations are also discussed.

Since the seminal work of Becker
(1960), there has been considerable interest in the application of consumer
theory to the study of fertility. Much of
this work, which has been surveyed by
Bagozzi and Van Loo (1978), represents
refinements of and extensions to Becker’s model. Bagozzi and Van Loo (1978,
p. 210) note that the work of Richard
Easterlin, however, makes ‘‘four contributions which represent additions to the
theories proposed by Becker and
Mincer.”’ These contributions are an
emphasis on potential income through
time; an explicit recognition of the role
of tastes; the indirect role of background
characteristics and norms operating
through tastes; and the role of relative
income as distinct from absolute income. There is, however, one component of Easterlin’s theory that has received little attention—the preference
ordering on which the theory is based.
Easterlin explicitly introduces commodity aspirations into the utility function
and shows how they influence an individual’s choice of commodities and
number of children. This preference ordering and its importance will be discussed in the first section of this paper.
In the second section, the formation of

commodity aspirations will be discussed
and given empirical content.

PREFERENCES IN EASTERLIN’S
THEORY

Williams (1977) has argued that Easterlin’s writing on fertility suggests a lexicographic ordering of preferences. Under such an ordering, a couple first seeks
to meet their aspirations for consumption commodities which defines their
standard of living. Any income above
the level needed to satisfy this basic consumption is spent on having children.
This preference ordering is shown in
Figure 1. As we can see from Figure 1,
the set does not contain that part of its
boundary which lies to the left of Xo. In
fact, it can not be represented by a continuous real function S (Malinvaud,
1972, pp. 19-20). Malinvaud argues that
such an ordering “hardly seems likely to
arise in economics, since it assumes that,
for the consumer, commodity 1 [consumer commodities] is immeasurably
more important than commodity 2 [children)” (p. 20).! Williams also thinks the

‘In contrast, Namboodiri, in an exchange on
the Bagozzi and Van Loo paper, wrote “‘economic
models would become much better suited to han
201

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

FIGURE 1

lexicographic ordering is unrealistic and
proposes as an alternative a utility function of the general form:

(1) U = U(C,G-G*)

Where Cis the number of children, G is
commodities and G* is an indicator of
consumption aspirations or tastes
formed during childhood. A CobbDouglas representation of Equation (1)
is undefined where G - G™* is negative
and an assumption that income is sufficient to cover G* is needed. As an alternative to the Cobb-Douglas representation, Williams has suggested a
utility function with a form such that
some positive amount of C can offset
levels of G below G* and thus define
non-negative utility. This formulation is
shown in Figure 2. Since the assumption
of income sufficient to cover G* is
dropped and replaced by a nonNegativity adjustment, the utility functions in Figure 2 exhibit continuous sub
die ‘more economic’ phenomena . . . if model
builders would recognize . . . the lexicographic nature of individuals’ preference structure” (Namboodiri, 1979, p 292). In a recent study Encarnacion (1982) developed a model of lexicographic
choice in which the target variable was a minimum
number of surviving children rather than a target
level of consumption.

Ahlburg

 

Social Biology

G

FIGURE 2

stitution between goods and children
and need not be asymptotic to G*, as in
the Cobb-Douglas case.

However, it is my reading of Easterlin? that his Relative Income Hypothesis of fertility determination is based on
the preference ordering shown in Figure
3. Above G* there is continuous substitution between children and goods.
However, if income, Y. is insufficient to
cover G*, then the indifference curves

G*

0

FIGURE 3

This interpretation is supported by recent
work of Easterlin (Easterlin, 1978, p. 115ff).

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 31, No. 3-4

are parallel to the C axis.’ For
Y < P,G*, then the traditional utility
curves of microeconomic theory prevail,
although these curves are asymptotic to
G*. This representation of preferences,
which we refer to as the intrafamily
model of endogenous preferences (Easterlin et al., 1976, p. 96) has the general
form:*
Equation (2) U = U(C, G/G*)
where Y> P,G* (orG > G*)
U = U(G/G*)
where Y < P,G* (orG < G*).

Such a representation does not run
into the non-negativity requirement of
the Cobb-Douglas utility function noted
above and, in fact, the assumption required by the Cobb-Douglas, namely
Y > P,G%, iscounter to one of the basic
tenets of the relative income hypothesis.
The representation of preferences in
Fquation 2 also does not need the alternative assumption of Williams that
\C| > |G - G*| when G < G*.

To see how our introduction of commodity aspirations into the utility function via relative consumption of commodities affects the consumption of
goods and the consumption of children,

3Horizontal indifference curves mean that utility is a function only of consumer goods. Children
have zero utility. The consumer’s equilibrium is at
acomer and the income-consumption curve below
G* is the G axis.

‘This general form of the utility function is similar to that used by Duesenberry in his “relative income” model of consumption. Duesenberry writes
the utility function as

_ §1 &r &
v=o(,. 8... 8)

where the G’s are a weighted average of the rest of
the population’s consumption. This says utility increases only if an individual’s consumption rises
relative to the population average. See Duesenberry (1949, p. 32). Duesenberry’s model is an example of what Easterlin, Pollak, and Wachter
(1976, p. 96) refer to as the socialization model of
interdependent preferences (see also Pollak,
1976).

Commodity Aspirations

203

consider Figure 4. We see that G* acts
as a shift parameter. As commodity aspirations rise, the whole preference set
shifts up. Figure 4 considers two families
with identical income and same shaped
utility functions (identical marginal
rates of substitution between children
and goods). However, Family A has
lower aspirations, G*,, than does Family B, G*. The income of Family A easily covers the commodities necessary for
the attainment of their minimum commodity bundle (or standard of living).
Their supernumary income is then divided between children and further consumption. Family B, however, must
spend substantially more of their income to cover their minimum standard
of living and thus has a smaller supernumary income to divide between children
and further consumption of goods. As
we can see from the individual consumer equilibrium, Family A has more
children than Family B. This is a basic
conclusion of the Relative Income Hypothesis: For two families with equal income and identical marginal rates of
substitution between commodities and
children, the number of children de
 

FIGURE 4
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

204 Ahlburg

manded is a negative function of commodity aspirations. Although Family B
consumes more commodities than does
Family A, its utility is lower, since utility
is a function of relative consumption of
commodities, not absolute consumption. The higher aspirations of Family B
reduce their relative consumption and
thus their utility.

While the concept of preferences and
relative consumption may be somewhat
unfamiliar, it has proven useful in a wide
variety of theoretical and empirical
studies. For example, it has been used
by Duesenberry (1949) in his explanation of empirical difficulties in demand
theory; Easterlin (1969), Wachter
(1975), and Freedman (1963) in studies
of fertility and Wachter (1972 and 1977)
in studies of labor force participation
and by Pollak (1976) in studies of the linear expenditure system. Related notions have gained growing theoretical
acceptance and empirical support in sociology, political science, and social psychology (see Easterlin, 1976, p. 424 fora
list of references). The explicit treatment of tastes as represented by relative
consumption is treated most completely
in Easterlin et al. (1980) and Pollak
(1976).

Perhaps the greatest success of the
relative income model, with its explicit
treatment of interdependent tastes, is in
the explanation of the baby boom and
the subsequent baby bust. The relative
income model predicted both swings
while the Chicago-Columbia model of
fertility has been unable to provide a satisfactory explanation of this experience
(Easterlin et al., 1980, and Leibenstein,
1976, p. 430).°

SLeibenstein (1976, pp. 428-428) sees this failure as a failure of standard economic theory to
“distinguish between committed income and that
portion of the income immediately available for

Social Biology

Further empirical support for the importance of relative notions comes from
a rather unusual source. In a review of
30 surveys from 19 countries covering
the period 1947-1976, Easterlin (1974,
p. 118) concluded that “‘in judging their
happiness, people tend to compare their
actual situation with a reference standard or norm, derived from their prior
and ongoing experience.” If we may
equate utility with happiness,° then such
findings strongly support the utility formulation of Equation 2.

THE DETERMINATION OF
COMMODITY ASPIRATIONS

As we have seen above, commodity
aspirations, G*, play a significant role in
Easterlin’s theory of fertility. As aspirations rise, ceteris paribus, the number of
children a family has falls. Thus, the determination of commodity aspirations is
of particular interest to those interested
in the study of fertility. But how are such
commodity aspirations formed?

Commodity aspirations are formed
by the material environment experienced during childhood (especially adolescence) and are primarily a function of
parental income.’ Easterlin (1969, p.

expenditures. This is a basic error in my view.” Indeed such an error has greatly impaired the predictive value of the Chicago-Columbia model of fertility.

°This seems a reasonable assumption. Survey
respondents reported economic considerations as
very important in the determination of happiness,
though by no means the only consideration (Easterlin, 1974, p. 118).

7Leibenstein (1976, p. 249) emphasizes that G*
is unlike the normal notion of consumption: “the
consumption choices involved [in G*] are not similar to choosing between hamburgers and cheese
sandwiches for Junch but involve commitments associated with neighborhood, housing, school,
churches, . . . etc.’’ They are characterized by
longer term contractual obligations that are difficult to change.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 31, No. 3-4

135) allows that other factors may be operative (for example, ethnic environment, religious environment, post-parental environment) but emphasizes
that “‘tastes—that is, the goods aspirations of young adults—are . . . determined chiefly by economic conditions;
namely, those experienced by young
adults in their parents’ household as
they are growing up” {Easterlin, 1973,
p. 197). Given that aspirations for material consumer goods such as housing, education, travel, neighborhood, cars,
etc., constitute a target standard of fiving, is it parental consumption of these
goods or is it the child’s consumption
that is relevant to the production of the
child’s aspirations? Easterlin (1969),
Leibenstein (1976, p. 428), and BenPorath (1975, p. 398) argue that it is the
parental consumption or standard of living that determines the child’s tastes or
aspirations.? As Ben-Porath says, “‘the
life styles of parents probably affect the
tastes of their offspring” and “people
who are exposed to a high standard of
living in their adolescence develop expectations or tastes with regard to consumption that tend to depress fertility,
ceteris paribus.” Thus, it is parents’
spending on themselves rather than total parental income that can be used asa
proxy for the child’s commodity aspirations (Williams, 1979, p. 6).

A complication noted by Ben-Porath
(1975, p. 348) is that the parents’ consumption (and thus a child’s consump
§In Leibenstein’s formulation, G* 1s referred to
as ‘‘commitment hump ” Tastes are a function of
three variables individual characteristics, nurture,
and peer group influences Leibeinstein concedes
that “it seems reasonable to presume the nurture
effects in some sense determine aspirations with
respect to the standard of living that individuals expect to enjoy, as well as aspirations with respect to
their ultimate family size” (Leibeinstein, 1976, p
428)

Commodity Aspirations

205

tion aspiration) is not independent of
the number of children ina family. Fora
given parental income, more children
are associated with a lower parental consumption since more children means a
higher expenditure on children (assuming that reduced spending per child does
not completely offset increases in the
number of children). Thus, consumption aspirations are a negative function
of the number of siblings. However, as
Williams (1979, p. 7) has pointed out, if
joint consumption is an important factor, then the number of siblings exert
less of a negative effect on aspirations.
Examples of joint consumption would
be housing, neighborhood, and cultural
environment.

In the absence of data on parental
consumption, income data may be used.
However, unless the parental propensity to consume out of income is constant, bias will be introduced into the
empirical application of this concept.
The relevant income concept is full family income (combined potential income
of husband and wife). The importance
of female income has been stressed by
Oppenheimer (1976). By ignoring the
female’s contribution to family income,
investigators may underestimate G”%,
particularly for large parental cohorts.
The wife in such a cohort is more likely
to be in the labor force than a wife in a
small cohort and thus contribute more
to family income (assuming, for the moment, husbands’ incomes constant
across cohorts of different sizes) and
thus parental consumption. If we include home produced goods as a component of consumption aspiration, then
G* is further underestimated, particularly for small parental cohorts where female labor force participation is low.
However, Williams (1979, p. 7) argues
that most home-produced goods are for

 

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

206 Ahlburg

consumption by children and thus
would not affect parental consumption
very much.

Thus, if commodity aspirations are
based on parental consumption, the appropriate equation to generate these aspirations is:

Equation (3)G* = f(Ys, Yu, K),

where G* is the aspiration level, Yr and
Yx, are income of the father and mother
respectively, and K the number of children in the family.

eo[a

G*
>?

ala

Grog 2G.
y, 7° 7 K <9

Williams (1979, p. 6) suggests that it
may be the child’s consumption level
rather than that of the parent that determines commodity aspirations. If this
were the case, aspirations would rise
with the father’s income and decline as
the number of siblings increased, as explained above. The role of mother’s income is less straightforward. While
mother’s market earnings increase family income and total consumption, market participation reduces the production
of home-produced goods which are primarily for consumption by children.
Thus, female labor force participation
has positive and negative effects on a
child’s consumption and aspirations. If
the mother works, then the value of
services she performs in the home is less
than the value of goods and services she
can buy with market earnings. If she
does not work, then the reverse holds.
Thus, if commodity aspirations are
based on own consumption while a child
is young, then:

Equation (3)G* = g(Yr, Yy, HPM, K)

where HPM is the quantity of home production of the mother and

 

Social Biology

 

a Yu 9
0 HPM
Thus, if the child forms its commodity aspirations on the basis of parental
consumption, the relevant proxy is parental consumption which is a positive
function of family income and a negative
function of number of children. However, if the child forms aspirations on
the basis of own consumption, then the
relevant proxy is total material consumption of that child which ts a positive
function of family income, home production, and a negative function of number of siblings. In either case, if Easterlin’s theory is correct, the estimation
of demand functions would require data
on the family of origin.

CONCLUSION

In their survey of theories of fertility,
Bagozzi and Van Loo (1978) identify
four significant contributions made by
Easterlin’s theory of fertility. They cite
his stress on potential income flow
through time as being pertinent to
household decision making; tastes being
an explicit determinant of fertility;
background characteristics and norms
as to standards of child care and family
size affecting fertility indirectly through
tastes rather than directly; and the fact
that relative income has an effect on fertility in addition to the influence of the
absolute level of income.

A fifth contribution, the introduction
of commodity aspirations into the utility
function, has been discussed here. It is
shown that, ceteris paribus, the number
of children demanded is a negative function of commodity aspirations, as is the
utility of the family. Commodity aspira
 
 

Vol. 31, No. 34

tions are formed by the material environment experienced during childhood
and are primarily a function of parental

Commodity Aspirations

207

income. Studies of the demand for commodities and children should, therefore,
include data on parental resources.

REFERENCES

AHLBURG, D. A. 1979. Alternative approaches
to forecasting U.S. fertility. Unpublished
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

Bacozzi, R. P., and VAN Loo. 1978. Fertility
as Consumption: Theories from the Behavioral Sciences. J. Consum. Res, 4:199-228.

BECKER, G.S. 1960. An economic analysis of

fertility, p. 209-231. In Demographic and

economic change in developed countries.

Universities-National Bureau of Economic

Research, Princeton University Press, Prin
ceton, N.J.

c& BEN-PoraTH, Y. 1975. First generation effects

on second generation fertility. Demography

12:397—40S.

+2 DUESENBERRY, J. 1949, Income, savings and the

theory of consumer behavior. Harvard Uni
2015

08 Decembe

13:4

a

 

5 versity Press, Cambridge.

-EASTERLIN, R. A. 1969. Towards a socioeco"Q nomic theory of fertility: A survey of recent
S ‘research on economic factors in American
rs fertility, p. 127-156. Zn Fertility and family
>, Planning: A world view, S. J. Behrman, L.
a Corsa, Jr., and R. Freedman (eds.). Uni5 versity of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

2 . 1973. Relative economic status and the
5 American fertility swing, p. 170-223. In
= Family economic behavior, E. B. Sheldon

(ed.). J. B. Lippincott Co., Philadelphia.
. 1974. Does economic growth improve
the human lot? Some empirical evidence. In
Nations and households in economic
growth: Essays in honor of Moses Abramowitz. Academic Press, New York.
. 1976. The conflict between aspirations
and resources. Pop. Devel. Rev. 2:417-427.
. 1978. The economics and sociology of
fertility: a synthesis. Jn Historical studies of
changing fertility, C. Tilly (ed.). Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.
EASTERLIN, R., R. PoLLAK, and M. L. Wacu
 

 

Downloaded b

 

 

 

 

 

TER. 1980. Towards a more general model of
fertility determination: Endogenous preferences and natural fertility, p. 81-150. In
Population and economic change in developing countries, R. A. Easterlin (ed.). University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

ENCARNACION, J. 1982. Fertility behavior and
labor force participation: A model of lexicographic choice, p. 287-246. In Research in
population economics, Vol. 4, J. L. Simon
and P.H. Lindert (eds.). JAI Press,
Greenwich, Conn.

FREEDMAN, D. 1983. The relation of economic
status to fertility. Amer. Econ. Rev.
53:414-426.

LEIBENSTEIN, H. 1976. The problem of characterizing aspirations. Pop. Devel. Rev.
2:427-431.

MALINVAUD, E. 1972. Lectures on microeconomic theory. North Holland, Amsterdam.

Nampoop ml, N. K. 1979. Fertility as consumption: Comment. J. Cons. Res. 5:290-292.

OPPENHEIMER, V. 1976. The Easterlin hypothesis: Another aspect of the echo to consider.
Pop. Devel. Rev. 2:433-457.

PoLLak, R. A. 1976. Interdependent Preferences. Amer. Econ. Rev. 66:309-320.

WachHTER, M. L. 1972. A labor supply model
for secondary workers. Rev. Econ. Statist.
§4:141-151.

. 1975. A time series fertility equation:

The potential for a baby boom in the 1980's.

Internat. Econ. Rev. 16:609-624.

. 1977. Participation rates: Their response to relative income and intermediate
swings. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, p. 545-576. Brookings Institute,
Washington, D.C.

WituiaMs, A. 1977. Fertility determinants in
the U.S.: A test of the relative income hypothesis. Presented to American Population Association, Philadelphia, 1979.

 

 
