Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1992) Book notes, Social Biology, 39:1-2, 177-180, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1992.9988814

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988814

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44
Book Notes

DEPRESSION: THE EVOLUTION OF PowERLESSNESS: By Paul Gilbert. The
Guilford Press, New York, 1992.
561 pages. $40, hardbound.

Bringing the reader up to date on
urrent research and theory,this volme presents an overview of the varius psychological approaches to unAderstanding and treating depression.
“Part I explores the major distinctions
‘among all types of depression, includcing discussion of seasonal affective dissorder, postnatal depression, and deression in children. A chapter on
epidemiology covers issues of preva"dence, relapse, long-term outcome,
Zand chronic depression. In addition,
sthe relationship between depression
sand the personality disorders is examgned in detail.
3 Part II offers an overview of evolu“tion theory and its particular relevance
cto depression. Special attention is
xiven to the social nature of the disorler expressed in submissive behavior,
Sense of inferiority, helplessness and
Qveakness, shame, guilt, anger, resentment, and envy. Gilbert’s evolutionary
approach offers a coherent account of
how these aspects of depressive functioning relate to two basic human
concerns —social power and belonging.
Part IJ covers the major theories of
depression, including psychoanalytic,
object relations, attachment, psychological, cognitive, behavioral, and social. Theories are compared and contrasted, high-lighting controversies,

mpber,2015

Vo

y

 

weaknesses, and strengths, and demonstrating where cross-fertilization of
ideas might be beneficial. The final
chapter outlines why simple theories of
etiology are inadequate, and explores
the cultural and social relationships
that elicit many forms of depression.

Illuminating the complex interplay
of cognition, behavior, and biology in
depression, this volume is a valuable
resource for researchers and practitioners in the fields of psychology, psychiatry, and other mental health sciences.

Paul Gilbert is Head of Adult Mental Health in the Department of Psychology, Pastures Hospital, Darby,
United Kingdom.

GENETIC ISSUES IN PSYCHOSOCIAL EPIDEMIOLOGY: By Ming T. Tsuang,
Kenneth S. Kendler, and Michael J.
Lyons (eds.). Rutgers University
Press, New Brunswick, NJ, 1992.
280 pages. $45, cloth.

To what extent 1s mental] illness inherited? The question 1s of compelling
interest to patients, their families, clinicians, and society. This volume critically surveys current understanding of
the hereditary component of psychiatric disorders. It analyzes the methodological strengths and weaknesses of
the techniques—both from traditional
epidemiology and from new work in
statistics and molecular genetics—used
to determine the genetic component of
these disorders. Ethical issues and the
complexity of the relationships among

177
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

178 Book Notes

genetically determined factors, social
influences, and developmental variables are stressed throughout.

Ming T. Tsuang, M.D., is a professor of psychiatry and epidemiology at
Harvard University. Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D., is a professor of psychiatry
and human genetics at the Medical
College of Virginia. Michael J. Lyons,
Ph.D., is an assistant professor of psychology at Boston University and visiting assistant professor of psychology
at Harvard University.

PORTRAIT OF DIVORCE: ADJUSTMENT TO
MarirAL BREAKDOWN: By Gay C.
Kitson with William M. Holmes.
The Guilford Press, New York,
1992. 438 pages. $40, hardbound.

Despite the increase of research on
divorce, relatively little is known about
such topics as how men adjust to divorce compared to women, how blacks
adjust compared to whites, and what
divorce adjustment looks like over
time. Filling a gap in the literature,
Portrait of Divorce presents a detailed
report on the causes and consequences
of divorce. The book covers the period
of estrangement through the divorce
process and on to 4 years after the couples separated. The work is based on
the integration of original data with
over 50 years of prior research. In addition, it contrasts divorcing people
with a comparable sample of people
who remain in intact marriages.

The book opens with a discussion of
today’s changing attitudes about marriage and the resulting mixed view of
divorce. A new model of divorce
adjustment—one that integrates the
pathology and crisis models of adjust
Social Biology

ment and includes elements of loss and
change—is outlined. The four sources
of study data used for the book are described, as are the ways in which such
key elements as subjective distress, attachment, self-esteem, and illness contacts were measured. To address the issue of comparability of the married
samples, background characteristics of
the suburban, reconciled, and marital
transition samples are examined. Also,
“risk factors” that have been thought
to predispose those who divorce are
explored.

Subsequent chapters cover the processes of the relationship estrangement
that occurs within marriage, and various “‘causes’’ of divorce including legal
definitions, psychological correlates,
and marital complaints. The effect of
divorce on physical and mental health
and the implications of age and other
life events on the ability to adjust are
described. Other topics include economic factors, social support systems,
and life after divorce. Analyses are
presented that illustrate what factors
are associated with better and worse
adjustment to divorce for blacks and
whites, and men and women, both
cross-sectionally and longitudinally.

This volume will be useful to clinicians who work with the divorced, and
also may serve as a classroom text for
students.

Gay C. Kitson ts an Associate Professor in the Department of Sociology
and a Senior Fellow in the Institute for
Life-Span Development and Gerontology at the University of Akron in Ohio
and also an Adjunct Associate Professor of Sociology in the Department of
Psychiatry at Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine.
William M. Holmes is Director of the

 
 

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Statistical Analysis Center for Massachusetts.

HUMAN SUGGESTIBILITY: ADVANCES IN
THEORY, RESEARCH, AND APPLICATION: By John Schumaker (ed.).
Routledge, Chapman & Hall, New
York, 1991. 372 pages. $45, cloth.

This volume comprises original
wworks from an internationally known
efroup of scholars in psychology and redated fields, including Ernest R.
#ilgard, Hans J. Eysenck, Albert ElYs, Michael J. Apter, Elizabeth Loftus,
And David Spiegel. The essays are arfanged in four sections devoted to the
nature of suggestibility, theoretical
"perspectives, research, and applica‘jon/implications.
=, While any discussion of suggestibil“Hy must overlap with the topic of hypHosis, the volume also deals with sugwgestibility in relation to mental illness,
advertising, education, self-deception,
‘forensics, political persuasion, and the
‘Diological aspects of the suggestion
‘process.
> Schumaker has provided an intro‘duction which discusses suggestibility

broad terms and makes the volumes
‘Suitable for the layperson as well as
Specialists in a wide variety of fields.
A John F. Schumaker is a clinical psychologist and lecturer in psychology at
the University of Newcastle, Australia.

AIDS In Arrica: Its PRESENT AND FUTURE Impact: By Tony Barnett and
Piers Blaikie. The Guilford Press,
New York, 1992. 193 pages. $18.95,
paper.

Terrifying in its potential and devastating in its impact, AIDS is now

Book Notes

179

widespread in a number of African
countries. Estimates suggest that as
many as five and a half million people
on the continent are currently carrying
the virus. Already weakened by
drought, poverty, civil war, and debt,
the AIDS epidemic may well be among
the most severe problems Africans
have faced. Tony Barnett and Piers
Blaikie, who have studied the impact
of AIDS in Uganda, present a compelling analysis of human cost of this
dread disease in Africa.

Demonstrating the potential impact
of AIDS for the continent, the authors
discuss the social long-term economic
consequences of the disease. They describe how both infected individuals
and their relatives cope, and delineate
the economic and human plight of
those left widowed and orphaned in an
already fragile economy. They show
how the epidemic may not only result
in the deaths of the millions of people
infected with AIDS, but may also engender further starvation and economic collapse as it kills farmers and
skilled administrators alike. The authors also consider how forced migrations and refugees, so long a feature of
the continent, may be hastening the
spread of AIDS, exacerbating a particularly vicious cycle of debility and
death.

Although the book focuses on Africa, its implications are significant for
readers everywhere. Its description of
the epidemic’s heterosexual spread
should forever dispel the erroneous
perception of AIDS as a “homosexual
illness” and should sound an alarm in
North America and Europe where
AIDS is now one of the five main
causes of infant and childhood mortal
ity.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

180 Book Notes Social Biology

Both co-authors work at the School leading center in the UK for teaching
of Development Studies, University of and research in development issues.
East Anglia at Norwich, which is the
