Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Discussion: Man's evolutionary past session i

F. Clark Howell

To cite this article: F. Clark Howell (1972) Discussion: Man's evolutionary past session i, Social
Biology, 19:2, 128-135, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987978

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987978

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Past

Session I

F, Clark Howell

Department of Anthropology
University of California
Berkeley, California

I was scheduled as a discussant following
this morning’s session. Now, it is instead
the end of a long day." So it is necessary to
be brief. I will seek only to accent, to supplement, and to explicate some points raised
in papers presented this morning. Some
perspective is necessary if recent developments in the study of early hominids, their
behavior, and their world are to be appreciated.

The stress that Charles Darwin placed a
hundred years ago on bipedality and on
tool-use, as both cause and effect in the
adaptive shift from an ape-like to a manlike condition, has become dogma. It is a
view to which one must ultimately pay
homage. When that situation presents itself, it is usually wise to reexamine some
basic premises. This is especially true when
models are based on the evident contrasts
between living species, but when there still
is little historical documentation to afford
a temporal evolutionary perspective.

It is necessary to stress that the matter
of hominid origins is still largely a subject
of speculation. Speculation is fun, and the

1 The discussant’s commentary on the morning’s
papers was presented at the end of the afternoon
session, rather than at the end of the morning’s
papers which were concerned with recent advances
in the study of human origins.

 

formulation of hypotheses is challenging.
However, hypotheses must be evaluated
and tested in the light of empirical data,
old and new, and revised or discarded
accordingly. Evidently, there is a critical
need for further empirical data.

In this connection it is worth considering how concepts of the origins of Hominoidea, and in particular of the divergence
of Pongidae and Hominidae, have changed.
Not long ago there prevailed much uncertainty and widely different concepts were
held. To some, it may seem that great
differences still exist in points of view. However, I would argue that much greater
differences existed between the standpoints
of colleagues forty and twenty years ago,
and even as recently as a decade ago. It
is a fact, not merely a hope, that important
advances are being made toward reducing
the wide range of disagreement which has
prevailed until only recently.

Dr. Pilbeam suggests that the Hominidae
were differentiated about fifteen to twenty
million years ago. Not long ago some
knowledgeable students of the subject
would have doubled the former figure. My
colleague Dr. Washburn suggests that the
figure is more likely between four to five
and ten million years. Scarcely any stu
128

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

dents of this problem would accept a four
to five million year figure; and only a very
few would seriously support a figure of
twenty million years. So the differences
even between current estimates are being
narrowed. The persistence of speculation
suggests that the level of uncertainty is
still too high. Additional facts are sorely
needed, along with improved bases and
techniques to better interpret these data.
My own thoughts are of course speculative
(maybe more so than the views of some
colleagues, who feel they already know the
answer) and derive from evaluations of
many different lines of evidence, rather than
unduly stressing any one. In my view, the
origins of Hominidae lie demonstrably prior
to five to six million years ago, while they
are not demonstrably prior to fifteen million
years ago. So a reasonable estimate would
be ~ 10 4 million years. This affords
paleontological researchers, who ultimately
must afford fossil documentation of the
phylogeny of the higher primates, a substantial time range in which to concentrate
their efforts. It is a range of geologic time
which is more often than not ill-known in
Africa, as well as in most of Asia, and even
in some parts of Europe.

It may seem commonplace to measure
these evolutionary events and phylogenetic
relationships in terms of years. However, it
is a recent development to do so on the
basis of reliable systems of calibration
which afford ages derived from isotopic
radiometry (as opposed to “ages” derived
from speculation). The customary procedures for referring to such past events require the terminologies of rock-stratigraphic
units, of time-stratigraphic units, of units
of geologic time, of biostratigraphic units
(of several kinds), and so on. These terminologies, and their referents, have specific
usages and significations and are to be
employed only in prescribed ways (as set
out in the Code of Stratigraphic Nomen
Discussion: Session I

 

 

129

clature). Unfortunately, many students of
hominid evolution appear to be unfamiliar
with the requisite aspects of historical
geology, and as a consequence there is much
in the way of confusion and misconception
in the literature. These terminological and
semantic difficulties continue to present
formidable hurdles to mutual understanding, and particularly so to individuals with
very different backgrounds and academic
training.

All students of vertebrate evolution have
been forcibly impressed by the relevance of
the increasing quantities of biomolecular
data for longstanding phylogenetic problems. However, with some notable exceptions, there unfortunately has been an
overall tendency toward polarization of
viewpoints. This has been both unnecessary
and premature. The results of biomolecular
studies afford another set of useful and very
informative data. With respect to the order
Primates at least, that data thus far confirm at almost all levels generally accepted
(i.e., traditional) concepts of phylogenetic
affinities, As Prof. Washburn has said, “it
reinforces the way in which we need to
look at primates.’’ However, it also sometimes affords unusual and frankly conflicting results in the case of the proteins of
certain species. These are particular problems which will require particular solutions.
Biochemists will have to resolve them. For
these and other reasons it is unwise either
to promote or to accept the concept of a
“protein clock.’”? Biochemists have afforded
us additional and powerful means of assessing degrees of affinity. However, the translation of degrees of affinity into units of
time is quite another problem. Thus far it
has not been done successfully.

It is worth remarking here on concepts of protohominids, and more particularly of Ramapithecus. Dr. Pilbeam, one
notes, has come to bet on his scientific
hunches, as Dr. Washburn has long sugDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

130 Howell

gested one ought to do. Pilbeam thinks
there is a 75% chance that the genus
Ramapithecus is the most ancestral hominid.? I think that most students of the
evolution of the higher primates, those who
are personally familiar with the original
material (the primary data), now would
support this position. However, one wants
to see that probability figure raised, and
one major way to do so is to seek actively
to recover additional specimens.

Much of what is currently thought about
hominid genesis and the fundamental adaptations of Hominidae is still mostly derived
from inference and speculation. There is a
remarkable dearth of positive evidence
upon which conclusions might be more
solidly based. This is certainly true with
respect to locomotor adaptations. Dr. Washburn has previously suggested, in part following an idea of Sir Arthur Keith, that
protohominids must have been knucklewalkers. That opinion has been vigorously
opposed by others, notably Dr. Russell
Tuttle. Now Dr. Pilbeam says he feels
quite certain that Ramapithecus, as representative of a protohominid or an earliest
hominid stage, was either a knuckle-walker
or a hanger-swinger. These concepts stand
in contrast to that of an erect biped. However, as the evolution of bipedalism is still
largely unknown, our concept of bipedality
is certainly incomplete. Actually, pitifully
little is known, beyond a distal humerus
from Fort Ternan (Kenya), which is potentially informative about the locomotor
capabilities of such a hominoid.

The dietary adjustments of protohominids have also come under renewed scrutiny. The seed-eating hypothesis, ingeniously applied to protohominids by Clifford
Jolly, has provoked discussion and renewed

2 On the other hand, we have Washburn’s word
on the seemingly inverse relationship between the
state of preservation and completeness of fossil
specimens and the interpretation and significance
attributed to them.

Social Biology

interest in this important question. In
contrast with Dr. Pilbeam, and in agreement with Prof. Washburn, I remain
skeptical of the seed-eating model as a basis
for the earliest hominid adaptation and
radiation. This does not, however, exclude
“small, tough vegetable objects” as significant elements in a protohominid diet.
Probably most important is the effect of
this and other ideas upon orthodox (i.e.,
traditional) views of meat-eating as the
dietary base of the earliest hominid adaptation. This concept has also become dogma
and is most often presented as fact to
students and lay audiences, rather than as
an hypothesis to be tested.

One of the most important implications
of Dr. Pilbeam’s paper is that we must
reconsider, I believe at every level, our
ideas (and preconceptions) concerning the
origins of Hominidae. How different this
discussion would have been with Franz
Weidenreich some twenty-five years ago, or
even a few years past with the recently
deceased Sir Wilfrid Le Gros Clark! The
subjects discussed and the approaches to
them have altered remarkably. There have
been, as Dr. Washburn indicated, very
rapid changes, and these changes have involved new data, new techniques, and new
conceptual frameworks.

In the past decade, major breakthroughs
have been effected in the understanding of
the Pliocene/Pleistocene time range, particularly in eastern Africa. These advances
have resulted from intensive interdisciplinary studies, in the field and in the laboratory of a number of sites of fossiliferous
sediments in or adjacent to the Rift Valley
System. These studies have been characterized by a return to the straightforward
and rigorous procedures of stratigraphic
geology in the field—associated with extensive mapping and measuring of sections—
and they have taken advantage of ongoing
developments in isotopic dating, in the

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2 Discussion: Session I 131

establishment of a paleomagnetic time scale, pared by H. B. S. Cooke and published a
as well as in studies of plate tectonics and decade later, was a schematic correlation
the history of sedimentation in the earth’s of rock-stratigraphic units on the basis of
ocean basins. As a consequence, we have an __biostratigraphic criteria. This publication,
increasingly detailed appreciation of the and two papers on paleoclimates and on the
ages, relative and absolute, and of the asso- bases of correlation in eastern Africa pubciations and contexts of early Hominidae. lished about the same time by Prof. R. F.

The three charts presented here show Flint, largely sounded the death knell for
better than any extended discussion the an assumed paleoclimatic succession in submajor changes effected during the past two Saharan Africa. The third (Figure 3), predecades. The first (Figure 1), prepared by pared by the speaker on another occasion

    

         

 

 
 

 

 

 

CLIMATIC TYPICAL EAST AFRICAN CULTURE EAST AFRICAN ZEUNER'S THE EUROPEAN CULTURE SEQUENCE
CHANGES SITES FOR SEQUENCE FAUNAS CLIMATIC | CLASSICAL ACCORDING TO ZEUNER
IN EAST EVIDENCE STAGES IN} ALPINE
AFRICA EUROPE [SUCCESSION
NAKURAN
2nd Pes! Pluwol
‘at
MAKALIAN —————- MESOLITHIC AN O NEOLITHIC
ist Post Pruviot

Wet Phose

{st Post Pluysai Decghtons
ch r ae | weve Pf
3

Upper Ke Final
epsilon Sriltboy ko. Maogdelenion
tou tt
tou i

Upper Kenye Suithay
Ries - Wurm

lnterglocial

 
      

      

    
  
    
   
    
 
   

   
  
 
 
 
  

     
 
  

      
       
            

Enderit

hs Molnly of today but with
rift

recession some extinct species such os

    
 
  
  

      
  
    
   
 

      
    
  

      

       

GAMBLIAN Mol Gorge Copeman
ath Pluvat — * Gonsies ion Upper Ker Proto- Equus hgtts!, Sybalus niltpont,
Frecestion Mla tiger * Copsion Stlibay Proconsylondee ngivashog

1 Muguruk etc, ] Lower Kenyo Developed te

Copsian Levollows

 
  
    

Founa very scorce The
mojority of the species of
ihe cartier period become
€xtinct a6 they do not reappeor

 
     
  

Major yvnconfor
aed mites everywhere
lnter pluviol between foregoing! Favresmth
ond loter beds,

    
 
  
 

  
 

Eorly Lower
Levotlos Sangoen

  
  
   

Upper
Achauleon

 

      
  
  
  
   
   
  
   
 

     
    
 
  
   
    
     

            
  
 
      
     
   

wm Next series of deposits

 

  
    
 
   
 

  

   
  
 

   
 
  
  

    

  
    
   

   
   

  

     

   
   
 
  

 

     
   

iT
Olduva: Upper Eorty
2 | port of Bed IVend | Fouresmith ¢ Peeudo- Pot nt Middle
KANJERAN + ] UPPES Part of Stibtboy torly Levolious
$ | Olorgesale etc | Acheulean 5 Sangoan | Notochoerus Mppopotamys Middle
3ed Pluviat 3 Olduvar Minor ne Proto- gorgops srvotherium Acheuleon
‘Formertycolied % | Bed sn Bed I¥ a Red tart Sangoon I Giraffe Phacochoerue
upper Komosion) & | Bed of Olorgesantie | Acheul 3] eioke culture Afrocrourig simceatecis poL tt
Olduvar Lower port | culture 2 | (Kenys Hopefountain) eS ne Earl
1 | of Bed IVaKonjeroete 1 : Papig, etc etc Levalfois

         

Founa scarce Mony genera
found eortier become extinct
including Deinothertym,

Archidiskadon, $chizotherium

etc & mony fish die ouf

 
      
 

   
 

Row Acheulean | Middie
zed Fish Beds Srage bindel<Riee Acheuleon
inter pluviol of ine “ lnterglacial
Olduv o Creiles tower
Bed Il Acheul culture Acheuleon

Otduve: Bad Hand | Chelleon § Dernotherium Archid:skodon | apt Gt tl
KAMASIAN Lower Raw: @eds Stages of 4 Schigotherium Pgloegloxodon
2nd Pluwel whe a Stytohipperion Sivotheriym Mindel
(Formerly called éavae Peloroviy Butarchys Noto- Gloctol
Lower Kamasian} Olduvar bed I oad choerus Simopisthecus Equus
roti

  

    
       
    
   

 
    
 

Oldewesn Mippepotamus gorgops etc

i
La '
x a Ae below but with Polecolor: ¢ M '
OES OF jowa don oppearing and some UNE © Minde’
Marsobit Oldowan the earlier faros such os Apt. Igl. interglacial
Anencus dymg our,

‘arly Old Archidigkodon Angnctus

Kanom Rate Cee e:natherium $regodon Cromerion
Advanced Pvgtheriym Stylohipporion

Ome Kofuon Gerontochoerus Pro-note Norvicion

Kagera Rivee choerug Hippopotamus
protamphibs ete

ipswichion

  

Eorly Kofuan

PLIO=> PLEISTOCENE BOUNDARY

  

Fic. 1~—Proposed correlation of Quaternary deposits in eastern Africa, based on inferred climatic changes and on mammalian biostratigraphy, with proposed correlation with the Quaternary
succession of Europe (after L. S. B. Leakey, Intern. Geol. Congress, Rept. 18'* Session, Great Britain,
1948, Part IX, 1950).

L. S. B. Leakey on the occasion of the 18" this year, shows our current understanding
International Geological Congress in Lon- of the temporal relationships of rock-stratidon in 1948, shows a climatic-stratigraphic graphic units yielding early Hominidae in
(and, in part, biostratigraphic) scheme for eastern Africa. The correlations are made
the post-Tertiary of eastern Africa. Its on the basis of isotropic age determinations
basic was assumed pluvial/interpluvial and biostratigraphic criteria. Overall, these
paleoclimates. The second (Figure 2), pre- examples illustrate a trend away from as
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

132

 

OLDUVAI
AREA

KENYA
RIFT

 

 

Howell Social Biology

HOMA ALBERT OMO
AREA RIFT AREA

brown
clays

tilting «¢
erosion

  
   

SeMeIKi

 

w |: 2 :BEDS..
Q : (Epi,
2 Rabies
oF

Qf.

a "ow

_ismincea

® | slays 0.

x ‘siltstones.

oF:

tf:

q

=f

x |:

2p:

KA

 

Fic. 2.—Possible correlation of Quaternary fossil and artifactual deposits in eastern Africa; the
vertical scale based on stratal thickness (after H. B. S. Cooke, Geol. Soc. of So. Africa, Annex

to Vol. 60, 1958).
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

 

Discussion: Session I

 

133

SERENGETI OMO BASIN EAST RUDOLF TURKANA DISTRICT BARINGO BASIN KAVIRONDO GULF
Pi y (Tanzarna) (Ethuogna) (Kerys) (Kenya) (Kerrys) (Kenya)
1
7
HLERET jo
2 XA) poccenene , pemeneeees
‘ 4 ! 1 uM 4
CHEMERON ‘® Li ecomenne wsdl
H Renee e eed ?
3 i | ©®
' ?
! |
4
‘ 3
|
fRubs Aly Mit 4
1 '
: a
‘ i bad tach ©
6
7
8

Fic. 3——Scheme of temporal relationships of Pliocene/Pleistocene fossiliferous localities yielding
Hominidae in eastern Africa (after F. C. Howell, in Calibration of Hominoid Evolution, Scottish Aca
demic Press, 1972).

sumption and inference to empiricism and
demonstration through established scientific procedures.

The nature of these developments, with
particular reference to the significance of
work at particular localities, can be briefly
outlined. In my opinion, they also delineate
the direction of future interdisciplinary
studies aimed toward an elucidation of the
nature of early hominids and their world.

(a) Overall there has been a real advance
in recent years in our knowledge of the
distribution, structure, and history of the
Rift Valley System of Africa. This has been
accelerated by geophysical investigations
of the earth’s crust and upper mantle, and
of course as a consequence of the intensified and expanding study of plate tectonics.
As all the more important fossil localities
of Neogene and most fossil localities of
Quaternary age in eastern Africa are related, directly or nearly so, to this system,

its fuller comprehension is critical to many
research areas.

(6) Over the past decade a number of
major intensive research efforts have been
focused on areas adjacent to the Eastern
Rift Valley of Tanzania, Kenya, and Ethiopia. They have included: the Serengeti
plains, as exposed at Olduvai Gorge and
Laetolil (Tanzania); the Baringo area of
the central Kenya rift; and several areas
adjacent to the Rudolf Basin (Kenya and
Ethiopia).

Olduvai was the first situation to afford a
(still unique) stratified succession, radiometrically dated and related through
volcanics and other sediments to the paleomagnetic time scale. It has yielded evidences of hominids, of multiple coexistent
hominid taxa, and impressive evidences of
hominid occupations and of culturally patterned behavior in an earlier Pleistocene
time range, all quite unknown previously.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

134 Howell

In the later 1960’s, a diversity of interdisciplinary studies were initiated in the
lower Omo Basin of southern Ethiopia by
participants of the Omo Research Expedition. The initial aim of the work was to
document the pre-Olduvia time range, considered to be present in the Omo on the
basis of vertebrate paleontological criteria.
A long and continuous stratigraphic succession was established, its time span (from
~ 4.5 my. to ~ 1.5 m.y.), and its subdivisions were soon extensively dated radiometrically (and are now being studied for
its paleomagnetic aspects), and its several
palecenvironmental settings were established. An important invertebrate biostratigraphy has also emerged, one which is of
importance for ascertaining post-hydrographic relationships with other parts of
Africa, as well as local conditions of sedimentation and their change through time.
The first palynological spectra from the
Pliocene/Pleistocene of Africa are now also
being elucidated in this succession. The
richness of these sediments in remains of
fossil vertebrates, including fish, amphibians, and reptiles and over a hundred species of mammals (identified so far), has
afforded a unique, well-dated vertebrate
biostratigraphy for a time range encompassing about three million years. Remains
of hominids have been recovered from some
70 occurrences over the 3 to 1.5 million
year time range, casting important light on
the nature of coexistent hominid taxa, their
affinities, frequencies, associations, and
paleoenvironmental contexts. Evidence for
culturally-patterned hominid behavior has
been obtained in the 2 to 1.9 million year
time range, also antedating the Olduvai
sequence,

After the first major field season of the
Omo Research Expedition, Richard Leakey
initiated reconnaissance in the vast, previously almost unexplored area to the east of
Lake Rudolf, in Kenya. Extensive fossilif
Social Biology

erous deposits, a thousand times the extent
of those at Olduvai and a hundred times
the extent of those in the Omo, have since
been found to occur there. As you have
heard, splendidly preserved vertebrate
fossils have been recovered in quantities,
as well as hominid skeletal remains in unprecedented numbers, and often in unexpectedly well-preserved condition. To date,
almost all derive from fluviatile and perilacustrine sediments which unconformably
overlie a tuff reliably dated at ~ 2.6 million years. Comparative biostratigraphy indicates that the Ileret and the middle and
upper Koobi Fora sequences fall within the
~ 2 to 1 million year time range. Hence,
they are broadly contemporaneous with
hominids, now some 35 in number, from
Beds I and II of Olduvai Gorge, and with
those from the younger part of the Omo
succession. Older sediments outcrop in East
Rudolf, and it is probably only a question
of time before they too afford important
remains of early Hominidae. Those at
about 2.5 to 2.6 million years have already
offered new evidence critical to the appreciation of the cultural capabilities of early
Hominidae.

These discoveries in East Rudolf rank
among the most important ever made in
the history of human paleontology and are
of immense importance for a fuller understanding of Hominidae during the earlier
Pleistocene. There are repeated occurrences,
in the same stratigraphic unit, of (at least)
two demonstrably different hominid taxa.
The most common is an Australopithecine
comparable in morphology to that represented in abundance at Swartkrans ('Transvaal, South Africa) and which is present
also in Olduvai Beds I and II. In East
Rudolf, it is represented by important,
often quite complete, and morphologically
distinctive postcranial parts, numbers of
partial and ever more complete jaws, and
several crania. From this material (robust)

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

Australopithecine variability, sexual dimorphism, and the distinctive pattern of
dental, cranial and postcranial structure
can be much more fully determined and
critically evaluated.

Moreover, important hominid jaw parts,
with dentition, and postcranial remains
have been recovered from those same series
of levels, and these manifestly represent
another hominid taxon. All those skeletal
parts known thus far differ from (robust)
Australopithecine structure and are more
like the structure of genus Homo. For most
students of human paleontology, the contemporaneous coexistence in the earlier
Pleistocene of multiple hominid taxa had
been well-established previously (particularly at Olduvai Gorge, and at the cavefilling of Swartkrans in southern Africa).
However, a few have continued to be skeptical. The hominid discoveries from East
Rudolf have now established this conclusion repeatedly, and on the basis of excellent fossil! remains. They have also
documented the relatively late occurrence—
into the “middle Pleistocene” in conventional terms—of a (robust) Australopithecine, perhaps extinct only by about a
million years ago, or so.

These studies of the past decade and a
half in eastern Africa have clearly demonstrated the extensive results of persistent,
intensive, and interdisciplinary researches
pursued along the Rift Valley system. Such
studies need to be continued in the very
rewarding situations already known, and in
other areas still only known for reconnaissance or from geological mapping activities,
as well as in geologically favorable situations still wholly unexplored scientifically.
The three to four million year time range
is represented by fossil vertebrates in sev
Discussion: Session I

135

eral localities, but hominids, their skeletal
parts and artifacts, are still unknown. However, the greater Rudolf basin (at Kanapoi) and the west Baringo area (at
Chemeron) have demonstrated that hominids are to be expected in the four million
year time range. Fortunately, both the
lower Omo and the Kubi Algi area of East
Rudolf have known fossiliferous exposures
of this age. It is now very likely also that
the middle and lower reaches of the Awash
Valley, in eastern Ethiopia, will also afford
valuable information from this, as well as
rather younger ranges of time. And the
provocative discovery of a hominid mandible fragment from the important mammal
fauna locality of Lothagam, again in the
southern extent of the greater Rudolf
Basin, indicates that the five to six million
year time span will ultimately afford us
some surprises relevant to hominid evolution once extensive exposures are found and
worked intensively. Some of the most promising areas for fossiliferous exposures of
this as well as greater ages, extending back
to some twelve million years ago, are
known to outcrop along the extensive, illexplored Baringo-South Rudolf sector of
the Kenya rift. In the future there is no
doubt this area will prove to be critical for
field researches directed toward unraveling
hominid beginnings.

If we are to understand the origin and
evolution of Hominidae, many different
lines of research must be encouraged and
actively pursued. It is especially important
that fieldwork related to the recovery of
primary data concerning human origins be
encouraged. Without such primary data we
will be forced to rely on the speculative and
deductive reasoning of Charles Darwin, a
century ago.
