Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The psychological paradigm shift in genetic
counseling

Seymour Kessler

To cite this article: Seymour Kessler (1980) The psychological paradigm shift in genetic
counseling, Social Biology, 27:3, 167-185, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988419

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988419

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 15
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 9 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

The Psychological Paradigm Shift in Genetic

Counseling

Seymour Kessler

Genetic Counseling Program
University of California
Berkeley, California

 

 

ABSTRACT: The history of genetic counseling can be organized around three different paradigms:
eugenics, preventive medicine, and psychologic medicine. Each paradigm is based on a differing set .
of beliefs and assumptions regarding the goals, principles, and practices of genetic counseling. The
emergence of a more psychologically-oriented genetic counseling has resulted, in part, from an
awareness of difficulties in achieving the goals of the other paradigms and a realization of the psychosocial nature of genetic disorders and of the genetic counseling process. The shift to a more psychological paradigm has important philosophical and practical implications, and some of these are
discussed around the issues of genetic education, communication, decision-making, and the provi
sion of supportive counseling.

Genetic counseling had its origins in
the biological sciences and by the end of
the 1950’s had become established as a
biomedical activity (Fraser, 1979). Over
the past several years, practitioners have
become increasingly aware of the psychological issues generated by genetic disease
and the psychosocial nature of genetic
counseling. An attitudinal shift has become apparent regarding the goals of genetic counseling and the role of psychological interventions in it. A new paradigm of
genetic counseling is in the process of emerging in which the emphasis is on ‘‘communication”’ as the core process involved.
This is reflected both in the definition of
genetic counseling adopted by the American Society of Human Genetics (Ad Hoc
Committee, 1975), and in the attitudes
professed by a majority of practitioners
(Sorenson and Culbert, 1979). To greater
or lesser extent, most genetic counselors
appear to hold the position that attention
to psychosocial issues is an integral part of
contemporary genetic counseling.

The history of the field of genetic coun
 

seling may be outlined as a progressive
shift from eugenics to preventive medicine
to psychologic medicine, each shift involving a re-examination of assumptions and
goals, modifications of philosophy and
principles, changes in practices and, at
times changes in the structure of genetic
services. Eugenics, preventive medicine,
and psychologic medicine each might be
thought of as a distinct paradigm (Kuhn,
1970) encapsulating prevailing beliefs regarding genetic counseling. Persistent beliefs appear in all these paradigms; for example, the provision of genetic education
is considered a core element that sets genetic counseling apart from other kinds of
medical counseling. However, divergences occur, to greater or lesser degree,
around several areas of belief, including
those involving the goals of genetic counseling, the respective role expectations of
counselors and counselees, the process of
counseling, and the appropriateness of
specific interventions and practices.

In this paper, I will briefly compare
these three paradigms and their implica
167

 

—
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

168 Kessler

tions for the practice of genetic counseling. Then, I will focus my attention on the
nascent psychological paradigm and ex
plore some of the perspectives this para-’

digm provides in the arenas of genetic education, communication, and decisionmaking and on the process of providing
psychological or emotional support.

THE PARADIGMS OF GENETIC
COUNSELING

The eugenics paradigm was the dominating paradigm of the early decades of
the twentieth century. Supported by the
intellectual excitement generated by evolutionary theory and by the new discoveries in the field of genetics, a vision of the
possibilities of managing and improving
the human hereditary heritage emerged.
Genetic counseling was the applied aspect
of this vision.

In its early years, adherents of the eugenics paradigm exerted energy in the political and social arenas and, among other
things, were instrumental in the passage of
legislation restricting linmigration and intermarriage and providing for the sterilization of some mentally retarded persons
(Ludmerer, 1972; Allen, 1975). How genetic counseling was conducted on an individual level was not well documented. It
was not part of clinical medicine (Porter,
1977) and, given its underlying philosophy, it might safely be inferred that the
counselor placed a greater value on the
defense of societal prerogatives or of.the
human gene pool rather than on individual needs (Lappé, 1973). Apparently, the
style of counseling was directive (Reed,
1959; Twiss, 1979).

As the excesses of Social Darwinism
became more apparent, many scientists
withdrew their support from the eugenics
movement. Without implying a causeeffect relationship, a more nondirective

 

Social Biology

philosophy of genetic counseling then began to emerge, particularly under the
influence of Sheldon Reed at the Dight Institute (Reed, 1955). An “enlightened”
eugenics model evolved emphasizing individual idealism regarding future generations. H.J. Muller (1958) expressed the
view as follows: “‘. . . people in general
[will] come to realize and act upon their
social obligations in regard to procreation
and bearing of children ... those burdened with more than their share of hereditary misfortunes . . . will deem it their
duty to limit to more than an average extent the number of their children. . . .”

Thus, a faith in the rationality of human
behavior and a belief that one’s duty or
obligation to the future would act as a motivation to seek genetic counseling appeared to be an important aspect of the
eugenics paradigm. Presumably, counseling practices were consistent with these
beliefs.

Beginning with the 1950’s, a new paradigm of genetic counseling evolved, incorporating the views of preventive medicine. Concomitant with the emergence
of this paradigm, genetic services became
centered in major medical centers and
with its medicalization, the issues of accurate diagnosis and the physician as the primary (or only) legitimate provider of services became increasingly evident. The
traditional doctor-patient relationship,
with its stress on professional advicegiving, became a major mode of service
delivery. The counselor was expected to
take the lead in pointing out the necessity
of counseling and in providing genetic education as well as advice regarding reproductive decisions. The counselees were
perceived as being motivated to seek genetic counseling either because of a concern or fear about the threat or repetition
of a genetic problem and/or the desire to
be compliant with the wishes of a referring
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

physician. Presumably, the counselees
were expected to take an overall passive
and compliant role, consistent with the
then newly described ‘“‘sick role’’ elucidated by Parsons (1951).

As this paradigm evolved, a more nondirective style of counseling was advocated by many genetic counselors. This
stance, however, required physiciancounselors to interact with counselees in
unaccustomed ways, relinquishing the
usual control, authority, and power generally exerted as a matter of course in the
traditional doctor-patient relationship.
(In genetic counseling, the counselees or
consultands were frequently neither ill nor
patients). This has created a tension which
has not yet been resolved; differences of
opinion exist as to how directive genetic
counselors should be. The pull toward directiveness continues to be strong among
adherents of the preventive medical paradigm. Porter (1977) describes the situation as follows:

One traditional principle of genetic counseling is the neutrality of the counselor in
decisions about reproduction. This is unusual in medical practice, and is a difficult attitude for many physicians to adopt and
may even be confusing to some patients
who expect to be guided by their physician.
This attitude ... may have originated in
counselors not engaged in patient care and
who may have felt some reluctance to enter
into the lives of their counselees in the way
practicing physicians do.... With...
more physicians providing genetic counseling, we may expect a change to a more traditional doctor-patient relationship.

Hecht and Holmes (1972) were among
the first to persuasively suggest that a shift
to a psychologically-oriented paradigm
was in the offing. This shift can be accounted for by several reasons. First of all, it
came to be realized that the goal of preventing genetic disease was not a realistically obtainable one, due to the absence of

 

Genetic Counseling 169

means of preventing genetic disorders, as
well as an inability to make the existing
technology of prevention available to the
public. In addition, persons at-risk for a
genetic disorder were sometimes found to
be resistant or reluctant to use available
prevention technology (Epstein, 1975).

Secondly, genetic counselors have become aware of large discrepancies between their goals as genetic educators and
the realities actually achieved. For example, although the communication of information is the central practice in both the
eugenics and preventive medicine paradigms, data suggest that anywhere from 20
to 75 per cent of counselees either do not
remember or understand the information
they receive (Sorenson, 1974). Also, in
several studies it has been found that after
genetic counseling, and even after having
made a “rational” decision, discrepancies
may continue to exist between what counselees said they intended to do about more
children and what they actually did
(Leonard et al., 1972; Antley, 1979).

Thirdly, practitioners of genetic counseling became more aware of the dilemma
posed by a strategy emphasizing prevention which, philosophically, put the counselor on the side of protecting the social
good at the expense of individual prerogatives. Many genetic counselors appear to
favor the individual’s right to choose and
decide about his or her reproductive destiny.

Fourthly, the shift may be seen as a response of practitioners to the reality of
dealing with human problems, particularly ones with a relatively high emotional
valence. The information provided in genetic counseling is evocative of strong
emotions, expressed directly and/or indirectly, as, for example, in an increase in
psychological defensiveness. Experiencing these reactions has made genetic counselors sensitive to the psychological issues
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

170

underlying genetic counseling (Kessler,
1979a).

Fifthly, genetic counselors gradually
acquired a more sophisticated understanding of the principles and psychodynamics of human behavior. It has become more widely accepted that the
psychological responses of counselees
may not only be normal but a necessary
step in comprehending, integrating, and
coping with a medical diagnosis or the
content of a genetic counseling session
(Antley, 1976; Falek, 1977; Falek and
Britton, 1974).

Sixthly, genetic counselors have become increasingly aware of the hidden
agendas with which counselees often
come to genetic counseling. These
agendas may involve marital and sexual
dysfunctions and other interpersonal
difficulties. If these hidden agendas are
not attended to, the counselor frequently
encounters difficulties in providing information and communicating with the counselees. If they are attended to, the counselor enters the arena of what might be
viewed as psychotherapy or personal
counseling.

Seventhly, counselors have become
aware of the possibility that genetic counseling may have long-range consequences
for the counselees and their relationship.
Intrapsychic and interpersonal conflicts
may be mitigated or exacerbated by genetic counseling.

These and other reasons have led to a
gradual waning of confidence in the assumptions, practices, and effectiveness of
the traditional approaches to genetic
counseling and have promoted a search to
find ways to make genetic services more effective. With this has come a growing
awareness that genetic counseling, like
other fields of personal counseling, deals
with human thinking, feeling, and actions,
and that in the process of providing advice, information, and counseling about

Kessler

Social Biology

genetic disease, we are modifying or
changing psychological and behavioral
states (Kessler, 1979b).' In short, the entire process of genetic counseling is in its
very core a psychological enterprise
whose effectiveness (or ineffectiveness)
rests on the extent to which realistic behavioral and psychosocial principles and
methods are understood and applied in
the counselor-counselee relationship.
Contemporary genetic counseling
tends to reflect all three of the paradigms
discussed above, although the modal approach appears to be one which combines
aspects of the eugenics and preventive
medicine paradigms. Because the different paradigms represent differing values
and imply divergent counseling principles
and practices, many ambiguities exist both
in the minds of professionals and of the
public. For example, counselors and
counselees may experience uncertainties
about their mutual role expectancies. The
latter may come to genetic counseling expecting that the counselor is operating under the assumptions of the eugenics paradigm, and thus may believe that the latter
would not be their ally but rather would
represent the viewpoints of greater society. This may engender anxiety, distrust,
arguments of genocide, and the like. On
the other hand, a sophisticated consumer
may come to genetic counseling expecting
that the counselor will be operating under
the assumptions of a psychologically
‘Correcting misperceptions, alleviating feelings
of anxiety and guilt, providing effective education,
and helping persons reach meaningful decisions are
all psychological activities which form the core of any
counseling process. The goal of such activities is to alter the person’s beliefs and cognitive and affective
functioning in relatively more effective and rewarding directions. Whether we wish it or not, genetic
counselors, like counselors in any field of personal
counseling (or psychotherapy), are agents of behavior change. By intellectually restricting our definition
of genetic counseling to nonpsychological issues, we
do not thereby alter the realistic facts or psychological nature of our work. We only impose arbitrary
limits on our own humanity and effectiveness.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 27, No. 3

oriented paradigm and that he or she will
be treated as an active partner. Faced bya
professional who expects counselees to
play a passive role may lead to mtsunderstandings and mutual dissatisfactions.

Besides the problems engendered by
discrepancies between the beliefs and
values held by counselors and those heid
by counselees, some misunderstandings
and tensions inevitably arise among counselors themselves as a consequence of the
pluralistic meanings assigned to the term
“genetic counseling.” For example, adherents of the different paradigms may see
the training needs of prospective genetic
counselors in very different ways. Counselors with eugenics leanings might emphasize a strong background preparation
in population genetics and statistics as the
basis for counseling practice whereas
those attracted to the preventive medicine
paradigm might emphasize biomedical education. Counselors attracted to the psychologically-oriented paradigm might
focus major attention on developing counseling and communication skills in addition to genetic or medical training.

The psychologically-oriented paradigm
differs from the more traditional paradigms of genetic counseling in several
ways. Most important are the assumptions
and set of beliefs with which the counselor
enters the counseling situation. Adherents of the traditional paradigms have
tended to create a scrupulous distinction
between the delivery of genetic information (and risk figures), labeled as genetic
counseling, and everything else that might
occur in the genetic counseling session, labeled as not genetic counseling (e.g., Li,
1977; Hsia, 1979). Adherents of the psychologically-oriented paradigm view this
distinction as arbitrary, unnecessary, unworkable, and nonproductive. The traditional approaches emphasized fragmentation along reason-emotion lines whereas
the psychological approach emphasizes an

 

 

 

Genetic Counseling 171

integrative stance regarding these issues.
The former tend to convey the attitude
that the provision of genetic information is
both a necessary and sufficient discharge
of one’s responsibility in genetic counseling whereas the latter tend to view the provision of genetic information as a necessary but not sufficient condition.

Philosophically, the psychologicallyoriented paradigm shows (1) an increasing
emphasis on a phenomenological philosophy and (2) an acceptance of the multilayered nature of psychological processes.

A conspicuous aspect of the shift to a
psychologically-oriented paradigm is a
movement toward a phenomenological
rather than an empirical philosophy of
knowledge and reality. From different
lines of thinking and research ranging
from existentialist philosophy (May,
1961), neuropsychology (Ornstein, 1972;
Pribram, 1971), psycholinguistics
(Bandler and Grider, 1975a, Chomsky,
1968), cognitive psychology (Posner,
1973), the genetic psychology of Piaget
(Flavell, 1963) and humanistic psychology
(Maslow, 1962; Rogers, 1964), a convergence has occurred supporting the view
that the individual structures and creates
reality and invests the ‘‘objective”’ world
with meaning. A Peanuts cartoon will illustrate my meaning: Frame I shows Lucy
playing outfield and mobilizing herself to
catch a fly ball. She yells, “I got it.”’ In
frame 2, she repeats the phrase, “‘I got it”
as She prepares to catch the unseen fly
ball. In the third frame, the fly ball drops
to the ground directly in front of her, and
Lucy observes the ball’s downward trajectory. In the last frame, Lucy says philosophically, ‘“Well, ‘I got it’ can mean a lot
of things.”’

That the ball drops is an empiric reality;
thinking that one has “‘it’’ as the ball rolls
to the outfield is one’s subjective or phenomenological experience. To an outside
observer, Lucy’s early statement might
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

172 Kessler

easily be taken to mean that she intended
to make an effort to catch the ball. To
Lucy herself, however, the same statement might have had a completely different meaning requiring different responses
than those the observer assumed needed
to be made.

Another facet of the psychological paradigm shift emphasizes the multilevel
structure of psychological processes. At
least two levels are always present, a deep
structure and a superficial one, each involving differing levels of consciousness
(Bandler and Grinder, 19755). Clinical
experience and research on hypnosis,
trance states, and altered states of consciousness (Erickson et al., 1976; Ornstein, 1972) all suggest that “knowing”’,
information processing, decision-making,
and other cognitive processes occur on
discrete yet interdigitated levels of awareness. How the professional helps the client
focus attention on one level, preferentially, or in concert with other levels of
awareness has important connections with
the latter’s problem solving and decision
making processes, the maintenance of his
or her self-esteem, and other issues.

How these philosophical issues are expressed in practice may become clearer as

_we consider some important processes of

genetic counseling, genetic education,
communication, decision-making, and the
provision of support.

GENETIC EDUCATION

The provision of genetic education is an
important part of genetic counseling. Under the eugenics and preventive medicine
paradigms, this activity consisted of a
transposition of the ambience and
methods of the classroom to the counseling situation. However, the educational
situation of genetic counseling differs in
important ways from the usual educational system with which we are ac
Social Biology

quainted. In the latter, the information
provided to the student is expected to be
handled in an objective, dispassionate
way. When we talk about disease, or disease processes, it is generally in terms of
other people’s misfortunes or problems.
Rationality and analytic thinking is encouraged, expected, and rewarded. In the
genetic counseling situation, however, the
information provided is very personal and
intimate, and the problem or misfortune is
that of the counselees, for whom the information is not neutral. It is egothreatening. Hence, anxiety levels tend to
be high, and contingencies which interfere
with the acquisition of knowledge are
maximized.

Contributing to this anxiety is the setting in which the educational experience
occurs. The medical setting, from the
counselee’s viewpoint, is generally unfamiliar, threatening, and filled with anxiety-arousing associations. Under such
conditions, there are few positive reinforcement contingencies for the counselees. Even when they are informed of
“good” news, it is often tainted with a per1od of waiting and anxiety which may dilute the positive impact such news would
usually have. Knowledge acquired under
such circumstances may be distorted or
difficult to recall later on; an attempt to recall the information may resurrect the
feelings present at the time of the learning, and these, in turn, may interfere with
the recall process.

Education can succeed only when
learning takes place. In considering learning, One also needs to examine reinforcement contingencies. ‘‘Reinforcement” tsa
term frequently used in the genetic counseling literature generally in connection
with re-emphasizing certain pieces of previously conveyed information. The psychological and behavioral consequences
of such tactics are seldom considered, although they are unquestionably there. It is

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

unclear what else, in the realm of attitudes
and beliefs and possibly actions, may be
reinforced (behaviorally) in the course of
redirecting attention or rediscussing certain issues during counseling or follow-up
sessions. For example, restating a recurrence risk, supposedly to help a counselee
remember a Statistical figure may, unintentionally, also shape the latter’s behavior and decision-making processes in a direction consistent with the counselor’s
own beliefs regarding that risk. Also, by
resurrecting an issue about which the
counselee may have no strong investment,
the counselor may be suggesting to them
that perhaps “‘there is something there to
worry about after all.”

How education is provided and how
learning occurs in genetic counseling is not
well understood. Little attention has been
given to the educational techniques used
in genetic counseling, albeit several geneticists have suggested the copious use of audio-visual materials (see below). Also, not
much is known regarding the content of
genetic counseling—even for the same genetic disorder—at different centers.

Deciding what specific information
needs to be transmitted in genetic counseling requires a choice as to what should not
be provided; this ts the nature of effective
communication.” Legal requirements may
dictate what information is provided, although counselor and institutional perceptions and interpretations of such requirements may play the determining role
in this regard (Reilly, 1979).

Another important issue involves the
question of how we can motivate coun
7For some geneticists, the thought that not every
bit of information is being transmitted appears to be
disturbing, as if they were not telling the whole truth.
The truth-untruth framework is not pertinent to the
issue. It is simply a practical matter of recognizing
that communication requires choice, and choice
means that the spotlight is on one issue as opposed to
another. When all issues are equivalently illuminated, one essentially has a blank screen.

 

Genetic Counseling 173

selees to learn. Rosenstock (1979) has recently discussed some of the issues promoting health motivation relevant to
genetic disease. Counselees frequently
come to genetic counseling expecting to
learn something new about themselves,
their children, etc. The ‘“‘something new,”
however, may be rather unpleasant and
distressing, and thus not entirely welcome. Under such circumstances, the motivation to learn new information is
conflicted and not optimal.

Evaluating the effectiveness of the educational process in genetic counseling is by
no means a simple matter. It is difficult to
obtain such evaluations without
influencing the service provided in order
to administer precounseling tests of baseline knowledge and postcounseling follow-up examinations. Results of one such
recent study (Sorenson et al., 1980) suggest that the educational attempt in genetic counseling is only partially successful. These investigators found that among
counselees who had an inaccurate precounseling knowledge of the pertinent diagnosis, over 60 per cent continued to
have an inaccurate or marginally accurate
level of knowledge after genetic counseling. Among counselees with a marginally
accurate level of knowledge, roughly onethird moved to the accurate category, but
the majority (58.3 per cent) continued to
have a marginally accurate level of knowledge following counseling.

The data concerning knowledge of recurrence risk are similar: 83.6 per cent of
counselees with an accurate level of
knowledge before counseling had this
level after counseling and among the
counselees with an inaccurate level of
knowledge before counseling, 45.8 per
cent had an accurate knowledge following
counseling. When studied six months
later, counselees in both groups tended to
show a slight but significant decrement in
the accuracy of their recall of the recur
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

174 Kessler

rence risk provided during genetic counseling. Of the counselees with an accurate
precounseling knowledge of recurrence
risk, 16.4 per cent were inaccurate after
counseling and 21.2 per cent six months
later. Of the counselees with an inaccurate
knowledge before counseling, 54.2 per
cent continued to be inaccurate after
counseling and 64.5 per cent were inaccurate six months later. Overall, the data
suggest that modest gains in knowledge
are made with genetic education, but
there is considerable room for improvement in this area. There is a possibility
that given the process of genetic education, as defined under the eugenics and
preventive medicine paradigms, and the
circumstances in which it is carried out,
further gains in providing effective education may be difficult, if not impossible, to
achieve.

Tests of the degree of accuracy in recall
of information provided during genetic
counseling generally do not take into account the static and dynamic processes of
memory. How information ts coded, represented, organized, stored, and retrieved
from memory, perforce affects the results

obtained in postcounseling studies. Re- .

search on human memory has generally
shown that as an unorganized system, it is
effective in combining and abstracting input rather than isolating and preserving
discrete pieces (Posner, 1973). In brief,
human memory may not be adapted for
exact recall, but rather for intellectual performance. When the bits and pieces of information provided in genetic counseling
fit together in a meaninful gestalt for the
person, it is likely to be remembered with
as sufficient accuracy as is needed.

COMMUNICATION

Genetic counseling has been defined as
a process of communication (Ad Hoc
Committee, 1975). It is surprising, there
Social Biology

fore, how little attention has been given to
the process of communication and to the
way information is acquired, processed
and translated into a useable form. Elsewhere, Kessler, (1979c) attempted to
present some of the known principles of
human communication pertinent to genetic counseling. Briefly, communication
has a structure, both deep and superficial.
The superficial structure is generally
transmitted via the literal or denotative aspects of the message being communicated. The deep structure corresponds to
the connotative or the various levels of
metamessages contained within the message itself. The metamessage is a message
or comment on the literal message often
taking the form of nonverbal behavior and
modulations of the verbal message (such
as in voice inflections, etc.)

In traditional genetic counseling, there
was a tendency to attend to the superficial
level of communication. Such questions as
‘“Why has this happened,” ‘“‘What chances
are there of this happening again,” “What
do most people do in our situation,” or
‘“‘What would you do, doctor,” etc.,
tended to be heard literally. Thus, the
counselor tended to miss important nuances of meaning in the counselees’ messages. This may have resulted in inappropriate responses and/or interventions
which did not address the counselees’
needs. Some examples of the differences
that might possibly occur as a function of
the counselor’s adherence to a particular
paradigm of counseling are shown in Table 1. The circumstances are ones that
have actually occurred in genetic counseling. The responses are both actual and
simulated and represent a tiny sample of
the overall possibilities inherent in a given
situation.

Three elements are involved in the
process of human communication:

1. A relationship between two or more
persons is implied, the nature of which has
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

Genetic Counseling

TABLE 1

 

175

GENETIC COUNSELING SITUATIONS AND PossIBLE COUNSELOR INTERVENTIONS (A = More
LITERAL APPROACH; B = More PsyCHOLOGICAL APPROACH)

Circumstance

Mother of two children affected
with cystic fibrosis asks: ‘“‘Are
you sure it’s (the risk) only
25%?”

A counselor has described the
amniocentesis procedure to a
woman who had an anencephalic
child. She asks, ‘“‘Do most people go ahead and have this in our
situation?”

The previous woman persists,
“But, what if your sister were
here, what would you tell her?”

The same woman says, “‘I just
don’t want to think that anything
I did hurt that baby. That really
upsets me.”

A mother of a stillborn with multiple congenital anomalies discusses the birth and says, “I kind
of look at it as a punishment sort
of.”

She replies to counselor B: “It
goes back to that abortion we
had before we were married.”
She continues, “I keep thinking
that that one was probably
healthy” (cries).

A

Yes, each pregnancy has a 25%
risk, independent of another.

Most? Most persons who come for
amniocentesis are couples of age
35 or older.

One never knows what one might
say, but, I think I personally
would take advantage of the available procedures and prevent this
from happening again.”

Let me reassure you. There is
nothing that could have been done
to prevent this.

You need not feel that way, because there is nothing you did to
cause this.

That sounds like guilt, and many
people who have abortions feel
guilty about it.

[remains silent and hands her a
box of tissues]

B

It sounds like you feel that
you’ve gotten more than your
share.

You seem unsure how to proceed. Perhaps you and your husband need to talk it over and decide what might be best for both
of you to do.

It doesn’t matter what I'd tell my
sister. What does matter is what
you and your husband believe is
right for the two of you, and
when you are ready to decide,
and if you need my help, I'll be
glad to help you reach a decision.

Of course that would be upsetting. Iam wondering, though, if
that’s what you are thinking anyway?

What have you done to deserve
such a punishment?

Would you like to say some
more about that?

So you look back and see the
things that might have been,
your dreams and hopes, and it
hurts. (Pause.) Regrets are painful teachers.

an important impact on the quality of
communication that occurs. The relationship between the counselor and counselees in genetic counseling is not an ordinary social interaction; it involves a
professional-client interaction with all the
mutual expectations inherent in such relationships (Kessler, 1979d). The profes
sional is assumed to be the more knowing
individual in the relationship; what he or
she says is expected to, and generally
does, have enormous impact on the counselees. Since the former represents a
“high prestige” source of messages, what
he/she advises is difficult to discount.
When a message is divergent from the
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

176

recipient’s preferred attitude, the latter
tends to experience a pressure to alter his/
her own beliefs to be more consistent with
that of the prestigious source (Manis,
1966).

2. There is a shared focus of attention
which frequently (but not always) is the
potential or actual problem involving a genetic disorder. Ideally, the genetic disorder and the biomedical information regarding it is a focus shared by both
counselor and counselee. However, departures from this “ideal” state often occur as the counselees frequently have their
own personal and interpersonal agendas
which claim their interest and focus of attention. Within the counseling session itself, issues may arise which may not be directly related to the disorder (e.g., marital
dysfunctions) and which may require major attention from the participants. If, for
whatever reasons, the salient issues on
which the counselees wish to focus fail to
capture the counselor’s attention and attentiveness, or vice-versa, communication
difficulties are likely to ensue.

3. The message being transmitted has
shared meanings. Verbal and nonverbal
messages conveyed in any significant human interaction are only symbols or abstractions into which meaning is invested.
To the extent that meanings are shared by
both counselor and counselee, effective
communication can occur. The words
used in genetic counseling, such as “‘risk,”’
“chance,” “gene,” “burden,” and so on,
sometimes are used as if a principle of oneword—one-meaning was operating. Since
differing sociocultural variables, philosophical positions, personalities, life experiences, expectations, etc., influence
the meanings we invest in verbal and nonverbal cues, achieving a common meeting
ground of meaning in the genetic counseling situation is a major challenge. Unfortunately, the verbal modality, which is the

Kessler

Social Biology

chief means of communication among humans, is a highly imprecise one?

One of the questions to which
insufficient attention has been addressed
in genetic counseling is what it is we wish
to communicate to counselees. Ambiguities in this area lead to inconsistencies in
the counseling practices we employ. For
example, a widely held belief in genetic
counseling is that the counselor should remain neutral and not directly influence the
decisions of the counselees in the domains
of abortion, reproduction, and/or the use
of prenatal diagnostic procedures. However, in the course of pre-amniocentesis
counseling, a widely recommended practice is to show counselees pictures of
Downs children, photographs of chromosomes, graphs showing risk and advancing
maternal age, and so on. This practice is
based on standard pedagogic techniques,
and, on the surface, appears to be consistent with the neutral educator model of genetic counseling. But, such practices may
unintentionally focus the counselee’s attention on the likelihood of having a defective child rather than a normal one, and
cognitively, magnify their risk for an affected child. Thus, the practice may serve
as a means of arousing their anxieties,
fears, or aversions regarding human defects and possibly of increasing their motivation (or triggering motivation) to take
appropriate actions to avoid such a problem. From that perspective, the practice
might be interpreted as an attempt to
influence the counselees to utilize the pre- |
natal diagnostic procedure, violating professed values of neutrality or nondirectiveness.

The extent to which persuasion occurs

For example, take the slogan, ‘“‘When guns are
outlawed, only outlaws will have guns.” This can be
(and has been) interpreted as supporting diametrically opposite political viewpoints regarding gun.
control legislation.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

in daily life (e.g., TV commercials) as well
as in professional!-client relationship, the
possibilities of persuasion and behavior
control are ever-present (London, 1969).
It is not too difficult to make indirect suggestions which may by-pass the counselees’ usual psychological defense mechanisms and influence their thinking and
actions without their being aware of them.
Suggestions regarding reproduction, for
example, can be imbedded in factual material regarding other matters and being
unexpected in that context, they might
have relatively greater impact and
influence on the counselees than those
made in a more expected context (such as
in direct response to requests for suggestions and advice). Also, how questions or
statements are phrased in counseling can
influence how the counselee’s attention
becomes focused on a particular issue or
experience. Certain words, phrases, and
actions can promote an expansion or contraction of differing degrees and levels of
awareness (Erickson et al., 1976). This, in
turn, can have a subtle influence on the
person’s functioning in the domains of
problem-solving and decision-making.

Perhaps it needs to be recognized that
attempts at persuasion do occur in genetic
counseling (Kessler, 1981). These need to
be studied and better understood so that
when they are used, if they must be at all,
they can be applied judiciously and in the
clients’ interests.

One of the major themes of contemporary communication theory is the link between communication and the issue of
self-esteem (Satir, 1964, 1972). In brief,
messages which have the perceived capability to diminish a person’s self-worth,
evoke psychological mechanisms which
tend to lead to distortions or other outcomes which diminish the threat to the
person. Psychodynamically-oriented clinicians tend to speak of these mechanisms

 

Genetic Counseling

177

as psychologic defense mechanisms. Some
cognitive psychologists speak of the Piagetian processes of assimilation and accommodation; information that is assimilated
is molded so as to fit pre-existing mental
schemas of the self and the world. Accommodation to new information requires
that the person change his/her mental
schemas; in the process the person
changes (Bemporad, 1974; Flavell, 1963).
From both cognitive and psychodynamic
viewpoints, the outcome is similar; under
conflict and stress, cognitive functioning
becomes either so narrow that important
input is not obtained, or so broad that important input cannot easily be differentiated from irrelevant material, and/or the
information itself is modified so that our
pre-existing self-image and _ self
evaluation is maintained or bolstered. Ef
fective genetic counseling eventually leads
to accommodation and hence to changes
in cognitive, affective, and behavioral
functioning, which is the same goal as any
other counseling (or psychotherapeutic)
process.

DECISION-MAKING

In our daily lives, we are perpetually
making decisions even though it may not
appear to be so. Faced with a myriad of
daily mundane choices—what time to
wake up, what to wear, what call to make
first, whether to write to mother,when to
go shopping—we have all become experienced decision-makers. Yet, faced with
the “‘biggies’’—where to live, how to live,
what career to follow, when to have children, whether to have an abortion, and so
forth—humans become reluctant decision-makers (Janis and Mann, 1977). This
occurs because such decisions are frequently filled with inner and interpersonal
conflicts and contradictory desires,
wishes, and fantasies. And, because the

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

178 Kessler

stakes are generally perceived as being
high, the person is beset with doubt and
worry as to which course to take.
Decision-making, like communication,
occurs on multiple simultaneous levels.
Some decisions are made so unconsciously, we are hardly aware of having
made them at all; others mobilize virtually
all of our energies and occupy major portions of our waking and sleeping states as
well. It is these latter kinds of decisions
that we encounter in genetic counseling.
In a recent review of decision-making,
Pearn (1979) has suggested that when parents need to make a decision about reproduction in the face of a genetic risk, there
are three mutually-exclusive alternatives:

1. The couple might decide not to have further children;

2. The couple will decide to have further
children;

3. The couple will decide to defer the decision. .

In reality, the alternatives are mutually
exclusive only on the most superficial
level. On deeper levels of consciousness,
other alternatives are possible. In fact,
without assuming a multileveled process
of decision-making, involving functions of
which the person is frequently unaware,
the richness and reality of the problems
actually seen in genetic counseling ts severely restricted.

Paradoxes in the realm of decisionmaking are frequently seen in the context
of genetic counseling. Following genetic
counseling, one couple stated that they
had decided to have more children, and in
short order purchased a pet. When questioned about it, they maintained that they
indeed wanted another child, and that the
pet had no connection to their decision.
Questioned further, it turned out that the
couple continued to use the same type of
successful contraception they had used
previously.

Social Biology

In this case, the pet may be a symbolic
representation of a child, filling the wish
for another child and, at the same time,
avoiding the risk for one with a genetic defect. This strategy both gratifies a conscious wish and controls an unconscious
fear. From the counselor’s point of view,
the couple’s behavior appears inconsistent—they say they want a child, yet they
continue to use successful contraception.

Another couple, on follow-up counseling, stated explicitly that they would not
have any more children. But when questioned, it turned out that they had not initiated or did not intend to initiate any adequate birth control methods. Yet another
couple stated that they were now ready to
try to have a child and soon thereafter purchased a television set, a luxury they had
not allowed themselves prior to this point.
The couple would stay up into the late
hours of the morning watching television
programs and this led to a marked dimunition in sexual activity; hardly a promising
situation to carry out their decision. Such
situations can be best understood as attempts to deal with the highly conflicted
needs and wishes of differing levels of cognitive-affective and interpersonal functioning, all, or at least some of which could
be satisfied by the strategy adopted.

Pearn (1979) has suggested that individuals seeking genetic counseling generally have deferred a decision regarding
further reproduction. This, however, does
not account for all cases seen in genetic
counseling. When their agendas are discussed, many counselees make it clear
that they have already reached a decision
and are interested in obtaining the
counselor’s support or affirmation for the
decision. Also, in some cases where counselees deny that a decision has been made,
it is possible to infer the opposite from the
counselees’ actions. For example, the discontinuance of contraceptive techniques
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

or their sudden initiation may be a better
indication of a decision, irrespective of
what the counselees say they have decided.

One of the new perspectives offered by
a psychologically-oriented genetic counseling is a more realistic exposition of the
goals of genetic counseling. For example,
consider rational decision-making, a frequently stated aim of the preventive medicine paradigm of genetic counseling. It has
now become apparent that rational decison-making may be more difficult to
achieve than previously thought. The
work of Simon (1956, 1980) and others
suggests that there are bounds or limits on
the rationality that humans can bring to
bear on personally-relevant problems
which require the individual to reach a decision. This is an area where the views of
psychodynamic psychology and cognitive
psychology again point in the same general direction. Psychodynamic psychologists have tended to emphasize the role of
unconscious factors in human decisionmaking. According to their view, important or personally-relevant decisions are
largely influenced by determinants over
which we have little awareness or control.
Since we tend, perhaps incorrectly, to
equate awareness and rationality, unconscious decision-making is often not considered to be rational.

According to cognitive psychology, human information-processing capacity and
problem-solving strategies are limited and
tend to be sensitive to biases and subjective errors of judgment which prevent
the maximization of “‘expected utility” or
net advantage to the decision-maker
(Tversky and Kahneman, 1974; Simon,
1980). Slovic (1972) has suggested that
these biases arise because of normal cognitive processes and thus have a persistent
quality not unlike that of perceptual illusions.

Genetic Counseling

179

In the face of ambiguity, thinking is directed toward simplifying the assessment
of probabilities and predicted outcomes of
complex choices. These processes of
simplification are discussed by Tversky
and Kahneman (1974) and include the use
of such heuristic principles as anchoring,
adjustment, availability, and representativeness. These may lead to errors of
judgement. For example, prior to coun- ©
seling, a person may have a preconceived
idea of a recurrence risk, the idea serving
as a reference point or anchor against
which new information is evaluated.
Thus, one person who may have expected
a risk of 100 per cent may be pleased by
how low a 1-in-2 recurrence risk is,
whereas another may be dismayed by how
high a 1-in-20 risk is relative to an anchor
of 1 per cent. In one case, the risk may be
unrealistically diminished and in the other
unrealistically magnified relative to their
respective anchoring points.

Given such simplifying cognitive processes, it would not be surprising to find
that decision-making about the issues under discussion in genetic counseling is far
from consistent and not in accord with a
theory that suggests that the rational person operates so as to maximize subjective
expected utility (SEU). Writing recently,
the Nobel Laureate Herbert Simon (1980)
has summarized contemporary thinking as
follows:

The axiomatization of the SEU theory has
stimulated numerous experiments aimed at
testing it empirically. A fair summary of
the findings of these experiments is that actual human choices depart radically from
those implied by the axioms except in the
simplest and most transparent of situations.
Humans are unable to choose consistently
in the face of even moderate complexity or
uncertainty . . . Thus, there is emerging a
theory of bounded rationality or procedural
rationality that describes man as an organism of limited computational ability and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

180 Kessler

possessing limited information and limited

imagination, seeking to survive in a world

rich in complexity.

Although the SEU theory provides a
handle on situations in which one person’s
choices or decisions need to be made, the
theory may not be germane to situations
such as those encountered in genetic counseling, where a couple needs to reach a reproductive decision. Game theory (von
Neumann and Morgenstern, 1944), which
takes into account decisions made by two
or more persons, tends to be based on an
assumption of competition, where one
person gains at the expense of another.
Some relationships seem to fit this description, but fortunately many do not.

How couples actually reach reproductive decisions following genetic counseling
needs to be better understood. LippmanHand (Lippman-Hand and Fraser, 1979)
recently interviewed women following genetic counseling and found that acommon
strategy used in reaching a reproductive
decision was to engage in mental “work”
in which various outcomes or “scenarios”
were imagined or rehearsed. The individuals would allow themselves to experience
in fantasy or daydreams the most tolerable
worst images. This researcher also reported, not surprisingly, that in such mental work the recurrence risk data are rarely
used in the way they were provided or intended by the counselor. Rather, it was
converted into a binary form—“‘TI will either have or not have an affected child.”
From the counselee’s perspective, each
pregnancy appears to have only one of two
outcomes—the child will be healthy or
not. We tend to forget that recurrence risk
data are applicable to populations, not to
specific individuals in that population; the
latter convert the risk figures they receive
into a personally relevant form. In this
form it has meaning for them and thus can
be used in their decision-making processes.

Social Biology

PSYCHOLOGICAL OR EMOTIONAL

SUPPORT

The concept of supportive counseling
comes from the psychoanalytic literature
and was used to describe short-term therapy with “‘suppressive’”’ procedures as opposed to long-term psychoanalytic psychotherapy which relied on so-called
“uncovering” procedures (Alexander,
1956). Implied in the term “‘supportive”
was the idea that the goal of the therapy
was not the reconstruction of the person’s
personality or a major change of behavior,
but a maintenance, or shoring-up, of existing functioning or a reestablishment of
precrisis functioning (Aguilera and Messick, 1974). The more current views of ego
psychology (White, 1972) tend to emphasize the change potentials inherent in life
crises, and by implication, the growth and
change possibilities inherent even in socalled supportive work.

The provision of emotional support to
genetic counselees is a widely endorsed
aim of genetic counseling. Nevertheless,
how one puts this aim into action has
rarely been addressed. Also, what needs
to be supported as well as what constitutes
emotional support ts rather vague, and because of this genetic counselors are often
unsure and uncomfortable about their
role here. This sometimes leads to such
defeatist attitudes as, ‘‘Let someone else
take care of the feelings,” or ““The counselees know what’s best for them, so let
them work it out on their own.” Thus,
there have been tendencies to either imagine that the necessary psychosocial interventions are outside the grasp of the average geneticist or that attention to
psychosocial issues can or should be minimized. Both views promote inaction and
are thus nonproductive, for they interfere
with the counselor’s ability to develop the
skills and sense of competence needed to
deal with the whole person. Without appropriate training and/or a sense of com
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 3

petence, the counselor can hardly be expected to display much eagerness to be
personally involved in providing supportive work.

Support is frequently associated with
help in lowering anxiety and fear as well as
helping someone in distress feel better.
But support can come in many different
forms. In some instances, support may
need to come in the form of challenging
the counselees’ assumptions or helping
them take a look at some unpleasant facts
and some disquieting facets of their functioning. For example, the mother who has
given birth to a child with the fetal alcohol
syndrome and who continues to drink may
need to be confronted and steered toward
professional help to deal with a drinking
problem that may otherwise reinforce her
sense of guilt and interfere with effective
childbearing activities.

Support may also come in the guise of
increasing the counselee’s anxiety or pain.
Having to raise a child with a chronic medical problem due to a genetic disease, or
one who can not survive long, is a painful
experience. And so is hearing that one has
a l-in-2 recurrence risk for an affected
child. Helping the counselees discuss
painful ideas or realize that these issues
will need to be faced is likely to promote
anguish and distress. And yet, this is far
greater support than passing a box of tissues or allowing a person to cry through
most of a counseling session. My own bias
is that the genetic counselor needs to support or ally him/herself with the
counselee’s adult side (Berne, 1964); the
part of the person striving for competence, psychological growth, and the mas
_tery of life conflicts and problems. Pro
moting passivity and providing messages
that the counselees do not know what is
best for them, or ignoring unpleasantries
in the face of the obvious, is generally not
supportive. Providing encouragement to

face difficult choices and communicating

 

Genetic Counseling

 

181

one’s faith that the counselees have the capacity to make these choices is, in my
mind, being supportive.

Productive support work becomes a
possibility when the genetic counselor has
the knowledge and skills to be able to
identify and accurately assess the counselees’ ego strengths and limitations, the
quality of their relationship, their emotional needs, current and long-term, their
areas of emotional conflict, developmental arrests, and so on. This assessment is as
important as making an accurate diagnosis
of the genetic problem; it is the basis for
the effective communication of information, for the provision of genetic education, for assisting the counselees in their
decision-making processes, and for. the
provision of psychological support. A
knowledge of statistics and genetics, both
necessary competences for genetic counselors, are not an adequate background to
provide the kind of supportive work discussed here. And, neither is the simple acquisition of communication skills, which is
often confused and incorrectly substituted
for counseling skills, sufficient as a basis
for the necessary wisdom and understanding needed for effective genetic counseling.

The emergence of the psychologicallyoriented paradigm is an important development with multiple implications. This
paradigm provides a rational basis for unifying the principles and practices of genetic counseling. Adherents of the traditional models of genetic counseling were
successful in setting forth their goals.
However, they failed to attend to how
these goals might or could be achieved
within the real-world context of the genetic counseling session. The fact that the
overwhelming majority of genetic counselors were (and are) trained in the biological rather than the psychological sciences
did not facilitate the development of counseling practices based either on a well
 

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

182 Kessler

developed theory of human behavior or
on clinical experiences. The naturenurture controversy probably further impeded genetic counselors from deriving
the benefits of the experiences of counselors in other fields of personal counseling (Kessler, 1979e).

In the absence of an integrated system
of principles and practices, the approaches taken to provide genetic counseling were often based on beliefs of how
others should think, feel, and behave under conditions of uncertainty rather than
on how others actually did function. The
focus on the literal meaning of communication (see section on Communication
above) and the emphasis on rationality are
but two among many areas involving sets
of beliefs about human functioning which
actually turned out to be without much
foundation in reality.

The psychologically-oriented paradigm
of genetic counseling suggests that at least
some of the principles of counseling found

_ to be effective in other contexts may be ef
fective in genetic counseling as well. Also,
it implies that the basic goals of other
forms of personal counseling—to educate,
advise, deal with the resolution of specific
problems, relieve unrealistic anxiety and
guilt, provide help in making decisions
and so on—are not dissimilar from those
of genetic counseling. In short, the psychologically-oriented paradigm moves genetic counseling closer to the world-view
of the psychotherapist or mental health
worker rather than that of the biologist.
This does not necessarily mean that the
genetic counselor needs to practice psychotherapy or be trained in the skills of the
psychotherapist, although it is difficult to
imagine how the counselor can be effective in carrying out his/her functions without some training in this arena.

The psychologically-oriented paradigm
also provides a new perspective on many
of the issues of genetic counseling. In the

 

Social Biology

area of communication, for example, the
traditional approaches to genetic counseling not only tended to emphasize literality
but also tended to view the process as a
unidirectional flow of information from
counselor to counselee. The psychologically-oriented paradigm emphasizes the
fact that communication in genetic counseling 1s a two-way street. Just as the counselor is attempting to communicate genetic and biomedical information to the
counselees, the latter are attempting to
make their needs, interactions, attitudes,
and beliefs known to the counselor. Not
infrequently, these needs, etc., are for
something more than information and
simply supplying genetic information
would convey to the counselees that the
counselor does not understand them. Professionals who are perceived as lacking
understanding generally do not leave their
clients feeling satisfied with their mutual
interactions (Korsch and Negrete, 1972).

In providing genetic education, the
counselor often conveys information that
erodes the counselees’ self-esteem and
raises anxieties. (Informing persons that
they have a risk of having a child with a genetic disorder is not likely to raise their
self-esteem.) When marital or other interpersonal difficulties are present, information provided in counseling may be used
by the counselees in the service of supporting a dysfunctional system (Kessler,
1979b). The psychologically-oriented paradigm suggests that the genetic counselor
needs to anticipate and actively intervene
in such situations with a goal of either not
worsening an already dysfunctional situation or, if possible, helping the counselees
improve it.

When the genetic counselor attempts
to help the counselees reach appropriate
health and reproductive decisions, he/she
will probably use the same techniques that
many psychotherapists would use under
similar circumstances—clarification of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

motivations and beliefs, an examination
of alternatives with their respective pros
and cons, a presentation of options not
considered in the counselees’ thinking, an
identification and Jabeling of facts and fantasies, challenges to unrealistic beliefs,
and so on. In other words, assisting counselees to make realistic personal decisions, a major goal of genetic counseling,
perhaps more than any other function, requires that the counselor employ the skills
of the psychotherapist. Presumably, genetic counselors trained in such skills
would be more effective in this arena than
those without such skills.

In sum, psychological issues permeate
every aspect of genetic counseling. The
concerns and problems that bring counselees to the counselor and the services
and information the latter provides are all
epo-threatening in that counselees must
expose themselves to the risk of being
shown to be flawed, imperfect, defective,
or abnormal and of having the potentiality
of transmitting these “flaws” to their progeny. The basic processes on which genetic
counseling rests, namely, communication
and decision making, are both psychological in nature. The issues with which these
processes are concerned—health and illness, and life and death—are emotionally
charged under the best of circumstances.
When a risk for a child with a genetic disorder is involved, the affective experience
is often intensified. How information is acquired, retained, and eventually used by
the counselees involves a series of complex multi-dimensional processes with

Genetic Counseling

183

major rational and nonrational components. Again we are dealing with psychological phenomena. Decision-making involves perception, cognition, motivation,
personality, interpersonal dynamics, and
other psychological variables. Also, how
counselees are helped to arrive at personally relevant decisions involves issues that
strike to the core of the counseling process
and raise questions as to how and when
the counselor’s values, beliefs, and personality are to be used to reach outcomes
beneficial to the counselees. The birth of a
child with a genetic disorder or providing a
couple with a diagnosis of such a disorder
generally triggers a series of responses
with which the genetic counselor needs to
deal irrespective of when the genetic
counseling is provided. Clinical experience suggests that points in the life cycle at
which the person undergoes stress are important ones in effecting changes in the
person’s intrapsychic and interpersonal
functioning. Thus the genetic counselor’s
interventions, or lack thereof, may have
major long-term consequences for the
counselees. In many ways, then psychological issues are an integral part of genetic counseling, a fact that will need to be
considered in the training of genetic counselors.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank Dr. Nancy Wexler for
sharing her thoughts on genetic counseling,
Dr. Arthur Falek for his friendship and longstanding generosity, encouragement and support, and Dr. Hilda Kessler for her help and
clarity.

REFERENCES

Av Hoc COMMITTEE ON GENETIC COUNSELING.
1975. Genetic counseling. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 27:240—242.

AGUILERA, D. C., and J. M. MEssick. 1974. Crisis
intervention. C. V. Mosby Co., St. Louis.

ALEXANDER, F, 1956. Psychoanalysis and psychotherapy. W. W. Norton and Co., New York.

 

ALLEN, G. A. 1975. Genetics, eugenics and class
struggle. Genetics 79:29-45.

ANTLEY, R. M. 1976. Variables in the outcome of
genetic counseling. Soc. Biol. 23:108-115.

. 1979, The genetic counselor as facilitator

of the counselee’s decision process. Birth De
fects: Orig. Art. Srs. 15(2):137-168.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

184 Kessler

BANDLER, R., and J. GRINDER. 1975a. The structure of magic I. Science and Behavior Books,
Palo Alto, California.

. 1975b. Patterns of the hypnotic techniques of Milton H. Erickson, M. D., I. Meta
Publications, Cupertino, California.

BEMPORAD, J. R. 1974. Cognitive development.
InS. Arieti (ed.), American handbook of psychiatry. 2nd ed. Basic Books, New York.

BERNE, E. 1964. Games people play. W. W. Norton, New York.

Cuomsky, N. 1968. Language and mind. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York.

Epstein, C. 1975. Genetic counseling: Present
Status and future prospects. In L. N. Went,
Chr. Ver-meij-Keers, and A. G. J. M. van der
Linden (eds.), Early diagnosis and prevention
of genetic disease. Leiden Univ. Press,
Leiden.

Erickson, M. H., E. L. Rossi, and S. I. Ross.
1976. Hypnotic realities. Irvington Press, New
York.

FaLEK, A. 1977. Use of the coping process to
achieve psychological homeostasis in genetic

=~ counseling. Jn H. A. Lubs and F. de la Cruz
(eds.), Genetic counseling. Raven Press, New
York.

FaLEK, A., and S. Britton. 1974. Phases in coping: The hypothesis and its implications. Soc.
Biol. 21:1-7.

FLAVELL, J. H. 1963. The developmental psychol!ogy of Jean Piaget. D. Van Nostrand Co.,
New York.

HEcuT, F., and L. B. Hoitmes. 1972. What we
don’t know about genetic counseling. New
Engl. J. Med. 287:464—465.

Hsia, Y. E. 1979, The genetic counselor as information giver. Birth Defects: Orig. Art. Srs.
15(2):169-186.

Janis, I. L., and L. Mann, 1977. Decision making. The Free Press, New York.

KESSLER, S. 1979a. The psychological foundations of genetic counseling. In S. Kessler
(ed.), Genetic counseling: Psychological dimensions. Academic Press, New York.

. 1979b. The genetic counselor as psycho
therapist. Birth Defects: Orig. Art. Srs.

15(2):187-200.

. 1979c. The processes of communication,

decision making and coping in genetic coun
seling. In S. Kessler, (ed.), Genetic counseling: Psychological dimensions. Academic

Press, New York.

. 1979d. The counselor-counselee rela
tionship. In S. Kessler (ed.), Genetic counsel
ing: Psychological dimensions. Academic

Press, New York.

. 1979e. Introduction. In S. Kessler (ed.),

Genetic counseling: Psychological dimen
sions. Academic Press, New York.

. 1981. Psychological aspects of genetic

counseling: Analysis of a transcript. Amer. J.

Med. Genet. 8:137-153.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Social Biology

Korscu, B. M., and V. F. NEGRETE. 1972. Doctor-patient communication. Sci. Amer.
227:66-~74.

Kuun, T. 1970. The structure of scientific revolutions. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Lappe; M. 1973. Allegiances of human geneticists: A preliminary typology. Hastings Ctr.
Stud. 1:63~-78.

LEONARD, C. O., G. CHASE, and B. CHILps. 1972.
Genetic counseling: A consumer’s view. New
Eng. J. Med. 287:433-439.

Li, C. C. 1977. A minority report. Report: Commission for the control of Huntington's Disease and its consequences. II. Technical Report: 361-367.

LrppMAN-Hanp, A., and F. C. Fraser. 1979. Genetic counseling—the postcounseling period,
I., Parents’ perceptions of uncertainty. Amer.
J. Med. Genet. 4:51-71.

LONDON, P. 1969. Behavior control. Harper and
Row, New York.

LUDMERER, K. M. 1972. Genetics and American
society. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.

Manis, M. 1966. Cognitive processes. Brooks/
Cole Publ. Co., Belmont, California.

MasLow, A. H. 1962. Toward a psychology of being. D. Van Nostrand, New York.

May, R. 1961. The emergence of existential psychology. In R. May (ed.), Existential psychology. Random House, New York.

Mutter, H. J. 1958. The world view of moderns.
50th Anniv. Lect. Srs. Univ. Il.

OrnSTEIN, R. E. 1972. The psychology of consciousness. The Viking Press, New York.

Parsons, T. 1951. The social system. The Free
Press, New York.

PEARN, J. 1979. Decision-making and reproductive choice. In Y. E. Hsia, K. Hirschhorn, R.
L. Silverberg, and L. Godmilow (eds.), Counseling in genetics. Alan R. Liss, New York.

Porter, L. H. 1977. Evolution of genetic counseling in America. In H. A. Lubs and F. de la
Cruz (eds.), Genetic counseling. Raven Press,
New York.

Posner, M. I. 1973. Cognition: An introduction.
Scott, Foresman and Co. Glenville, linois.

PRIBRAM, K. 1971. Languages of the brain. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

Reep, S. C. 1955. Counseling in medical genetics.
W.B. Saunders, New York.

. 1959. Types of advice given by heredity
counselors: II. Jn H. G. Hammons (ed.), Heredity counseling. Hoeber-Harper, New
York,

REILLY, P. 1979. Genetic counseling: A legal perspective. In Y. E. Hsia, K. Hirschhorn, R. L.
Silverberg, and L. Godmilow (eds.), Counseling in genetics. Alan R. Liss, New York.

Rocers, C. R. 1964. Toward a science of the person, In T. W. Wann (ed.), Behaviorism and
phenomenology. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

Rosenstock, I. M. 1979. Patterns of health behavior. In Y. E. Hsia, R. L. Silverberg and L.
Godmilow (eds.), Counseling in genetics.
Alan R. Liss, New York.

Satir, V. 1964. Conjoint family therapy. Science
and Behavior Books, Palo Alto, California.

. 1972. Peoplemaking. Science and Behavior Books, Palo Alto, California.

Simon, H. A. 1956. Rational choice and the structure of the environment. Psychol. Rev.
63:129-138.

. 1980. The behavioral and social sciences.
Science. 209:72-78.

Stovic, P. 1972. From Shakespeare to Simon:
Speculations—and some evidence—about
man’s ability to process information. Oregon
Research Institute, Research Monograph,
12:1-29.

SORENSON, J. R. 1974. Biomedical innovation,
uncertainty, and doctor-patient interaction. J.
Health Soc. Behav. 15:366—-374.

SORENSON, J. R., and A. J. CULBERT. 1979. Professional orientations to contemporary ge
 

 

Genetic Counseling

185

netic counseling. Birth Defects: Orig. Art.
Srs. 15(2):85-102.

SORENSON, J. R., J. P. Swazey, and N. A.
Scotcu. 1980. Impact of genetic counseling:
results of the collaborative study. Paper presented at Birth Defects Conference, New
York City, June 11, 1980.

VON NEUMANN, J., and O. MORGENSTERN. 1944.
The theory of games and economic behavior.
Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N. J.

Twiss, S. B. 1979. The genetic counselor as moral
advisor. Birth Defects: Orig. Art. Srs.
15:(2):201-212,

Tversky, A., and D. KAHNEMAN. 1974. Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science 185:1124-1131.

WuitE, R. W. 1972. The enterprise of living.
Holt, Rhinehart and Winston, New York.
ZIMBARDO, P. G., E. B. EBBESEN, and C.
MaSLacH. 1977. Influencing attitudes and
changing behavior. Addison-Wesley, Read
ing, Mass.
