Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Changes in sexual desire after voluntary
sterilization

Frank D. Bean , Margaret Pruitt Clark , Scott South , Gray Swicegood & Dorie
Williams

To cite this article: Frank D. Bean, Margaret Pruitt Clark , Scott South , Gray Swicegood &
Dorie Williams (1980) Changes in sexual desire after voluntary sterilization, Social Biology, 27:3,
186-193, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988420

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988420

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 2
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

   

Changes in Sexual Desire
After Voluntary Sterilization

gaa LOR Sch merydenpenrmnstest ore Cop
Te ee te
eo ee a“ de
3 fg eM x

ee €

Ss. Ss Fe es,
eras py of § Ces ng
" ee. Becomes
a ropomveneteee es Bee 6 Pdoweceeahit

‘Frank D. Bean, *Margaret Pruitt Clark, 'Scott South, 'Gray Swicegood and
'Dorie Williams

"Department of Sociology, the University of Texas, Austin, Texas, and* Department of
Sociology, Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine.

ABSTRACT: Sterilized and non-sterilized males and females are compared with respect to the effects
of voluntary sterilization on longitudinally reported changes in desire for sexual intercourse in order
to ascertain which of several alternative hypotheses provides the best prediction of postoperation
perceptions of changes in sexual desire. The results indicate that sterilized women are less likely
than sterilized men to report enhanced desire, a result that supports the idea that a gender-specific
explanation of sterilization effects is required to account for the sexual consequences of sterilization.

Over the past two decades, voluntary
sterilization has become an increasingly
popular method of birth control in the
United States (Presser and Bumpass,
1972; Pratt, 1975; Westoff and Ryder,
1977; Ford, 1978). In view of frequently
expressed fears that surgery for such purposes may be “demasculinizing” or “‘defeminizing” (Rodgers and Ziegler, 1973,
p. 165), and given evidence indicating that
some persons think erroneously that sterilization interferes with male sexual capability (Presser and Bumpass, 1972), investigations concerning the effects of
contraceptive sterilization on male and female sexuality are of practical as well as
theoretical significance. The purpose of
the present paper is to test several alternative hypotheses that may be invoked to
predict self-reported changes in sexual desire after surgery among married males
and females who have undergone sterilization, as well as among individuals whose
spouses have been sterilized.

Recent research into the sexual effects
of sterilization (Trussell and Westoff,
1980) suggests that frequency of intercourse among married couples may not increase following surgery, although in
general coital frequency is positively asso
ciated with the effectiveness of the contraceptive method used. In any event, to the
extent that reports of frequency reflect actual rates of marital intercourse, one
would expect married couples to report
similar rates of intercourse, regardless of
which spouse had been sterilized. Desire
for sexual intercourse, however, may vary
independently of the frequency of sexual
relations, since frequency may be more a
reflection of the power dynamics of a couple (which partner has more control over
frequency of intercourse) than of individual responses to sterilization. A more sensitive measure for assessing the effects of
sterilization on individuals’ sexual response would appear to be whether or not
their desire for sexual intercourse has
changed following surgery. The hypotheses to be considered, therefore, involve predictions of self-reported changes
in sexual desire following contraceptive
sterilization.

ALTERNATE HYPOTHESES

Prior research on the sequelae of sterilization has focused either upon only one
type of sterilization procedure or upon
only one spouse (usually the one being

186
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 3

sterilized). To our knowledge, no previous study has simultaneously examined
both types of surgery and both sterilized
and nonsterilized spouses. Since sterilization may have an effect upon either spouse
(or both), irrespective of which spouse is
sterilized, it is important not only to examine the effects of obtaining either a
male or a female procedure, but also the
effects on both the sterilized and the nonsterilized spouse.

Compensatory Hypothesis.—Our first
hypothesis concerning postsurgical effects may be derived from the work of
Rodgers and Ziegler and their associates
(1968, 1969, 1973) on the socialpsychological effects of vasectomy. In
these studies, vasectomized men exhibited tendencies toward personal and sexual maladjustment (in comparison with
controls) while simultaneously expressing
a high degree of satisfaction with the procedure. The men were described as responding to the surgery as though it were
demasculinizing, as evidenced by an overemphasis on “‘masculine”’ behavior (however defined) and a decrease in flexible behavior. The data were interpreted as
suggesting that a compensatory mechanism may operate among vasectomized
males whereby surface satisfaction is generated in response to having undergone an
anxiety-provoking experience. This suggests that to the extent that males are anxious about how vasectomy may affect their
sexual capabilities, they may attempt to
compensate by emphasizing positively
valued sexual behaviors presumably
threatened by the surgery (Williams et al.,
1980). Given this sort of process, vasectomized males might be expected to report greater poststerilization increases in
desire for sexual intercourse than nonsterilized males (i.e., those whose wives
obtained a sterilization).

A similar prediction might apply in the
case of females undergoing sterilization.

Sexual Desire and Sterilization

187

Research reporting that some women feel
defeminized and devalued after sterilization (e.g., Rodgers and Ziegler, 1973,
Ekblad, 1961; Whitehouse, 1971) would
seem to indicate that the experience has
just as much anxiety-provoking potential
for women as for men. In this event, the
compensatory hypothesis provides a basis
for expecting sterilized women to be just
as likely as sterilized men to report greater
postsurgical increases in desire for sexual
intercourse than nonsterilized persons.

Fear of Pregnancy Hypothesis.—
Another perspective on the sexual effects
of sterilization would emphasize that,
above all else, sterilization is elected for
contraceptive purposes—that is, people
undergo sterilization primarily because
they do not wish to have additional
children (cf. Wiest and Janke, 1974, pp.
446-447). A major consequence of the decision for sterilization may be the removal
of anxiety about unwanted pregnancy.
With this anxiety-provoking aspect of sexual relations removed, couples who have
undergone sterilization might be expected
to report an increase in desire for sexual
intercourse. Evidence in-support of this
idea is found in a study of vasectomized
males (Kohli and Sobrero, 1973) who attributed their increased desire for sexual
relations following surgery to freedom
from worry about pregnancy. This increase in sexual desire would be expected
to occur in approximately the same magnitude among both males and females as
well as among sterilized and nonsterilized
spouses.

Gender-specific Hypotheses.—It is also
possible that the sexual consequences of
sterilization involve patterns of effects
that are different for men and women.
Two such patterns in particular suggest
themselves. One results from conditions
that might limit the applicability of the
compensatory hypothesis to males, and
the other derives from factors that might
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

188 Bean et al.

neutralize for sterilized women the salutary effects anticipated by the fear of pregnancy hypothesis. To take the first possibility, for example, if males, whether from
biological propensity or through socialization, tend to be more preoccupied with
sexuality and with sexual competence
than females, then sterilization might represent a greater threat to continued sexual
adequacy among sterilized males than
among sterilized females. In this event,
one might expect the prediction of the
compensatory hypothesis to hold for
males but not for females. In the case of
the second possibility, among women
(particularly those undergoing vaginal hysterectomies for contraceptive purposes)
sterilization may be a more traumatic surgical experience that operates to suppress
sexual desire long after physical discomfort has subsided. In this event, one might
expect the prediction of the hypothesis
based on the idea of removal of fear of
pregnancy to be less likely to apply to
sterilized females.

The alternative hypotheses may be
summarized as follows: The fear of pregnancy hypothesis predicts an increase in
self-reported desire for sexual relations
among both sterilized and nonsterilized
males and females (that is, it predicts a
uniform increase across groups). The
compensatory hypothesis predicts an increase in sexual desire only among those
sterilized. The gender-specific hypotheses
predict different effects of sterilization depending upon gender. These patterns are
represented in Table 1. In the following
analysis, we test for each of these possibilities.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data for this research are drawn
from a sample of men and women and
their spouses who obtained either a male
or female sterilization procedure at one of

 

 

  

Social Biology

TABLE 1

ALTERNATE HYPOTHESES FOR PREDICTION OF
EFFECTS OF STERILIZATION ON REPORTED
SEXUAL DESIRE

PREDICTED RELATIVE

CHANGE*
HyPotHeEsis SM SMS SF _ SFS
1. Fear of pregnancy......... + + + +
2. Compensatory............ + 0 + 9

3. Gender-specific

a. Male-specific
compensatory .......... + 0 O 9
b, Female physicaltrauma.. + + QO +

*SM = Sterilized males; SMS = Spouses of sterilized males;
SF = Sterilized females; SFS = Spouses of sterilized females.

four military hospitals in either San Antonio, Texas (Brooke Army Hospital) or
Washington, D.C. (Walter Reed Army,
Malcom Grow Air Force, and Bethesda
Naval hospitals). The data were collected
in military hospitals and thus the research
suffers the potential deficiency that the
findings may be inapplicable to the broader population of persons obtaining sterilization. However, longitudinal data of the
type collected for this study are difficult to
obtain, and the selection of military hospitals as the site for the research undoubtedly improved the rate of participation in
the study. Free medical care for military
personnel offers the additional advantage
that respondents were free to select a
sterilization procedure without regard to
the cost of surgery. This removes any potentially confounding influence from this
factor.

Couples entering the Urology and Obstetrics/Gynecology clinics at the hospitals
in order to obtain a Sterilization procedure
were asked if they would be willing to
complete a questionnaire while waiting to
consult with a physician about surgical
sterilization. Almost all of the couples
agreed to participate. Husbands and wives
independently filled out the question
  
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 3

naire, and altogether data were obtained
for 855 individuals. Of this group, 122
were members of couples that either never
obtained a sterilization procedure or delayed their decision to obtain sterilization
beyond the time-frame of the present
study. These persons are thus excluded
from the present analysis. Another twenty
are also deleted, seven women (and their
husbands) who obtained postpartum sterilizations and three couples wherein both
spouses obtained procedures. This left altogether 713 individual husbands and
wives who initially completed a questionnaire prior to obtaining sterilization.

One of the questions the respondents
were asked was whether or not they would
be willing to complete a follow-up questionnaire six months after surgery. Approximately 65 per cent agreed to do so
and six months after the sterilization procedure was obtained, these individuals
were sent a second questionnaire. In addition to those respondents who did not
agree to respond to a follow-up, other respondents from the first wave could not be
reached because they did not provide correct addresses. Altogether, the six-month
follow-up questionnaire was successfully
mailed to 427 respondents. Of these, 267
returned completed questionnaires, thus
yielding a response rate among those who
agreed to participate and could be reached
of 62.5 per cent. It is this group of respondents, less those with missing data on the
analysis variables, that constitutes the
sample (N= 224) for the present report.

These respondents are compared with
respondents completing the initial questionnaire to see if they are different in any
important respect. In general, few differences emerge. The proportion of males
and females responding to the follow-up is
about the same as the proportion of males
and females in the original sample (54.5
per cent and 45.5 per cent respectively
versus 49.8 per cent and 50.2 per cent;

Sexual Desire and Sterilization

 

189

X? = 1.97, p=n.s). Vasectomized
males are more prevalent in the follow-up
than in the original sample, and women
with a female procedure slightly less so
(75.6 per cent of the males versus 67.6 per
cent and 24.4 per cent of females versus
32.4 per cent; X? = 11.4; p<0.01). Also,
the age distribution of the two samples is
nearly identical (X age = 32.9 for original
sample, X age = 32.3 for the follow-up
sample; t = 1.18, p = n.s.). The followup sample shows a slightly higher educational distribution than the original sample (Xed = 14.3 versus Xed = 13.9;
t = 1.94; p<0.10). This is not surprising
since more highly educated persons are
more likely to take the time to respond to
this type of follow-up inquiry.

In the follow-up questionnaire, respondents were asked whether the desire for
sexual intercourse had increased, remained the same, or decreased since sterilization. Answers to this question comprise the chief dependent variable of
interest in the analysis. Responses to the
question asking whether the desire for
sexual intercourse had changed are dichotomized into two categories—“‘increased”’
versus “remained the same.” Since only
two respondents indicated that their desire for sexual intercourse had diminished,
these are categorized with those answering “‘remained the same.”

Our primary independent variable is
sterilization status. This is treated as a
dummy variable and scored “‘1”’ if s/he received the sterilization procedure and “‘0”
otherwise. We also introduce two control
variables into the analyses, age and education, in order to adjust for any differences
that might obtain from these factors
(Presser and Bumpass, 1972). The former
was measured in years and the latter in
years of school completed.

In order to investigate the hypotheses
outlined above, multiple regression
analysis is employed with the expression
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

190 Bean et al.

of increased desire for sexual intercourse
regressed on the dummy variable for sterilization status and the two control variables, age and education, separately for
males and females. The estimation of separate regression equations for males and
females provides a more satisfactory basis
for assessing the two alternative patterns
predicted by the gender-specific hypothesis than would a test for interaction based
on a single equation since it allows a more
straightforward examination of whether
sterilized and nonsterilized persons report
significantly different increases in desire
separately by gender. Since we report separate equations by gender, we present the
unstandardized coefficients (Blalock,
1967).

RESULTS

The correlations among the variables,
together with their means and standard
deviations, are presented in Table 2. The
first result of interest is the proportion of
males and females reporting an increase in
desire. These are indicated simply by the
mean values on this variable reported in

 

Social Biology

the table. Approximately the same proportion of both males and females report
an increase in sexual desire following voluntary sterilization (0.30 and 0.25 respectively). This result is thus consistent with
the findings of other investigators (Kohli
and Sobrero, 1973) and suggests that removal of fear of pregnancy may have a salutary effect on sexual desire. It does not
tell us, however, whether the tendency to
report increases In desire occurs uniformly
by gender and sterilization status.

For these results, we look at the regression analyses presented in Table 3. Examining first the effects of the control variables, we find that age and education both
reveal significant coefficients. In the case
of males, the higher the education the less
likely the respondent is to report an increase in desire for sexual intercourse; in
the case of females, the older the respondent, the less the likelihood of a reported
increase. These patterns of relationships
are not surprising and indicate the utility
of controlling these variables in the
analysis.

Turning to sterilization status, we see In
Column 1 that sterilized females are

TABLE 2

INTERCORRELATIONS, MEANS, AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR VARIABLES USED IN REGRESSION
ANALYSES

Sex of
Respondent _
and Variables 2 3 4 X 5S
Females (N= 102)
1. Education. ......... 0. ccc ccc een cee aeees —0.072 13.26 2.15

Dy PURE a cece 0S Na ad Se he Oba og Bae
3, Sterilization status............... cc ec cee ee eee

4. Reported increase in

desire for intercourse .............0.cceceeeee

Males (N= 122)

1. Education. .......... 0c. ccc cece ccc n cee eeeees
OT 5 a
3. Sterilization status.............0.cceeecccecee

4, Reported increase in

desire for intercourse ..............0. cece eee

0.206 -0.052

-0.050 —-0.233 30.87 5.98

wm —0.191 0.30 0.46

0.25 0.44

0.152 0.101 —0.252 15.24 2.62
~0.049  -0.092 33.47 6.47

0.073 0.79 #041
0.30 0.46

 

 

 
 

Vol. 27, No. 3

TABLE 3

REGRESSIONS OF SELF-REPORTED POSTOPERATIVE
CHANGE IN SEXUAL DESIRE ON CONTROL
VARIABLES AND STERILIZATION STATUS,

MALES AND FEMALES SEPARATELY
(Unstandardized Coefficients)

Destre CHANGE

1 2
PREDICTOR VARIABLES (Femsiles) (Males)
Control variables

yy, Education. .cecs esas cesses ~0.007 —0.044*
BS ABEL eee eee eee eee ee ~0.017+ -0.003
“ Independent variables
& Sterilization status......... ~0.194F = 0.108
5 Constant .........0. 0. cee eee 0.941 1.002
A FA oe og wading an ge ne gl bebe 0.097 0.076
ey GND as oe os ws pe a a Ew (102) (122)
D Ficcccccnc ence eect eeeteee 3.497¢ 3.216t
om
+p <0.01
= tp<0.05.
‘
oS
OO

significantly less likely than nonsterilized
'S females to report an increase in sexual de‘sire. The insignificant coefficient for the
dummy variable for sterilization in Col“umn 2 indicates that sterilized males are
‘Eno more likely than nonsterilized males to
~ report an increase. In the case of females,
it should be remembered that this doesnot
"3 mean that they perceived a decrease in de$ sire, but rather that they were less likely
"= than nonsterilized females to perceive an
e increase.

Because the sterilized female group tncludes women who had received hysterectomies as well as women who had received
tubal ligations, it is of interest to consider
that one or the other of these groups might
tend to account for this pattern among the
sterilized women. To check this possibility, the analysis was repeated twice, first
excluding one type of female sterilization
and then the other. Both analyses yielded
similar results. This indicates that the pattern of a lesser likelihood of reporting a
perceived increase in sexual desire holds

Sexual Desire and Sterilization 191

for women receiving either type of procedure.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The major finding to emerge from this
investigation is that the effect of sterilization on desire for sexual intercourse varies
depending on whether it is the male or the
female who is sterilized. Among females,
having been sterilized is negatively related
to the likelihood that an increase in sexual]
desire will be reported; among males,
however, no significant differences between sterilized males and males whose
wives have undergone sterilization
emerge in the tendency to report an increase.

While our findings are not inconsistent
with the hypothesis that removal of fear of
pregnancy through sterilization results in
an increase in desire among spouses, this
increase is not uniform, thus suggesting
that other factors are also at work. That
the increase in desire does not vary by
sterilization status irrespective of gender,
but rather by sterilization status contingent on gender, suggests little support
for the compensatory hypothesis, at least
insofar as this hypothesis might provide a
basis for explaining outcomes for both
sterilized males and females.

The version of the gender-specific hypothesis predicting that the effect of sterilization is less likely to make for an increase in sexual desire among females,
however, is supported by the results. That
is, sterilized females are found to be less
likely than females whose husbands are
sterilized to report an increase in desire,
but having been sterilized does not predict
a significantly greater increase among
males. This pattern is consistent with the
idea that surgical sterilization may involve
a greater degree of physical trauma for
some women than for men.

The findings that both women undergo
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

192 Bean et al.

ing laparoscopic tubal ligations and those
obtaining hysterectomies were less likely
to report an increase in sexual desire,
however, makes this interpretation suspect. While it appears plausible to assume
that vaginal hysterectomy might have this
effect, it is less clear why laparoscopic tubal ligation, which is often equated with
vasectomy in degree of physical trauma,
would also result in a lesser increase 1n expressed desire.

A more compelling explanation for this
finding may be provided by research into
the quality of marital interaction among
spouses choosing male or female sterilization procedures. Couples reporting lower
levels of husband-wife communication
have been found to be significantly more
likely to select a female sterilization procedure over vasectomy (Bean et al.,
1981). This finding is consistent with other
research reporting that husbands in mar
Social Biology

riages characterized by low communication and sex-segregated activities tend to
relegate reproductive decisions to wives
(Hill et al., 1959; Rainwater, 1965; Hollerback, 1980). In the absence of effective
marital communication and shared decision-making, husbands are less likely to be
involved in family planning, thus leaving
their wives to undergo sterilization. The
lesser reported increase in sexual desire
reported by sterilized women may be a
reflection of their relative lack of choice in
selection of the procedure and of the quality of the marital relationship as it affects
the sexual life of the couple.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by Grant
HD 10678 from the Center for Population Research, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development.

The authors are listed alphabetically.

REFERENCES

BEAN, F., M. CLARK, G. SwicEGoop, and D. WilLIAMS. 1981. Marital communication and selection of a male or female sterilization procedure. Ms.

BLaLock, H. 1967. Causal inferences, closed
populations, and measures of association, p.
139-151. In H. M. Blalock (ed.), Causal
models in the social sciences. Aldine, Chicago.

Exsiap, M. 1961. The prognosis after sterilization on social-psychiatric grounds, a follow-up
study of 225 women. Acta Psychiatric Scandinavica. Suppl. 161, Vol. 37.

Forp, K. 1978. Contraceptive utilization in the
United States: 1973 and 1976. Advance data
from vital and health statistics, No. 36. Public
Health service, Rockville, Maryland.

Hitt, R., J. Stycos, and K. Back. 1959. The family and population control. Univ. of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

HOLLERBACK, P. 1980. Power in families, communication and fertility decision-making.
Center for Policy Studies, Working Papers,
No. 53. The Population Council, New York.

Koutl, K., and A. SoBrERO. 1973. Vasectomy: A
study of psychosexual and general reactions.
Soc. Biol. 20:298-302.

Pratt, W. 1975. Preliminary findings from the

National Survey of Family Growth, 1973. Paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the
Population Association of America.

PressER, H., AND L. Bumpass. 1972. Demographic and social aspects of contraceptive
sterilization in the United States: 1965-1970,
p. 505-568. In C. F. Westoff and R. Parke
(eds.), Demographic and social aspects of
population growth and the American future,
research papers, Vol. 1. Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C.

Ropcers, D., and F. ZrEGLER. 1968. Changes in
sexual behavior consequent to use of noncoital procedures of contraception. Psychosom. Med. 30:495-505.

. 1973. Psychological reactions to surgical
contraception, p. 306-326. In J. Fawcett
(ed.), Psychological perspectives on population. Basic Books, New York.

Rarwater, L. 1965. Family design: Marital sexuality, family size, and contraception. Aldine,
Chicago.

TRUSSELL, J., and C. WEstorF. 1980. Contraceptive practice and trends in coital frequency.
Fam. Plan. Persp. 12:246-249.

WestorF, C., and N. Ryper. 1977. The contraceptive revolution. Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 3

WHITEHOUSE, D. B. 1971. Letter. Brit. Med. J. 2
(June): 707.

Wiest, W., and L. JANKE. 1974. A methodological critique of research on psychological effects of vasectomy. Psychosom. Med. 36
(Sept.-Oct.): 438-449.

Wixuiams, D., G. Swicecoop, M. Cuark, and F.

Sexual Desire and Sterilization

193

Bean. 1980. Masculinity-femininity and the
desire for sexual intercourse after vasectomy:
A longitudinal study. Soc. Psychol. Quart. 43
(Sept.)

ZIEGLER, F., D. RopGers and R. PRENTISS. 1969.
Psychosocial response to vasectomy. Arch.
Gen. Psychiat. 21:46—-54.
