Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Psychological features of Huntington's disease and
the problem of early detection

Robert S. Wilson & David C. Garron

To cite this article: Robert S. Wilson & David C. Garron (1980) Psychological features of
Huntington's disease and the problem of early detection, Social Biology, 27:1, 11-19, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1980.9988399

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988399

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 6
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 6 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Psychological Features of Huntington’s Disease

and the Problem of Early Detection

Robert S. Wilson and David C. Garron

 

 

Department of Psychology and Social Sciences, Rush University, and Rush-Presbyterian-St.

Luke’s Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois

ABSTRACT: Huntington’s disease (HD) is a chronic degenerative neurologic disorder inherited as an
autosomal dominant trait. Symptom onset typically occurs at about age 40, and considerable effort
has been expended in attempts to diagnose the disorder prior to the childbearing years. We review
attempts to use psychological tests in early diagnosis. Specifically, we identify variables that show
promise as early markers of the disorder, review evidence that a prodromal phase may exist, ana
Huntington’s disease (HD) is a chronic
degenerative neurologic disorder which is
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
Its cardinal manifestations include a progressive movement disorder, typically
chorea but occasionally akinesia and rigidity, as well as progressive cognitive and
emotional changes. The most characteristic neuropathologic finding is a loss of
neurons in the corpus striatum (Bruyn et
al., 1979). Cerebral atrophy is often
present as well, particularly in the frontal
lobes. Imbalances in a variety of neurotransmitters, amino acids, and peptides
have been noted (e.g., Enna et al., 1977).
These alterations, however, probably
reflect pathological changes in specific
brain regions (e.g., corpus striatum)
rather than the sort of pathway-specific
changes seen in Parkinsonism (Barbeau,
1979).

The age at which symptoms become apparent is variable but typically occurs in
middle age: Various epidemiologic
studies suggest a mean age of symptom
onset of about forty with a standard deviation of about ten years (Myrianthopoulos,
1966). Thus, symptoms are not typically
apparent until after the childbearing

- lyze the few prospective studies of persons at risk for HD, and consider the logical and methodological problems involved in early detection research.

years. Considerable scientific interest has
been focused on ways of detecting the disease before the childbearing years, at least
ten to twenty years earlier than is now possible.

The purpose of this paper is to review
attempts to use psychological tests in the
early detection of HD and to discuss some
of the logical and methodological problems these attempts have encountered.
We will not cover the ethical issues involved in early detection. Excellent discussions of these issues exist elsewhere
(e.g., Stern and Eldridge, 1975).

Attempts at early identification of HD
gene carriers may be broken into two categories. Presymptomatic or premorbid detection properly refers to attempts to
diagnose affected individuals prior to
symptom manifestation. Such a procedure
would presumably be based upon detection of some byproduct of the mutated
gene. It was this sort of procedure that the
Commission for the Control of Huntington’s Disease and its Consequences (1977)
had in mind in outlining criteria for the
ideal predictive test: a safe, reliable laboratory procedure to detect a specific protein or enzyme, for example, resulting

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

12 Wilson and Garron

from the mutated HD gene. Such a procedure might be implemented at birth or
even prenatally.

Early detection, on the other hand, refers to attempts to detect the symptoms of
the disease earlier than is now possible.
These approaches are essentially attempts
to refine the way in which the disease is
diagnosed. A variety of instruments and
procedures have been and are being used
in such efforts, including electroencephalography (Chandler, 1966), computerized
tomography (Neophytides et al., 1979),
tremometry (Falek, 1969), and levodopa
loading (Klawans et al., 1970). Psychological testing also falls into this category.
These approaches all assume the presence
of a prodromal stage in HD, a period prior
to the onset of frank symptoms during
which subtle but detectable signs exist.
For these approaches to be effective, this
prodromal phase must begin at least ten
years before obvious symptoms become
manifest.

EARLY PSYCHOLOGICAL
CHANGES

Huntington’s disease is a progressive
disorder. Descriptions of behavior in HD
are unlikely to be illuminating without reference to the disease stage with which
these behaviors are associated. Late in the
course of the disease patients often show
rather widespread cognitive and emotional disturbances (Wilson and Garron,
1979). The behavior changes early in the
course of the disease, however, are somewhat circumscribed. From the standpoint
of early detection, it is these early changes
that are of interest.

Two kinds of early psychological
change may be distinguished. These are
cognitive changes on the one hand, and
psychopathological changes on the other.
Currently, cognitive changes-are emphasized, in keeping with the contemporary

Social Biology

interest in dementia and the development
of neuropsychological tests. In the past,
however, there was considerable interest
in early changes in personality and in prechoreic signs of psychopathology. We will
discuss these two kinds of change separately although many of the points we
make apply to both.

Butters and his co-workers (Butters et
al., 1978) compared two groups of patients differing in years since diagnosis.
The chronic patients showed a variety of
deficits: intellectual deterioration, primary and secondary memory changes,
and a nonsignificant trend toward a naming disturbance. In contrast, the recently
diagnosed (within the past year) patients
showed a relatively isolated defect in secondary memory. The patients had
difficulty forming enduring memories.
Their IQ’s were in the normal range and
language skills remained intact. Caine,
Weingartner, and their colleagues have
taken a slightly different approach to this
problem (Caine et al., 1978; Weingartner
et al., 1979). Given the difficulty in pinpointing the age of symptom onset in this
disorder, they have simply chosen to study
patients without disabling cognitive or
psychiatric symptoms. These are patients
who would be classified as stage one or
two on Shoulson’s five point clinical staging scale (Shoulson and Fahn, 1977).
These minimally affected, patients are
described in terms quite similar to those
used by Butters. That is, the patients show
a rather circumscribed memory deficit.
IQ’s are in the normal range and language
skills are intact. They also appear somewhat apathetic and complain of difficulties
in initiating and organizing behavior.

Although future research on such patients may reveal additional deficit areas,
the work to date suggests that memory is
affected early in the course of the disease
and that memory may be impaired while
other cognitive functions remain intact.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

Clearly any attempt to use neuropsychological tests to identify those persons at risk
for HD who are actually afflicted must be
weighted heavily with memory tests.

EARLY PERSONALITY CHANGES

A wide variety of early personality
changes have been described among persons with HD. According to reports, these
changes seem to be coincident with the occurrence of chorea and dementia in about
one-third of the cases (Dewhurst et al.,
1969). These changes tend to cover the
spectrum of psychopathology, and it is
difficult to determine whether there are
some manifestations typical of HD. Two
broad classes of personality change are
frequently described, however (Garron,
1973). First, there are changes involving
emotional states and emotional lability including extremes such as euphoria,
apathy, and irritability. Second, there are
even more extreme changes involving inappropriate sexual behavior, preoccupation with the sexual misbehavior of others,
delusions of persecution and/or grandiosity, and hallucinations. These manifestations often lead to diagnoses of mania,
psychotic depression, paranoia, or schizophrenia.

This variety of early behavioral change
may reflect the actual symptomatic heterogeneity of HD. The reports are contradictory, however, rather than simply
varied. For instance, some report that
schizophrenic behavior is most common
(Brothers, 1964), some report few cases of
schizophrenia (Minski and Guttman,
1938; Heathfield, 1967), some specifically
deny schizophrenia syndromes (Dewhurst
et al., 1969), and some report affective
disorders as characteristics (McHugh and
Folstein, 1975; Folstein et al., 1979). The
contradiction may well also reflect reliance on simple observation of patients or
on unreliable characterizations by rela
 

Huntington’s Disease 13

tives (Garron, 1973). While systematic
ratings of behavior might make interstudy
comparisons more reliable, the few
studies which do use standard instruments
tend to use self-report scales such as the
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). The use of self-report scales
in a condition marked by impaired insight
may be questioned (Wilson and Garron,
1979).

In any event, there are four reports of
relatively systematic, formal personality
testing of patients with HD. It may be inferred from these reports that the patients
were examined relatively early in the
course of the disease and were not incapacitated by dementia. Unfortunately,
the samples total only 42 persons and are
of unknown representativeness. In addition, the results are often characterized
briefly or summarized, rather than detailed. Goodman et al. (1966, 1969), for
instance, report four persons with HD and
characterize them as depressed, hostile,
relying on denial and repression, and sensitive to their disability based on interpretations of the MMPI, Rotter Incomplete
Sentences, and Draw-A-Person tests. Boll
et al. (1974) report a comparison between
nine HD patients and “brain damaged”
patients matched for cognitive disability
on the Halstead Impairment Index. A
comparison of MMPI profile indicators of
degree of psychopathology did not differentiate the two groups. Norton (1975)
compared MMPI’s from six HD patients
and five otherwise undescribed brain damaged patients matched for age and education. There were no differences on an
MMPI measure of severity of psychopathology. Finally, Fedio et al. (1979)
compared ten patients with HD and
twenty-eight considerably younger normal persons. The tests were the MMPI, a
problem checklist (Mooney and Gordon,
1950), a test of emotionality (Plutchik and
Kellerman, 1968), and the IPAT Anxiety

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

14 Wilson and Garron

Scale (Cattell and Scheier, 1963). HD patients had significantly elevated MMPI
profiles, in particular on the Sc, D, and Pt
scales, and on experimental scales indicative of emotional lability, anxiety, and social disability. The results of the other selfreport scales were essentially similar,
reflecting patients’ concern about emotional lability and increased anxiety.

That these HD patients were able to
take a variety of self-report scales, and
that few were described as showing more
schizophrenic and other psychotic signs,
may indicate that they were not adequately representative of all persons with
the condition. Nevertheless, the consistent self-descriptions of emotional lability, anxiety, and concern about selfcontrol, in conjunction with similar
descriptions in the clinical surveys, suggest that self-report scales may be more
useful in early detection than previously
thought and that signs of affective disturbance may be more general indicators
than schizophrenic or other psychotic
signs.

EVIDENCE FOR A PRODROMAL
PHASE

Evidence that recently diagnosed or
minimally affected patients exhibit an isolated memory disorder is one thing. Evidence that this memory disorder is
present, for example, ten years before the
point of diagnosis is quite another thing.
Although hard evidence for such a prodromal period is lacking, some suggestive
evidence does exist.

First, there are numerous case reports
of individuals exhibiting various cognitive
and/or psychiatric symptoms years before
the onset of a movement disorder (e.g.,
Lion and Kahn, 1938; Van Putten and
Menkes, 1973; Winn, 1955). More convincing evidence for a prodromal phase
comes from two retrospective studies. In

Social Biology

one study (Dewhurst et al., 1969) the clinical histories of 68 patients were examined.
About 85 per cent were said to have undergone a prodromal phase beginning on
the average of ten years prior to the point
of diagnosis and consisting largely of
nonspecific psychiatric complaints. Unfortunately, the authors did not specify

.precisely what information was collected,

how it was gathered, or what sort of behavior subsequently unaffected siblings
were exhibiting during the same time period. In another study (James et al., 1969)
the hospital records of 33 VA patients
were examined. Of particular interest
were the records of 18 patients who were
initially misdiagnosed and whose charts
made no mention of HD. These patients
began to complain of symptoms an
average of about seven years prior to the
point of diagnosis. The most frequent
complains were of poor memory and depression. Despite their methodological
shortcomings, these two studies add some
credence to the clinical hypothesis that the
frank symptoms of HD, particularly the
movement disorder, may be preceded by
years of subtle, perhaps detectable, behavior changes.

EARLY DETECTION STUDIES

To date there have been three prospective neuropsychological studies of persons
at risk for Huntington’s disease. One of
these is essentially completed (Lyle and
Gottesman, 1977; Lyle and Quast, 1976),
one in progress (Wexler, 1974, 1979), and
one just recently begun (Fedio et al.,
1979).

In the 1950’s Pearson (Pearson et al.,
1955) began systematically evaluating the
offspring of known HD patients. A total
of 632 subjects were invited to enter the
study and 156 agreed to participate. These
subjects were given a battery of rather
standard psychological tests including
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

Wechsler intelligence scales and a test requiring subjects to draw nine BenderGestalt geometric designs from memory.
Lyle was able to contact 88 (56 per cent) of
the original at-risk sample, 28 of whom
had developed frank symptoms of HD in
the intervening 15 to 20 years. When compared with the asymptomatic risk subjects, those who had developed the disease showed a deficit in recall of designs
(Lyle and Quast, 1976) and in the Wechsler IQ (Lyle and Gottesman, 1977). The
IQ difference was nearly one standard deviation (15 points).

The results of this study provide the
best evidence for the existence of a prodromal phase in HD. At the same time,
the study raises questions and points to
some of the problems involved in early detection. First, over 40 per cent of the original sample was lost on follow-up, a
figure which must raise some concern
about the representativeness of the final
sample. Second, some of the asymptomatic subjects in the at-risk group may still
develop HD. Lyle and Gottesman (1977)
calculated that only one more asymptomatic subject should actually have the disease given (1) the age distribution of the
sample at the initial testing point and (2)
certain assumptions about the mean and
variance of onset ages in the population.
Nonetheless, the possibility that several
currently asymptomatic subjects may yet
develop the disease cannot be discounted.
Current evidence indicates that age of
symptom manifestation is inversely related to severity of symptoms (e.g.,
Wilson and Garron, 1979). Thus, it is at
least possible that, should a number of
Lyle’s still normal subjects develop HD
symptoms, the original test differences
might be considerably diminished. Third,
it is somewhat surprising that an IQ test
should be sensitive to these prodromal
changes. The previously cited work on recently diagnosed patients found IQ’s in

Huntington’s Disease 15

the normal range. Finally, as Lyle and
Gottesman (1977) are careful to point out,
these IQ test scores are of dubious value
for individual prediction, particularly
given the desirability of maintaining a low
false alarm rate.

Wexler (1974, 1979) examined 35 atrisk subjects and 15 normal controls in
1974 and again in 1979. Subjects were interviewed and given a battery of cognitive
and perceptual-motor tests. The age range
of the risk subjects at the initial testing was
20 to 36, close to the age of highest risk for
symptom onset. Nonetheless, no differences were found between the at-risk
and normal control subjects at either the
initial or follow-up testing. Wexler’s sample is small and the study is far from complete, but the results to date must be
somewhat sobering to those who advocate
the use of neuropsychological tests in
early detection of HD.

The study by Fedio and his colleagues
(Fedio et al., 1979) consists at this point
simply of an initial evaluation of 47 at-risk
and 28 normal control subjects. It remains
to be seen whether this sample will be systematically followed. A further concern is
the fact that control and risk subjects were
initially matched on the Wechsler Memory Scale. This is a clinical memory scale
on which relatively intact, recently
diagnosed patients show rather striking
deficits (Butters et al., 1978). The authors
do not explicitly state whether this match
was fortuitous or intentional. If intentional, the match may have served to exclude subjects showing prominent prodromal symptoms. If fortuitous, one must
again be concerned about the lack of
group differences between risk and normal subjects in an area, memory, that
holds the most promise for early detection.

There are also three prospective
studies of persons at risk for HD using tests
of psychopathology. One of these is com
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

16 Wilson and Garron

pleted (Palm, 1973), and the other two are
in progress, aS described previously (Fedio et al., 1979; Wexler, 1979).

In 1952, Palm (1973) tested 24 persons
at risk, all of them the descendants of the
same index case. None of the 24 had any
signs of HD at the time. They were given
an MMPI and a Rorschach test. Two of
the MMPI’s were regarded as invalid, and
two were incomplete. Inspection of the set
(Palm, 1973, Table 2, p. 318). indicates
that only three persons had any MMPI
scales in the pathological range (T score >
70); the scales involved were Hs for one,
Ma for one, and Pd and Pa for one, respectively. Eight of the Rorschach’s were considered abnormal, and five as borderline,
based on various criteria. The MMPI and
Rorschach did not necessarily identify the
same persons as abnormal. In 1972, one
member of the group was known to have
developed chorea. She was originally
tested at age 53, was diagnosed at age 56,
and died at age 66. She had not completed
the MMPI when tested, but her incomplete profiles did not suggest psychopathology, and her Rorschach test results
were not regarded as abnormal or borderline. None of the other persons had developed HD, although ascertainment cannot be regarded as complete after twenty
years. In any event, the variability of the
psychological test results and the failure to
predict within a twenty-year period are
discouraging.

The study in progress by Fedio et al.
(1979) has been described. It includes 47
persons at risk and 28 controls matched
for age, education, IQ, and Weschsler
Memory Quotient. Comparison of the
Problem Checklists, MMPI, Emotion
Profile Index, and IPAT Anxiety Scale indicate that the persons at risk, as a group,
resemble the normal control subjects
more than the HD patients. Wexler (1979)
in a study also described above, included
35 persons at risk and 15 controls matched

Social Biology

for age, education, and socioeconomic
status. Although Wexler apparently did
not use standard tests of personality or
psychopathology, she did use a “‘Traditional Indicator Rating Scale,” involving
criminality, psychiatric disorders, alcoholism, job instability, divorce, promiscuity,
and an otherwise undescribed assessment
of psychological stability. The at-risk subjects did not differ from the normal controls on this scale.

In general, then, scores on tests of personality or psychopathology do not seem
to be promising in the early detection of
HD among persons at risk. Relatively few
persons at risk have clearly abnormal
scores prior to the onset of more diagnostic signs, and the variability in personality
characteristics is similar to that seen in the
general population.

DISCUSSION

The studies reviewed here are far from
definitive; yet some tentative conclusions
may be drawn. The evidence now suggests
the existence of a prodromal period in
HD, a period prior to the onset of frank
(i.e., choreatic) symptomatology during
which subjects undergo subtle behavioral
changes. The precise nature of these
changes remains to be demonstrated.
Mnemonic changes appear to be part of
this prodromal phase (Butters et al., 1978;
Caine et al., 1978; Lyle and Quast, 1976).
Emotional changes may also be present
(e.g., Dewhurst et al., 1969) although the
evidence in this area is somewhat more
problematic. Other subtle changes may be
present as well (Fedio et al., 1979). At
what point in the disease and in what proportion of patients this prodrome occurs
remains to be seen. Answers to these two
questions must await further prospective
research on at-risk cohorts. The outcome
of these studies should ultimately settle
the value of psychological testing in early

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

detection. At present, however, the use of
neuropsychological tests in the search for
cognitive deficits may be more rewarding.

In the absence of such a body of data, it
is possible to pinpoint some problems with
the use of neuropsychological tests as predictive tools. First, the specificity of the
deficit is unknown. Is the deficit pattern
the same in all patients? Are some patients mentally normal? Further, it is clear
that the isolated mnemonic deficit seen
early in the course of HD is not a unique
pattern. Alzheimer’s patients, for example, often present with an isolated memory disorder (e.g., Miller, 1977). Second,
neuropsychological assessment can be
quite stressful for persons at risk to develop a chronic, disabling, and fatal disease. The effect of this stress on test performance is not well understood and is
probably variable across patients. Third,
and perhaps following from points one
and two, neuropsychological] tests are imperfect. Not all the variance in test performance is likely to be due, for example,
to the presence or absence of the HD
gene. In the best of circumstarices,
neuropsychological test batteries are
probably only 75 to 80 per cent accurate in
the identification of persons with subtle
brain damage (Spreen and Benton, 1967).
The value of a predictive test which falls
considerably short of perfection is not immediately apparent.

In summary, logical considerations
suggest that neuropsychological testing is
unlikely to provide a good solution to the
problems of early detection, particularly
by the criteria outlined by the Commission
for the Control of Huntington’s Disease
and its Consequences (1977). On the
other hand, neuropsychological testing

Huntington’s Disease 17

continues to be of considerable value in
making the diagnosis of HD and will undoubtedly continue to be used on a clinical
basis. We endorse such use but urge caution at the same time. Indeed, our lack of
knowledge about the prodromal stage
makes a conservative approach to the interpretation of psychological tests data in
HD mandatory. A final point needs to be
made. We have argued here and elsewhere (Wilson and Garron, 1979) for the

_ need for prospective research on persons

at risk for HD. Such research will probably be less valuable in its ultimate contribution to the problem of early detection
and more valuable in teaching us about
the onset and early developmental course
of generalized dementing illnesses. Considerable effort has been expended on
high risk research on schizophrenia (e.g.,
Mednick and Schulsinger, 1968). Dementia, when thought of as a symptom of a variety of neurologic disorders, is much
more prevalent than schizophrenia. It is
also chronic and disabling and therefore a
costly public health problem. Huntington’s disease, because of its mode of inheritance and relatively late age of onset,
is an accident of nature that provides us
with a unique opportunity to study precisely how behavior breaks down early in
the course of dementing illnesses. Such
knowledge would be of great value in patient management, in understanding the
factors which influence adaption to the
disease, and in identifying persons for future neuropharmacological intervention.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

An earlier draft of this paper was presented
at the Behavior Genetics Association meetings, June, 1980, Chicago, Illinois
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

18 Wilson and Garron

 

Social Biology

REFERENCES

BARBEAU, A. 1979. Update on the biochemistry
of Huntington’s chorea, p. 449-461. In T.
Chase, N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.),
Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington’s
disease. Raven, New York.

Bo.i, T., R. Heaton, and R. REITAN. 1974.
Neuropsychological and emotional ccrrelates
of Huntington’s disease. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.
158:61-69,

BroTHERS, C. 1964. Huntington’s chorea in Victoria and Tasmania. J. Neurol. Sci. 1:405—420.

Bruyn, G., G. Bots, and R. Dom. 1979.
Huntington’s chorea: Current neuropathological status, p. 83-94. In T. Chase, N. Wexler,
and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington’s disease. Raven,
New York.

Butters, N., D. Sax, I. MONTGOMERY, and S.
TARLOW. 1978. Comparison of the neuropsychological deficits associated with early and
advanced Huntington’s disease. Arch.
Neurol. 35:585—-589.

CaINE, E., R. Hunt, H. WEINGARTNER, and M.
EBERT. 1978. Huntington’s dementia: Clinical
and neuropsychological features. Arch. Gen.
Psychiat. 35:377-384.

CATTELL, R., and I. ScHEIER. 1963. Institute for
personality and ability testing: Anxiety Scale
Questionnaire. IPAT, Champaign, Illinois.

CHANDLER, J. 1966. EEG in prediction of
Huntington’s chorea: An eighteen-year follow-up. Electroenceph. Clin. Neurophys.
21:79-84.

COMMISSION FOR THE CONTROL OF HUNTINGTON’S
DISEASE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES. 1977. U. S.
Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare. Bethesda, Maryland.

DewuurstT, K., J. Ottver, K. Trick, and A. McKNIGHT. 1969. Neuropsychiatric aspects of
Huntington’s chorea. Confin. Neurol.
31:258-268.

Enna, S., L. STERN, G. WASTEK, and H. YaAmaMURA. 1977. Neurobiology and pharmacology
of Huntington’s disease (Minireview). Life
Sci. 20°205—212.

FaLek, A. 1969. Preclinical detection of

«Huntington’s chorea, p. 529-533. In A. Barbeau and J. Brunette (eds.), Progress in
neurogenetics. Excerpta Medica Foundation,
Amsterdam.

Fepio, P., C. Cox, A. NEOPHYTIDES, G. CANALFREDERICK, and T. CuHase. 1979. Neuropsychological profile of Huntington’s disease: Patients and those at risk, p. 239-255. In T.
Chase, N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.),
Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington’s
disease. Raven, New York.

FoLsTEInN, S., M. Fotstern, and P. McHuGu.
1979. Psychiatric syndromes in Huntington’s
disease, p. 281-280. In T. Chase, N. Wexler,
and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neuro
 

logy, Vol. 23: Huntington’s disease. Raven,
New York.

Garron, D. 1973. Huntington’s chorea and schizophrenia, p. 729-734. In A. Barbeau, T.
Chase, and G. Paulson (eds.), Advances in
neurology, Vol. 1: Huntington’s chorea,
1873-1972. Raven, New York.

Goopman, R., C. Hatt, L. TERRANGO, G. PERRINE, and P. RosertTs. 1966. Huntington’;s
chorea: A multidisciplinary study of affected
parents and first generation offspring. Arch.
Neurol. 15:345-355.

. 1969. A clinical approach to the early recognition of Huntington’s chorea, p. 517-528.
In A. Barbeau and J. Burnette (eds.), Progress in neurogenetics. Excerpta Medica
Foundation, Amsterdam.

HEATHFIELD, K. 1967. Huntington’s chorea: Investigation into prevalence in N.E. Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board area. Brain.
90:203-233. .

JAMES, W., R. MEFFERD, and I. KIMBALL. 1969.
Early signs of Huntington’s chorea. Dis. Nerv.
Syst. 30:558-559.

Kiawans, H., G. PAuLson, and A. BARBEAU.
1970. Predictive test for Huntington’s chorea.
Lancet. ii:1185-1186.

Lion, E., and E. KAHN. 1938. Experiential aspects of Huntington’s chorea. Amer. J. Psychiat. 95:717-727.

Lye, O., and I. GoTTEsMan. 1977. Premorbid
psychometric indicators of the gene for
Huntington’s disease. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 45:1011—1022.

LyLe, O., and W. Quast. 1976. The Bender Gestalt: Use of clinical judgment versus recall
scores in prediction of Huntington’s disease.
J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 44:229-232.

McHucui, P., and M. FotstTeEin. 1975. Psychiatric
syndromes in Huntington’s chorea, p.
267-286. IN D. Benson and D. Blumer (eds.),
Psychiatric aspects of neurologic disease.
Grune and Stratton, New York.

MEpDNICK, S., and F. SCHULSINGER. 1968. Some
premorbid characteristics related to breakdown in children with schizophrenic mothers,
p. 267-291. In D. Rosenthal and S. Kety
(Eds.), The transmission of schizophrenia.
Pergamon, London.

Miter, E. 1977. Abnormal aging: The psychology of senile and presenile dementia. John

~ Wiley & Sons, London.

Minsk], L., and E. Guttman. 1938. Huntington’s
chorea: A study of thirty-four families. J.
Ment. Sci. 84:21-96.

MyRIANTHOPOULOS, N. 1966. Huntington’s chorea. J. Med. Genet. 3:298-314.

Mooney, R., and L. Gorpon. 1950. Problem
checklist. Psychological Corporation, New
York.

NEoPHYTIDES, A., G. D1 Cuiro, S. BARRON, and
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. I

T. CuasE. 1979. Computed axial tomography
in Huntington’s disease and persons at-risk for
Huntington’s disease, p. 185-192. In T.
Chase, N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.),
Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington’s
disease. Raven, New York.

Norton, J. 1975. Patterns of neuropsychological
test performance in Huntington’s disease. J.
Nerv. Ment. Dis. 161:276-279.

Pawo. J. 1973. Longitudinal study of a preclinical
test program for Huntington’s chorea, p.
311-324. In A. Barbeau, T. Chase, and G.
Paulson (eds.), Advances in neurology, Vol.
1: Huntington’s chorea, 1872-1892. Raven,
New York.

PEARSON, J., M. Peterson, J. LAzareT, H.
BiopcetTrT, and I. Kiey. 1955. An educational
approach to the social problem of
Huntington’s chorea. Proc. May Clin.
30:349-357.

PLUTCHIK, R., and H. KELLERMAN. 1968. Emotions profile index. Western Psychological
Services, Los Angeles.

SHOULSON, I., and S. FAHN. 1977. Clinical staging
of Huntington’s disease. Paper presented at
the seventh Huntington’s Disease Workshop,
Leiden.

SprEEN, O., and A. BENTON. 1967. Comparative
studies of some psychological tests for cerebral damage. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.
140:323-333.

Huntington’s Disease 19

STERN, R., and R. EL_pripceE. 1975. Attitudes of
‘patients and their relatives to Huntington’s
disease. J. Med. Gen. 12:217-223.

VaN PuTTEN, T., and J. MENKEs. 1973.
Huntington’s disease masquerading as chronic
schizophrenia. Dis. Nerv. Syst. 34:54-56.

WEINGARTNER, H., G. Carmine, and M. EBERT.
1979. Imagery, encoding and the retrieval of
information from memory: Some specific encoding-retrieval changes in Huntington’s disease. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 88:52-58.

WEXLER, N. 1974. Perceptual-motor, cognitive,
and emotional characteristics of persons at
risk for Huntington’s disease. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.

. 1979, Perceptual-motor, cognitive, and

emotional characteristics of persons at risk for

Huntington’s disease, p. 257-271. In T. Chase,

N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances

in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington’s disease.

Raven, New York.

WItson, R., and D. Garron. 1979. Cognitive and
affective aspects of Huntington’s disease, p.
193-201. In T. Chase, N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neurology, Vol. 23:
Huntington’s disease. Raven, New York.

 

Winn, J. 1955. Case reports: Chronic progressive
chorea masquerading as a functional disorder.
New York State J. Med. 55:110-112.
