Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

Kenneth A. Bennett

To cite this article: Kenneth A. Bennett (1976) Book notes, Social Biology, 23:4, 363-365, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1976.9988253

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988253

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Book Notes

THE GENETICS OF BEHAVIOR: By Lee
Ehrman and Peter A. Parsons. Sinauer
Associates, Inc., Sunderland, Mass,
1976. 390 pp. $17.50 (hardbound).

Ehrman and Parsons have written this
book primarily for professional geneticists,
animal biologists, and psychologists, but it
will also be welcomed by others with
periphera! interests in behavior genetics.
The authors begin with an introduction to
genetics as applied to behavior and then
provide the theoretical bases of analyses of
polygenic traits in various organisms, including humans. They proceed to a phylogenetic analysis of behavior, a discussion
of the role of behavior in evolution, and
conclude with the position of modern behavioral genetics in evolutionary biology.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF HUMAN
FERTILITY: Edited by Bernice A. Kaplan. Wayne State University Press, Detroit, 1976. 146 pp. $8.95 (hardbound).

This volume is a hardbound reproduction of Human Biology, Vol. 48, No. 1
(1976) and includes ten papers. The subjects examined include the cultural aspects
of population distribution, the impact of
economic stress on birth spacing, the interaction of disease and sex ratio affecting
interrelationships between populations
and ultimately genetic variability, environmental aspects of population growth,
how family residence patterns affect inbreeding rates, and the relationship between high mortality and high fertility.

 

S

CHROMOSOMES TODAY. VOL. FIVE: Edited by P. L. Pearson and K. R. Lewis.
John Wiley and Sons, New York, and
Israel Universities Press, Jerusalem,
1976. 473 pp. $47.50 (hardbound).

Forty-five original papers and abstracts
of fifty additional papers comprise this
book, the Proceedings of the Leiden
Chromosome Conference held on July
15-17, 1974. This is a reference book on
modern chromosomal research and methodology in organisms from plants to humans and will be primarily useful to professional cytogeneticists.

AGGRESSION: Revised and expanded edition. By John Paul Scott. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1975. 233 pp.
$4.95 (paper).

Scott surveys multiple aspects of aggressive behavior, including genetic, physiological, social, and ecological factors. He
also discusses outlets for aggression, both
normal and abnormal. He succeeds quite
well in presenting the problems of aggression and offers some suggestions for coping with aggressive behavior and social
disaggregation. The book is written for
biological and social scientists at all levels,
as well as for the general public.

SUICIDE IN DIFFERENT CULTURES:
Edited by Norman L. Farberow. University Park Press, Baltimore, 1975. 286
pp. $19.50 (hardbound).

This international study of suicide in

363
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

364 Book

different countries contains seventeen
original papers by professional suicidologists. Many factors associated with the
frequency of suicide are investigated, such
as geography, climate, and religion. Also
discussed are cultural attitudes toward
suicide, as reflected in each country’s literature, music, and art. Written for students and professional psychologists, psychiatrists, sociologists, and counselors,
this source book provides an understanding of the ethnic differences in suicide
cause and frequency.

MAN IN THE ANDES. A MULTIDISCIPLINARY STUDY OF HIGH-ALTITUDE
QUECHUA: Edited by Paul T. Baker
and Michael A. Little. Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, Stroudsburg, Pa., 1976.
482 pp. $25.00 (hardbound).

Seventeen investigators have contributed twenty articles to this long-awaited
synthesis of ten years of high-altitude research in the Peruvian Andes. Included in
this volume are studies on genetics, physiology, demography, growth and morphology, nutrition, cold adaptation, drug
use, work performance, energy flow, social and political structure, and the early
care and training of children. This book is
an excellent contribution to the literature
in biological anthropology and particularly to our understanding of human adaptation in a harsh environment.

ANCIENT EUGENICS: By Allen G. Roper.
Burgess Publishing Co., Minneapolis,
1976. 76 pp. $7.95 (hardbound).

Now considered a classic, this reprinted
essay was written in 1913. It is an historical survey of eugenic measures, but
throughout the volume brief commentaries are given about what was considered modern eugenic thought in 1913 as
opposed to the practices that occurred

Notes Social Biology
both historically and in preliterate societies. The main topics include the origin
and early justification of infanticide and
genocide; early mating practices; and
methods for the regulation of population
numbers.

CONCEPTS OF SPECIES: Edited by C. N.
Slobodchikoff. Benchmark Papers in
Systematic and Evolutionary Biology,
Vol. 3, Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross,
Inc., Stroudsburg, Pa., 1976. 368 pp.
$25.00 (hardbound).

This volume is a compilation of
twenty-two previously published papers,
dating from 1950 to 1974, that represent
important contributions to our understanding of the species concept. These
papers are arranged in a five-part format:
(1) Historical and Philosophical Origins of
Species Concepts, (2) Are Species Real?,
(3) Microbial, Parthenogenetic, and
Paleontological Species, (4) Species in
Higher Plants and Animals, and (5) Alternative Concepts. As in other “Benchmark
Papers,” these articles are copied in their
entirety. Hence this collection should be
especially useful for those systematists and
taxonomists who cannot otherwise obtain
these papers.

DEMOGRAPHIC ANTHROPOLOGY. QUANTITATIVE APPROACHES: Edited by Ezra
B. W. Zubrow. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 1976. 299
pp. $20.00 (hardbound).

The eight articles in this book are based
upon an advanced seminar sponsored in
1973 by the School of American Research.
The topic of the seminar, demographic research in anthropology, is considered in
conjunction with ecological, social, biological, and economic systems. After an introductory article by Zubrow, other authors use a variety of quantitative tech
 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 4

niques to explore how phenomena such as
sedentism, kinship, childhood marriage
association, and economic growth operate
reciprocally with demographic parameters. Other subjects deal with estimation
of population size, detection of migration,
and the socioeconomic correlates of inbreeding. This volume should be appealing to both graduate students and professionals, especially those with primary interests in biocultural interactions.

FAMILY PLANNING AND FAMILY SIZE
DETERMINATION. THE EVIDENCE
FROM SEVEN’ LATIN AMERICAN
COUNTRIES: By M. J. Carvajal and
David T. Geithman. University of
Florida Press, Gainesville, 1976. 96 pp.
$5.00 (hardbound).

Book Notes

365

The motives for this study are (a) to
estimate past fertility patterns among a
large sample of Latin American women,
(b) to analyze the correlates of their family
planning activities, (c) to formulate an
economic model for parental demand for
children, and (d) to test this demand-forchildren model after controlling for the effects of age on childbearing. These aims
are carried out on women acquainted with
reliable contraceptive techniques, others
exposed to cruder methods, and a third
subsample with no family planning activities. This research monograph, complete with appendices on significant differences among groups and survey questionnaires, would seem most appropriate
for sociologists and demographers.

KENNETH A. BENNETT
