Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The Shirishana of the Yanomami: A demographic
study

John F. Peters

To cite this article: John F. Peters (1980) The Shirishana of the Yanomami: A demographic
study, Social Biology, 27:4, 272-285, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988430

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988430

 

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 21

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

The Shirishana of the Yanomami:
A Demographic Study

John F. Peters

Department of Sociology and Anthropology
Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

 

 

ABSTRACT: The Shirishana, a primitive Yanomami group in north Brazil, first made contact with
Western civilization in 1958. The author resided eight years among them and has researched social
change in the group over a twenty-three-year period. At contact, the population was 118 with a sex
ratio of 149. Despite foreign diseases and the practice of abortion and infanticide, the group in 1980
numbered 280 with a sex ratio of 93. This research shows a small population to be highly volatile,
particularly when in the flux of cultural change. The early second stage in demographic transition
theory is shown to have an initial high death rate due to foreign diseases and lower infant mortality
due to medical aid. Population stability is not anticipated in the immediate years ahead.

The purpose of this paper is to document the demography of the ShirishanaYanomami over a twenty-three—year period and to interpret these findings in the
light of contemporary demographic research done among preliterate peoples. In
this study, recent population increase is
attributed to immigration, medical care,
and the absence of warfare, all unique
characteristics of the Shirishana when
compared to other Yanomami' found in
the Orinoco-Amazon watershed.

Modern demographic transition theory
posits three stages. In the first stage, birth
and death rates are high and therefore
there is relatively little population increase. In the second stage, the. death rate
drops considerably and there is a high
growth rate. In the third stage, generally
typified by a few modern societies, the
birth and death rates are stabilized, and
there is again little if any population increase. This paper will relate the Yanomami society to this popular theory, more

'These people are often referenced as Yanomamé. I have adopted the orthography used by Brazilian anthropologists, linguists, and government.

272

specifically to the early part of the second
stage.

It is unusual to find accurate demographic data for a small society from the
time of its initial contact with civilization
through two successive decades. This
study documents such a case, including
the critical social and cultural pressures on
a society in what is commonly termed the
second stage in demographic transition
theory.

Beside the above, other factors which
contribute to the significance of this report
are the following: (a) The Shirishana are a
dialect group of the Yanomami, a tribe located in north Brazil and Venezuela which
has received considerable publicity in the
past ten years (Chagnon, 1968, 1972,
1977; Chagnon et al., 1970; Neel and
Chagnon, 1968). (b) The Shirishana lived
in complete isolation from 1939 to 1957
when they contacted the Brazilians downstream to obtain steel goods. In 1958 I initiated contact within the Shirishana community and have since that date carefully
researched aspects of social change on a
longitudinal scale (Peters, 1971, 1973,
1974; Peters and Hunt, 1975).
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

The Shirishana numbered 118 in 1958
and despite epidemics of colds, measles,
whooping cough, and currently tuberculosis, the population increased to 280 by
1980. The Shirishana are located 3 degrees
north latitude and 62 degrees east longitude on the Mucajai River in north Brazil,
some one hundred kilometers south of the
Venezuelan border. They have resided in
this general region since 1939 when they
fled from the Uraracoiera River after a series of reciprocated raids with the Carib
Maiyongongs which resulted in a number
of killings on both sides.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

I served as a member of a team of missionaries residing in the tribe from 1958
until 1967. I participated in reducing the
language to writing, recording legends
and folklore, and writing ethnographic
material. A birth and death record was begun in 1959 and has been meticulously
kept since that time. Cause of death was
also reported, often being attributed to
witchcraft or “‘spirits’’ (Peters, 1974).
Ages of all members born prior to 1958
were estimated, with particular attention
given to birth order. The recalling of birth
order is a valuable Yanomami culture
characteristic complimenting population
research. In some cases the 1939 raid became pivotal in age estimations.

In 1972 I returned to visit the tribe, this
time as scholar and researcher. I was welcomed by the Shirishana and missionaries,
and as kinsman often resided in the communal houses of the Shirishana. By being
a participant observer, and through informants, I gathered more precise data on
abortions, infanticide, migration flow,
conception beliefs, wife stealing, warfare
and disease.

In late 1979 I again returned for two
months to continue longitudinal studies of
demography and social change. Amiable

Shirishana of the Yanomami

273

relations with natives and missionaries
were reestablished.

I have adapted Turnbull’s (1972) term
of “‘small scale society” for this population
study, rather than such conventional
terms as primitive and preliterate. Small
scale societies are often self-sufficient and
basically dependent upon their own resources. Turnbull suggests that small scale
society demographic research is plagued
with the following difficulties: (a) the variety of social forces at play, many of which
are complex; (6) social anthropologists
who do not give the minute detail necessary for exacting demographic study; (c)
problems in translation of cultural concepts such as family, father, marriage, and
betrothal; and (d) the quantification of
many terms such as love, hunger, hate. He
underscores the significance of adaptation
in the social and geographical environment. This paper will address these concerns.

Kunstadter (1972) stresses the unique
characteristics of small scale societies. He
questions whether a parent makes a calculation of the high child mortality rate and
as a consequence produces many offspring
to assure the longevity of one or two children. Such a rationale has been unduly
emphasized in the literature. Kunstadter
reminds us that contact with cosmopolitans is not always negative (also see Petersen, 1975, pp. 365-394). Such contact often introduces new foods, improved food
technology, and money for cash crops so
as to provide food in times of cyclical
shortages. In a very limited way this is relevant to this study. At the same time the
Murphy and Quain (1966) research on the
Trumai of central Brazil shows radical depopulation due to foreign diseases disseminated by neighboring Indian peoples.
This depopulation contributed to considerable apathy about cultural distinctiveness and eventually to the “death of a culture.”

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

274 Peters

Nag’s (1962) cross-cultural analysis
shows that venereal disease, a characteristic of the second stage in demographic
transition in underdeveloped societies,
limits fertility. Venereal disease is present
among the recent but few YanomamiWaica immigrants among the Shirishana.
Wynne-Edwards (1962) deals with demographic implications of social stress, superstition, and social conventions, an area
to which [I give emphasis. Finally,
Chagnon (1972) has done some insightful
research on social organization and genetics among the Yanomami. His work
shows that warfare has a profound effect

upon the sex ratio, age distribution, and:

fertility rate. Headmen are shown to have
more options and therefore produce
larger families. These factors will be examined among the Shirishana, who are
also Yanomami but who had no contact
with them between 1939 and 1959.

RESULTS
VILLAGE DISTRIBUTION

The 280 Shirishana are now grouped in
four geographical locations. Three of
these four groups are located within an
hour’s walk of the mission station, first established in Jate 1958, and no more than
two hours from one another. The fourth
village is located some 22 kilometers
downstream, a five- to seven-hour brisk
walk from the other villages (Figure 1).
Contact is fairly frequent.

In 1958 the population of 118 was located in two villages, each with a single
large communal house. The larger group
were known as “‘Borabuk,”’ people of the
rapids, and the upriver, smaller group as
“*Kasarapais,”’ long-lipped people, a name
recorded by earlier anthropologists. Presently each of the four villages of 99, 56, 52,
and 73 people may have as many as four
dwellings of varying size and shape in one

Social Biology

geographical nucleus. Then after a few
years they may construct one building for
all inhabitants. Most of the inter- and
intra-village separations come about due
to gossip, scolding, and verbal ridicule by
the women, and, to a lesser degree, due to
quarrelling children. While recent single
nuclear family dwellings number only
three in the entire tribe, this pattern will
likely continue in the years ahead.

It is not uncommon for a village to have
a second location. Presently the Kasarapais have a field and house two days journey north. For the Shirishana this recent
two-location dwelling lifestyle is more
suitable for their present social and economic needs. They continue to have access to trade goods, medicines, “‘novel”
Western ideas and behaviors, and ina few
cases, literacy, at their habitat located
closer to the mission station. At the same
time they have periods of isolation from
fellow tribespeople at their second location, thus tempering potential feuds. In
this way they are able to hunt in areas
where game has not been “overkilled.”’

Apart from the permanent dwellings
described above, the Shirishana periodically move into the forest in nuclear or extended family units for 3-30 days. Temporary shelters are quickly and easily
constructed. On such occasions local fruit
is gathered, fish are “poisoned” in the
creeks, game is hunted, and/or a canoe is
carved.

Periodically one or several men will
journey to a distant abandoned field to obtain arrow cane or the choice pupunha
fruit.

Each village usually has a “‘festivity”
house which measures approximately
thirty meters in diameter. Most of the village members dwell within the circumference of this large structure. Before a feast
an abundance of game is hunted and
roasted, bananas are harvested, and the
cassava bread staple is amply prepared.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

to
Shirianas
(10 days) t

   
    
   
   
   

Second
Kasarapai
field (2 days)

Kaserapai
Village

Canoe, trail and
Canoe trip to
Paramitelis
(6 days) Brena's
Village A

to Marashitelis
(6 days)

—_—

HI- rapids or falls
—— Mucajai Mission Station
2.5 and airstrip

O Habitat at time of contact

Shirishana of the Yanomami 275

Wakop's

   
   

Baxo's Village
(4 day) —

   

Mucajai river
(7 days) Boa Vista

to Hewakema

/ (4 more days)

Fic. 1.—Map showing the location of the Shirishana in 1980.

Other Shirishana and Yanomami are invited to celebrate. Curare is sniffed, intoxicating liquid is often drunk by the men,
bone ash of a deceased member is rubbed
on children under ten, and men and
women dance in separate groups. Other
events include ceremonies in which goods
are traded, women are requested as wives,
and feuds are “‘settled.”’ This is also a time
of extramarital sexual relations. (Peters, ms.).

GROWTH RATE

With a population of 118 in 1958 at the
time of contact, the Shirishana showed an
average annual growth rate of 0.2 in the
following five-year period (Table 1). The
death rate was high (3.7), and the birth
rate was 2.7. Immigration was a small contributing factor (1.2).

In the second five-year period
(1963-67) the annual calculated birth rate
was 4.3; the death rate, 2.8; and the migration rate, 1.1. The crude growth rate was

6.1, which remained at this level for a
fifteen-year period.

The birth rate of 5.0 and the migration
rate of 2.5 were contributing factors to the
annual crude growth rate in the following
five-year period (1968-72). During this

TABLE 1

ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE IN SHIRISHANA
POPULATION IN PER CENT, 1958—-1980*

Total Crude Crude Crude Crude

Years Popul. Birth Death Migration Growth

Rate Rate Rate Rate
1957 ....... 118 0 wae Lae we
1958-1962... 119 2.7 3.7 1.2 2
1963-1967... 136 43 2.8 1.1 6.1
1968-1972... 185 5.0 1.0 Deo 6.1
1973-1977... 252 54 0.8 1.1 6.1
1978-1980... 280 43 03 0.4 3.5

*Calculations have been made in each five-year period on the
figure midway between that cohort, i.e., the 1968-72 calculation was
made on

136 +___\285-136) _ 160,

2
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

276 Peters Social Biology

TABLE 2 siderably. Only in the case of the very old

CAUSES OF DEATH AMONG SHIRISHANA, and sickly is death viewed culturally as

1958-1980 natural or normal. In all other cases it is a

crisis, an aberration of life. For the two

Causes INFANTS CHILDREN Abutts years of 1978 and 1979 the birth-death ra
Deatt MF Al MF Al MF au tiowas 10:1.
The death records reveal several critirepeal we rr cal years in the known history of the
10uUS QiS- ae «

case, acute. do... 21210°2°2 Shirishanas. In 1960 and 1961 the tribe

Otherdisease 2 5 7 3 5 8 10 515 was plagued with colds, and many suc
Killings . ee ee ee ee ee ee 3... 3 cumbed, particularly older men. The avInfanticide* .. 1 4 Scie cee cee cee wee wee f th dul ho died

Unknown....... 0.4. -. 3 3 6 3 9 €fage age OF the ten adults who died was

Other .......0.. 0. 0... 2 1... 12 1 around 50. In March and April of 1967 a

Total...... 41418 3 1013 21 10 31 measles epidemic hit, and by the end of

*Three additional cases of infanticide have no record of sex.
Infanticides are grossly underreported.

time the death rate dropped sizeably to
1.0.

Aneven higher birth rate of 5.4 and the
migration rate of 1.1 were again strong
factors in the growth rate of 6.1 during
1973-77. The death rate dropped.

Demographic data show a trend toward
greater stability in the last three-year period (1978-80). The growth rate was 3.5,
the birth rate, 4.3; the death rate, 0.3; and
the migration rate, 0.4.

The sex ratio of all births between 1958
and 1980 was 102; of all natural deaths, 87;
and of all migration, 61.5. The 1980 sex ratio of the population is 93.

The ratio between known male and female deaths in the twenty-three—year period was 26:27. The average age at death
was 25.6 years. The figures do not include
infanticides or stillborn births, the majority of which were female (Table 2). It
would be a considerable asset to demographic research if the frequency of abortion and infanticide among the Shirishana
were known. Some reported stillbirths are
in fact infanticide. Three instances of infanticide in 1980 were reported. It is not
known whether infanticide has increased
or decreased since contact. However it is
evident that it affects the population con
the year whooping cough also struck. Ten
died that year. Though tuberculosis had
been discovered and treated as early as
1966, it had a heavy death toll in 1975. Tuberculosis still continues as a threat to the
population. The disease has two Yanomami sources: the immigrant Aicas from
the Apiau and Ajarani region who have
married into Baxo’s village, and from the
visiting with and eventual marrying of the
Paramitelis by people in Brena’s village.
In the early sixties a few cases of TB may
have been transmitted by peasant Brazilians downstream. Persons of all ages are
affected. The protracted illness cripples
the individual of zest for life. Apathy is evident. TB places an important limitation
upon fertility. There are currently ten critical cases and 40-50 suspect cases, either
of the pulmonary or intestinal variety. The
latter is extremely difficult to diagnose.
Government concern and assistance regarding TB treatments has proven to be
sporadic, temporary and seldom thorough. Other maladies common among the
Shirishana are malaria, worms, and
among a number of immigrants from the
Apiau and Ajarani river, venereal disease.

Chagnon reported warfare as the cause
of death for one-third of the adult population (1972, p.258) among the Venezuelan
Yanomami. Undoubtedly this would also

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

have been the case for the Shirishanas except for their isolation between 1939 and
1958. No Shirishana has been killed in
raids since 1939. In 1963 two young men
visited the Shiriana, but never returned.
They are believed to have been killed by the
Shiriana though this host group stated the
young men departed with colds and must
have died en route home. Such information
leaves the door wide open for presumption,
antagonism, and many years of hatred and
bitter feeling. In 1967 a 17-year-old hunter
strayed from the trail and surprisingly found
himself in Waica territory. He encountered
four men and in fright shot three of them.
He then was shot by the fourth.

The concept of revenge is deeply embedded in the thinking of every
Shirishana. Alliances through marriage in
more recent years with other Yanomama
tribes have drawn the Shirishana into a
raid with the Duhunaktelis and the Parahudis. With the latter group, a blood bath
was averted in 1976. A Shirishana and
Marashiteli killed one Duhunakteli in
1974. His body was cut into pieces by machete, and various segments were hidden
in a half dozen locations in the forest to
discourage reprisal and further use of
black magic against Shirishana allies. The
Shirishana have not had any reprisals
against their own village because of their
relative geographical isolation, ease of canoe travel, recognized bravery and prestige, minimal practice of intertribal black
magic, and up until recently, their superiority in the possession and use of guns and
ammunition.

As mentioned, in recent history the
Shirishana have died from Western diseases such as measles, colds, whooping
cough, and tuberculosis. However these
diseases are always diagnosed by the native in precontact terms of black magic
(Peters, 1974, p.67). In 1960 several
Shirishana died of pneumonia, and revenge for the alleged act of shamanism re
Shirishana of the Yanomami

277

sulted in the killing of five Shiritelis. In
1967 a Shirishana woman and her daughter died of pneumonia. The Aicas were
blamed, and the Shirishana avenged with
eight male deaths. In November of 1979 a
male of about 60 died of tuberculosis.
Seven weeks later, I witnessed the ritual
burning of the bones and the preservation
of the ash. In the midst of the ceremony
the Paramiteri widow detected two “unusual’? spots on the bone which she decisively attributed to black magic. Only history will tell whether more lives will be
taken in revenge.

The precontact time before 1958 may
be viewed as the first stage in demographic
theory. Though there was no migration
for the previous two decades, there are no
birth-death records. The Shirishanas had
no means of counting except as “one,”
“two,” or “many,” a problem for accurate
demographic data before contact. My inquiry concerning the size of their villages
before contact received the response of
“few” or “‘many,”’ all in the cultural context that large numbers of men are associated with the capability of resisting enemy
attack and ‘“‘few’’ men and many women
identifies the village as highly susceptible
to such attacks. Raiding and warfare were
an important part of population flux, characteristics still present among Yanomami
to the west (Chagnon, 1977). In the past
four decades warfare has had very minimal direct affect of loss of life in the
Shirishana population.

Since 1968 this population may be considered in the second stage in demographic theory, that of early transition.
The birth rate climbed to 6.1 annually,
while the death rate eventually dropped to
0.3. Fecund immigrant women contributed
sizeably to this measured birth rate. Infant
survival increased, though current data cannot be compared to pre-1958 times. At the
same time the death rate declined, partially
due to a younger population. A disproporDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

278 Peters

tionate number of elderly people died in the
previous ten-year period, having been particularly susceptible to colds and complications as well as to measles. The annual
death rates show considerable fluctuation.
Ten deaths, particularly when affecting fecund women, 1s a serious alteration of the
population composition. It should also be
noted that societies of this description may
carry a double deficit in human life, because
deaths are not perceived as the result of
purely physiological or anatomical causes,
but rather as black magic and such activity
must be avenged, thus precipitating an even
higher death rate.

The sex ratio was 149 in 1958, but had
changed to 108 by 1972 (Peters, 1974). In
1980 it was 93. Fifty per cent of the population is under 16 years of age. A population
pyramid of this society is relatively stable
until the 30-34 age cohort, when the population is relatively small. Thereafter the
population is rarely balanced by sex in any
of the five-year cohorts. In the 35-49 age
cohort there are 10 women, presumably
fertile, and 28 men. The population over
35 has a sex ratio of 181. The sex ratio of
the small population over 50 is 91. Two explanations seem plausible—a high rate of
female infanticide and/or a death rate disproportionately greater for females than
males before contact. Warfare, raiding, or
bride stealing did not occur between 1939
and 1960 and therefore are not contributing factors to the low sex ratio in the population over 34 years of age.

MIGRATION

There is a total of 31 immigrant women
among the Shirishana who migrated as (a)
captives, (b) marriage partners, (c) independent migrants, or (d) children or close
relatives of a, b, orc. The 27 fecund immigrants have borne a total of 86 offspring or
48 per cent of all Shirishana infants born
since 1958.

The immigrants can be readily divided

Social Biology

into two groupings. The first group consists of four non-Yanomami women who
were acquired through raids in approximately 1937 and 1939 and therefore are
not specifically identified in Table 1 or 2.
The one Macu and three Maiyongong
women bore 4, 1, 8, and 9 children respectively. All these women have terminated
their childbearing years and were still
alive at the time of writing.

The second group of immigrants are all
Yanomami and settled in 1960 or later
from six different geographical locations.
Eight of these adult women were acquired
through raids (1960 and 1968), along with
one male and two female children. This
mode of wife acquisition through raiding
is common among the Yanomami tribes.
The only peculiarity for the Shirishana is
that no males were lost in the two raids.
Fleven women came as spouses for
Shirishana men. In these cases bride price
and bride service were made. Five women
and one female child came into the
Shirishana region because of some social
disorganization in their own tribe, coupled with an invitation by a relative or
friend among the Shirishana. The relative
prestige of the Shirishana since 1958 may
have given them an advantage in bride
payment.

Except for four women who have
reached menopause or who have not yet
attained puberty, the immigrant women
since 1960 are in the high fertility age
range. Two of the three women from the
1960 raid have born five and seven living
children. The other is now a grandmother.

There has been a total of two emigrants
from among the Shirishana in the past
forty years. Both were women. About
1969, after concerted family attempts to
force marriage with unfavorable or uninterested males, a 22-year-old woman
eloped and fled with a Waica male to the
Apiau River region. She has aborted at
least twice, has no children, and is consid
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

ered infertile, a shame for any Yanomami
woman, A few years later she returned to
the Shirishana and persuaded her younger
sister to accompany her back to the
Waicas, much to the anger and frustration
of her parents and brothers.

Sixteen males have immigrated to the
Shirishana. With the exception of a young
boy accompanying his mother in 1962,
these men have all immigrated since 1968.
They came because they (a) acquired
Shirishana wives through sister exchange,
(b) moved with sisters, (c) were closely related to (a) or (b) individuals, (d) fled their
village (one), or (e) were orphaned (one).
Males who migrate and who are between
10 and 23 years of age are often very mobile, frequently visiting their own tribe or
the Brazilians who live three days by canoe travel downstream. They usually settle in one location only after marriage and/
or after having a child.

The population of small societies where
immigration and emigration takes place
tends to fluctuate considerably. Five or six
people affect the increase or decrease of
the population to a considerable measure.
In this case study the Shirishana gained in
immediate numbers and reaped further
benefits through the offspring of the fecund women. A more thorough macro
study would include the effect upon the
societies from which the immigrants
came. The few remaining living Shiritelis
in 1960 fled to join the Mayoptelis. The
surviving Aicas from the 1968 raid in
which eight men were killed are believed
to have fled to another village. The few
Aicas who migrated from the Apiau on
more peaceful terms came from very small
villages which have since been vacated.

A number of Palamitelis have migrated
to the Shirishana, some through betrothal
and some because of social disorganization. In late 1980 I received communication that a Palamiteli male had been killed
in an effort to stay a fisticuff fight between

Shirishana of the Yanomami

 

279

two tribal members. The guilty Palamiteli
and his family have fled to the Shirishana.
The Palamiteli population has actually decreased since 1958.

MARRIAGE

Marriage is multifunctional among the
Shirishana. It has political implications,
(alliances, Chagnon, 1977, pp. 76-80), economic results (bride service and bride
payment), social purposes (reproduction
and socialization), practical aspects
(someone to cook meals), as well as psychological benefits (a sex partner, status).
Marriage is fundamentally a male institution in that he is dominant, while the female is considered subordinate and utilitarian as long as she bears children,
prepares the meals, and keeps the hearth
fire burning (Peters, ms.). As she approaches menopause, the wife is often replaced by a young fecund woman.

The age of the female at marriage is a
key parameter of total fertility (De Jong,
1972, p. 53). The Shirishana are betrothed
soon after birth and marry within two
years after puberty. In ten recorded cases
of time from birth to puberty, the mean
was 12 years and three months, with a variance of two years. Two of these women
have borne children, and in each case it
was three years and ten months after puberty.

Though monogamy is most common,
other forms of marriage such as polygyny
and polyandry (Peters and Hunt, 1975) as
well as serial monogamy are practiced, depending upon the sex ratio and age distribution of the population, as well as the
availability of women. Whereas there
were numerous cases of polyandry in
1958, there was only one such case in 1979.
Polyandrous women may bear more living
children than other married women because (a) they are likely to be kept more
active in reproduction, and (b) extramarital liaisons are less likely to take place,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

280 Peters

minimizing the possibility of abortion or
infanticide. There were two cases of polygamy in 1980.

Unlike the frequent termination of
‘Marriages among the Yanomami in the
Surucucu and Palami-U regions,’ the
Shirishana rarely “‘break” the marriage
before the wife reaches menopause. This
allows for many years of uninterrupted
childbearing. When serious marriage tensions exist, they often occur early in a marriage, and the union is dissolved before
children are conceived. In such cases the
individuals eventually find other partners.

In 1979, 67 relationships of malefemale bonding were recorded, which
showed an average age difference of the
husband being 12.9 years older than his
wife. One husband was estimated as being
58 years older than his wife, and three
more were at least 40 years older. It is
common for a husband to exceed his
spouse by 20 years. It is conceivable that a
woman in a monogamous relationship
would bear more children were she married to a younger male rather than a male
over 55 years of age. There were seven
cases (10 per cent) where the wife was the
older spouse, with a range of 2-24 years
and a mean of 8.6 years.

The more normative mate selection occurs when a male of 16-24 years requests a
female of between zero to four years of
age. During the first decade after contact
almost all females under three were betrothed. Currently there are numerous
uncommitted young females and teenage
men. I expect this situation will decrease
the age difference between spouses and
give the women a stronger voice in marriages in the future. It is unknown whether
such marriages will be more fragile in their
early years. Currently the male will initiate bride payment and services for his

2This information is from conversations with missionary Sandra Cue.

 

Social Biology

promised wife at betrothal and continue
payment for at least fifteen years during
cohabitation. The mother of the young
bride admonishes her daughter to acquiesce to the sexual desires of her husband
which often results in early unwanted
pregnancy. It is not uncommon to abort
the first pregnancy because it is said to
thwart the proper development of later
pregnancies.

Though it has been reported that prepubescent sexual intercourse occurs
among the Yanomami in Surucucu and
Palami-U to the west, it is rare among the
Shirishana. Such deviation is strongly disapproved. A young girl of nine or ten may
accompany her “‘husband”’ on trips to the
field or on fishing excursions. At eleven
she may have her hammock hung near his
hearth (even close to the hammock of his
other older wife). But as a norm intercourse is practiced only after puberty.

A man may, with discretion, have sexual access to another man’s wife. This is
most likely to occur if the man (a) is the
husband’s brother, (b) is young, (c) is desired by the woman, (d) periodically
brings meat to her hearth, (e) is single, or
(f) his own wife is nursing an infant. Any
child thus conceived may have two, three,
or even four legitimate social and biological fathers. Cultural norms of this nature
may add to the number of children born to
a Shirishana woman.

CONCEPTION, INFANTICIDE AND
CHILD SPACING

A single act of coitus is not considered
sufficient to impregnate a woman. Repeated acts of intercourse cause conception, and such continued acts assure the
proper development of the fetus. A husband may “‘plan” childbearing, in that he
may say, “I am now going to make a
child.” If his wife does not conceive, it is
her fault, never his. Infertile women are

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 4

stigmatized and may be ‘“‘divorced.’’ Coitus takes place in the field or on the forest

floor and happens quickly and without

foreplay. Married couples also copulate at
night in the wife’s hammock hung in the
communal dwellings. Both male and female are reported to enjoy sex, although
the male enjoys it more.

Because male children are preferred, a
woman may wear the necklace or bracelet
of a woman who has borne several boys,
so as to increase the probability of a male
offspring.

Two forms of “‘black magic”’ are used to
avoid pregnancy (Peters, 1974). A liquid
may be drunk or a root rubbed upon the
woman’s abdomen. The latter is only done
by a clandestine lover, in revenge against
the woman or her husband for not allow
ing the “‘lover”’ sexual access. Such magic

is considered a grave offense.

Three other forms of birth control are
practiced. Abortion is the most common.
Almost all women have had at least one
abortion (Peters, 1974). Abortions are
performed when (a) the progenitor is considered undesirable, (b) the progenitor is
not likely to supply meat for the child, (c)
the pregnant woman is viewed as relatively young, (d) the woman feels she is ignorant of how to care for a child, (e) the
woman does not want the child, or (f) the
pregnancy occurs when the mother is still
nursing an infant. Abortions are performed by the pregnant woman or another
woman hand manipulating and pressing
the womb. This method is used in cases
when the pregnant woman is thin. In other
instances a woman will tramp upon the expectant mother’s abdomen while she is
prostrate upon the ground.

Infanticide is also practiced. Reasons
for infanticide are similar to those for
abortion, (a) through (e) mentioned
above, as well as (f) malformation of the
infant, and (g) if the baby is female. Upon
rare occasions male infants are also killed.

Shirishana of the Yanomami

281

It is questionable whether the 23 years of
missionary presence among the
Shirishana has diminished the practice of
infanticide or abortion. There is no evidence that any form of birth control is
practiced among the Shirishana because
of limited food resources.

Both men and women of the tribe are
aware that pills, vasectomies, and tubal ligation are means used by Western peoples
to control birth. Many tribal people are intrigued by this, and some women would
appreciate access to these means of birth
control.

Postpartum coitus restraint is common,
though seldom absolutely observed. An
early pregnancy after the birth of a child is
unwelcome because of the fear of
insufficient milk supply for the suckling
child. In 1979, 98 instances of child spacing for 37 married women showed an average of 34.8 months between the birth of
siblings. This is a slight, decline from a previous study done in 1972 (Peters, 1974).

Three children were born eleven
months after the delivery of a previous
child. In each of these cases the earlier
baby was stillborn or was killed. The
shortest period between the birth of two
living siblings is 19 months. With the exception of a total of six cases, all siblings
born since 1957 have at least a 24 month
span between them.

In a selection of six fertile women in
monogamous marriages, with 3-5 living
children each and with no occurrence of
abortions, infanticides, or stillborn children, it was found that the mothers averaged between 24.3 months and 37.6
months in the births for their respective
children.

Asa general pattern, it appears that under normal circumstances the spacing between the second and third child is often
less than the time between any of the other
sibling birth sequences. This finding is
consistent with that of De Jong, in that
ce

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

282 Peters

“the fertility curve by age has an inverted
U-shape: low but rising sharply in the midto-late teenage category, highest for
women in their twenties; then declining
slowly for women past thirty until menopause ...” (1972, p. 52). Among the
Shirishana, by the time the second child is
nursing, the female parent has more completely accepted the role of mother, wife,
and procreator.

Current birth rates are attributed to the
number of women of childbearing age.
There are now 51 women or 18 per cent of
the total population between the ages of
15 and 40. Only two of these women are
not married. This statistic can be compared to 1958-62 and 1963-67 when the
percentage of women between ages 15 and
40 were 7 and 10 per cent respectively.

DISCUSSION

With the permanent presence of Westerners in the Shirishana community, demographic patterns have been altered.
The population has moved out of the pretransitional stage and is considered to be
in the early phase of stage two in demographic transition theory. The infant survival rate is believed to have risen. The
permanent availability of health care has
averted a number of fatalities in infancy.
The birth rate is stayed somewhat with the
continued practice of infanticide. General
health care and a vigorous health immunization program have increased longevity.
The tribe has been susceptible to foreign
diseases, and this crisis period is not yet
over. Wagley (1977), Murphy and Quain
(1966), and more recently Ramos and
Taylor (1979) document similar patterns
among Indians in Brazil.

Diseases have been transmitted by
neighboring Yanomami to the south,
west, and north, as well as the Brazilians
to the east. Tuberculosis is still a very serious threat with approximately 50 suspect

Social Biology

cases. TB prevention and cure is extremely difficult given the life style of the
Yanomamli. Venereal disease is less
threatening, but still a limiting factor in
population growth.

The fate of the Shirishana would have
been much more severe, were it not for
the medical assistance of the resident missionaries. The tribe might easily number
one-half its population of 1958 and be divided into very small villages scattered in
the jungle. The permanent availability of
health care has averted a number of fatalities in infancy, as well as addressed itself
to more normative injuries or maladies.

The permanent presence of the missionaries and their medical technology has
affected the infant and adult mortality
rate. As De Jong has stated, “‘infant mortality may be affected rather quickly and
directly by health programs specifically
oriented toward the problems of infants
... (1972, p. 52). Besides access to gen;
eral health care, virtually all Shirishana
have been treated with vitamins, penicillin, and malaria and worm medicine. With
the assistance of the Brazilian government, the entire population has been immunized against yellow fever, small pox,
measles, and diphtheria. More recently,
two migrants from the Aicas arrived with
venereal disease, though there is no such
case among the Shirishana. To date there
is no known non-Indian blood among the
Shirishana. Cases of cancer, Hodgkins
disease, snake bite, burns, and jaguar and
wild boar gashes have also been treated.
Medical authorities in Boa Vista are consulted, and critical cases are sent by airplane, not only to Boa Vista, but on two
occasions to Belem and Rio de Janeiro.
Such timely assistance with skill and
money is incalculable and has contributed
immeasurably to the life chance of every
Shirishana. This is particularly noticeable
when contrasting the disintegration of culture and human life among the Apiau and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

Catrimani Yanomami peoples, who have
had extensive contact with civilization in
the past decades. The penetration of the
highway through Catrimani territory with
its toll on lives is one tragic account of
modern day irresponsibility (Ramos and
Taylor, 1979). This could easily have been
repeated among the Shirishana after 1956
in their efforts to make contact with civilization for axes and knives.

The Shirishana do not show the demographic fluctuations amongst the warrior-age male population’ which
Chagnon poses (1977). They have not lost
any males in intertribal battles, even
though they have been involved in warfare
four times since 1960. On two of these occasions, they acquired many fecund
women who in turn have changed the population dramatically. Other Yanomami
who have immigrated under more amicable circumstances have also augmented
the Shirishana population.

The social forces (Turnbull, 1972) of a
small society and its unique characteristics
(Kunstadter, 1972) contribute to the ebb
and flow of a population. A few vivid examples from the Shirishana illustrate this
point. Their access to trade goods allowed
them to barter for Malashiteli and Palamiteli women who were exchanged for pots,
beads, knives, and axes obtained from the
missionaries. The Shirishana prestige
among neighboring tribes invalidated the
practice of matrilocality when nonShirishana wives were acquired. The accessibility of medicines and professional
medical skill decreased the mortality rate
and stayed the epidemics of colds, malaria, measles, and tuberculosis which
could have decreased this population toa
number less than fifty. Missionary presence has curtailed at least two potential
bloodbaths, when revenge for a death
upon adjacent tribes was deemed deserving. Shamanism in the form of casting a
spell upon neighboring tribesmen has di
Shirishana of the Yanomami

283

minished, at the same time decreasing the
possibility of a revenge raid.

The cultural practice of cohabitation
beginning shortly after puberty gives a
woman many years of childbearing. On
the other hand, abortion methods have restricted family size. The relative marriage
stability enhances maximum childbearing.
Cultural norms which permit a husband’s
brother or other eligible males access to
his wife also increases conception probability.

A few traditional health care practices
have either diminished or ceased. The
flesh of the forehead, arms, and legs of the
ill are no longer cut with a stone by the native to release ‘‘foul’’ blood. No
Shirishana has starved to death in the past
decade, because he or she felt bewitched
by an enemy shaman. In more recent
years no shaman has sought to heal by
breaking an already fractured bone. Some
traditional practices persist which may or
may not contribute to better health. The
shaman as healer still practices, often in
cases where medicine does not yield an
immediate recovery. Illness is definitely
attributed to traditional causes, not to
Western diagnosis of tuberculosis, infection, etc. Revenge for death is very much
endorsed, which has very serious effects
when deaths occur through foreign diseases such as colds and whooping cough
but are interpreted as black magic by a
neighboring village. On a few occasions
shotguns have been used upon enemies to
avenge such a “‘normal’’ death.

Realism generally does not permit us to
look at potential alternatives in history,
but my identification with this fragile community over many years prods me to suggest a few events which could have critically affected the demography. About
1955 the Shirishana began to search for
modern-day metal goods to the southeast.
History would have changed had they
slaughtered the Aicas on the Apiau rather
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

284 Peters

than merely passing through their fields.
In 1957 the Shirishana first contacted the
Brazilians on the lower Mucajaf. The
younger men received a few axes and
knives, and the older men attempted to
arouse their tribesmen to kill the Brazilians in order to obtain more trade goods.
Such an event would have made the initial
contact in 1958 by this author and his
group highly improbable. What if the
Shirishana had been raided in the early
1960’s when they were still small in number? Undoubtedly they would be enmeshed in a network of warfare alliances,
in which there is never any adequate resolution, where revenge and antagonism lingers for decades—a stark reality for the
Surucuru Yanomami peoples living 170
kilometers to the west.

At this point, an accurate prognosis of
the Shirishana population cannot be
made. Small societies are highly vulnerable. The Shirishana are at the very early
transitional stage in demographic transition. Death rates are being reduced but
birth rates remain high and maternal care
is present (De Jong, 1972, p. 39). It is
highly unlikely that warfare will take the
toll of lives commonly found in Yanomami villages. The attention given to
health care to infants as well as to all other
segments of the population has increased
longevity. Though the Shirishana have
been immunized against many diseases,
there is currently inadequate medical
treatment available for two threatening
maladies: tuberculosis and, to a lesser degree, venereal disease. These diseases will
have their toll on the lives of many in the
present decade.

This demographic study of a twentiethcentury isolated Indian community

Social Biology

through a twenty-three-year period makes
several specific observations. The early
transition stage shows an unprecedented
number of deaths, due to little or no resistance to foreign diseases. These plagues
are transmitted by other aboriginal
groups. The population is still threatened
by tuberculosis. The permanent presence
of Western missionaries with some know]ledge in medicine and resources for health
treatment and care at a very crucial period
in Shirishana history has stayed the spread
of infectious diseases. Had this not been
the case, we have reason to believe the
community would be but a fraction of the
size it is today.

Unlike other Yanomami communities,
the Shirishana have not been negatively
affected through wars. Western influence
has curtailed a larger number of wars, or
death through shaman activity. Due to the
stability of their social organization and
their access to trade goods, as well as their
success in two raids, they have been able
to attract a relatively high number of immigrants, many of whom have borne children in subsequent years. The major population growth of the past eighteen years
hinges upon this factor.

I would hope that demographic studies
of small societies would force us beyond
intrigue with cultural idiosyncracies and
the ponderings of population and cultural
despair to concern in providing viable,
workable, and creative options for victimized peoples.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author recognizes the.assistance of
Lorraine Peters in this research. This research
was funded by Research Grant 00-4111 from
Wilfrid Laurier University.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

Shirishana of the Yanomami 285

REFERENCES

CHAGNON, N. A. 1968. The culture-ecology of
shifting (pioneering) cultivation among the
Yanomamo Indians. VIII Intl. Congr. Anthrop. Ethnol. Sci. 3:249-255.

. 1972. Tribal Social organization and ge
netic micro-differentiation, p. 252-282. In L.

A. Harrison and H. J. Boyce (eds.), The struc
ture of human populations. Oxford, London.

. 1977. Yanomamé: The fierce people.
2nd ed. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New
York.

CHAGNON, N. A., J. V. NEEL, J. WeiTKAMp, H.
GERSHOW!ITZ, and M. Ayres. 1970. The
influence of cultural factors on the demography
and pattern of gene flow from the Makiritare to
the Yanomama Indians. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 32:339-349,

DEJONG, GorDON F. 1972. Patterns of human fertility and mortality, p. 32-56. In G. A. Harrison and A. J. Boyce, (eds.), The structure of
human populations. Oxford, London.

KUNSTADTER, PETER. 1972. Demography, ecology, social structure, and settlement patterns,
p- 313-351. InG. A. Harrison and A. J. Boyce
(eds.), The structure of human populations.
Oxford, London.

Murphy, R. F., and B. Quain. 1966. The Trumai
of central Brazil. University of Washington
Press, Seattle.

Nac, Moni. 1962. Factors affecting human fertility in nonindustrial societies: A cross-cultural
study. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

NEEL, J. V., and N. A. CHAGNon. 1968. The de
 

 

mography of two tribes of primitive, relatively
unacculturated American Indians. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 59:680-689.

PETERS, JOHN FRED. 1971. Mate selection among
the Shirishana. Pract. Anthropol. 18:19-23.

. 1973. The effect of Western material

goods upon the social structure of the family

among the Shirishana. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Sociology, Western Michigan University.

. 1974. Demography of the Shirishana.

Soc. Biol. 21(1):58-69.

. Gender identity and sex role socialization
among the Yanomami. Unpublished manuscript.

PETERS, JOHN FRED, and CHESTER Hunt. 1975.
Polyandry among the Yanomama Shirishana.
J. Comp. Fam. Stud. 6(2): 197-207.

PETERSEN, WILLIAM. 1975. Population, p.
365-394. 3rd ed. Macmillan, New York.

Ramos, ALcipA R., and KENNETH I. TayYLor.
1979. The Yanomami: Brazil. Anthro. Resource Centre, Cambridge, Mass.

TURNBULL, COLIN M. 1972. Demography of
small-scale societies, p. 283-312. In G. A.
Harrison and A. J. Boyce (eds.), The structure of human populations. Oxford, London.

WAGLEY, CHARLES. 1977. Welcome of tears, The
Tapirapé Indians of Central Brazil. Oxford,
New York.

Wywnn_E-Epwarps, V. C. 1962. Animal dispersion
in relation to social behavior. Hainer, New
York.

 

 

 
