Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Genetics and epidemiology: Medical interventions
and public policy

Gilbert S. Omenn

To cite this article: Gilbert S. Omenn (1979) Genetics and epidemiology: Medical interventions
and public policy, Social Biology, 26:2, 117-125, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988370

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988370

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali} Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Genetics and Epidemiology:
Medical Interventions and Public Policy

Gilbert S. Omenn

Office of Science and Technology Policy
Executive Office of the President
Washington, D.C.

 

ABSTRACT: Appropriate population-based data and epidemiological analyses are essential for such
medical and public health interventions as genetic counseling, genetic screening, and prenatal tests
for genetic conditions. At the Federal level, genetics and epidemiology are important in several current public policy matters: (1) Protection of people from chemical hazards and radiation has focused
on scientific evaluation of risks of mutagenesis, carcinogenesis, and teratogenesis, including potential individual variation in susceptibility. (2) The National Genetics Diseases Act is being implemented in concert with state maternal and child health programs to relate knowledge about medical,
psychological, and economic burdens of genetic disorders to appropriate care. (3) Expansion of laboratory and educational support for prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders is closely tied to questions of the efficacy and safety of the techniques and to discussions about social values and ethical
issues. (4) Genetic screening, genetic couseling, and artificial fertilization are leading topics for consideration by the new Ethics Advisory board of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.

In the halls of Congress, throughout
the departments and agencies of the Executive Branch of our Government, andin
many other settings where science and
technology and public policy are discussed
together, the terms epidemiology,
genetics, and toxicology are gaining a familiar ring. These terms and the fields they
designate may not yet be household
words, but policy makers of all stripes are
looking to experts in these fields for help
in identifying persons at “‘high risk.”’
These policy makers are either writing or
seeking to implement legislation that
more and more explicitly brings these disciplines to the forefront. This situation is
true in issue after issue—whether toxic

substances or recombinant DNA or hu
Dr. Omenn is on leave from his position as Professor of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

man nutrition or nuclear nonproliferation
or ionizing radiation or a host of others.
The twin notions have caught hold that individuals and population subgroups have
differing susceptibilities and needs and
that population-based data are essential
for decision-making. Our Office of
Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) in
the White House has a broad agenda with
much emphasis on the life sciences. The
focus of this paper is on human genetics,
of course, but I wish to note at the outset
that we have taken a considerable interest
in OSTP also in enhancing modern genetic
approaches in agriculture and in ecology.
I think it is quite appropriate, as requested by the organizers of the Symposium, to link discussion of medical interventions and of public policy in this paper.
First of all, there are important public policy aspects in the planning and assessment

117

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

118 Omenn

of medical interventions for defined populations. Secondly, I believe there is much
analogy to the public policy maker in the
work of the “‘compleat physician.”’ The
physician must do his best for his patient
and yet use available resources wisely. He
or she should be sensitive to social and
family considerations and careful to avoid
unnecessary hazards and costs, and physicians need population-based data to estimate the likelihood of particular
diagnoses in patients of various backgrounds.

MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH
INTERVENTIONS

In the present context, I have chosen to
distinguish medical interventions from
public health interventions, the former illustrated by genetic counseling and the
latter by genetic screening.

GENETIC COUNSELING

The dominant feature of the genetic
counseling encounter is the fact that it is
almost always initiated by the patient. The
patient comes to the physician or genetic
counseling team with a medical problem
or a fear of developing a medical problem
Or passing on some such problem to
children. The patient comes as an individual and/or the patient’s family comes as an
individual family unit. The components of
genetic counseling then may be characterized as follows.

1. Precise medical diagnosis, based
upon complete history and physical examination of the patient/consultand and
the family. Appropriate tests may be ordered, and special care is taken to delineate different causes of similar clinical
problems—like specific causes of mental
retardation or of anemia or of muscular
dystrophy. This first step cannot be overemphasized, because a correct diagnosis is
essential to the provision of useful and
sympathetic advice.

Social Biology

2. Assessment of social and psychological aspects of the family and patient. Oftentimes the people coming for genetic counseling have already gone through
wrenching experiences due to their illness—at work, in the family, and in previous encounters with health professionals. Guilt about passing on ‘‘bad
genes” to children may be severe. People
may feel they could have done something
to prevent their problems. They may be
angry at other health professionals, or
they may have been discriminated against
on the job. Psychological defenses like denial or intellectualization may be evident.
Genetic counselors, for all these reasons,
find a counseling session an absorbing and
often an emotional experience.

3. Explanation and counseling for the
patient’s problems, needs, and questions.
A patient often needs-help to formulate
questions about the nature and implications of the disease. Options for dealing
with the disorder and for preventing its recurrence in future family members require careful explanation. A statement of
the recurrence risk may depend upon the
judgment of the physician about whether
the particular condition is transmitted as a
dominant or a recessive trait, or whether it
is transmitted at all rather than being due
to anew mutation.

It is no longer true that doctors can’t do
anything about hereditary diseases. A tremendous array of treatment approaches
has been developed—using special diets,
giving missing hormones or gamma globulin or clotting factors, administering drugs
to remove toxic metals or enhance certain
enzymes, using mechanical aids from eyeglasses to hearing aids to kidney dialysis
machines, or employing surgery to remove cataracts or a bowel full of polyps or
to transplant a kidney (Table 1). All of
these approaches are effective and are employed as in conventional medical care for
similar disorders with nongenetic causes.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

 

Genetics and Epidemiology 119

TABLE 1
THERAPY OF GENETIC DISEASES BY CONVENTIONAL MEANS*

Treatment Approach

1. Add missing substance (product)

Examples

Thyroid hormone, cortisol, insulin, antihemophilic globu
lin, gamma globulin, blood cells, vitamin B,,

2. Prevent accumulation of toxic precursor

we)

. Replace the defective enzyme

Phenylalanine in PKU; galactose-1-phosphate in galactose(substrate) mia
Plasma pseudocholinesterase deficiency; Fabry’s; metach
romatic leukodystrophy

. Use drug therapy (inhibit enzymes)
. Induce enzyme by drug
. Remove toxic substance

NN

Allopurinol to prevent gout
Phenobarbital for jaundice in newborn
Metal removing drugs for copper {Wilson’s disease) or iron

(hemochromatosis)

7. Surgically remove organ

Colon in congenital polyposis; spleen in spherocytosis; lens

with cataracts

8. Transplant

Kidney (polycystic kidneys, cystinosis); bone marrow (tha
lassemia); cornea

9. Use artificial aids
10. Block physiological (immune) response

Eyeglasses; hearing aids; kidney machine
Rhogam treatment of Rh-negative mothers who deliver

Rh-positive babies

*From Omenn, 1973.

The major difference is that for diseases
with genetic causes family members
should be examined to see whether the
disorder could be diagnosed in them at an
earlier and less damaging stage than it was
in the index case for the family.

Besides treatments, preventive measures are significant. The first and still most
important is prevention of damage to the
fetus from Rh blood incompatibility between mother and fetus. Population and
clinical studies for over thirty years, beginning in the 1940's, led together to this remarkable advance. Now Rh disease is disappearing. In the past decade the most
important development has been prenatal
diagnosis of a growing number of severe
conditions early enough in pregnancy that
the pregnancy can be terminated if the
parents so choose.

4. Post-counseling follow-up to help the
patient assess the new, sometimes reassuring, sometimes shocking information
from the genetic counseling session or sessions. Follow-up is also needed sometimes
to obtain further information from espe
cially complicated tests and from additional relatives. In this step, as well as in
the previous steps, nonphysician health
professionals—social workers, genetic associates, specialized nurses, others—are
extremely important and effective members of the counseling team who can take
care of much of the process once the
diagnosis is made or confirmed.

GENETIC SCREENING

Genetic screening is an entirely
different process in an entirely different
context from genetic counseling. Genetic
screening is population-based, including
screening for sickle cell anemia and sickle
cell trait, for Tay-Sachs disease, and for
PKU and other amino acid disorders, hypothyroidism, and chromosome anomalies in newborns (National Research
Council, 1975). The persons involved in
screening seek the subjects, almost all of
whom have no known medical problems.
Often the subjects are confused or reluctant or even hostile about giving information or samples of blood or other tissues.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

120 Omenn

Children or even newborns may be the
subjects, involving parents as proxy
sources of informed consent. Any test has
some false positives, but this is especially
true of screening tests which are designed
not to miss affected individuals. The result
is that unsuspecting subjects may be made
anxious or be misinformed, at least temporarily, about potential health problems.
Finally, the purposes of some screening
programs have been unclear or too many,
making education of the community and
of individuals less than satisfactory.

Despite all of these problems, genetic
screening has great potential value. First,
genetic screening may provide early detection of significant disorders, allowing
interventions that prevent suffering, disability, and loss of life. Such screening
should have a high priority in programs of
health promotion and disease prevention,
as recommended by the report of the Institute of Medicine (Nightingale et al.,
1978). Second, screening programs have a
potential for achieving a better acceptance
of those persons affected with such disorders. Third, screening offers a very important means of collecting data for epidemiological analyses of heterogeneous
causes of many common categories of disease—neonatal abnormalities, cardiovascular disease, cancer, etc. There is a connection between genetic screening and
genetic counseling, of course, in that those
persons who are found to be affected in
the screening program then require
effective genetic counseling.

CURRENT FEDERAL ACTIVITIES

At the Federal level, the interplay of
genetics and epidemiology ts important in
a number of current public policy matters.
1 will highlight four of these topics in this
section of the paper.

Social Biology

1. REGULATIONS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION

The Carter Administration is proud of
the series of Congressional Acts and Executive Regulations that provide significant
protection for Americans in the areas of
public health and safety, ranging from air
quality, water quality, food safety, and
waste disposal to highway safety and reduction of physical and chemical hazards
in the work place. In some respects, our
standards are more stringent than those of
other countries around the world. However, we are confident that in due time
those countries, our economic competitors, will adopt similar measures to protect their own citizenry.

As an example, under the Clean Air
Act of 1970 and its 1977 amendments, the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is instructed to protect health and welfare. Thus, the legislative and administrative history of this Act
has focused on protection of health, with
much less attention to technical feasibility
and little or no attention to the economic
requirements.

The two critical questions in development of proposed regulations are the establishment of the appropriate endpoint
for a definition of adverse health effects
and the designation of the most suscepttble subpopulation for whom a standard
must be stringent enough to assure protection. Scientific evidence is critical to the
regulatory decision-making process. Government policy makers increasingly recognize the need for sound knowledge and
are seeking to enhance research efforts.

Organized efforts cutting across more
than one regulatory agency are reflected
in the Interagency Regulatory Liaison
Group task forces, comprising representatives of the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Occupational

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), and the Consumer Product
Safety Commission (CPSC). The Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
has recently announced the establishment
of a National Toxicology Program, aimed
at coordinating research and training with
HEW and satisfying the needs of the regulatory agencies outside of HEW. The
President announced in October, 1978,
the formation of a Regulatory Council,
which is charged with developing a calendar of forthcoming regulatory actions. In
the review of budget requests to the President for the 1980 fiscal year, the Office of
Management and Budget and OSTP
worked together with the agencies on a
zero-based budget review of research related to toxic substances. Finally, our
office has prepared a paper on establishment of a consistent or uniform framework for the evaluation of substances as
potential human carcinogens (Calkins et
al., 1979).

Delineation of specific genetic sub
groups in the population has not yet oc
curred, to my knowledge, in the development of regulatory actions. However,
population-based data are being used intensively to decide what level of a pollutant can be tolerated without significant ill
effects by many of the most sensitive people in the population.

In the case of the ambient air standard
for stationary sources of air lead, recently
announced by EPA (Costle, 1978), EPA
defined the most sensitive population as
young children with a lifetime of potential
exposure and picked a standard to protect
99.5 per cent of exposed children from an
elevation of blood lead that would produce any significant degree of anemia.
The standard so derived was a complex
calculation based upon judgments of the
scientific literature and margins of safety
for each element of the equation, from the

Genetics and Epidemiology | 121

identification of the most sensitive population to the analysis of adverse health
effect, to the blood lead level, to the air
lead level, to the meteorological model
with which air sampling sites were selected
for monitoring, to the emission standard
for the plant itself.

In the Criteria Document reviewing
health effects, it was first proposed that
the adverse health effect to be prevented
was a deviation from background level of
a metabolic intermediate, namely erythrocyte protoporphyrin (Environmental
Protection Agency, 1977). No abnormalities in red blood cell function can be associated with modest elevations of erythrocyte protoporphyrin. Perhaps criticism of
use of this biochemical marker as an adverse health effect led to the later decision
by EPA to utilize prevention of anemia as
its criterion, although the standard which
was derived was identical.

In a more recent regulatory action, the
updating of the standard on photochemical oxidants (smog), EPA is proposing a
standard for ozone on the worst day of the
year that has been estimated by some
EPA consultants to protect at least 99 per
cent of the most sensitive population,
namely the 5 per cent of the general population with chronic asthma, bronchitis, or
emphysema. Here the adverse health
effect is increase in symptoms, such as increased cough and wheezing. There was
no attention to such obvious genetic subgroups as persons with cystic fibrosis or
deficient in alpha-1-antitrypsin, but such
persons are probably involved in this extreme end of the bell-shaped curve of susceptibility to respiratory irritants.

The notion of differential susceptibility
to environmental health hazards is hardly
anew one. In 1938 in Heredity and Politics
J. B. S. Haldane wrote:

But while I am sure that our standards of
industrial hygiene are shamefully low, it is
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

122 Omenn

important to realize that there ts a side of
the question which so far has been completely ignored. The majority of potters do
not die of bronchitis. It is quite possible that
if we really understood the causation of this
disease we should find out that only a fraction of potters are of a constitution which
renders them liable to it. If so, we could
eliminate potters’ bronchitis by regulating
entrants into the potter’s industry who are
congenitally exposed to it.

Such a proposal raises large questions
about protection of workers in the work
place. Regulation by OSHA has focused
entirely on responsibilities of the companies to employ engineering controls to reduce toxic exposures to zero or to some
tolerable minimum. Occasionally,
workers are encouraged to wear respirators or take other measures to protect

themselves directly, above and beyond

what can be accomplished by protection of
the environment of the work setting.

A very interesting test of workers’ responsibilities in insuring their own health
is the interaction of asbestos exposure and
Cigarette smoking. It 1s well established
(see Hammond and Selikoff, 1973) that
asbestos exposure can induce chronic lung
disease, lung cancer, and/or cancer of the
pleura. However, the majority of the excess cases of cancer occurs in smokers. As
a result, Johns Mansville, a leading producer of asbestos, proposed, in addition to
efforts to reduce exposures, a policy under
which no smokers would be hired for certain jobs and current employees who are
smokers would be offered the choice of
participating in a company-sponsored
stop-smoking campaign or else being
transferred to a different job within the
company. The union has taken the company to court charging discrimination.

As in so many issues in our society, the
courts will have to start addressing this
large loaded question about the distribution of responsibility for health protection
in the work place. It is understandable, as

Social Biology

I’ve written elsewhere (Omenn, 1978),
that companies wish to reduce their liability and to take as many measures as feasible to protect the health of their employees; on the other hand, companies may be
suspected of shifting responsibility and
cost and of thereby denying certain employees or potential employees some job
opportunities.

As far as testing for specific genetic
polymorphisms which may predispose to
occupational health hazards, very little
has been done. A scientist at the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) many years ago proposed screening for alpha-1l-antitrypsin
deficiency, for G6PD deficiency, for contact allergens, and for sickle cell trait.
Upon reviewing the field a few years later,
he found little had been done by industry
(Stokinger and Scheel, 1973). In another
example, a scientist at a major European
chemical company identified a plasma enzyme polymorphism for paraoxonase,
which metabolizes the pesticide parathion
(Geldmacher-v. Mallinckrodt, 1978).
However, workers have not yet been
tested to see whether slow metabolizers
had higher blood levels of the chemical or
higher incidences of potential neurological effects.

Ecogenetics—the study of genetically
determined differences in susceptibility to
environmental agents (Motulsky, 1976;
Omenn and Motulsky, 1978)—is equally
important in the areas of foods, nutritional requirements, and food safety
(Omenn, 1978). For example, for certain
nutrients, further research on nutritional
requirements may be unproductive, since
the present uncertainty may be no larger
than the real biological variation in needs
among different individuals. In the case of
cholesterol, the recognition of familial hypercholesterolemia, combined hyperlipidemia, and probably other heterogeneous
cases of elevated serum cholesterol

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

greatly complicates the large scale studies
already undertaken to test the intervention of cholesterol reduction on the risk of

_coronary heart disease.

We may anticipate that assessment of
health effects in the work place and tests
for relative susceptibility or relative resistance in workers will become an increasingly productive area of research and an
increasingly contentious area of public
policy in the years ahead.

2. NATIONAL GENETIC DISEASES ACT

On April 22, 1976, the National Sickle
Cell Anemia, Cooley’s Anemia, TaySachs, and Genetic Diseases Act was
enacted as Title IV of Public Law 94-278.
This legislation provided for a program of
research, health services, and education
programs in genetic diseases. Health services were a major focus of the Act and included testing and counseling for the
diagnosis, control, and treatment of
genetic diseases. The original Act authorized thirty million dollars to be spent in
each of three years beginning in 1976.
Money was not appropriated by the Congress, however, until the program was
funded for four million dollars in February, 1978. The program has been
reauthorized for the years 1979 through
1981, but each year’s appropriation will be
a matter of Congressional action.

It is clear that this program is serviceoriented and closely tied to populationbased data on the frequencies of specific
genetic disorders and the needs of people
in the state or regional catchment areas.

The implementation of the program
under the National Genetic Diseases Act
was assigned to the Health Services Administration (HSA) of the Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare. After
consultations with experts from around
the country in university medical centers,
sickle cell and hemophilia clinics, and maternal and child health programs at local,

Genetics and Epidemiology 123

state, and Federal levels, and after establishment of a Public Health Service advisory committee involving NIH, HSA,
CDC, and other agencies, a peer review
panel was organized to evaluate grant applications. Twenty-one awards were made
to state health departments in the following states: Alabama, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Maine,
Michigan, Nebraska, New Jersey, New
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island,
Tennessee, Texas, Vermont, Virginia,
West Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.

The programs funded represent a collaboration between state health departments and medical genetics centers in
those states and represent a deliberate
effort to stimulate attention to genetic diseases in existing maternal and child health
programs and other health and public
health programs in the state or region. I
know from personal communications that
this program has stimulated such collaboration in an effective way in a number of
those states for the first time. Growth of
this new program will depend upon its
success in providing services and enhancing public education and public understanding of genetic disorders as well as in
generating epidemiological evaluations of
genetic disorders and their management.

3, PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS OF
GENETIC DISORDERS

The development of amniocentesis and
of related techniques for the prenatal
diagnosis of genetic disorders has revolutionized genetic counseling and provided
increasingly valuable information to couples seeking to enhance their chances of
having healthy babies. Among all the
many technologies introduced into medical care in the past few years, the technologies involved in prenatal diagnosis of
genetic disorders stand as the leading example of rational introduction of medical
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

124 Omenn

technology and of careful and thoughtful
assessment of efficacy and safety. I have
discussed that conclusion at much greater
length in an article in a special issue of
Science magazine (May 26, 1978) devoted
to ““Health Maintenance.”

In 1971, at a time when approximately
three hundred patients had been subjected to amniocentesis, collaborative
studies were initiated in the United States
and in Canada and the United Kingdom to
assess the clinical and laboratory aspects
of the approach to prenatal diagnosis and
to guide genetic counseling. The results of
those studies, supported in the United
States by the National Institute for Child
Health and Human Development
(NICHHD), indicated that hazards to
mother and fetus were fewer than expected and appeared to be indistinguishable from the hazards of normal pregnancy in the second trimester with regard
to fetal loss and various maternal complications.

Health care technology is receiving
more and more attention these days as the
high costs associated with high-technology
in-patient care have become recognized.
In the Office of Science and Technology
Policy we are seeking a balance between
the increase in health care costs attributable to utilization, especially inappropriate utilization, of existing and new
technologies and the clear need to
enhance the development of efficacious
and cost-effective technologies to improve
our capabilities of dealing with many medical problems (Omenn and Ball, 1978).
President Carter ordered a Cabinet-level
review of the many factors in Federal policy that could serve to provide incentives
for, and may now serve to discourage, the
technological innovation so important in
health, energy, defense, and the general
economy. The review focuses not only on
research and development, but also on
Federal procurement policy, tax policies,

Social Biology

venture capital formation, anti-trust statutes, patent policy, environmental regulation, and various managerial approaches. Representatives of the
pharmaceutical and medical device manufacturers have served on task forces in this
review.

Late in 1978, President Carter signed
into law a bill establishing a National Center on Health Care and Technology. This
Center will develop from the Office of
Health Technology in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health at HEW. It
will complement the series of technical
consensus exercises well established now
at the National Institutes of Health. All
these activities depend heavily upon population-based data and assessments of the
impact of diseases in population terms.

4. PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON
ETHICS IN MEDICINE AND RESEARCH

Issues at the juncture of genetics and
epidemiology, such as genetic screening
and genetic counseling, have been prominent in recent and projected studies of
biomedical ethics. Between 1974 and 1978
the National Commission on Protection of
Human Subjects carried out a number of
landmark analyses and made many useful
recommendations. One of their recommendations was for an Ethics Advisory
Board, which has been established by the
Secretary of Health, Education, and
Welfare and which is currently holding
hearings around the country on the topic
of artificial fertilization. Review of that topic was triggered by a grant application to
the National Institutes of Health seeking
federal support for research on in-vitro
fertilization.

The latest Federal entry in the bioethics
field is the President’s Commission for the
Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine
and Biomedical and Behavioral Research,
which was approved by Congress in October, 1978. One of the specific responsibiliDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 2

ties of the new Commission will be to examine, or reexamine, the “ethical, moral,
social, and legal implications of voluntary
testing, counseling, and information and
education programs with respect to
genetic diseases and conditions.”

In conclusion, it should be evident from
these examples that research in genetics
and epidemiology and issues arising from
information gained from genetic epidemiology are of great interest to policy
makers in the Federal Government as well

Genetics and Epidemiology 125

as to many interested persons in the professions and the general public.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The original version of this paper was presented at the symposium ‘‘Genetics in Epidemiology,” sponsored by the AAAS Sections
on Biological and Medical Sciences, the Society for the Study of Social Biology, and the
American Public Health Association at the
Annual Meeting of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, Houston,
Texas, January 4, 1979.

REFERENCES

CaLkins, D. R., R. L. Dixon, C. R. Gerser, G.
S. OMENN, and D. Zarin. 1979. A scientific
framework for establishing a consistent federal policy on the evaluation of substances as
potential human carcinogens. Draft discussion paper, October 20, 1978. Final paper,
January 30, 1979. Office of Science and Technology Policy, Washington, D.C.

CosTLe, D. 1978. Announcement by EPA administrator of the National Ambient Air
Quality Standard for Lead. September 29,
1978. Washington, D.C.

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY. 1977.
EPA proposed national ambient air quality
standard for lead. Fed. Reg. 42:63076-63094.

GENDMACHER-V. MALLINCKRODT, M. 1978. The
polymorphism of the human serum paraoxonase, p. 160-169. 7/1 Human genetics, Suppl.
1. Springer-Verlag, New York.

HaLpanE, J. B.S. 1938. Heredity and politics. W.
W. Norton, New York.

Hammonp, E. C., and I. J. SELikorr. 1973. Relation of cigarette smoking to risk of death of asbestos-associated disease among insulation
workers in the United States, p. 312-317. InP.
Bogovski, J. C. Gilson, V. Timbrell, J. C.
Wagner, and W. Davis (eds.), Biological
effects of asbestos. Scientific Publication No.
8. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.

Motutskxy, A. G. 1976. Ecogenetics: Genetic
variation in susceptibility to environmental
agents. Jn Human genetics, Proceedings of the
Fifth International Congress of Human
Genetics, Mexico City, October 10-15, 1976.
Springer-Verlag, New York.

NATIONAL RESEARCH CoUNCIL. Committee for
the Study of Inborn Error of Metabolism.
1975. Genetic screening: Programs, principles, and research. National Academy of
Sciences, Washington, D.C.

NIGHTINGALE, E., M. CURETON, V. KALMAR, and
M. TrupeEav. 1978. Perspectives on health
promotion and disease prevention in the United States—A staff paper for the Institute of
Medicine. January. National Academy of
Sciences, Washington, D.C.

OmENN, G. S. 1973. Genetic engineering: Present
and future, p. 48-63. In R. H. Williams (ed.),
To live and to die. Springer-Verlag, New
York.

. 1978a. Ecogenetics: A view from the

U.S. President’s Science Advisory Office, p.

179-184. In Human genetics, Supp! 1.

Springer-Verlag, New York.

19788. Prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders. Science 200: 952-958.

OmeENN, G.S., and J. R. BALL. 1978. The role of
health technology evaluation: A policy perspective. Paper given at the Conference on
Health Care Technology Evaluation, Columbia, Missouri, November 6-7, 1978.

OmENN, G. S., and A. G. MoTuLsky. 1978. Ecogenetics: Genetic variation in susceptibility to
environmental agents, p. 83-111. In B. H. Cohen, A. M. Lilienfeld, and P. C. Huang,
Genetic issues in public health and medicine.
CC Thomas, Springfield, Ill.

STOKINGER, H. E., and L. D. SCHEEL. 1973. Hypersusceptibility and genetic problems in occupational medicine—A consensus report. J.
Occupat. Med. 15:564-573.

 

 

 

 
