Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Differential fertility by intelligence: The role of
birth planning

J. Richard Udry

To cite this article: J. Richard Udry (1978) Differential fertility by intelligence: The role of birth
planning, Social Biology, 25:1, 10-14, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988313

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988313

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 5
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 34 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Differential Fertility by Intelligence:

The Role of Birth Planning

J. Richard Udry

Carolina Population Center
University of North Carolina
Chapel, Hill, North Carolina

 

ABSTRACT: In a sample of urban white U.S. women, an inverse relationship is demonstrated
between fertility and 1Q and is shown to come about because low-IQ women have more unwanted
births than high-IQ women. The excess of unwanted births among low-IQ women is caused by
their elevated failure rate with temporary physician-administered contraceptive methods. In
order to control their fertility according to their own desires as well as do high-IQ women, low-IQ
women require increased use of permanent birth control methods.

Over the past decades, a number of papers have examined the relationship between intelligence and fertility. The primary purpose has been to determine
whether or not there is a dysgenic differential in fertility, under the assumption
that a sizeable proportion of the variance
in intelligence is genetically controlled.
These studies have not been consistent in
their conclusions. For example, Cattell
(1950), Frederick Osborn (1971), and R.
T. Osborne (1975) have reported dysgenic
effects; Waller (1970), Bajema (1963), and
Higgins, et al. (1962) have reported either
no effects or eugenic effects. Cattell (1974)
has reviewed factors which continue to
threaten the validity of findings in such
studies.

Irrespective of the findings of such studies, the fact remains that among the
ever-married population low-IQ parents
have more offspring than high-IQ parents.
The larger number of children in each sibship may further depress the IQ of the
children (Zajonc, 1976). Low-IQ parents
may thus be faced with the problems of
rearing large numbers of low-IQ children,
a situation with which they are ill
10

prepared to cope. Focus on the genetic
issues has led to the neglect of this problem.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The present paper identifies a sample of
urban white ever-married women in
which IQ is inversely related to fertility. It
explores the role of birth planning in producing this inverse relationship.

The sample derives from an area sample
survey of ever-married white women age
15-44 in low- and high-income census
tracts in 16 U.S. cities interviewed in 1974
in connection with an evaluation of family
planning programs in those cities.! About
one hundred women were interviewed in
each city, except in Milwaukee, Akron,
Houston, Columbus, and Memphis where
about two hundred women were interviewed. While the sample is a probability

1 The cities in which interviews were conducted
were Portland, Oregon; Houston, Texas; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Muskegon, Michigan; Utica,
New York; Atlantic City, New Jersey; Wilmington,
Delaware; Altoona and Johnson City, Pennsylvania;
Savannah, Georgia; West Palm Beach, Florida;
Jackson, Mississippi; Memphis, Tennessee; Columbus and Akron, Ohio; and Mobile, Alabama.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 1

sample of the census tracts selected, it is
not strictly representative of the total
population of those cities since cities were
not represented in the sample proportionate to their populations and since not
all census tracts were in the pool from
which the sample was drawn. Nevertheless, it represents a broad spectrum of the
socioeconomic strata in U.S. urban areas.
There is no reason to suspect that the
sample is unrepresentative of U.S. urban
ever-married women within the age range
15-44.

The first task was to.establish that there
was a relationship between intelligence
and fertility, net of social background factors. Intelligence IQ) was measured by a
shortened adaptation of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test suitable for administration as a part of a comprehensive field
survey. This test is admittedly very far
from culture fair and is known to be highly
influenced by educational and other social
background factors. Fertility was measured as children ever born (CEB). Because the sample varied in age, age and
marital duration were measured and controlled. Because our IQ test is known to be
sensitive to social background factors,
father’s occupational status at respondent’s age 14 (coded on the Nam-Powers
scale) was controlled. While it must be
taken for granted that IQ causes some of
the variance in education, education was
nevertheless controlled. In this way, the
analysis introduces controls for two social
sources of variance in IQ scores, even
though IQ probably also affects these two
control variables. Consequently, these
data present a relatively conservative estimate of the relationship between IQ and
CEB.

RESULTS

Table 1 gives the results of analysis of
covariance in which IQ is the independent

Differential Fertility 11

TABLE 1

ANALYSIS OF COVARIANCE OF IQ ON CHILDREN
EVER Born, USING AGE, DURATION OF MARRIAGE,

EDUCATION, AND FATHER’S OCCUPATION AS
COVARIABLES

IQ and Covariables F Signif.

Main effect of IQ ........... 3.54 0.028
Covariables

Ae . oe cece ee ccc cee eens 53.20 0.001

Duration of marriage ...... 481.55 0.001

Education............008. 14.01 0.001

Father’s occupation ....... 16.77 0.001

variable, CEB is the dependent variable,
and the covariables are age, duration of
marriage, education, and father’s occupational status. The main effect of IQ on
CEB is statistically significant. Table 2
shows a 0.19 difference between the mean
CEB of high- and low-IQ groups when
covariables are controlled. While this difference is small, it is statistically significant. The high-IQ group has about
nine-tenths as many children as_ the
low-IQ group, other variables controlled.

Because the original purpose for which
these data were gathered was to answer
questions about the effectiveness of family
planning programs, considerable data
were gathered on current fertility desires,
planning status of births, and patterns of
use of contraception. These data will allow us for the first time to examine the
possible role of birth planning in the rela- .
tionship between IQ and fertility. The following possibilities are examined.

1. Low-IQ women desire more children
than high-IO women. In this case, higher
fertility would represent their accomplishment of higher fertility goals. Examination of the data shows that low-IQ
women desire 0.16 more children than
high-IQ women. Therefore, desired family
size was added as a covariable to the analysis shown in Table 1. If desired family
size accounts for the relationship between
IQ and CEB, then the significance of IQ
should disappear as a main effect. FurDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

12 Udry

TABLE 2

MEAN CHILDREN EVER Born By IQ ADJUSTED
FOR COVARIABLES

CHILDREN EVER Born

IQ Mean No.
LOW 2. eee ec ee cee tenes 1.89 590
Medium ..............ece00e- 1.86 612
High... 2.2... eee cee eee 1.71 625

ther, the CEB difference between highand low-IQ groups in Table 2 should be
eliminated. In fact, desired family size is a
significant covariable. But the significant
level of IQ as a main effect is unchanged,
and the difference in CEB between highand low-IQ groups remains unchanged.
Differences in desired family size associated with IQ are therefore not the explanation for the relationship between IQ and
CEB.

2. Low-IQ women have more unwanted
fertility than high-IQ women. This hypothesis was examined by identifying unwanted births occurring to each women at
risk of unwanted fertility at an index point
three years before the interview. The measure is therefore the proportion of women
at risk of an unwanted birth three years
ago who had an unwanted birth in the
three-year interval. Only 668 out of the
original sample of more than 2,000 women
were at risk of an unwanted birth at the
index point. A woman is at risk of an
unwanted birth if her desired completed
parity is not greater than her parity at the
index point. This system allows for some
slippage in desired family size, and therefore an underenumeration of unwanted
births, since the desired family size was
determined at interview, not at the index
point. It is well known that a small proportion of women alter their desired family size upward to accommodate births
which before the fact would have been
identified as unwanted.

Table 3 presents the percentage of
women at risk who expenenced an un
Social Biology

TABLE 3

PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN HAVING UNWANTED

BIRTHS IN THREE-YEAR PERIOD FOR THOSE AT RISK

AT BEGINNING OF PERIOD, BY IQ AND MARITAL
STATUS AT TIME OF INTERVIEW

HUSBAND PRESENT OTHER
IQ % No. % No.
Low ......... 24.7 146 25.4 63
Medium...... 16.7 168 22.2 54
High......... 11.0 191 8.7 46

wanted birth in the three-year index period by marital status at time of interview.
For women with and without spouses present, the low-IQ women report two to
three times the percentage of unwanted
births as the high-IQ women. Since the
results in Table 3 may be an artifact of a
relationship between social background
factors (which are shown in Table 1 to be
related to IQ) and percentage of unwanted
births, a regression analysis was prepared
with “having an unwanted birth” as the
dependent variable, [Q as the independent
variable, and age of respondent, father’s
occupation, and respondent’s education as
controls, again using only women at risk
of an unwanted birth. The regression
analysis is displayed in Table 4. While
age, as expected, was an important determinant of unwanted births, neither of
the social background variables had anything approaching significant regression
coefficients. We can therefore conclude
that low-IQ women have a much higher
number of unwanted births than high-IQ
women and that social background factors
are not contributors to that relationship.

TABLE 4

REGRESSION OF “HAD UNWANTED BIRTH IN THREE
YEARS” ON AGE, EDUCATION, IQ, AND FATHER’S
OCCUPATION FOR WOMEN AT RISK AT BEGINNING

OF PERIOD
Variables b F Signif.
Age .........005- ~—0.02 76.69 0.001
Education........ —0.005 0.54 NS
| { © —0.002 6.45 0.05
Father’s occupation —0.0009 2.30 NS
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 1

Why do low-IQ women have more unwanted births than high-IQ women?
There are three possibilities. (1) Low-IQ
women use less effective contraceptive
methods. (2) Low-IQ women fail more
frequently with equally effective methods.
(3) Low-IQ women do not rationalize unwanted births as effectively as high-IQ
women. The third possibility can be
eliminated logically, because if it were the
sole explanation there would be no fertility
difference to explain.

Do low-IQ women at risk of unwanted
births have more unwanted births because
they use less effective contraceptive methods? A tabulation, by IQ, of the percentage of women at risk who were using
a physician-administered contraceptive
(PAC) method (pill, IUD, sterilization) at
both the beginning and end of the threeyear index period shows that a somewhat
higher percentage of high-IQ women were
using PAC methods (38 per cent of highIQ women vs. 30 per cent of low-IQ women), Therefore, the variable “using/not
using PAC method at beginning and end
of the period” was added to the regression
shown in Table 4. While use of PAC
methods explains a significant amount of
variance in unwanted births, the
coefficient for IQ is unchanged and still
significant, and its F ratio is hardly reduced by the addition of “use of PAC.” We
conclude that while fewer low-IQ women
use PAC methods, this fact does not account for their disproportionate number of
unwanted births.

From the fact that after entering “‘use of
PAC” in the regression, IQ stil] had essentially the same coefficient and F-ratio, we
can conclude that the relationship between
IQ and unwanted births is attributable to
the more effective use by high-IQ women
of methods theoretically of similar effectiveness.2 Table 5 shows the percentage of

2 It is possible that high-IQ women are using ‘‘bet
Differential Fertility 13

TABLE 5

PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN HAVING UNWANTED

BIRTHS IN THREE YEARS FOR THOSE AT RISK, BY

IQ AND Use oF PAC METHOD DURING ENTIRE
PERIOD OF RISK

Usep a PAC METHOD ENTIRE PERIOD

Yes No
IQ % No % No
LOW vaccines 11.1 63 30.8 146
Medium...... 8.2 73 22.8 149
High......... 3.4 89 14.9 148

women at risk who experienced an unwanted birth in the three-year period separately for those “using a PAC method for
the entire period” and those not “using a
PAC method for the entire period.” The
first thing to note is that those mot using a
PAC method during the entire period had
unwanted births at about three times the
rate of those using a PAC method during
the entire period. But more important for
our analysis, within method-use categories, low-IQ women experienced unwanted births at more than twice the rate
of high-[IQ women. We conclude that the
disproportionate number of unwanted
births occurring to low-IQ women can be
accounted for by their disproportionate
failure with methods theoretically of equal
effectiveness. Here “failure with method”
must be interpreted broadly to include discontinuance or sporadic or otherwise incorrect use of the method.

CONCLUSIONS

Low-IQ women in the present sample
have slightly higher fertility than high-IQ

ter” PAC methods than low-IQ women. Perhaps a
higher percentage of the high-IQ women at risk are
sterilized or spend a larger proportion of the index
period sterilized. A variable was added to the regression equation in Table 4, indicating whether the
woman or her husband was sterilized, and if so, for
what part of the index period. Use of PAC was not
included in this regression. “Sterilized time” had a
trivial and insignificant regression coefficient and did
not affect the remainder of the regression in any way.
This finding indicates that the difference by IQ in
unwanted births which is attributable to use of PAC
is associated with use of temporary methods.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

14 Udry

women, even after social background factors have been controlled. Low-IQ women
have slightly higher fertility because they
have more unwanted births than high-IQ
women, not because they desire more
children. While low-IQ women do not use
PAC methods as often as high-IQ women,
this fact is not the explanation for the relationship between IQ and frequency of
unwanted births. This relationship can be
explained by the fact that low-IQ women
at risk of unwanted births fail more frequently than high-IQ women to prevent
the births they do not want while using
temporary methods theoretically of equal
effectiveness.

Following this argument to its logical
implications for program application, we
can infer that low-IQ women are in need
of permanent methods of fertility prevention when they have reached their desired
family size if they are to be able to control

Social Biology

their fertility as well as high-IQ women. It
should be emphasized that, according to
our data, education is not necessarily the
answer, since the differential in unwanted
births for women at risk by education net
of IQ is not significant. Within the ethical
framework guiding family planning service delivery in the United States, the
public purpose is to make it possible for
Americans to realize their own fertility
goals. Low-IQ women can only control
their fertility in accordance with their desires as well as high-IQ women with the
use of permanent methods.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by funds from
the Center for Population Research, NICHD
NO1-HD-42804, NO1-HD-32715 and
HDOS798-04. Thanks to Bruck Eckland for
useful comments on an earlier draft and to
Judy Kovenock for management of the data
analysis.

REFERENCES

BAJEMA, C. 1963. Estimation of the direction and
intensity of natural selection in relation to human
intelligence by means of the intrinsic rate of natural increase. Eugen. Quart. 10:175-187.

CATTELL, R. B. 1950. The fate of national intelligence: Test of a thirteen-year prediction. Eugen.
Rev. 42:136-148.

. 1974. Differential fertility and normal selection for IQ: Some required conditions for their
investigation. Soc. Biol. 21:168-177.

Hiccrns, J. V., E. W. REED, and S. C. REED. 1962.
Intelligence and family size: A paradox resolved.
Eugen. Quart. 9:84—90.

 

OSBORN, F. 1971. Races and the future of man, p.
149-157. In R. H. Osborne (ed.), Biological and
social meaning of race. Freeman, San Francisco.

OSBORNE, R. T. 1975. Fertility, IQ, and school
achievement. Psych. Rep. 37:1067-1073.

WALLER, J. H. 1970. Differential reproduction: Its
relationship to IQ test score, education, and occupation. Soc. Biol. 18:122—136.

ZAJONC, R. B. 1976. Family configuration and intelligence. Science 192:227-236.
