Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Afterthoughts on Haldane

Krishna R. Dronamraju

To cite this article: Krishna R. Dronamraju (1987) Afterthoughts on Haldane, Social Biology,
34:1-2, 119-121, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1987.9988667

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1987.9988667

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
NM
—
©
N

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December

Afterthoughts on Haldane

Krishna R. Dronamraju

 

Center for Demographic and Population Genetics
University of Texas Health Service Center at Houston

Houston, Texas

In my recent book on J.B.S.
Haldane, I attempted to summarize his
life and work with special reference to
India (Aberdeen University Press,
1985). This account was largely based on
my personal knowledge of Haldane during the years 1958-63. However, certain
important details of fact as well as interpretation need to be expanded to understand the nature of life and contributions of Haldane in India. I take this
opportunity further to respond to certain questions raised in recent reviews of
my book.

HALDANE’S IMPACT ON INDIAN
SCIENCE

India is a vast and populous nation
with several major languages, the principal channel of communication among
the educated classes being the English
language. Thus, anything Haldane
wrote for the popular press, even if
widely read (as it often was), barely
touched the large mass of population.
As far as I know, there have been no
translations of his works into local Janguages to any great extent. In this respect, his medium of public instruction
was limited to a small educated elite in
contrast to his position in Great Britain
where his popular essays were enjoyed
by all interested individuals with varying
economic or social background. Consequently, Haldane’s influence, as far as

the large masses were concerned, was
rather limited in India and not as wide as
he would have wished. He was, of
course, well aware of this situation.
There was no equivalent of the Daily
Worker for working classes in India that
was accessible to Haldane.

Furthermore, there were strong cultural differences between Haldane’s
writings and the traditional Hindu culture. Iam sure that his free discussion of
mating systems, genetic engineering,
and eugenic selection was rather shocking to those who were brought up in the
Hindu family tradition. Similarly, his
references to Dundee coal mines, New
College cloisters, or Dartmoor, or some
other well known place or event in
Great Britain struck no familiar chord in
his Indian readers. For this reason, he
had to assimilate a great deal of Hindu
terminology, Indian history, mythologies, and social customs in a very short
time, and he achieved this very efficiently. Haldane showed his great skill
in popular writing, frequently using
words familiar to Indian readers. No
doubt, on occasion he was simply showing off as when many Indian readers felt
that they surely knew what “coconuts”
meant when Haldane referred to them
as “narikel,” a word not often used by
the educated Indian public.

Now, to answer the question of what
kind of longer-term influence Haldane
had on Indian science, it is hard to gauge

119

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

120 Communications

this precisely yet. Given the multilanguage complexity and cultural differences, Haldane’s attempts at either popularization or serious science may have
been just as effective as throwing a pebble in a large pond. This seems to be the
situation at first, but perhaps it is not
quite the end of the story. His frequent
criticisms of pomposity or expensive research, I believe, made a significant impact on a number of individual scientists. His suggestions on such crops as
rice, coconuts, and jute have been
adopted by several institutions and scientists. There are no big and brassy
monuments to Haldane in India, but, in
subtler ways, his ideas have had a significant impact on a number of scientists.
He raised the dignity and pride of the
scientific community to a higher level
and brought their concerns to the attention of influential government leaders.
In contrast to large regimented research
institutes, Haldane pleaded with the
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru that
much progress can be achieved by encouraging small groups led by able sci
entists and by simplifying bureaucracy

which stifles scientific progress.

There are no Haldane Chairs (are
there any in England?) or obvious monuments or fellowships, and the only institute devoted to his ideas is a small private one founded by his former
colleague, T. A. Davis, in Nagercoil,
Tamilnadu, South India. The real monument to Haldane’s efforts may be the
encouragement received by many
young scientists in numerous disciplines. It is hoped that at least some of
these will pass on this tradition to their
students and so on in future generations.

Social Biology

FORMER COLLEAGUES

It is of interest to comment briefly on
the subsequent careers of those who
worked with him in India. S.K. Roy,
who conducted experiments on crop
yields in mixed plots of rice varieties, became Dean of the Graduate School at
the Statistical Institute. T. A. Davis, after his retirement from the Professorship at the Statistical Institute, worked
for some years as a coconut expert for
the United Nations in Manila and now
directs the J.B.S. Haldane Research
Centre in Nagercoil. $.D. Jayakar
joined the Genetics Institute at the University of Pavia, and continues his investigations in theoretical population genetics in which he collaborated with
Haldane many years ago. And, as for
myself, I continue to be interested in human genetics, having just completed a
book on the subject of oral cleft malformations (Cleft Lip and Palate: Aspects
of Reproductive Biology, 1986, Charles
C. Thomas, Springfield, Ill.). Ihave had
little to do with Indian science since I left
India in 1963 during the last year of
Haldane’s life.

Mrs. Haldane (Dr. Helen Spurway)
continued to direct the Genetics and Biometry Laboratory at Bhubaneswar after Haldane’s death in 1964. In 1967,
when the contract with the Orissa State
Government expired, Helen moved to
Hyderabad in the state of Andhra Pradesh and settled down to spend her remaining years in studies of animal behavior. She meta tragic death in 1978, at
the age of 63, resulting from tetanus infection due to jackal bite. Haldane
would have said she died a heroic death

 
—
©
N
tH
cD)
O
i)
oO

o
A

CO
©
N
wT
m
=
—
CS
‘g
SS
oN
—
a
O
S
ey
©
>>
—
N
~
oO
>
os
c
~.
ve)
Oo
cv
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
5
©
a

Vol. 34, No. 1-2

while engaged in scientific research—in
this instance, domestication of wild animal species, a subject of life-long interest to her.

RONALD CLARK’S BIOGRAPHY

More than one reviewer of my book
compared it with the biography of
Ronald Clark (JBS: The Life and Work
of JBS Haldane, Hodder & Stoughton,
1968). Such comparison may have been
inevitable but is also regrettable for a
number of reasons. Clark, a professional writer and biographer of several
scientists, wrote a formal biography of

Communications

421

Haldane. In contrast, my book is not
“formally” biographical, although it has
utilized much biographical information,
especially of the Indian period. It is, in
part, acritique of Haldane’s works, both
his scientific papers as well as his popular essays. I have deliberately designed
my book to fill in the gaps that seemed to
me were evident in Clark’s biography.
These include a summation of
Haldane’s scientific contributions, a
summary of Haldane’s and his students’
research works in India, and an eyewitness account of his and Spurway’s life
in India. J believe I have accomplished
these goals.

 
