Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Socioeconomic status and use of family planning
among Ghanaian government workers

Lawrence Kannae & Brian F. Pendleton

To cite this article: Lawrence Kannae & Brian F. Pendleton (1998) Socioeconomic status and
use of family planning among Ghanaian government workers, Social Biology, 45:1-2, 113-133,
DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1998.9988967

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1998.9988967

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 11
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Socioeconomic Status and Use of Family Planning
Among Ghanaian Government Workers

 

Lawrence Kannae and Brian F. Pendleton

University of Akron and Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration, Greenhill, P.O.
Box 50, Achimota, Ghana; and Department of Sociology, University of Akron, Ohio 44325-1905

ABSTRACT: The low utilization of family planning methods in Ghana, and by inference in much
of Africa, is explained by reference to traditional sociocultural values held by males. A LISREL
model is tested using data collected from educated males working in the Ghanaian government.
Among the findings are that lack of couple communication, segregated conjugal role relationships, and male-dominated decision-making are all significant predictors of non-use of family
planning methods (pronatalist attitude is not). Possession of knowledge of family planning
among Ghanaian males alone is unlikely to initiate use of family planning methods. Additional
sociodemographic and modernization findings are reported.

Contraceptive use among both males
and females in African countries has been
very low (Dow et al., 1986; Khalifa,
1988; Larson, 1980; Mbizvo and Adamchak, 1991; Adamchak and Mbizvo,
1990; Wawer et al., 1991). While many
studies (c.f., Bulatao et al., 1983a, 19835;
Kasarda et al., 1986) have investigated
factors contributing to low contraceptive
use among African women, there has
been little or no systematic study of contraceptive use and knowledge among
African men (Omondi-Odhiambo, 1997;
Speizer, 1995; Adamchak and Mbizvo,
1991). Thus, debate continues about the
extent to which men’s attitudes toward
family planning methods influence their
own or spousal acceptance and use of
contraceptives.

The purpose of this study is to address
this knowledge gap and to attempt to establish the core factors responsible for the
overall failure of family planning programs in African countries in general, and
Ghana specifically. It is the thesis of this
study that the low utilization of family
planning methods in Ghana can be ex
plained by reference to traditional sociocultural values held by males.

An investigation of male contraceptive
behavior in Ghana is important. First,
males’ personal attitudes and opinions
about family planning impact spousal acceptance and use of birth control (Speizer,
1995; Kannae and Pendleton, 1994). Second, heads of households and government
bureaucracies in Ghana are males; thus,
knowledge of male attitudes would provide information needed to formulate appropriate family planning programs. The
results of the study can then be used to assess family planning desires and needs of
Ghanaian males.

BACKGROUND

FAMILY PLANNING IN
AFRICAN COUNTRIES

Family planning programs have been
an integral part of national development
plans in Africa since the early 1970’s
(Caldwell, 1995; The Population Institute,
1988; Centre National de Sante Familiale

113

 

 
 

114

and Columbia University, 1987; Central
Statistical Office, 1989; Population Crisis
Committee, 1990). For example, as early
as 1969 Ghana had drawn up a national
development plan that established specific policies to address population problems (Heckel, 1986). By 1986, 13 subSaharan countries (including Ghana) had
established explicit population policies
aimed at reducing or stabilizing fertility
0 i
states, primarily through family planning
“dnd birth spacing (Heckel, 1986). Subaharan Africa has a current population
growth rate of about 2.9 per cent, the high(Sst in the world (Population Reference Buopeau, 1996; Caldwell, 1995). Ghana’s curopent growth rate is 3.0 per cent (Population
‘Reference Bureau, 1996).
~ Despite attempts to integrate family
planning programs in national developSnent plans, current use of contraceptives
"in West Africa ranges between 10 and 20
Sper cent (Ghana Statistical Service, 1995;
‘€aldwell, 1995; World Fertility Survey,
9083; Wawer et al., 1991). Fifteen subSaharan African countries have total
Brevalenct rates over 10 per cent, and 7
ave modern prevalence rates over 10 per
-gent. The 1993 Ghana Demographic and
“Health Survey (Ghana Statistical Service,
$995) reports that about 91 per cent of
‘gurrently married women have knowldge of modern contraceptives, but only
32 per cent have ever used a modern
method and only 10 per cent are currently
using (see also National Census Office,
1984; Cohen, 1993). Martin (1995) concludes that only 5 per cent of currently
married women in Ghana are using modern methods of contraception, and the
Population Reference Bureau (1996) reports 10 per cent. Jolly and Gmnbble
(1993), after extensive analyses, concluded for Ghana that “contraceptive use

y

Kannae and Pendleton

Social Biology

made the smallest contribution to limiting
fertility of any of the proximate determinants” (p. 100).

THE FAILURE OF AFRICAN
FAMILY PLANNING

Contraceptive knowledge and use, and
fertility decision-making, often vary by
economic, social, and demographic characteristics (e.g., Ghana Statistical Service, 1995; Renne, 1993). Such variations
help provide a conceptual understanding,
at the macro level, regarding the success
or failure of family planning programs.
Lack of adequate financing for family
planning programs in sub-Saharan Africa,
where annual per capita expenditures for
family planning programs are below
$0.20, is often cited as a major reason for
low national prevalence rates (Wawer et
al., 1991, 1990; Ross et al., 1988; see
also Carael and Stanbury, 1983; Repetto,
1972). Caldwell (1995), however, concludes that sociocultural values seem to
play an even greater role than financing.
Most studies have concentrated on asking
women in African countries whether they
approve or use family planning methods
but failed to realize that even if the
women want to use contraceptives, they
cannot use them because their husbands
tell them not to.

Much of the failure of family planning
programs in African countries can be
traced to the incorrect assumption that
“birth planning behavior” is exclusively
within the decision domain of women
(Mott and Mott, 1985). Mbizvo and
Adamchak (1991) note that one of the
major limitations facing African-based
family planning promotion programs and
population policy is that they neglect men
when probing the circumstances that govern a couple’s contraceptive behavior (see

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

also Renne, 1993; Okediji, 1968). A
study by Wawer et al. (1991) revealed
that both males and females in the baseline surveys perceived that members of
the opposite sex were interested in having
more children and had little desire to use
family planning (see also World Bank,
1986; Van de Walle and Traore, 1986).

Wawer et al. (1990) report significant
differences between male and female desires for additional children in Senegal,
Niamey, Burkina Faso, and the Sudan.
While 9-13 per cent of male respondents
report wanting no additional children,
18-22 per cent of the females said they
do not want additional children. This sex
difference relating to childbearing could
play a significant role in determining the
use of contraceptive methods among
African societies. Cohen (1993), in his
extensive review of sub-Saharan African
fertility, noted that while contraceptive
use may be increasing, it may be the result of desire to space children, rather
than limit family size.

Wuy MEN SHOULD BE CONSIDERED

The current study argues that male
traditional values relating to marriage
and family must be considered when investigating contraceptive practices in
African countries, partly because most
African nations are primarily patrilineal
and male-dominated societies (Peil,
1972; Brown, 1981; Bhatia, 1978; see
also Speizer, 1995). The opinion of the
husband in African societies carries more
weight than that of the wife in decisionmaking, especially in matters of family
planning. Hence, a majority of wives do
not have control over their fertility. Reproductive decisions are primarily made
by males, and male approval must precede any consideration of the use of con
Family Planning

115

traceptives in most African societies,
including Ghana (Omondi-Odhiambo,
1997; Speizer, 1995; Kar and Talbot,
1980; McGinn et al., 1989; Khalifa,
1988; Hosken, 1984; Caldwell, 1970,
1974; Ware, 1975; Arowolo, 1976;
Ndhlovu et al., 1986; Boohene and Dow,
1987; Dow and Werner, 1983; Zimbabwe
National Family Planning Council and
Westinghouse Public Applied Systems,
1985; Goldman and Pebley, 1989). Studies report that many women are knowledgeable about contraceptives and wish
to use them, but cannot because their husbands would not give prior permission
because of a desire for more children or
more male children (Adamchak and Adebayo, 1987; Mustafa and Mumford, 1984;
Population Reference Bureau, 1990a,
1990b, 1990d; Adetunji, 1995).

Caldwell (1995) refers to a particular
part of West African social structure fostering continued high fertility and low
prevalence of contraceptives (p. 26):

... the major support for high fertility ...
has been a division between those responsible for fertility decisions and those who
bear the greater share of the economic burden. .. . reproductive decisions are a matter
for the husband and his family of origin.

Renne (1993), acknowledging the complexity of male dominance in reproductive
decision-making, finds that increases in
schooling for women and greater availability of contraceptives for Nigerian women
may lead to changing reproductive desires.
Oni and McCarthy (1986) found that the
high demand for children clearly constituted an obstacle to increased contraceptive use for the purpose of limiting fertility. However, Martin’s (1995), review of
health and demographic surveys for 26
countries found that Ghana is one of the
few to display relatively small differentials

 
 

116

in the use of modern contraceptives by
education. A recent survey of educated
government-employed males in Ghana
confirms male expectations to control the
fertility behavior of wives (Kannae and
Pendleton, 1994).

It is explicit from the literature reviewed that one characteristic that has
distinguished families of a number of
African countries, including Ghana, is the

—telative lack of egalitarianism in the mari“lal relationship (Goode, 1963; see also
<mondi-Odhiambo, 1997; Pitts et al.,
1995; Assimeng, 1981; Bhatia, 1978; Ma-son and Taj, 1987). The traditional patricarchal norms embodied in the extended
sdamily system emphasize male dominance
cin decision-making. The power to make
-flecisions is not subject to bargaining or
rmegotiation between husband and wife as
as the case in Western societies (Scanzoni,
“1978; see also Lesthaeghe, 1989).
= Theoretically, the adoption of family
‘planning should be the result of mutual
“jgreement between the couple. That is not,
chowever, the case for many African coun‘dries. The male has disproportionate conStrol over the decision to have children, and
Sraditional values for many African coun“Gries, including Ghana, place a high prenium on prolific childbearing (Goldman
‘and Pebley, 1989). Males generally tend to
ave a pronatalist attitude toward prolific
childbearing or large family size. There is
little that the woman can do to prevent having additional children if the man desires
to have more, and the issue of whether to
have children is rarely discussed between
spouses in African societies.

Coupled with the lack of spousal communication on childbearing matters is the
definition of conjugal role relationship according to gender. Men have specified
roles to perform that are different from

 

Kannae and Pendleton

Social Biology

those of women. Thus, male attitudes constitute a major facilitating or inhibiting
factor in female contraceptive use. In
Kenya, for example, even though most
husbands know of modern contraceptive
methods, 36 per cent had not discussed
family planning with their spouses during the preceding year (National Council
for Population and Development, 1989;
Omondi-Odhiambo, 1997).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
’ THEORETICAL MODE

Drawing from the preceding literature
review, four traditional male familial values
relating to marriage and family that affect
the practice of family planning can be
distinguished: male-dominated decisionmaking power, pronatalist attitude, lack
of couple communication, and segregated
conjugal-role relationship. As noted earlier,
the norm among African communities is for
the male to be the head of the household,
which confers on him the prerogative power
over decision-making, including those about
reproductive matters. Coupled with male
dominance is the strong male commitment
to having a large number of children (i.e.,
pronatalist). The traditional concept is that a
family is never too large. Implicit in this
view is also the idea that no community’s
population is ever considered to be too large
in relation to its economic resources. The
concept of overpopulation therefore becomes unacceptable to traditional African
males. Belief in polygyny and the strong
preference for having sons contribute to the
desire for large family size.

Stemming logically from the male monopoly over decision-making is the lack
of communication that occurs between
spouses about the number and timing of

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

children (see for example Martin, 1995;
Wawer et al., 1991; Kar and Talbot, 1980).
It is the main contention of this study that
the low utilization of family planning in
Ghana can be explained in terms of the
above four interrelated dimensions of familial traditional values relating to marriage and the family. Thus, deriving from
the theoretical causal linkages established
between these dimensions and the use of
family planning, the following theoretical
model (see Figure 1) is presented for
empirical investigation. The concepts of
modernity, kinship system, rural-urban
residence, age, and religion, in addition to
income and educational status, have been
incorporated into the overall theoretical
model as control variables.

For Ghanaian male government employees, the following hypotheses are
postulated:

H,: There will be an inverse relationship
between modernity and a male-dominated
decision-making process.

H,: There will be an inverse relationship
between modernity and a pronatalist attitude.

H,: There will be an inverse relationship
between modernity and a lack of couple
communication (i.e., more modern the attitudes, the greater the communication between the couple).

H,: There will be an inverse relationship
between modernity and a segregated conjugal-role relationship.

H,: There will be a positive relationship
between modernity and knowledge of family planning.

H,: Male-dominated couple decisionmaking power will be inversely related to
the use of family planning methods.

H,: There will be an inverse relationship
between a pronatalist attitude and the use
of family planning.

Family Planning

117

H,: Lack of couple communication will
be negatively related to the use of family
planning methods.

Hy: Segregated conjugal-role relationship will be negatively related to the use of
family planning methods.

H,9: There will be a positive relationship
between knowledge of family planning
methods and the use of family planning
methods.

As indicated in the theoretical model
(Figure 1), there are no hypothesized relationships among the latent variables of
male-dominated decision-making power,
pronatalist attitude, lack of couple communication, segregated conjugal-role relationship, and knowledge of family
planning. It is argued that the male’s
childbearing decision-making does not
affect his knowledge of family planning
methods since the agents and organizations that disseminate family planning information are independent of individual
families. Although the reverse relationships may be plausible, for methodological and theoretical reasons related to
causal ordering of constructs (see James
et al., 1986), the causal path between
knowledge of family planning and decisionmaking power has been left out.

It may be argued that being pronatalist
in attitude (i.e., having a desire for more
children) could create less motivation in
the individual to look for information on
how to limit family size. However, the
current study does not speculate about a
relationship between desire for more children and knowledge of family planning
since family planning program information is disseminated by various agents
of government outside the control of
individuals. Although communication
between spouses and joint conjugal-role
relationships could increase sharing of

 
118

knowledge about family planning, they
may not necessarily be related because in
Ghana family planning information is
communicated to the public through the
government controlled mass media.

A United Nations’ report (1981) on
factors related to the fertility rate in
African countries indicates that ascribed
characteristics, such as region, religion,

_cthnicity, and age in developing coun=tries, appear to be more important predic“tors of fertility desires than characteristics
Sassociated with modernity, such as educaStion, occupation of husband, and wife’s
Alabor force activity. Important as these assxecribed variables may be to the current
costudy, the focus is on male familial tradicctional values relating to marriage and the
family and how they impact on the
‘gknowledge and use of family planning in
co€shana. Nevertheless, ascribed character“istics such as kinship system, rural-urban
residence, age, and religion, in addition to
Cincome and educational status, have been
incorporated into the overall theoretical
omodel as control variables. Yamanaka et
‘eal. (1982) have noted that background
— variables such as those used in the current
romodel work better as controls through the
concept of modernity, which explains
why the model does not provide any
Spaths between the background variables
Gand the rest of the endogenous variables.

METHODS

Source of Data.—The data used in this
study were obtained from a 1993 survey of
male government employees’ attitudes toward marriage, family, and the use of family planning in Ghana (Kannae, 1993; see
also Kannae and Pendleton, 1994). Many of
the items in the structured self-administered
questionnaire were derived from previous
instruments (e.g., World Fertility Surveys,

Kannae and Pendleton

Social Biology

1983; Inkeles, 1966; Kahl, 1966, 1968) that
have been found to be valid and reliable.

The sample was randomly drawn from
personnel in four Ghanaian government
departments: Health, Agriculture, Education, and Administration. Questionnaires
were distributed personally by the first
author. Completed questionnaires were
returned to the respective heads of departments and a series of personal follow-ups
were made to collect the unreturned questionnaires. A total of 500 questionnaires
were distributed in person by the first author to male employees of each of the
four selected departments (125 in each
department). A total of 484 completed
questionnaires were returned, constituting
a remarkably high response rate of 96.8
per cent.

Sociodemographic characteristics of
the sample are displayed in Table 1. The
sample is comprised of literate male workers who are primarily Catholic and have an
average age of 39.5. The sample was not
intended to be representative of the population, but to reflect individuals who are
most likely to influence national policy.

MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES

Thirteen latent variables are used in the
current study (Figure 1). The six exogenous latent variables are: kinship (&,),
education (€,), income (&,), residence (&,),
age (&,), and religion (€). The seven endogenous latent variables are: modernity
(n,), male-dominated decision-making
process (,), pronatal attitude (7,), lack
of couple communication (n,), segregated conjugal role relationship (,),
knowledge of family planning (1), and
use of family planning (1,). A reliability
coefficient of 0.65 or higher was used as
the criterion for including latent variables
with multiple indicators in the model.

 

 
 

 

Vol. 45, No. 1-2 Family Planning 119

 

 

TABLE 1
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SAMPLE
Variable / Categories Per Cent
Age?
Fo ea gst wis NPN yen ey PN SSDS gE ns = NESE 22.2
BIO. ce ceecsscencssseneseeseeeees Mecsesscuscecsscccescessessenscsessnteesesseasecesgssessensscsevsacsecessessersensserenses 54.2
AL —5O ..eeeccccscssescssessccssccesceceesecscsseensescasseseseeesesteesensenentseseneeesessasseeseassscenseseesnecesseecesnsereenes 14.4
51-6... .ccscccsteescsscscecscesssseesteuseseseonsesseuscsssatenscscavesessesesssesssatersensescnssscesesatecsenersessnesenseees 2.1
Marital Status
DATES or oxamcxeniibeidinnenennhd*rsabe teonmecenexnnenevessnastiniitieitnianmentotis>tn:ctlomeghsiteinnenneness#aeaaieina aaa 88.8
i Es ssccn sea. - ssccenesonors spgnmumsscerten ee asheasais ass soe cere R RT RNEENNREENRE EEE TET ERRENRTTEERRNETIED 8.7
i DiVOrced ........:cceccsesscseccscescescesscccussussecesscsessestesneassceusaseecescessesseseesuausensessnsnsceceessensensentenes 0.8
= WidOwe d ..........sscccessscssseceucenccccesescescescesscrscutancascsvevensestecteeucensensessansassececceeeensencantensaneetessas 1.7
“ Number of Children
D crear ere cccn peu ear eam nneeanene nnn cnn n EA NSERAITONROREA IIE DCRR ERNERCERDU RANE CUTER ENDE AME REREERDORNREEENMEamene Tenses 0.5
LQ ececssesscssccsccsssesssesscssessesecsussusssecessessussssesseseesessessassevsessassnsensassansessssessesesesatencencesseesaeeees 45.5
3 BD ccerrrrannennapersoeeeeoeagpyga} (CidttamgernpuerevesrineetanydeoacenaryynyyagitdilhiGDleckyseevnssyneeypaagiftiNstsih teas anni 35.4
Oo SO .cecsscccssesscsssccescesssesesessscsccsscscscesssecesessccscesscusaucovaseeceteesesuscsecuscunescessacscssusesessvasarsessetesses 12.9
PO DB icssssessscccnsnsssssssecssssssssssesesssnsssueseessesssnsseseesssssssecsssesegcssssssssssssgnssuesessesseee sesvuseececsnsenseseeee 4.7
SOAS vecsssescsesssuesssecssscssecessessscsseccuuecsscssecssuscnsessucsdvessrsccasessessascsseasasssessssusseusenseseseessesssesseesses 2.3
co-~=—- Residence (of upbringing)
= Rural occ... ccesesscescsssssccecssecscsvsnsscsestecscsssascecetenssesestassontettensensessessaseesescessscsttetsarsnucessseesers 69.8
— UIrban........ccccescccccessescevcstesssstesnccrestetseseescesseceeseesnanseceeceseeseeseeceeteeseesensarecuceeesseeseseeecenseetensee 30.2
<3 © Kinship
So Patrilimeal ............cccccccouseseesecsvecccsescossccecnscatsuseuccseeccceescetuetsencetsunseuensenseeeesecatensetsanecensceeseses 89.3
By Matrilineal ..............c.cccccccsceecesccnsnsssesscscesscesscnsncersnsscssseneesceecurtscnconsansaacascnstestesseceareasensens 6.4
= BE Bet ccc comers sesng sen saegstnsccasiumegnng 5400 Eee me gOS ARES FS TRTNE TRAE yge SCTE SS LAGAN NANOS RETAIN 4.2
2 Education?
> ——-— Middle SchOOD csescccsesscccsssessscsvesccssssusosssssececcouetesssnssescessvecsessuevensssuessensnssssarsuveesassuessasaessee 12.5
5 Technical/Vocational ...........scscssssssssesssssesseseereetscnesecncorseneenonss seseseecensesesseseaesenecseacaeneeneees 7.2
> TA LoS cece anniztttce dd comnmcenenenannnnenanenthdiiienemaennnnibidii US ade niennnmcmnnannanttihaiehSticente nie 12.7
Z Aclyanced LEVEL .....-.eceet8ssi-sixspavaneenssarvenssnensiide cor vepryseyuit his UUW gegnesnenconeseanned ¥ittsbbeer ceundtX6N 10.2
0 DRO... piss oss saesssissd iggengangthitesmrnneng yy TbsieTG Laine SKATES peg OUES TEATS aneeeiK RNC TETRIS 22.7
o DOB sssccsccsngpemensemasessamensnga ans aseanaascrs qa generar enaremanaeeaaNg au pesEsTaNecscaoRNENONTTERETATT 21.8
~ Monthly Income
“ex, —- 10, 000 C 20,000 (822-944) scccescorsnsnnenunecrsatnnnsecercersnamiooneeneesmnnnececeeseahannneeeneeonsemcirseeset 12.2
Oo €21,000—-C30,000 ($47-$67) .......cescccsccssescessscsressssserecteceestecnassnseacsecersesseutensersenenseassesens 18.6
‘ C31,000-C40,000 ($69-$89) ooo ecccccsccseseseesessccsncasseseecensesssscsenteneuconsacecseeesssesseeseeseenss 22.9
3 C41,000-C50,000 (S91-S111) voce cccescescessecsesenscsensesessessesseecesessessecesesseeseesententeats 23.4
oS €51,000—-C60,000 ($113-G133) 0... ceecsssesceccescesesecnssscetsecesensssstescesesseatsuseteeeesseeseeneeacees i)
S Religion
Oo TRENT OTERETAD sox. sxcscancmnenanananneasancnsece see un ISIKSSENT tC NA ENDER RHE. OC RT 12.0
2 Catholic .......ccsccsssccescescectectscrsssccssseesesscesceucenseseecescsessessenceessneusnnceseesecececsusetserenecsseesesneetes 54.1
MUSIIM ...........ccccecscceeseescesceccesscensscussssessnscessecsessetsenseesscasensceseescensstersenscensesessueessateasenseesears 12.6
Methodist................ssscsscsrscsccsssncsseccoscnccoceosscstonsnsessscoecessesseensarsarsecoscossecccseeseareasscsescoseessess 1.2
OrthodOX .........ecsessccscscsssestceconsesssseeceseesscscescetsetenssseseeseesecetcetetsegeescescerssecccateatensnsseeeccerens 1.4
PRES UY LORIN... 100 sstesan wtaeasprenspansieweoens eugrgnahidid inn nearevadSUHeTSGUNEyeyqpennenecnengygyyieThitinenewssei Dieta 2.5
AROS TOIT a resasceorscenasenensesnmeects pqreninessrcauamannanc esters diy plaNsRENTreaoemEmmneENEUCERNIEE 1,2
*Mean=39.5; SD=17.1.
b’Mean=2.9; SD=1.9.

Modernity (,)—Modemity (MODERN- scales (see also Inkeles, 1969; Singh,
ITY) is conceptualized as Inkeles (1966) 1982). Inkeles and Kahl operationally charand Kahl (1966) intended, and the con- acterize modernity by the holding of the folstruct is derived from their modernity lowing values: activism, future orientation,

 
 

120

Modernity

oy

[Univefsity of

‘deferred gratification, trust, preference for
Urban life, faith in science and technology,
oO - ee
acceptance of change, belief in the efficacy
‘éf the individual in the structure of com
unity, belief in the efficacy of the individual in occupational chances, low integration with relatives, and mass media
participation. Each of the above indicators
of modernity was derived as a composite
of a number of other sub-indicators by
Inkeles and Kahl (see also Gusfield, 1967).
The current study used the sub-indicators
as measures of modernity.

Respondents were asked five questions
relating to modernity characteristics. They
were asked to rate on a four-point scale

Kannae and Pendleton

Social Biology

 

Fic. 1.—Structural equation model of contraceptive use and knowledge.

(1 being “strongly agree” and 4 being
“strongly disagree’) their feelings about
the following statements: Man’s success 1s
decided at birth (MANSUCCE). One
ought to think about the present (THINPRES). Doctors’ discoveries do not help
(DOCTDIS). Things should be kept the
same (KEEPSAME). Old ways are better
(OLDWAYS).

Male-Dominated Decision-Making Process (1,).—Male-dominated decisionmaking process (MALEDECI) was measured by questions relating to whether the
man, or both man and wife, should have a
final say on matters affecting the family.
Most of these questions were derived

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

from instruments used in previous studies
to measure conjugal decision-making
power (e.g., Blood, 1960; Fox, 1973;
Gillespie, 1971; Hallenbeck, 1966; McDonald, 1980; Raven et al., 1975; Rosen,
1965).

Five questions were asked covering
four main decision-making areas. The
first two questions required the respondent to indicate whether he (MANIFICLO), or both spouses (BITFICLO),
should have a final say in deciding the
amount to spend on clothing. The three
remaining questions asked whether both
spouses should have a final say in deciding on the number of children to have
(BOTFICHN), where the wife should
work (BOTFIWRK), and who the wife
can visit (BOTFIVIS).

A four-point response scale was used
for all five questions (1 being “strongly
disagree” and 4 being “strongly agree’’).
Four of the questions were reverse-coded
so scores would read in the same direction, from low to high. The higher the
score, the more male-dominated the
decision-making process.

Pronatalist Attitude (13).—Pronatalist
attitude (PRONATAL) was measured by
asking respondents a number of fertilityrelated attitudinal questions. The questions were drawn from previous studies
on population and fertility issues in subSaharan Africa (e.g., Caldwell, 1981).
Respondents were asked their opinions
regarding the following statements: Children are a blessing (CHNBLESS). Men
should have as many children as possible
(CHNPOSSI). Resources can stretch no
matter the number of children a family
has (STRETCH). Polygyny is an asset
(POLYASET). A man should continue to
have children until the desired proportionate number of sons and daughters is

Family Planning

 

121

achieved (PROPOCHN). A_ four-point
scale (1 being “strongly agree” and 4 being “strongly disagree”) was provided for
each of five fertility-related statements.
Four of the questions were reverse-coded
to read in the same direction as the rest of
the variables. The higher the score, the
more pronatalistic the attitude of the respondents.

Lack of Couple Communication (q4).—
Lack of couple communication (LACKCOMM) was measured by asking the respondents whether they discussed matters
in general, including family planning
with their spouses. Respondents were
asked whether it was important for them
and their spouses to understand how each
other felt about things; and whether they
talked about birth control or family planning with their spouses. The response
categories used were “yes” and “no.”

Segregated Conjugal-role Relationships
(n,)-—The measure of segregated conjugal-role relationships (SEGROLE) was
derived from Rainwater’s (1965) topology of marital role relationships: jointrole relationships (measured by whether
the respondent shared activities and tasks
with the spouse) and segregated-role relationships (measured by whether the respondent emphasized formal division of
Jabor and activities in the family).

Respondents were asked five questions about whose duty it is to perform a
number of house chores: cooking meals;
cleaning and dusting of the house; disciplining children; gardening and maintenance of the house; and managing
money. The response categories were
1=“by the man,” 2=“by the woman,’
and 3=“by both.” The variables were recoded to collapse response categories “1”
and “2” into one category based on the
rationale that the two response categories

 

 

 
 

122

“by the man” and “by the woman” both
implied role segregation. Thus, the original response categories were reversecoded to read 1 “by both” and 2 “by the
man” or “by the woman.” This re-coding
means that “1” implies low role segregation and “2” high role segregation.

Knowledge of Family Planning (¢).—
The two questions used to measure
knowledge of family planning (KNOWAMP) in the current study were derived
from the World Fertility Survey (1983)
nstrument for Ghana. Respondents were
asked whether they knew of any methods
et birth control (KNOWMETH).

oo Use of Family Planning (,).—Use of

family planning (USEFAMP) questions

cwere again derived from the World Fertility Survey (1983) instrument for Ghana.
rRespondents were asked whether they or
their spouses had ever used (EVER
DONE) or were currently using any form

2af birth control (CURREUSE) and how

‘@ften they used it (OFTENDID). Re
Sponse categories are “yes” and “no” for
the first and second questions, while the
>

‘third question has a four-point scale with

=“frequently” and 4=“never.”

& Age (&,).—Age (RESPAGE) was mea
red by asking respondents to indicate

Sheir chronological age at the present

me.

A Residency (€,).—Residency (BROUGUP)
was measured by asking the respondents
to indicate whether they had been brought
up in rural or urban areas.

Kinship System (€,).—The kinship
system in the current study was conceptualized in terms of the right of ownership of children in a marital relationship
and the line of inheritance. While, in a
patrilineal system the children belong to
the man by custom, in the matrilineal
system, the children belong to the mater
Kannae and Pendleton

Social Biology

nal uncles. The bilateral system is a
looser system in which both sides have
equal claim. Because, in the paternal system, children belong to the man in the
event of divorce, male desire for more
children tends to be greater than in the
matrilineal and bilateral systems. The response categories for the type of kinship
system that the respondent came from
was framed in this hierarchical order of
the degree of demand for more children
in mind. The type of kinship system practiced varies from one region in Ghana to
another. While the southern regions are
predominantly matrilineal, the northern
regions are patrilineal.

Kinship system (KINSHIP) was measured by asking respondents the type of
kinship system practiced in the ethnic or
tribal area. Three response categories are
provided for this question: patrilineal,
matrilineal, and bilateral. The last category is very rare to find in most Ghanaian
communities, and in Africa in general.
Nevertheless, the bilateral category is included in the current study to make sure
that the categories are inclusive.

Educational Status (€ ,).—-Educational
status (EDUSTAT) was measured by asking respondents to indicate the level of
education they had attained. Six categories derived from the Ghana educational system were provided for the respondents to choose from: middle school,
technical/vocational, ordinary level, advanced level, diplomat, and degree.

Income (&,).—Income (INCOME)
was measured by asking each respondent
for the total amount of income he earned
in a month after taxes in terms of the
Ghanaian local currency (cedis).

Religion (€,).—Religion (RELIGION)
was measured by asking the respondents
to indicate the religion they adhered to.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

The seven religious categories available
in Ghana include the following: Traditional; Catholic; Muslim; Methodist; Orthodox; Presbyterian; Apostolic.

RESULTS

ESTIMATES OF THE MEASUREMENT AND
STRUCTURAL MODELS

The hypotheses embodied in the structural equation model (Figure 1) are tested
using LISREL VII (Joreskog and Sorbom, 1990, 1988).'! Table 2 shows the
standardized coefficients for lambda Y
and X. The fairly high standardized coefficients are evidence that the latent constructs in the model are adequately measured.

Latent variables relationships are displayed in Table 3 as “gammas” (y°) and
“betas” (85). These coefficients are comparable to traditional standardized multiple regression coefficients. The > are
parameter estimates for hypothesized relationships among the exogenous latent
variables and the endogenous latent variables, while the 8° are estimates for the
hypothesized relationships among the endogenous latent variables.

The statistical significance of the y*
and B° are determined by the t-value statistic, which is equal to the ratio of the

'The most important parameter estimates to be examined from the measurement model are the standardized coefficients for lambda Y and X. These coefficients
are comparable to the factor loadings generated from a
principal axis factor analysis. They measure the extent
to which the indicants share a common variance with
the theoretical latent variables. The higher the standardized coefficients, the stronger the contributions of the indicants to the theoretical (latent) variables. Start values
were provided by LVPLS (Latent Variable Partia) Least
Squares Analyses) (Falk and Miller, 1992; Lohmoeller,
1989, 1984).

Family Planning

123

coefficient to its standard error. Coefficients that are twice as large as their respective standard errors (i.e., t>2SE,)
are considered statistically significant at
alpha=0.05.

Hypothesis 1.—An inverse relationship was hypothesized between modernity and male-dominated decisionmaking process. The results (see Table 3)
support this hypothesis with modernity
having a significant negative impact
(B=—0.52) on male-dominated decisionmaking process. This finding suggests
that as Ghanaian males become more
modern, the less likely they are to be
dominant in the conjugal decisionmaking process. The finding is consistent
with Goode’s (1963) assertion that modernization leads to the realignment of the
conjugal power structure, thereby contributing to the average family becoming
more egalitarian and democratic. The
finding also corroborated Scott and
Morghan’s (1983) report that exposure to
modern values exerts significant influences on traditional family expectations.

Hypothesis 2.—It was hypothesized
there would be an inverse relationship between modernity and pronatalist attitude.
Modernity (see Table 3) had a significant
negative impact (8=—0.77) on pronatalist attitude, supporting Hypothesis 2. The
finding suggests that the more modern
the Ghanaian male becomes, the less
likely he will be to have a large number
of children or believe in prolific childbearing.

This finding is consistent with current
literature relating modernity to traditional
family values in African countries. It supports Entwisle and Casterline’s (1989)
finding that the rate of acceptance of family planning in rural Egypt varies inversely
with the level of modernization. In other

 
 

VARIABLES

see ANB OE preccanecenncamnrnnnnene
Y¥2 THINPRES ou... cccsessseeeeseees

Y18 TALKBIRT .....cccccscssssesseeees
Y19 COOKMEAL .... ee eeeeeeteee
¥20 CLEANSE: scsiscessisnscasscseusass
Y21 DISCICHIN sscssssnssocssessearezenes

Y24 KNOWMETH .......scsssesseeees
¥Z5 EVERDONR ssssssscssvssssvecessnes
Y26 CURREUSE .... cc eeeescsesees
Y27 OFTENDID wu... eecesseseceseees

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

0.49
0.60
0.55

0.66

NN

0.53
0.53

0.66
0.60

3

0.64
0.61

0.40
0.43

TABLE 2
STANDARDIZED MEASUREMENT COEFFICIENTS (LOADINGS) FOR LAMBDA Y AND X

LATENT ConsTRUCTS®

N4 Nis Ne ue fi f,
0.65
0.94
0.33 cae
it 0.50
0.48
0.32
0.62
0.59 wen
emt 1.00 aT
0.73
0.49
0.60

§

gs &

(Table 2 continues)

u0}3[pusg pue avuUuLey

ASO[Olg [B190S

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

 

TABLE 2 (conTINUED)
STANDARDIZED MEASUREMENT COEFFICIENTS (LOADINGS) FOR LAMBDA Y AND X
LATENT CONSTRUCTS"
VARIABLES mH "2 3 4 Ns 16 7 fi fy g, f, fs E,

Xl RESPAGE.... ec ceeeeteeseee 1.00 see ‘
X2  BROUGUP..........csescesseneenens 1.00 sae
2 KINSHIP ncascsssinieninane : 1.00 is
MA EDUSTAD weisssnnssassnsagennnvavnnen : aT 1.00 oss
PS ENGOME scesssisxcesnnenscomameanesa . ‘ 1.00 am
K6 RELIGION ....ceeeneenees ‘ . 1.00

“A description of the latent variable names follows:

£, RESPAGE Respondent Age 1, MODERN Modernity

£, BROUGUP Area Brought Up 1) MALEDECI Male-dominated decision-making process

€, KINSHIP Kinship 43 PRONATAL Pronatalist attitude

£, EDUSTAT Educational status a, LACKCOMM Lack of couple communication

£, INCOME Income 1s SEGROLE Segregated conjugal role relationship

& RELIGION Religion tis KNOWFAMP Knowledge of family planning

7 USEFAMP Use of family planning

Z-T “ON ‘SP “1A

Id Ajruey

e

surmue

Sél

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD STANDARDIZED COEFFICIENTS FOR STRUCTURAL MODEL?

DEPENDENT VARIABLES

INDEPENDENT VARIABLES 1 Ny Ns a Ns
E, (RESPAGE) ...cssssssscssceccecesseseeseessenecsessssssssssssssss —0.16
E, (BROUGUP) ......cccescssecssssseereeteeneenseneacaeneasenes —0.08
E, (KINSHIP).......cccccssssessecenssnssnsnessssseseeesesssssssssnn 0.04
E, CEDUSTAT) sesccsnssisscnsssnneaecsuvessevceransmecanvornenas 0.26
E 5 (INCOME)....cccsccccssscsssssssssnssnsneniesseeseeseeeensensesen 0.22
Eq (RELIGION) vccsscsnecsserseaceoccennanneansansesssnsaresnreoss —0.07 “ne wis cus ama
Tl, (MODERNITY ).....cssssssecosesrerssrstscsesssnstsessansonees sim 8 —0.52 —0.77 —0.87 —0.70
Mig (MALEDECT) ....csssssssssssssssssetesseececceseestenenssnsnen 8» a - Lee bes
Nz (PRONATAL).......ccscsscecsesssesesenesnsnsesseneseeenenseees
Tg (LACKCOMM).....ssssssssessssessssssesssansensesssneensene
thy (SEGROLE)...sssssssssssssssseesensenesnesssssesssnneneenesensen
Tig (KNOWFAMP)......sssssessssecsssssssesccsssssnteseensennenes
hy CUSEFAMP)...cccccssssssssccsssssccensecssssessscececeeeeeseet ee ia bee Les Lee
Squared Multiple Correlation ......ccsssccssecesseseeeee 0.17 0.11 0.14 0.25 0.13

(x?=2893.33, df=455, p=0.000)

*Coefficient of Determination (COD)=0.999; Goodness of Fit Index (GFI)=0.758; Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index (AGFI)=0.701; Root Mean Square Residual (RMR)=0.084; Modification Index (MD=54.01

for element (8, 4) of lambda Y.
’n<0.05.

6

0.42

0.10

Ny

—0.12
—0.02
-0.61
O21
~-0.00

0.22

 

u0j}a[puag pue avuULy

ABoo1g [eos
—|
=
©
N
smi
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
a
Co
©
CO
v.
4
=
—
CS
ry
la}
OQ
oo
O
=
Ce
©
>>
—
—
N
_
oO
>
os
c
-,
va)
Oo
vo
oO
me)
CS
©
—
c
S
©
a

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

words, the more rural the community, the
greater the emphasis on having large
numbers of children, or prolific childbearing.

Hypothesis 3.—An inverse relationship was hypothesized between modernity and lack of couple communication.
The results (see Table 3) did indeed indicate that modernity has a significant negative effect (8 =—0.87) on lack of couple
communication. This result suggests that
as Ghanaian males become more modern
in their value orientations, the more
likely they are to increase family planning communication with their spouses.
This finding is consistent with Feldman’s
(1967) study which reported lower levels
of communication between illiterate couples than literate couples in Ghana.

Hypothesis 4.—It was also hypothesized that there would be an inverse
relationship between modernity and segregated conjugal-role relationship. The
results (see Table 3) show a significant
negative relationship (8 =—0.70) between
modemity and segregated conjugal-role
relationships, supporting the hypothesis.
The finding suggests that as Ghanaian
males become more modern in their values, the less likely they are to divide conjugal roles on the basis of gender. This
finding is consistent with Rainwater’s
(1965) finding that modern persons tend
to have mutual relationships in marital interactions and encourage less segregation
in role relationships within the family.

Hypothesis 5.—Hypothesis 5 predicted that there would be a positive relationship between modernity and knowledge of family planning. The results (see
Table 3) showed that modernity has a
significant positive effect (B=0.42) on
knowledge of family planning. Having
control over one’s future, coupled with

Family Planning

future orientation and recognition that
change is inevitable reflect a “modernistic” orientation. Modernistic corollaries are desire for information, literacy,
and media involvement through which an
interest in social events is cultivated. Because the media is the main source
through which the Ghanaian government
disseminates population and family planning policies to the people, it is not surprising that “modern” people are more
aware that something can be done to contro] family size.

Hypothesis 6.—An inverse relationship
between the male-dominated decisionmaking process and use of family planning was hypothesized. The results indicated that a male-dominated decisionmaking process has a significant negative
effect (8=—0.12) on the use of family
planning methods. This fairly weak impact of the male-dominated decisionmaking process on the use of family
planning may be explained by the fact
that this study sample is literate, which
has an influence on the way family decisions are made. Oppong (1970) found a
positive association between syncratic
power relationships and couples of similar education among a sample of Ghanaian civil servants.

A more traditional autocratic pattern
(i.c., male-dominated) was found among
couples with lower levels of education.
Drawing from Oppong’s findings, we might
argue that a stronger negative relationship
between male-dominated decision-making
and use of family planning probably
would have been found if the current study
had incorporated the non-literate population in the sample. The finding is also consistent with the literature relating to conjugal decision-making power and family
planning in African countries (e.g., Dow

 
 

128

et al., 1986; Kar and Talbot, 1980; Arowolo, 1976). These studies have all attested to the significant role that African
male traditional values play in inhibiting
the use of family planning methods among
couples in Africa. Traditional patriarchal
norms emphasize male dominance which
tends to inhibit the use of family planning
methods, even under circumstances where
the women desire to use contraceptives.
Hypothesis 7.—It was hypothesized
that a pronatalist attitude would be inversely related to the use of family planning methods. The results (see Table 3)
Aindicated no relationship (B= —0.02) becotween a pronatalist attitude and the use of
ofamily planning. Several studies (e.g.,
ccGadalla et al., 1985, 1980; see also
~=Gadalla, 1978), have reported significant
rcNegative associations between the need
Sfor more children and the use of family
Splanning. It is therefore surprising to find
=no relationship exists for this sample.

One would have expected a strong negative relationship between pronatalist attiOtude and use of family planning among
‘=Ghanaian males, given the fact that there
“is strong traditional emphasis on having
Slarge numbers of children. As reported by
“2Adamchak and Adebayo (1985), the need
Sfor many children among African societies
is so strong that older men tend to marry
younger women to guarantee them many

years of childbearing. The weak negative

relationship may be explained in terms of
this sample being literate, reflecting
weaker traditional values relating to the
number of children a family should have.

As shown in Table 1, the mean number of

children for this sample is only 3. Feldman

(1967), for example, found significant dif
ferences between uneducated and educated

couples in terms of their attitudes toward
family planning and abortion in Ghana.

cember 2015

y of

Univers

Kannae and Pendleton

Social Biology

Hypothesis 8.—As anticipated, there
was a very strong negative relationship
(8=—0.61) between lack of couple communication and use of family planning
among Ghanaian males. This result suggests that communication between couples is critical to the use of family planning methods in Ghana. The finding is
consistent with Kar and Talbot’s (1980)
study which stressed the importance of
conjugal power and communication in
promoting or inhibiting contraceptive intentions. In their African surveys on
knowledge, attitude, and practice of family planning, Wawer et al. (1991) found
that husbands and wives rarely hold discussions with their spouses on family
size, family planning, or related issues. In
fact, three out of every five couples in
Togo reported that they had not discussed
family planning in the year prior to the
survey (Population Reference Bureau,
1990b). Card (1978) also reported significant correlations between spousal communication and use of family planning in
developing countries.

There is no doubt that limited communication between couples in many
African countries not only limits the
ability to talk about problems of a general nature, but also seriously limits the
likelihood of adopting birth control measures. Spousal communication is particularly important because some family
planning methods require consistency,
careful application, and sometimes deferred gratification to achieve effective
results.

Hypothesis 9.—lt was hypothesized
that there would be an inverse relationship
between segregated conjugal-role relationship and use of family planning methods. The results (see Table 3) reveal a significant negative relationship (8=—0.21)

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

 

 

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

between segregated conjugal-role relationship and the use of family planning.
This finding provides support for Hypothesis 9 and corroborates Rainwater’s
(1966) finding that a segregated conjugalrole relationship limits the ability to control family size. Thus, one should expect
greater success in family planning where
spouses share household tasks than where
roles are divided strictly on the basis of
gender. Joint conjugal-role relationships
afford spouses the opportunity to share
ideas of personal concerns and seek consensual solutions for them.

Hypothesis 10.—Consistent with the
literature, knowledge of contraceptives
was not a good predictor of use; rather,
male-dominated decision-making, pronatalist attitude, lack of couple communication, and segregated conjugal-role relationships proved to be better predictors.

In terms of the effects of the exogenous
sociodemographic variables on modernity,
only age, educational status, and income
have significant impacts. Age has a significant negative effect (8 =—0.16) on modernity. The relationship suggests that the
older the respondent, the less likely he is
to be modern. This finding may seem logical, since the older the respondent, the
more likely he is to be a first generation
literate and may therefore still cherish
traditional values. There is a significant
positive relationship (B=0.26) between
educational status and modernity. The relationship suggests that higher education
is associated with higher modern values.
This result should not be surprising since
formal education in African countries is
Western in content. The results also
showed that income is significantly related
(8=0.22) to modernity. Thus, the higher
the income, the more likely the respondent
is to be modern in his value orientation.

Family Planning

CONCLUSIONS

In summary, the study provides empirical support for most of the hypotheses that
were embodied in the theoretical model.
First, the results indicate strong significant
negative relationships between modernity
and the four dimensions of familial traditional values (i.e., male-dominated decisionmaking process, pronatalist attitude, lack
of couple communication, and segregated
conjugal-role relationships). These findings suggest that as Ghanaian males become more modern, the less likely they are
to be dominant in the conjugal decisionmaking process, the less pronatalist they are
in their attitudes, the more likely they are to
communicate with their spouses, and the
less likely they are to discharge household
tasks separately.

Second, the results show that among the
four dimensions of African traditional family values, lack of couple communication
is the most significant predictor of non-use
of family planning methods among Ghanaian males. Segregated conjugal-role relationships is the second strongest predictor
of non-use, followed by male-dominated
decision-making. The relationship between
pronatalist attitude and contraceptive use is
not statistically significant. The results further show that possession of knowledge of
family planning among Ghanaian males
alone is unlikely to initiate use of family
planning methods.

Finally, the results also show that
among the sociodemographic variables,
age, educational status, and income are
the only significant predictors of modernity.

In terms of the overall goodness of
fit of the model, the various indices
(e.g., squared multiple correlation [R71],
goodness-of-fit index, root mean square

 
 

130

residual, chi-square statistic, Q-plot, modification index) (see Table 3) produced by
LISREL provide sufficient support for
the data having a good fit with the theoretical model.

IMPLICATIONS OF FINDINGS

There are several implications for the
findings. They provide an additional ap_Proach that should be integrated into famoily planning programs in Ghana, and in
other African countries, to enhance current
-2 approaches focusing on educating couples
9% on the advantages of limiting family size
Aas a way of gaining the population’s ac% ceptance and use of family planning.
ce =Second, much as Omondi-Odhiambo
9(1997) found for Kenya, the study implies that there are several traditional fa"emilial values influencing fertility deci.Osions that exert considerable pressure on
"S Ghanaian males to want to have large
= families. This finding means that, as
© Speizer (1995), Renne (1993), and Cald=well (1995) all discuss, men’s familial
S traditional values could exert significant
‘impact on the success or failure of family
> planning programs, and perhaps govern= mental population policies. Unless the
-Ypressure exerted by these familial tradiStional values is changed or reduced, famF ily planning programs in Ghana are unA likely to achieve significant results.
Closely related is that the study shows
men to be important actors in fertility and
family planning processes in Ghana. If
family planning programs are to have any
success in Ghana, then men must be considered active participants in the process
of planning, designing, and implementing

Kannae and Pendleton

Social Biology

birth planning policies. It is recommended that national programs aimed at
controlling women’s fertility in Ghana
examine males’ perspectives.

Finally, the findings are relevant to
community-based and clinical programs
that have as their goal the satisfaction of
an existing unmet demand for family
planning services, particularly in populations with moderate fertility desires on the
part of the women and with opposition
from the men. Having identified lack of
spousal communication as the major obstacle to use of family planning in Ghana,
community-based programs could set up
focus groups of couples to initiate and encourage dialogue among couples on population policies and use of family planning,
and life skills training could be promoted
among teens. Communication skills training could become part of prenatal classes.

The major limitations in this study are
methodological. First, the manner in
which the sample was selected may limit
the generalizability of the results to the
general population. The sample was comprised of literate male workers who, while
they are most likely to influence national
policy, are atypical of the general population that is predominantly illiterate. Second, this population is disproportionally
represented by Catholics whose religious
beliefs do not subscribe to most of the
modern forms of contraceptives. The unexpected lack of relationship between
knowledge of family planning and use of
family planning methods could be attributed to the comparably large number of
Catholics in the sample of study.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Family Planning

131

REFERENCES

ADAMCHAK, D. J., and A. ADEAYO. 1987, Male attitudes: A neglected dimension in Nigerian fertility research. Soc. Biol. 34:57-67.

ADAMCHAK, D. J., and M. T. MBizvo. 1991. Family
planning information sources and media exposure among Zimbabwean men. Stud. Fam. Plan.
22:326-331.

. 1990. The relationship between fertility
and contraceptive prevalence in Zimbabwe. Int.
Fam. Plan. Persp. 16:103-106.

ADETUNII, J. A. 1995. Infant mortality and mothers’
education in Ondo State, Nigeria. Soc. Sci.
Med. 40:253-263.

ARowoLo, O. O. 1976. Departments of fertility
among Yoruba of Nigeria. Occas. Monog. Ser.
721-10.

ASSIMENG, M. 1981. Social structure of Ghana.
Ghana Publication Corporation, Accra.

BuatiA, J. C. 1978. An analysis of reproductive
norms and behavior in rural Ghana. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.

BLoop, Jr., R. O., and D. M. WoLFE. 1960. The
husbands and wives: The dynamics of married
living. The Free Press, New York.

BOouENE, E., and T. E. Dow. 1987. Contraceptive
prevalence and family planning program effort
in Zimbabwe. Int. Fam. Plan. Persp. 13:1-7.

Brown, J. E. 1981. Polygyny and family planning
in sub-Saharan Africa. Stud. Fam. Plan.
12:322~326.

Buxatao, R. A., R. D. Lee, P. E. HOLLERBACH, and
J. BONGAARTS. 1983a. The determinants of fertility in developing countries, Vol. 1. Academic
Press, New York.

BULATAO, R. A., and R. D. LEE. 1983b. The determinants of fertility in developing countries, Vol. 2.
Academic Press, New York.

CALDWELL, J. C. 1995. The population factor in
African change. In A. Mafege and S. Radwan
(eds.), Economic and demographic change in
Africa, p. 11-35. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

. 1974. The study of fertility and fertility

change in tropical Africa. Occasional Papers.

Population Council, New York.

. 1981. The mechanisms of demographic

change in historical perspective. Pop. Stud. 35:

5-27.

. 1970. The economic rationality of high fertility: An investigation illustrated with Nigerian
survey data. Pop. Stud. 31:5.

CARD, J. J. 1978. The correspondence of data gathered from husband and wife: Implications for
family planning studies. Soc. Biol. 25:196-204.

CARAEL, M., and S. B. STANBURY. 1983. Promotion
of birth spacing on Idjwi Island, Zaire. Stud.
Fam. Plan. 14:134—-142.

 

 

 

 

CENTRE NATIONAL DE SANTE FAMILIALE and COLUMBIA UNIversITY. 1987. Rapport de l’enquete en
Sante Familial: Connaissances, attitudes, pratiques (CAP): Project de recherche operationnelle. Niamey, Niger, Niger: Ministere de la
Sante Publique et des Affaires Sociales. Columbia Univ. Center for Population and Family
Health, New York.

CENTRAL STATISTICAL OFFICE, GOVERNMENT OF ZIMBABWE and INSTITUTE FOR RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT. 1989. Zimbabwe Demographic and
Health Survey 1988, Preliminary report. Harare.

COHEN, B. 1993. Fertility levels, differentials, and
trends, p. 8-67. In K. A. Foote, K. H. Hill, and
L. G. Martin (eds.), Demographic change in
sub-Saharan Africa. National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.

Dow, T., J. CHomMBo, L. NDHLOVU, P. SHUMBA, and
B. DHLODHLO. 1986. Characteristics of new
contraceptive acceptors in Zimbabwe. Stud.
Fam. Plan. 17:107-113.

Dow, T., and L. WERNER. 1983. Perceptions of family planning among rural Kenya women. Stud.
Fam. Plan. 14:35—-42.

ENTWISLE, B., and J. CASTERLINE. 1989. Villages as
context for contraceptive behavior in rural Egypt.
Amer. Sociol. Rev. 54:1019-1034.

FALK, R. EF, and N. MILter. 1992. Latent variable
partial least squares analyses. Univ. of Akron
Press, Akron, OH.

FELDMAN, H. 1967. The Ghanaian family in transition. Wineaba Training College and Comell
University, Ithaca.

Fox, G. L. 1973. Another look at the comparative
resource model: Assessing the balance of power
in Turkish marriages. J. Marr. Fam. 35:
718-730.

GADALLA, S. M. 1978. Is there hope? Fertility and
family planning in a rural Egyptian community.
American Univ. Press, Cairo.

GADALLA, S. M., N. Nosseir, and D. G. GILLESPIE.
1980. Household distribution of contraceptives
in rural Egypt. Stud. Fam. Plan. 11:105-113.

GADALLA, S. M., J. McCartuy, and O. CAMPBELL.
1985. How the number of living sons influences
contraceptive use in Menoufia Governorate,
Egypt. Stud. Fam. Plan. 16:164-169.

GHANA STATISTICAL SERVICE. 1995. Ghana 1993:
Results from the demographic and health survey. Stud. Fam. Plan. 26:245-249.

GILLesPIE, D. L. 1971. Who has the power? The
marital struggle. J. Marr. Fam. 33:445-458.

GOLDMAN, N., and A. PEBLEY. 1989. The demography of polygyny in sub-Saharan Africa. In R.
Lesthaeghe (ed.), Reproduction and social organization in sub-Saharan Africa, p. 212-237.
Univ. of California Press, Berkeley, CA.

 
 

132

GoopbE, W. J. 1963. World revolution and family
patterns. Free Press, New York.

GUSFIELD, J. 1967. Tradition and modernity: Misplaced polarities in the study of social change.
Amer. J. Sociol. 72:35 1~362.

HALLENBECK, P. N. 1966. An analysis of power dynamics in marriage. J. Marr. Fam. 28:200-203.

HECKEL, N. I. 1986. Population laws and policies in
sub-Saharan Africa: 1975-1985. Int. Fam.
Persp. 12:122-124.

HOSKEN, F. P. 1984. Urban neighborhoods. Wiley,
New York.

INKELES, A. 1969. Making men modern: On the
causes and consequences of individual change
in six developing countries. Amer. J. Sociol.
75:208-225.

. 1966. The modernization of man, p. 45-65.
In M. Meiner (ed.), Modernization of man: The
dynamics of growth, Basic Press, New York.
Causal analysis: Assumptions, models, and data.
SAGE, Beverly Hills, CA.

Jotiy, C. L., and J. N. Griese. 1993. The proximate determinants of fertility, p. 68-116. In
K. A. Foote, K. H. Hill, and L. G. Martin (eds.),
Demographic change in sub-Saharan Africa.
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

JORESKOG, K. G., and D. SoRBom. 1988. LISREL 7:
A guide to the program and applications. SPSS
Inc., Chicago.

. 1990. LISREL 7: A guide to the program

and applications. SPSS Inc., Chicago.

5 Kant, J. A. 1968. The measurement of modernism.

>, Univ. of Texas Press, Austin.

. 1966. Some measurement of achievement
orientation. Amer. J. Sociol. 70:669-681.

KANNAE, L. 1993. The masculine side of family
planning: Male government employees’ attitudes and use of family planning methods in
Ghana. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation. Department of Sociology. University of Akron, Akron,
OH.

KANNAE, L., and B. F. PENDLETON. 1994. Fertility
attitudes among male Ghanaian government employees. J. Asian African Stud. 29:65-76.

© Kar, S. B., and J. M. TALBOT. 1980. Attitudinal and
non-attitudinal determinants of contraception: A
cross-cultural study. Stud. Fam. Plan. 11:51-64.

KHALIFA, M. A. 1988. Attitudes of urban Sudanese
men toward family planning. Stud. Fam. Plan.
19:236-243.

Kasarpa, J. D., J. O. G. BILLy, and K. West. 1986.
Status enhancement and fertility. Reproductive
responses to social mobility and educational opportunity. Academic Press, New York.

Larson, A. 1980. Patterns of contraceptive use
around the world. Population Reference Bureau,
Washington, D.C.

LESTHAEGHE, R. J. 1989. Social organization, economic crises, and the future of fertility control
in Africa, p. 475-503. In R. Lesthaeghe (ed.),
Reproduction and social organization in sub
 

5
rm
rs)
n
>
=
5
7
z
Ks
bd
j
5

 

Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

iversit

wnloaded by [Un

D

Kannae and Pendleton

 

Social Biology

Saharan Africa. Univ. of California Press,
Berkeley, CA.

LOHMOELLER, J. 1989. Latent variable path modeling with partial least squares. Physica-Verglag,
Heidelberg.

. 1984. LVPLS 1.6 program manual: Latent
variable path modeling with partial least
squares. Physica-Verglag, Heidelberg.

MARTIN, T. C. 1995. Women’s education and fertility: Results from 26 demographic and health
surveys. Stud. Fam. Plan. 26:187-202.

Mason, K. O., and A. M. Tas. 1987. Differences
between women’s and men’s reproductive goals
in developing countries. Pop. Dev. Rev. 13:
611-638.

MBizvo, M. T., and D. J. ADAMCHAK. 1991. Family
planning knowledge, attitudes, and practices of
men in Zimbabwe. Stud. Fam. Plan. 22:31-38.

McDonaLp, G. W. 1980. Family power: The assessment of theory and research, 1970-1979. J.
Marr. Fam. 42:841-854.

McGmv, T., A. BAMBA, and M. BALMA. 1989. Male
knowledge, use, and attitudes regarding family
planning in Burkina Faso. Int. Fam. Plan. Persp.
15:85-87.

Motr, F. L., and S. H. Mort. 1985. Household fertility decisions in West Africa: A comparison of
male and female surveys results. Stud. Fam.
Plan, 16:88-99.

MustTaFA, M. A., and S. D. Mumrorb. 1984. Male
attitudes toward family planning in Khartoum,
Sudan. J. Biosoc. Sci. 16:88-99.

NATIONAL CENSUS OFFICE. 1984. National census
reports. Ghana Publishing Corporation, Accra.

NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT. 1989. Kenya demographic and health survey
1989. National Council for Population and Development & IRD/Macro Systems, Inc., Nairobi.

OKEDUI, F, O. 1968. Some psychological aspects of
fertility among married women in an African
city. Stud. Fam. Plan. 10:117-123.

OMOND!-ODHIAMBO. 1997. Men’s participation in
family planning decisions in Kenya. Pop. Stud.
51:29-40.

OnI, G. A., and J. McCartuy. 1986. Use of contraceptives for birth spacing in a Nigerian City.
Stud. Fam. Plan. 17:165--171.

Opponac, C. 1970. Conjugal power and resources:
An urban African example. J. Marr. Fam.
32:676-680.

Peit, M. 1972. The Ghanaian factory worker: Industrial worker in Africa. Cambridge Univ.
Press, London.

Pitts, M., M. BOWMAN, and J. McMaster. 1995.
Reactions to repeated STD infections: Psychosocial aspects and gender issues in Zimbabwe. Soc. Sci. Med. 40:1299-1304.

POPULATION CRISIS COMMITTEE. 1990. Population
pressures threat to democracy. Population Reference Bureau, Washington, D.C.

POPULATION REFERENCE BUREAU. 1996. World population data sheet. Washington, D.C.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

. 1990a. Nigeria’s Ondo state shows high

birth rate. Pop. Today 18:4—5. i

. 1990b. One-third of Togo’s married women

are using family planning. Pop. Today 18:5.

. 1990c. Spotlight: Zambia. Pop. Today

18(2):12.

. 1990d. Survey report: Sudan. Pop. Today
18(11):5.

RAINWATER, L. 1996. Some aspects of lower class
sexuality. J. Soc. Iss. 2:96-109.

. 1965. Family design: Marital sexuality,
family size and contraception. Aldine Publishing, Chicago.

RAVEN, B. H., R. CENTERS, and A. RODRIQUES.
1975. The bases of conjugal power, p. 231-244.
In R. Cromwell et al. (eds.), Power in families.
Wiley, New York.

RENNE, E. P. 1993. Gender ideology and fertility
strategies in an Ekiti Yoruba village. Stud. Fam.
Plan. 24:343-353.

REPETTO, R. 1972. Son preference and fertility behavior in developing countries. Stud. Fam. Plan.
3:70-76.

RosEN, B. C. 1986. Cross-cultural measurement of
control, power, and authority in the husbandwife relationship: Methodological considerations. Presented at Groves Conference, Boston.

Ross, J. A., M. RicH, J. MOLZAN, and M. PENSAK.
1988. Family planning and child survival: 100
developing countries. Columbia Center for Population and Family Health, New York.

SCANZONI, J. 1978. Social processes and power
in families, p. 456-467. In W. R. Burr et al.
(eds.), Contemporary theories about the family:
Research-based theories. Free Press, New York.

Scott, W. J., and C. S. MoRGHAN. 1983. Analysis of
factors affecting traditional family expectation
and perception of ideal fertility. Sex Roles
9:901-914.

SINGH, K. P. 1982. Modernity value orientations,
fertility and family planning. J. Fam. Welfare
29:84-88.

 

 

 

 

 

Family Planning

133

SPEIZER, I. 1995. Men’s desire for additional wives
and children. Soc. Biol. 42:199-213.

POPULATION INSTITUTE, THE. 1988. A nation in crisis: Building a future for Africa in the twentyfirst century, No. 8. Population Institute, New
York.

Untrep Nations. 1981. Variations in the incidence
of knowledge and use of contraception: A comparative analysis of world fertility survey results
for twenty developing countries. United Nations, New York.

VAN DE WALLE, F., and B. TRAORE. 1986. Attitudes
of women and men toward contraception in
Bobo-Dioulasso. Working Paper No. 13, African
Demography Working Papers, Population Studies Center, Columbia University, New York.

Ware, H. 1975. Motivations for the use of birth
control: Evidence from West Africa. Demography 13:479-493.

Wawer, M., R. MCNAMARA, T. McGinn, and D.
Lauro. 1991. Family planning operations research in Africa: Reviewing a decade of experience. Stud. Fam. Plan. 22:279-293.

. 1990. Program evaluation in low prevalence countries: What works and why. Presented
at the Population Association of America,
Toronto.

WORLD FERTILITY SURVEY. 1983. The Ghana fertility survey, 1979-1980. Voorburg: WFS.

Wor_pD BANK. 1986. Population growth and policies in sub-Saharan Africa. The World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

YAMANAKA, K., H. C. CHANG, and F. O. LORENZ.
1982. Modernity and fertility preference in Taiwan. Sociol. Quart. 23:539-551.

ZIMBABWE NATIONAL FAMILY PLANNING COUNCIL
AND WESTINGHOUSE PUBLIC APPLIED SYSTEMS.
1985. Zimbabwe reproductive health survey.
Harare.

 

 
