Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Wives’ and husbands’ expected costs and benefits
of childbearing as predictors of pregnancy

Ellen Shapiro Fried & J. Richard Udry

To cite this article: Ellen Shapiro Fried &J. Richard Udry (1979) Wives’ and husbands’ expected
costs and benefits of childbearing as predictors of pregnancy, Social Biology, 26:4, 265-274,
DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988385

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988385

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 13 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Wives’ and Husbands’ Expected Costs and Benefits
of Childbearing as Predictors of Pregnancy

PROM ngoeeneen dy Hee ES
o
we

Ellen Shapiro Fried and J. Richard Udry

Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina; and Carolina Population
Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina

ABSTRACT: This paper examines the usefulness of one-sex and two-sex utility models of reproductive behavior in predicting births as consequences of wives’ and husbands’ perceptions of the costs
and benefits of another child. We used longitudinal data on a sample of 280 white and 69 black
young urban American couples. For whites, female models are mostly better than male models.
Two-sex models generally predict more variance than female models. We show that the white wife’s
utility considerations dominate the predictions, with husband as ajunior partner and partial redundancy of female and male models. The utility considerations of black husbands dominate the pre
-dictions, with wives as junior partners and no redundancy in female and male models. We conclude

that neither sex incorporates completely the spouse’s utility considerations into its own utility structure. Because some male models are surprisingly strong, researchers cannot omit males without

running the risk of leaving out an important component of the determinants of fertility.

The purpose of this paper is to explore
the usefulness of one-sex and two-sex utility models of reproductive behavior in understanding the process by which the utility considerations of two spouses
separately and jointly influence the reproduction of the couple. We do this by analysis of data collected in a lJongitudinal
study of a panel of young black and white
married urban U.S. couples.

In the past few years we have learned a
great deal about applying utility models to
predict fertility. Utility models of fertility,
simply put, state that having or not having
a child (or intending or not intending to
have a child) is a function of the
individual’s perceived payoff matrix from
having a birth compared with the matrix
for not having a birth.

Several researchers have proposed that
measurements of the anticipated costs and
benefits of another child are useful predictors of fertility and fertility plans (see, for
example: Becker, 1960; Namboodiri,

265

1972; Arnold and Fawcett, 1975; Hoffman
and Hoffman, 1973; and Terhune, 1974)
Two recent studies are similar to ours both
in their theoretical orientation and in the
fact that they are longitudinal (Davidson
and Jaccard, 1979; Townes et al., 1977).

Davidson and Jaccard (1979) based
their study on interviews of 244 married
white women at three yearly intervals.
Using an approach based on the work
of Rosenberg and Fishbein, they attempt
to predict reproductive behavior using a
variable combining a birth or an attempt
to become pregnant and a variable which
is a birth or no birth. They use an attitudinal component and a normative component as their predictors and are able to
explain 25 per cent of the variance in births or no births and 35 per cent
of the variance in births or attempts to become pregnant.

Townes et al. (1977) interviewed 74
married couples twice, a year apart. The
respondents were for the most part highly
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

266 Fried and Udry

educated and middle class. Race is not reported, but we assume they were white.
The investigators used a subjective expected-utility approach. At the first interview they measured the positive and negative values associated with having or not
having another child for both the wife and
the husband. At the second interview,
they determined whether the wife had become pregnant or had tried to become
pregnant. They reported that they can
predict the occurrence or nonoccurrence
of a pregnancy attempt quite well. Among
couples for whom they predicted there
would be no pregnancy, there were very
few pregnancies or attempts, while among
those for whom pregnancy was predicted,
about half reported a pregnancy attempt.

Births are presumably the consequence
of actions of both parents. In what way do
utility functions determine what plans will
be made and what reproductive consequences will follow, when there is more
than one actor? Becker (1974) deals with
this question in the theoretical analysis of
households by introducing the concept of
the household head who by definition in
his/her own utility function optimizes
those of all other members of the household. (Becker says one does this out of
“‘love.””) The empirical importance of
Becker’s model depends upon whether
households have ‘‘heads’’ in this specific
sense.

With respect to fertility decisionmaking, is there a head in Becker’s sense?
More generally, how do the utility considerations of husband and wife contribute to
determining reproductive events?

FERTILITY DECISION MAKING
PATTERNS OF INFLUENCE

Let us suppose that wife and husband
contemplate their plans for another child.

 

 

Social Biology

Each considers the costs and benefits of
having or not having another child. Each
spouse identifies a distinctive cost-benefit
structure when surveying the domains of
possible outcomes. The couple may discuss these considerations with one
another, so that each partner knows the
other’s payoff structure. On the basis of
their discussion, they may decide to stop
contraceptive measures in order to conceive; or they may not discuss the issue,
but each may try to imagine how the
other’s payoffs look; or they may ignore
how the situation appears to the other.

Let us suppose that as a result of
whatever subjective considerations each
makes, whatever deliberations they shate,
and whatever individual or joint action
they take (or fail to take), a knowledge of
the wife’s payoff perceptions allows us to
predict well whether or not a birth occurs,
and that adding information from the husband does not improve our prediction. We
would then say that the wife’s utility structure influences the occurrence of the
event. But we could be wrong. She may
have so completely incorporated his considerations with her own that the influence
of his is also represented by hers. We can
discover this incorporation by examining
our ability to predict reproductive events
by examination of his utility structure
alone. If, in addition to what has been
said, his payoff structure alone predicts as
well as hers alone, and the addition of hers
to his does not improve the prediction, we
may say that their payoff structures are
completely redundant. Because of the
consideration of one another necessary to
arrive at this state, we will identify this
state of affairs as a Love Pattern.

Now consider the circumstances where
knowledge of the payoff structure of each
spouse predicts the events equally well,
but simultaneous consideration of both
payoff structures allows us to predict
events twice as well as using either alone.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 4

In this circumstance, we may imagine that
neither spouse has incorporated the considerations of the other into a personal
payoff structure. We may say that the
couple’s payoff structures are completely
nonredundant. Because the pair is involved in a joint venture in which each
considers only an individual payoff structure, we will identify this state of affairs as
a Partnership Pattern.

In yet a third set of circumstances, suppose that knowledge of the payoffs of one
partner alone allows a much better prediction than knowledge of the other alone,
and addition of knowledge of the second
partner’s payoffs makes a negligible improvement in the prediction. We can then
say that one partner or the other dominates the events, and the other has a negligible influence. The case of domination by
a single partner will be called a Wife Pattern if the wife dominates, and a Husband
Pattern if the husband dominates. Where
one sex dominates and the other makes a
lesser additional contribution which Is not
redundant with the first, the sex making
the lesser contribution may for convenience be designated a junior partner.

Of course, this discussion of patterns
represents a great simplification of the circumstances. Sometimes one spouse will
be indifferent because personal payoffs
are not affected very much one way or the
other. Sometimes one spouse will be ambivalent, because of anticipating many
strong benefits which are offset by many
high costs.

We have eliminated by definition the
case where wife and husband have identical payoff structures independent of considerations of the other. This situation
cannot occur because we have defined
their payoff structures as different. In marriages where wife and husband have similar motivational structures and no division
of labor by sex, these definitions distort
reality. In practice we shall have to con
Costs and Benefits of Childbearing 267

sider nondifferentiated marriages as rare
events, as Herbst (1960) and Blood and
Wolfe (1960) have shown.

Of course, we have only stated the extreme cases in our models. Redundancy
can have any value from zero to one hundred per cent. Predictive powers of male
and female models can differ greatly or little. But the simplifications may help us to
understand the influence structure of fertility events. A number of researchers
have examined two-sex models of reproductive behavior, primarily to answer the
practical question of whether or not addition of the husband’s data improves predictions of fertility enough to justify
nearly doubling the expense of surveys of
fertility determinants. Evidence on the
advantages of collecting data on husbands
as well as on wives is sparse and mixed.

Data from our pilot study (Hofferth
and Udry, 1976, ms.) showed that models
which used expected consequences from
both spouses were considerably more
powerful predictors of contraceptive behavior than models which used the consequences expected by only the wife or the
husband. Neal and Groat (1977) report on
a study in which wives’ and husbands’
alienation scores were used to predict
various aspects of reproductive behavior.
They found that having the scores for both
spouses improved predictive ability over
the scores for either spouse alone and that
husbands’ scores often predicted as well as
those of wives.

There is, however, evidence on the
other side. Bumpass and Westoff (1970)
found that husbands’ family-size desires
added very little to the variance explained
in estimated completed family size by
wives’ family-size desires. In predicting
childbearing intentions in our study
(Fried et al., 1980), we found that femaleonly models were better than male-only
models. Two-sex models were usually better predictors than one-sex models, but
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

268 Fried and Udry

not very much better. Townes et al. (1977)
compared the ability of wives’, husbands’,
and wives-and-husbands’ subjective expected utility scores to predict the occurrence of a pregnancy. They report that the
model using an average of wives’ and husbands’ scores predicted about as well as
wives’ scores alone but that husbands’
scores alone did not predict a pregnancy as
well. In addition, when they used stepwise
discriminant function analysis with both
wives’ and husbands’ variables, several
wives’ variables entered before any husbands’ variables. The question is still an
open one.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Our study is based on data from the second and third waves of a panel study. In
1973 (Time 0), we obtained area samples
of 100 white and 100 black ever-married
women aged 15-44 from urban low income census tracts. The whites were in
predominantly white tracts and the blacks
in predominantly black tracts. The areas
were in 16 SMSA counties (14 for blacks,
because of the small black population in 2
of the 16 counties) which had previously
been defined as likely to show a demographic response to a subsidized family
planning program. Almost all of these
tracts were in the central cities. In addition
to this low income sample, a sample of 100
ever-married white women aged 15-44
from middle income census tracts was interviewed in 5 of the 16 counties. The
tracts from which these women came were
contiguous to the central city boundaries.

The data for this report come from the
two waves of the study which were carried
out in 1976-77 (Time 1) and 1978 (Time 2)
with a subsample of these women and
their husbands. The subsample consists of
women who were under age 30 at the time
of the initial interview. For the present
analysis, we used 505 couples in which the

Social Biology

woman was married to the same man at
the time of all of the interviews.

STATISTICAL MODEL

We used multiple regression models to
explore the questions we have raised. For
each dependent variable, we ran separate
analyses for the female and male independent variables as well as a joint run using
both female and male independent variables. This procedure was done separately
by race. In each run, a forward entry
multiple regression was performed with
F=2.0 and tolerance of 0.30 required to
enter the model. The run was cut if the total F for the model increased after a decline. No more than ten variables were allowed to enter. Couples which were sterile
or in which the wife was pregnant at Time
1 were excluded from the analysis. There
are 69 black and 280 white couples in the
analysis.

DEPENDENT VARIABLES

1. PREGNANCY is a dummy variable
which is scored 1 if the woman has been
pregnant between Time 1 and Time 2 and
0 if she has not. Since we excluded from
our analysis women who were pregnant at
the time Time 1 interview, this group includes only pregnancies presumed to have
started after the measurement of the independent variables. Fourteen per cent of
the black women and 28 per cent of the
white women had a pregnancy during the
interval between interviews.

2. TRYOREV is a dummy variable
which is scored 1 1f the woman has been
pregnant in the interval or if she reports at
the time of the second interview that she is
trying to become pregnant. It seemed reasonable to expect that we might be able to
predict this variable better with our
measures of anticipated consequences
than we could predict actual pregnancies
since those couples who are subfecund
might not have become pregnant during
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 4

the one-year interval, even though they
were trying. (Davidson and Jaccard
[1979], found this to be true for their sample.) Twenty-three per cent of the black
women and 37 per cent of the white women reported either that they had been
(or were) pregnant or that they were trying to become pregnant at Time 2.

INDEPENDENT VARIABLES

The independent variables in our utility
model were selected to represent each of
the major domains of consequences of
having birth. An extensive review of literature on consequences of reproduction for
the parents led us to identify the following
major domains: (1) satisfactions and cost
which derive directly from infant and child
care; (2) differential satisfactions related to
the child’s sex; (3) changes in selfevaluation; (4) monetary costs of a birth
and child; (5) consequences for the marital
relationship; (6) normative responses from
important persons in the parent’s soctal
network. For each of these domains we developed one variable from our questionnaire which seemed best to represent that
domain. The exception to this was Area 6,
where we included as variables the normative responses anticipated from several persons in the social network.

The independent variables were all
measured at Time 1. In each case our interest was in the respondent’s perceptions
of the consequence as a cost or benefit (reward). Each question was asked of both
wives and husbands, so there is a female
and a male variable for each. We describe
the areas below.

1. Infant Care. We presented the respondents with a list of ten items related to
taking care of babies, for example, talking
to the baby or changing the baby’s diaper.
We asked respondents to rate each of the
items on a five-point scale from “‘like a
lot’’ to “dislike a lot.”’ Scores on the index
were the average of ten responses.

 

Costs and Benefits of Childbearing 269

2. Sex of the Children. Respondents
were asked how important it is to them to
have a (another) boy and how important it
is to them to have a (another) girl. We averaged the responses to form an index.

3. Changes in the Respondent's Feelings
about Themselves. We asked respondents,
“If you (your wife) became pregnant
during the next few months, how would
you feel about yourself?’ A list of six
items of the following form was presented:
“Would you feel more or less proud of
yourself?” The other adjectives were: mature, successful, embarrassed, critical,
and selfish. Responses to the six items
were averaged to create an index, with a
high score indicating an expectation of
positive feelings.

4. Cost of Children. This variable was
constructed from three items in which respondents indicated the extent to which
various financial costs associated with
pregnancy and child rearing would influence their decisions to have a (another)
child. A high score on this index indicates
financial matters would influence their decision.

5. Changes in the Marriage. We used
two variables to measure changes that respondents might expect to occur in their
marriages as a result of having a (another)
child in the next year (see Orden and
Bradburn, 1968, for properties of the
scale). One variable deals with positive aspects such as being affectionate. For each
of nine items, respondents were asked
whether they would expect to do them
more often, less often, or about the same.
The second variable deals with tensions.
For each of nine areas of potential tension, respondents were asked whether
they would be more troublesome, less
troublesome, or about the same.

6. Responses from the Social Network.
For each of seven individuals in a person’s
social circle, we asked respondents
whether they thought that individual

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

270 Fried and Udry

would be more approving or more critical
if the wife became pregnant in the next
few months. If the respondents indicated
that they expected such a change, they
were asked how they would feel about it:
whether they would be pleased or
bothered by it. We constructed one variable for each person in the respondent’s social circle based on the respondent’s reaction to the anticipated behavior change.
The persons asked about were best friend,
sibling, mother, father, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, and spouse.

Our sole interest in this paper is to examine the relative influence of husband
and wife utility considerations in determining subsequent fertility events. In the
interest of simplification, we have avoided
the examination of the importance of particular husband and wife variables on outcomes. It is in the nature of the statistical
procedures used that entry of one specific
husband or wife variable may reduce the
statistical effect of subsequent variables so
that in two-sex models, different variables
may enter than entered in single-sex
models.

RESULTS
OvERALL MODELS

Table 1’ shows the overall results for
whites, and Table 2 shows the overall results for blacks. For both blacks and whites, the prediction of TRYOREV is distinctly superior to the prediction of
pregnancy. We show results using each
dependent variable, but for brevity and
simplicity offer interpretations of the

'An extensive search of the statistical literature
and consultation with a number of statisticians have
failed to identify a Icgitimate and straightforward
method for testing the differences in R*'s (or multiple
R’s) between models. The practice of using a Z transformation to compare multiple R’s ts not valid.
Furthermore, there are no tests for the differences
between two F's; indeed, such a test is not statistically possible.

Social Biology

TRYOREYV results only. For whites, the
results in Table 1 resemble the Wife Pattern, with male-only models weaker than
female-only models, and partial redundancy. The two-sex model is only a minor
improvement over the female-only
model. For blacks, the results in Table 2 fit
the Husband Pattern, with wife as junior
partner, and no redundancy. The male
model is stronger, but the two-sex model
is as good as the sum of the one-sex
models.

PARITY-SPECIFIC MODELS

Several scholars maintain that fertility
decisions may be governed differently at
different parities (Terhune, 1974; Namboodiri, 1973).

Earlier studies of family decision making show that the more children there are
in the family, the less the decision-making
power of the woman (Blood and Wolfe,
1960; Heer, 1963) when considered over
all decision-making domains. We examined whether this holds for fertility decisions specifically by looking at the whites
separately by parity. (There are too few
blacks to obtain stable models by parity.)
These data appear in Table 3. At Parity 0,
the model predicting pregnancy shows the
male model slightly better than the female
model, with the female model completely
redundant to the male. But the model predicting TRYOREV shows the female
model stronger, and the male model
mostly redundant. At Parity 1, the TRYOREV results fit the Wife Pattern, with
husband a junior partner, and no redundancy. At Parity 2 and over, male and female models are about equal, and there is
moderate redundancy, suggesting a
Partnership Pattern.

The parity-specific models are somewhat better than the all-parity model, indicating that for the purposes examined
here, there is some utility in examining the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 26, No. 4

 

Costs and Benefits of Childbearing 271

TABLE 1

PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R?) BY
ONE-SEX AND Two-SEX MODELS, FOR WHITE COUPLES
(N=280)

FEMALE MODEL

DEPENDENT Al. No. of

VARIABLES R* R Var.
PREGNANCY .. 10* 8 4
TRYOREV..... 16* 15 4 12*

*Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

results by parity (but see Fried et al., 1980
for conflicting results). The TRYOREV
results for different parities are as a group
not out of line with the all-parity model
and can be characterized without too
much violence as Wife Patterns with husband as junior partner and moderate redundancy.

Why do we find white wives generally
more influential? Is it simply because they
must bear the child? Or does it have to do
more with the subsequent changes in her
life being more dramatic than those in the
husband’s life? We can examine this
further by making a few simple assumptions.

WIFE’S EMPLOYMENT STATUS

Assume that in couples where the wife

MALE MopDEL Two-sex MODEL

Adj. No. of Adj. No. of
a Var R? Re Var.
3 3 12* 10 6

10 4 20* 18 7

works there is less differentiation of sex
roles with respect to childrearing than
among couples in which the wife is not employed. One would therefore assume that
childrearing was more the preserve of the
nonemployed woman. Under these circumstances, one would predict that
among couples in which the woman does
not work outside the home, wives would
have more impact and husbands less on
fertility decisions than among couples in
which the wife is employed. A review of
the literature on family decision making
shows contradictory findings, depending
on the research techniques used (Udry,
1974, pp. 268-269). Table 4 presents analysis for employed-wife and nonemployedwife couples separately. This table shows
that nonemployed wives dominate the fer
TABLE 2

PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R”) BY
ONE-SEX AND Two-SEX MODELS, FOR BLACK COUPLES

(N=69)
FEMALE MobeEL MALE MODEL. Two-s—Ex MODEL
DEPENDENT net No. of a No. of ae} . No. of
VARIABLES R- R Var. R R Var R° R Var
PREGNANCY .. 7* 5 2 6 2 15* 10 4
TRYOREV..... IL* 8 2 27* 25 2 41* 34 7

*Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

272 Fried and Udry

Social Biology

TABLE 3

PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R”) BY
ONE-SEX AND TWO-SEX MODELS, BY PARITY, FOR WHITE COUPLES

FemaLte MODEL

DEPENDENT ag): No. of
VARIABLES R R Var.

Parity 0 (N=58)

PREGNANCY..... 27* 23 3

TRYOREV....... 31* 25 4
Parity 1 (N=96)

PREGNANCY..... 14* 10 4

TRYOREV....... 17* 12 5
Parity 2+ (N= 126)

PREGNANCY..... 16* 15 2

TRYOREV....... 17* 16 2

*Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

tility decision process more than employed wives. The model for nonemployed wife couples is a pure Wife Model,
while for employed wife couples it is a
Partnership Model with partial redundancy.

HUSBAND PARTICIPATION IN CHILD CARE

A key domain in producing differential
utility structures for husband and wife

Ma .e Moper Two-seEx MODEL

' ait No. of 5 ad). No. of

R R Var. R R Var.
35* 30 4 35* 32 3
20* 16 3 38* 31 6

4 3 1 16* 12 4

8* 6 1 25* 19 7
12* 10 3 23* 20 4
15* 13 4 23* 21 4

with respect to fertility is child care. We
might suppose that the more the husband
participates in child care, the more
influential he will be in determining subsequent reproductive events. A measure of
division of labor with respect to child
rearing is available in our data set. We
asked fathers in the study about how many
hours per week they spent with the
children. One might assume that the more

TABLE 4

PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R?) BY
ONE-SEX AND Two-sExX MODELS, BY WIFE’S EMPLOYMENT STATUS, FOR WHITE COUPLES

FemaLe Mopet

DEPENDENT Ad). No. of
VARIABLES R? R Var.

Wife employed (N= 146)

PREGNANCY..... 6* 4 2
TRYOREV ....... 16* 14 4
Wife not employed (N= 134)
PREGNANCY..... 12* 10 3
TRYOREV....... 20* 18 4

*Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

Ma ce Mopec Two-sex MopEeL

fs. No. of AD. No. of
R? R Var. R? R Var.
10* 9 2 10* 9 2
14* 12 4 21* 18 6
4 3 2 14* 12 4
9* 6 3 21* 18 5

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 4

TABLE 5

PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R’) BY
ONE-SEX AND Two-sEX MODELS, BY HUSBAND’S INVOLVEMENT IN
CHILD CaRE, FOR WHITE COUPLES

FEMALE MopEL

DEPENDENT Adj. No. of
VARIABLES R- R’ Var.

Costs and Benefits of Childbearing

 

 

MALE MODEL Two-seEx MODEL

Adj. No. of Adj. No. of
R- Var. R R* Var.

No
te

Husband spends <25 hours per week with children (N= 101)

PREGNANCY .... 18* 15 3
TRYOREV....... 20* 18 3

Husband spends >26 hours per week with children (N= 111)
3

PREGNANCY .... 13* 10 4
TRYOREV....... 14* 11 3

*Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

time the husband spends with the
children, the less the division of labor, and
therefore, the more his influence relative
to that of the wife. But Table 5 shows it
doesn’t work out that way. For husbands
who spend more than 26 hours per week
with the children, the male model does not
reach significance, but for husbands who
spend less time than that, the male model
vies with the female model for equal
infiuence. On the other hand, the two-sex
model represents about a 50 per cent improvement over the best single-sex model
for both categories of time spent with
children. Overall, husband’s time spent
with children does not affect relative
influence of husband and wife on fertility
outcomes in the predicted way.

FAMILY INCOME

It may be hypothesized that family income affects the division of labor in the
family. Numerous studies show that in
high status families, the husband dominates the decision making more than in
low status families (Blood and Wolfe,
1960). We therefore examined our models
when the sample was dichotomized for
family income. The data analysis (not

16* 14 Zz 28* 24 5
24* 21 4 29" 26 5
} 19* 14 7

2 1 20* 15 6

shown) indicates that dichotomizing on
family income does not produce results
which are different from the results for the
total sample.

CONCLUSIONS

While there is some diversity in the results, the conclusions from our analysis
may be stated relatively simply. For white
couples in our sample, the relative
influence of wife and husband utility structures on reproductive events fits a Wife
Pattern with husband as junior partner,
and partial redundancy of the single-sex
models. Models constructed by parity are
an improvement over all-parity models in
predictive power, but generally are of the
same type. Two-sex models generally predict more variance than female-only
models. However, among couples in
which the wife is not employed, the data
show a Wife Pattern. Household income
and husband’s time with the children do
not differentiate distinctive models.

This study gives us some insight to the
way in which utility structures of husband
and wife act jointly to determine reproductive outcomes. First, there is little emDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

274 Fried and Udry

pirical evidence for the existence of household headship in Becker’s sense. Neither
wives nor husbands subsume the utility
structure of the other in their own. However, the partial redundancy of male and
female models suggests that love may be a
force to be reckoned with. The skeptical
reader will prefer to explain redundancy
as a consequence of those domains in
which husband and wife outcomes are the
same (for example, concern with costs)
because they are not affected by role
differentiation.

The black results are something else
again. The TRYOREYV results for blacks
are strongly Husband Pattern, with wife as
junior partner, with no redundancy. It isa
pity that we do not have enough blacks in
the sample to explicate this finding. This
we save for further research.

From a practical point of view, is it
worth interviewing husbands in order to
gain the additional predictive power of

 

Social Biology

two-sex models? While our previous research indicates that the two-sex models
are only a marginal improvement when
predicting reproductive intentions, the results of this analysis indicate clearly for
blacks, and with more ambiguity for
whites, that having the husbands’ input in
predicting reproductive events is worth
the cost. Because male models are sometimes surprisingly strong, researchers who
do not have husband data cannot be sure
that they have not left out half of what
they need to know.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This ts a revision of a paper presented at the
1979 annual meeting of the Population Association of America. The research on which it is
based was supported by funds from the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (#N01~HD-42804). Thanks are
due Joy Wood for data analysis.

REFERENCES

ARNOLD, F., and J. T. Fawcett. 1975. The value
of children: A cross-national study. Vol. 3.
East-West Population Institute, Honolulu.

Becker. G. S. 1960. An economic analysis of fertility. p. 209-240. Im National Bureau of
Economic Research (ed.), Demographic and
economic change in developed countries,
Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.

. 1974. A theory of social interactions. J.
Polit. Econ. 82: 1063-1093.

Bioop, R. O.,Jr.,and D. M. WoLrFE. 1960. Husbands and wives. Free Press of Glencoe, Glencoe, Tl.

Bumpass, L. L.,and C. F. WestTorrF. 1970. The later years of childbearing. Princeton Univ.
Press. Princeton.

Davipson. A. R., and J. J. JaccARD. 1979. Variables that moderate the attitude-behavior relation: Results of a longitudinal survey. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 37: 1364-1376.

Friep, E. S.. S. L. HoFrertH. and J. R. Upry.
1980. Parity specific and two-sex utility
models of reproductive intentions. Demography 17: 1-12.

Heer, Davip M. 1963. The measurement and
bases of family power: An overview. Marr.
Fam. Liv. 25: 133-139.

HerssT, P. G. 1960. Task differentiation of husband and wife in family activities. Ja N. W.

 

Bell and E. F. Vogel (eds.). A modern introduction to the family. Free Press of Glencoe,
Glencoe, II.

HorrertH, S. L.,andJ.R. Upry. 1976. The contribution of marital outcomes to explaining
the reproductive behavior of couples. Paper
presented at the meeting of the American Sociological Association,

HorrMANN, L. W., and M. L. Horrman. 1973.
The value of children to parents. p. 19-76. In
J. T. Fawcett (ed.). Psychological perspectives on population. Basic Books, New York.

Nampoonpmrl, N. K. 1972. Some observations on
the economic framework for fertility analysis.
Pop. Stud. 26: 185~206.

Neat, A. G., and H. T. Groat. 1977. Alienation
and fertility in the marital dyad. Soc. Forc. 56:
77-85.

OrpeEN, S. R., and N. Brapsurn. 1968. Dimension of marriage happiness. Amer. J. Sociol.
73:715-731.

TERHUNE, K. W. 1974. Explorations in fertility
values. Calspan Corp., Buffalo.

Townes, B. D., F. L. CAMPBELL, L. R. BEacH,
and D. C. Martin. 1977. Birth planning values and decisions: The prediction of fertility.
J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 7: 74-88.

Upry, J. R. 1974. The social context of marriage.
3rd ed. Lippincott, Philadelphia.
