Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Why not use contraception? Economics of fertility
regulation among rural Egyptian women

Wayne A. Schutjer , C. Shannon Stokes & John R. Poindexter

To cite this article: Wayne A. Schutjer , C. Shannon Stokes & John R. Poindexter (1986) Why
not use contraception? Economics of fertility regulation among rural Egyptian women, Social
Biology, 33:3-4, 214-228, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988640

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988640

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Why Not Use Contraception?
Economics of Fertility Regulation
Among Rural Egyptian Women

 

Wayne A. Schutjer, C. Shannon Stokes, and John R. Poindexter

Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology, and Population Issues
Research Center, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania

ABSTRACT: Use of contraception by rural Egyptian women who desire no more children is examined within a modified microeconomic framework. Four sets of factors are hypothesized to
influence current use of contraception: (1) costs of contraception, (2) factors influencing the
slope of the desired family size function, (3) anticipated costs of child rearing and (4) strength of
motivation for fertility regulation. Women’s education and two measures of psychic costs were
found to be important predictors of contraceptive use. Factors affecting the demand for children and thus indirectly influencing the motivation for fertility regulation were also important.
Land ownership, cultivating status of the household, and educational expectations for children
were significantly related to current use. Strength of motivation, although significant, was less
strongly related to use of contraception. The findings suggest women who want no more children, but who are not practicing contraception, are affected by factors influencing both the costs
of contraception and the costs of an unwanted child.

An important question facing policy
makers and population planners in less
developed nations is: Why do many
women who want no additional children
fail to practice contraception? A recent
analysis of 11 less developed nations revealed that less than 10 per cent of currently married women in Nepal and
Pakistan who wanted no more children
were practicing contraception (Palmore
and Concepcion, 1981). The proportion
was considerably higher in Panama,
Peru, and the Philippines, where over
half of the women desiring no additional
children were using contraception to
prevent additional births. In all cases,
however, women who wanted no additional children yet were not practicing
contraception represented a significant
potential clientele for family planning
programs.

The behavior of women who want no
more children, but who do not use contraception, is often viewed as irrational
in that these women are not using available means to attain their goal of no additional children (Chang et al., 1981). The
microeconomic approach to fertility behavior, however, suggests that judgements about the “‘irrationality” of such
behavior may be too facile (Easterlin,

1975, 1978). Under conditions in which —,

contraception is neither costless nor per-'>
fectly effective, the costs of practicing
contraception may exceed the costs of
an unwanted child. While this situation
may be difficult to visualize in more developed countries, it may be likely to occur in less developed nations. In nations
where contraception may be frowned
upon for religious or cultural reasons,
and where the means of contraception

214

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

are difficult or costly to obtain, costs of
contraception may exceed the costs of
an additional child.

This paper presents an analysis of the
contraceptive behavior of rural Egyptian women who desire no additional
children. Earlier work in rural Egypt
found that only 31 per cent of women
who desired no additional children were
practicing contraception. Moreover, as
the authors note: “there is no adequate
explanation of why the two-thirds of rural Egyptian women who do not want
more children, are not practicing contraception” (Stokes et al., 1983, pp. 64—
65).

The theoretical framework underlying the analysis draws heavily upon the
socioeconomic model developed by
Easterlin. That model incorporates both
demand factors and biological factors as
determinants of family size. The empirical approach is similar to that used by
Easterlin and Crimmins (1981) in their
analysis of World Fertility Survey data.
Both the theoretical framework and empirical procedures have been modified,
however, to reflect the rural nature of
the sample, the limitation to women desiring no additional children, and the detailed data available from the survey regarding each of the major variables.

The empirical analysis is based upon
data collected from 1,200 rural wonien
in Lower Egypt in the summer of 1978.
To assure a range of socioeconomic and
agricultural conditions, 12 villages were
randomly drawn from three strata
reflecting variation in both sets of characteristics. From each village a random
sample of households was drawn. The
desired sample size was 1,200 evermarried women less than age 50. The
1,200 interviews were obtained from 685
households. Restrictions of the sample
to households with male heads, the

 

Rural Egyptian Women 215

elimination of polygamous households,
and, most importantly, limiting the focus to those in which the wife desired no
more children, yielded 440 cases for
analysis.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

Easterlin (1978) has demonstrated
that a demand curve exists for fertility
regulation that relates the price and motivation for fertility regulation. In that
model, the motivation for fertility regulation is approximated by the number of
unwanted children the household would
have if fertility were unregulated, The
cost of fertility regulation includes both
economic and psychic costs of limiting
births. A comparison of these costs, and
the strength of motivation of fertility
regulation underlie the decision to limit
births.

Following Easterlin’s notation, Cp
equals the desired family size in a perfect contraceptive society, i.e., a society
in which contraception has no cost and is
perfectly effective. Cy equals natural
fertility, the number of children that
would be born to a family in the absence
of any voluntary control of fertility, adjusted by the probability that a child will
survive to age 20. Cp is determined at a
given child price by the tangency of the
family income constraint and the indifference curve for children and other
goods consumed by parents. The difference between Cy and Cp is Easterlin’s
measure of motivation to regulate fertility, that is, the number of children that
would survive to adulthood in the absence of voluntary fertility control, and
the number that would be desired if fertility regulation were costless and perfectly effective.

In Figure 1, the function C’p-C'p
relates Cp and the price of children. The
 
   
     
 
  
 

  

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Schutjer et al.

  
 
    
   
     

— G

   

Social Biology

 

    
  

XXX
eX XK KX AKA

(}
YY)
OK

0
x

0

é
eX

    

Kx

Children

Fic. 1,-—Utility loss as a measure of motivation to regulate fertility

price of children (Pc) includes both actual and anticipated monetary outlays
and foregone parental earnings associated with bearing and rearing children.
Thus, at (Pc) the desired family size is
Cp, while Cy represents natural fertility
adjusted for survival rates. Cy—Cp is
Easterlin’s measure of the strength of
motivation to regulate fertility which is
compared to the costs of contraception
in making a decision regarding fertility
regulation. Cy, is current actual family
size. Figure 1 also suggests a second
measure of the strength of motivation to
regulate fertility, that is, the loss in utility associated with the failure to use contraception. Clearly, the number of children that would occur in the absence of
regulation, over and above those desired, is an important determinant of
motivation to regulate fertility. However, not all unwanted children reduce
family utility by an equal amount. Thus,
an alternative to Cy—Cp is to consider
not only the number of children that

would occur in the absence of regulation, but also the loss of utility their birth
would engender. Hicks et al., (1981)
make a similar argument when they suggest that the strength of motivation for
contraception is captured by the net
benefits of an additional child (in their
case negative), which, after an adjustment for the probability of having a
child in the absence of fertility regulation, can be compared to the costs of
contraception.

In Figure 1 the loss of utility associated with unwanted children is represented by the cross-hatched area. Conceptually, that area represents a
negative consumer surplus that would
be associated with required consumption of a good (at a fixed price) beyond
the quantity desired. Thus, it is anticipated ioss of utility that families compare to the costs of contraception in
making a decision regarding fertility
regulation.

To this point the strength of motivaDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

tion for fertility regulation has been calculated under the assumption of a perfect contraceptive world, i.e.,
contraception is free and perfectly effective, In a world where contraception is
‘not free, a family would have children
beyond Cp. That is, a couple would not
use contraceptives until the disutility of
an additional child exceeds the cost of
contraception. Thus, either actual family size (C4), or anticipated completed
family size at the end of the childbearing
period, will exceed Cp as long as contraception is not completely free and 100
per cent effective. Similarly, for a sample of women desiring no additional
children Cp has already been equaled or
exceeded. As a result, the strength of
motivation for fertility regulation must
be adjusted for the actual fertility position of the family in question. Families
with C, less than Cp will find no motivation for contraception other than spacing of children. Families living in a perfect contraceptive world would have C4
equal to Cp. Families for whom contraception is not costless nor perfectly effective would often find C4, > Cp. For
this group, the strength of motivation is
best captured by the loss of consumer
surplus that would result from Cy—C,
additional children that would occur in
the absence of contraception (Figure
1).!

The size of the cross-hatched area in
Figure 1 depends not only upon CyC4, but also upon the price of children
(Pc) and the slope of the demand for
children function C’p—C’p. Following
Leinbenstein (1974), the demand for
children reflects the utility a child provides a family. In Leibenstein’s frame
1Spacing of children may, however, be important if Cp— Cy, is small and Cy— Cp is large, e.g.,
young couples already close to Cp.

Rural Egyptian Women

 

217

work, children provide families three
types of utility: income utility (additions
to family income), security utility (financial and emotional security in parents’
later years), and consumption or
consumer-good utility.

The weights assigned to each utility
will vary among societies and among individual families within a society. In
Western nations, consumption utilities
prevail and families experience negative
family income effects, since the opportunity cost of parental time is greater
than the income children generate during the period of time they live at home.
Similarly, institutional mechanisms in
most Western nations provide a degree
of security to elderly people in the absence of support from children. Within
more traditional systems, the range of
utilities generated by children is wider
than in the Western system. Children do
in fact generate income, provide old-age
security, and generate consumption utility.

A second dimension of the demand
for children relates to the attributes of
children that parents value. Following
the approach suggested by Becker
(1960) and elaborated by Willis (1974),
Becker and Lewis (1974), and Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1978), parents
are assumed to derive utility from both
the number of children and the average
quality or resource intensity of those
children. Thus, Cp includes parental
consideration of the utility that would be
derived from varying numbers of children given a level of resource intensity.

Figure 2, Panel A, demonstrates the
impact of variation in the slope of the Cp
function on the motivation to use contraception. For a family with the child
demand function C'p—-C'p the crosshatched area represents the loss in consumer surplus that would result from

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

218 Schutjer et al.

 
   

Children

Cy
A

Fic. 2.—-Price and demand variation effects on

Cy-C, additional children. A family
with the child demand function C’pC"p would experience a greater loss of
consumer surplus with Cy—Cy, additional children. Specifically, the loss
would equal the cross-hatched area plus
the solid area.

Figure 2 also demonstrates the impact on the motivation to regulate fertility when the price of children beyond C,
is positively related to the number of
children. In Panel B of Figure 2 the solid
area represents the additional consumer
utility that would be lost with the rising
price. Clearly, the price of children need
not be a positive function of number; it
may be constant or negative. Similarly,
as with the utilities that underlie the demand for children function, the price relationship with number of children will
vary between cultures and between families within a culture.

The price of fertility regulation includes three elements: (1) fixed monetary costs, (2) variable monetary costs,
and (3) psychic costs. Fixed costs associated with fertility regulation are costs

 

 

Social Biology

 

Cp Cy Children

motivation for fertility regulation

which do not vary with the number of
births averted. Fixed costs include the
cost of acquiring information regarding
contraceptive techniques and of making
a decision regarding the technique appropriate to household circumstances.
Variable monetary costs relate to the
cost of averting each birth, specifically,
those costs required to maintain a pattern of contraceptive behavior. Examples of variable costs are the money cost
of regulation devices, travel costs involved in their acquisition, as well as travel and medical costs associated with
continued use. Psychic costs are the disutility associated with contraceptive behavior growing primarily out of familial
or community disapproval or religious
taboos against particular forms of fertility regulation.? Thus, it is these three
costs which families must weigh in making a decision regarding contraception.

*Psychic costs enter the Easterlin formulation
as an element (a) in the general utility function
where U = f(a, GP, C). Thus, o is a measure of
disutility associated with fertility regulation that is
equal to unity if fertility regulation generates no
personal disutility.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

MATERIALS AND METHODS
EMPIRICAL MopDEL

On the basis of the theoretical framework, four sets of variables were expected to influence current use of contraceptives by women who desired no
additional children. The sets of variables are: (1) the cost of fertility regulation, including both monetary and psychic costs; (2) factors which influence
the slope of the desired family size function; (3) the anticipated costs of rearing
an additional child; and (4) the number
of additional children that would result
in the absence of fertility regulation. Table 1 provides the definitions and measurement of variables used in the analysis to represent the four sets of factors.
Also included is the hypothesized effect
of each variable on contraceptive behavior.

Conceptually, the calculation that
would determine contraceptive use
among women who desire no additional
children is a comparison of the costs of
contraception and the loss of consumer
surplus associated with the number of
additional children that would likely be
born in the absence of contraception.
For the empirical analysis it was not possible to obtain a measure of the quantity
of children that would be desired in a
perfect contraceptive world, nor to obtain monetary estimates of contracepstive costs and the price of children. Asa
result, the empirical analysis does not
provide a comparison of the loss of consumer surplus and contraceptive costs.
Rather, the analysis differentiates between contraceptors and noncontraceptors using the sets of variables noted
above that are thought to underlie the
determinants of the consumer surplus
loss and the price of contraception.

Rural Egyptian Women

219

CosTs OF CONTRACEPTION

Indirect measures of each of the three
costs of contraception were included.
Husbands’ and wives’ educational attainments (HBEDC and WFEDC) provide measures of the fixed cost of adopting contraception. The cost of acquiring
information is lower for families of
higher educational attainment, but once
acquired, contraceptive knowledge can
be used to prevent a number of unwanted births.

The availability of a center that provides family planning services to village
residents was included as an indicator of
the variable costs associated with the
adoption and maintenance of birth control. Thus, the 42 per cent of the sample
women who have to travel to a neighboring village for contraceptive services
would have higher time and monetary
costs.

Two measures of psychic costs were
used in the analysis. The first measure
(HWTALK) was designed to capture
the degree of communication between
the partners regarding family planning.
The second indicator of psychic costs
was the extent to which the sample
women perceived relatives to be using
contraception (RELUSE). Those
women who discussed family planning
with their husband and whose relatives
were perceived to be using contraceptives were judged to have lower psychic
contraceptive costs. In each case the
contraception variables were coded so
that lower costs have a higher numerical
value, and hence, were expected to have
a positive impact on contraception use.

DEMAND FACTORS

In agricultural societies a household’s
relationship to land is a major factor influencing both social status and ecoDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

220

Category and Variable

Costs of contraception

Fixed costs
Female education

Husband’s education

Social Biology

Hypothesized
Direction of
Effect

Schutjer et al.
TABLE 1
DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES, CURRENT USE OF CONTRACEPTION,
Rurat EGyprt, 1978
Defimtion Measure
Years of formal 0 = None
schooling 1 = 1 or more years
Years of formal 0 = None
schooling 1 = 1 or more years

Variable costs
Distance to f.p.
center

Psychic costs
Husband/wife
communication

Perceived use of f.p.
by relatives
Demand for children
Security utility
Income utility
Consumption utility

Landless laborers

Child quality

Price of children
Accessibility of
secondary school

Strength of motivation to
contracept
Potential family size

minus actual family size

Use of contraception
Use of family planning

 

Location of f.p. center
in village

Have husband/wife ever
discussed family
planning?

Does wife perceive use
of f.p. among
relatives?

Land ownership

Size of cultivated
area

Income

Noncultivators/
cultivators

Average education
expected for
children

Distance to secondary
school

Difference between
potential supply of
children (natural
fertility) and actual
family size

Current use of
efficient family
planning method

0 = Not in village
1 = In village

0 = Never discussed
1 = Have discussed

1 = Don’t know @ use
2 = None use f.p.
3 = Some use f.p.
4 = Many use f.p.

0 = Owns no land

1 = Owns some land

Size of cultivated area
in feddans

Per capita family income
in pounds

0 = Noncultivator

1 = Cultivator (owner or

tenant)
0 = None
1 = Primary

2 = Junior high
3 = Senior high
4 = Post secondary

Miles

CN-CA (see text for
explanation)

Q = Not currently using
1 = Currently using
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

nomic wellbeing (Schutjer and Stokes,
1982; Stokes and Schutjer, 1984). As a
result, major emphasis was placed upon
land availability and the conditions governing access to land as determinants of
the families’ demand for children. Land
ownership provides a hedge against economic deprivation for individuals unable to secure either a labor or a management return from the agriculture
production process (Schutjer et al.,
1983). A dummy variable separating
landowners from tenants and landless
laborers was included. The hypothesis
was that land ownership (OWNLAND)
provides a supplement to children as a
source of security, particularly old-age
economic security, and thus would be
positively related to contraceptive use.

The size of area cultivated by the
family (CULTVA) and a dummy variable that distinguishes landless agricultural laborers from the cultivators
(FARMER) were both included to provide an indication of the potential economic contribution of children to family
economic activity. The argument for including these variables was that farm
families with access to more land for cultivation would be able to incorporate
child labor into the family incomegenerating mechanism more effectively
than would either landless laborers or
families with less land available for cultivation. The expectation was that both
CULTVA and FARMER would be
negatively associated with the adoption
of contraceptive practices.

A fourth factor hypothesized to influence contraceptive behavior through
an impact on the demand for children
was household per capita income
(HHINC). The expectation was that
families with higher levels of income
would desire more children, or con
Rural Egyptian Women

oe

221

versely, suffer a smaller loss of utility
with an unwanted child, than would
lower income families. Hence, a negative relationship between HHINC and
contraceptive use was expected.

The final factor included in the empirical model to reflect variation in the
demand for children was a measure of
child quality or resource intensity. Thus,
to determine the impact of anticipated
discretionary expenditures on the contraceptive decision, the model included
the education that would likely be provided by the family to future children.
The argument was that educational expectations for existing children (EXPEDC) provide an indication of the education future children would receive
and serves as a measure of child quality.

The quantity of children that parents
desire is likely to be jointly determined
with expected resource intensity or child
quality. Thus, it was necessary to treat
child quality (EXPEDC) as an instrumental variable. Thus, an expected education equation was estimated for the
sample as a whole, and EDHAT was
calculated for each female using the
coefficients obtained. The calculated
variable (EDHAT) was then entered
into the contraception equation with the
expectation it would be positively related to contraceptive use.

The expected education equation regressed the categorical value of expected education on five independent
variables. Four of the variables were
those thought to underlie the quantity of
children desired: (1) area cultivated
(CULTVA); (2) the dummy variable
FARMER that distinguishes landless laborers from cultivators; (3) land ownership (OWNLAND),; and (4) household
income (HHINC). The fifth independent variable, designed to reflect com
 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

222

munity educational norms, was the proportion of school-aged boys in the
village of residence that were enrolled in
school (PROBOY). The estimated
equation, with ¢ values in parentheses,
was as follows:

EXPEDC =

0.7671 -0.1673 OWN - 0.0106 CULT
(—1.15) (—0.67)

+ 0.0018 HHINC - 0.0729 FARM
(2.93) (—0.43)

+ 0.2092 PROBOY
(2.86)

R? = 0.05 F = 4.65

PRICE OF CHILDREN

In order to estimate the impact of
variation in child price on the contraceptive decision, a variable that measured
the distance to a secondary school
(DSTSNS) was included in the empirical model. The argument is that much of
the difference in child price between rural families would be captured by variation in distance to school facilities. The
expectation was that DSTSNS would be
positively related to contraceptive use.
It is important to note, however, that it
would have been much preferable to
have an actual measure of the prices associated with raising children.

POTENTIAL ADDITIONAL CHILDREN

The number of children that would
likely result in the absence of contraception is shown in Figure 1 as Cy— Cy. To
estimate the potential additional children, we calculated the natural fertility
level (Cy) for each woman in the sample
using a modified Easterlin-Crimmins
procedure. The number of living children (C,) of each woman was then subtracted from her estimated Cy. The re
Schutjer et al.

 

Social Biology

sulting variable, labeled STRGTH, had
a mean value of 1.76, indicating that in
the absence of contraception the women
would bear an average of 1.76 additional
children by the end of their childbearing
years. The variable was entered into the
contraceptive model with the expectation that it would be positively related to
current use of contraceptives.

The Easterlin-Crimmins procedure
for estimating natural fertility (Cy) involves estimating a fertility equation for
the sample women which includes a fertility control or contraceptive use variable. Using the coefficients obtained
from the fertility equation, we can calculate an individual woman’s estimated
completed natural fertility by deleting
the fertility control variable and substituting her individual values for the other
independent variables. This procedure
was modified in the current analysis.
Current marriage duration was expanded to include the years remaining
between current age and age 45, taken
to be the end of the childbearing period.

The fertility equation used in the
present study regressed the number of
children ever born (NCEB) on eight independent variables:

(1) Fertility control (FERCON)—
number of years since beginning use
of a modern contraceptive method.
This was calculated as current age minus age at first use, plus one year.

(2) Marriage duration (DURMAR)—
years since first marriage.

(3) First birth interval (BRINT1)—
number of months between marriage
and the first live birth.

(4) Second birth interval (BRINT2)—
number of months between the first
live birth and the second live birth.

(5) Secondary sterility (NOTSTR)—a
dummy variable valued at zero if the
woman had not given birth in the past
five years, was not pregnant, and did
not use contraception during the interval.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

(6) Breast-feeding (BFEED)—number
of months the nest-to-last child was
breast-fed.

(7) Pregnancy wastage (PREGWS)—
proportion of all pregnancies not
ending in a live birth.

(8) Child mortality (CHMORT)—
proportion of all live births resulting
in child deaths.

The regression procedure produced
the following estimated fertility equation:

NCEB =
1.7159 + 0.0034 FERCON
(4.02) (0.23)

+ 0.2518 DURMAR - 0.0161 BRINT1

(18.52) (~3.17)
— 0.0265 BRINT2 + 1.2208 NOTSTR
(—4.79) (5.38)
— 0.0117 BFEED - 2.4187 PREGWS
(—0.99) (—4.20)
+ 4.1386 CHMORT
(8.51)
R2=0.62 F= 88.77
RESULTS

The empirical model was estimated
using both OLS and logit procedures.
The results obtained from both estimation procedures are presented in Table
2. The similarity of results in terms of
both the significance of coefficients and
overall variance explained suggested

_considerable stability in the relationships. The OLS R? of 0.25 and the logit
D value of 0.24 obtained in the analysis
seem reasonable given the use of crosssectional data and are comparable to the
0.22 R* and 0.23 D values obtained for a
sample of rural Mexican women (Hicks
et al., 1981).

The results support the importance of
contraceptive costs as determinants of
contraceptive behavior. Both measures

Rural Egyptian Women

 

 

223

of the psychic costs were significant and
in the hypothesized direction. Couples
in which the husband and wife had
talked about family planning and those
in which the wife perceived other relatives to be using contraceptives were
more likely to be current users than
other couples.* The social and cultural
acceptability of contraception, reflected
in the perceptions of respondents about
the use of contraceptives by (1) friends
and (2) others in the community were
used in preliminary analyses, in addition
to the perception of use by relatives.
Collinearity among the three measures
prevented the simultaneous use of all
three. However, it is worth noting that
the influence of perceived use varied directly with the degree of social closeness. That is, perceived use by relatives,
friends, and others in the community all
exerted significant impacts and their relative influence was as expected. One
measure of fixed contraceptive costs, female education, was significant with the
anticipated sign. Husband’s education
was not significant in either model. The
fact that the availability of a family planning facility in the village (DSTSNS)
was not significant was somewhat surprising. Among the sample women, 42

The exogeneity of the husband-wife communication variable may be questioned. It may be argued that those who practice contraception perforce must discuss it. However, in rural Egypt we
would argue that the husband’s approval (and perhaps that of the mother-in-law) is critical to the
adoption of family limitation practices. Consequently, we retained this variable although its theoretical interpretation remains open to question.
In order to insure that this variable was not unduly
influencing the overall results, we also estimated
the model deleting husband-wife communication.
Other than a small decrease in the R? value and
slight changes in the significance levels of some
coefficients, the results were quite similar to those
reported here. Because of the importance of these
psychic costs, and their relative neglect in most
models, we retained this variable.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

224

Schutjer et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 2

OLS REGRESSION AND LoGISTIC ESTIMATES OF THE CONTRACEPTIVE USE MopEL,
RuRAL Eeypt, 1978 (N = 440)

OLS
Parameter Standard
Vanable Estimates Error
Costs of
contraception
Fixed Costs
HBEDC........... ~0.05272 0.04856
WFEDC........... 0.17559 0.08242
Variable costs
DISTCN .......... —~—0.01287 0.04277
Psychic costs
HWTALK ......... 0.22232 0.04628
RELUSE .......... 0.12576 0.02239
Demand Factors
HHINC ............ —0.00163 0.00034
CULTVA .......... 0.02059 0.00597
OWNLAND ........ 0.29129 0.06282
FARMER .......... —0.12054 0.06322
EDHAT ............ 0.67031 0.13977
Price
DSTSNS ........... —0.00396 0.00405
Supply
STRGTH ........... 0.01760 0.00837
Intercept 202. .05 os .05 —0.99295 0.16744

Logit

Significance Parameter Standard Significance

Probabulty Estimates? Error Probability

0.2783 —0.42341 0.31649 0.1809
0.0337 1.08203 0.49616 0 0292
0.7636 —0.01696 0.28399 0.9524
0.0001 2.15982 0.46914 0.0000
0.0001 0.75423 0.15361 0.0000
0.0001 -0.01079 0.00239 0.0000
0.0006 0.13068 0.03975 0.0010
0.0001 1.82789 0.43989 0.0000
0.0572 —0.72682 0.41890 0.0827
0.0001 4.24479 0.97297 0.0000
0.3285 —0.02049 0.02567 0.4247
0.0362 0.11050 0.05846 0.0587
0.0001 —10.00984 1.33687 0.0000

*] ogit estimates obtained through use of SAS Logit procedures The estimated coefficient is the elasticity of odds ratio with

respect to the parameter

per cent lived in villages lacking a family
planning center and thus would be expected to incur additional time and
monetary costs to maintain contraceptive behavior. The lack of significance
may well indicate the success of the
Egyptian family planning effort exemplified by a 1980 survey suggesting that
“almost 98 per cent of the rural population live within 15 minutes travel time of
a family planning center” (Khalifa et al.,
1982, p. 130).

The demand factors measuring
household per capita income, educational expectations, land ownership,
and the distinction between landless and

 

cultivating families (FARMER), were
all significant and in the hypothesized direction. The negative sign on the income
coefficient suggests that with the price of
children (DSTSNS) controlled, higher
income families are less willing to suffer
the loss of utility associated with contraception. It also appears that landowners
and landless families perceive less utility
from additional children and hence are
more likely to bear the costs of contraception. In the case of landowners, the
theoretical explanation is related to a reduced dependence on children for security. Among the landless, the economic
contribution of children would be po
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

tentially smaller. Thus, as with landowners, landless couples more readily
accept the costs associated with preventing the birth of an additional child than
do cultivating families (FARMER).

The child-quality instrumental variable (EDHAT) had a significant positive
impact on contraceptive behavior.
Thus, as hypothesized, among the rural
Egyptian women desiring no additional
children, those who anticipated greater
investments in education of their children were more likely to adopt contraception.

Among the demand factors, the area
cultivated variable (CULTVA) exhibited a sign contrary to expectations. It is
likely that the positive sign on
CULTVA resulted from the fact that
the economic contribution of children to
the agricultural production process was
captured by the variable FARMER
which distinguishes between landless
families and those with access to land for
cultivation purposes.

The impact of the child price variable
(DSTSNS) was not significant in either
the OLS or logit model. Thus, the
results did not support the hypothesis
that families who perceived a higher cost
for an additional child were more likely
to adopt contraceptive practices. Interpretation of this finding must be viewed
as tentative, given the problems associated with measuring the price variable.

The hypothesis that the number of
additional children that would likely
result from a failure to regulate fertility
(STRGTH) is an important determinant of a family’s motivation to use contraception was supported by the OLS
and logit results. This finding is significant because the calculated variable
Cy- Cy, incorporates supply factors
such as infant mortality, breast-feeding,
and marriage duration, and because it

 

Rural Egyptian Women 225

demonstrates the usefulness of a modified Easterlin-Crimmins approach to
estimating natural fertility (Cy).*

THE MARGINAL COEFFICIENTS

In order to examine the impact of
marginal changes in the determinants of
contraceptive use, we calculated the
partial derivatives and elasticity coefficients from the logit estimates. The
results of both calculations are presented in Table 3.

The instrumental variable (EDHAT), that was included as a measure
of child quality or resource intensity,
was the variable with the greatest marginal impact on the probability of contraception among the women in the
sample. From a public policy perspective, this finding is encouraging because
it provides support for the notion that
increasing the availability of educational
opportunities for rural children may
have a positive impact on the adoption
of contraception, if we assume that increased educational opportunities result
in greater educational expectations.

Among the variables that were significant in the OLS and logit models, contraceptive behavior was also clearly re
‘Although this procedure provided a partial
control for the biological determinants of fertility,
the question may be raised as to how differences in
the ability to conceive and successfully bear a child
to term are perceived by the women themselves. It
is not necessary to subscribe to a highly rationalized view of these perceptions to visualize how
they might influence fertility expectations.
Women who have had difficulty conceiving and/or
carrying a child to term (long birth intervals and repeated fetal deaths), would be expected to anticipate fewer additional births than women whose
childbearing history is uncomplicated by such
events. Cy— C, was thought to measure women’s
additional potential childbearing, and hopefully,
should correspond roughly to the women’s perceptions. It should be noted that in a preliminary analysis, the Easterlin-Crimmins procedure was used
without modification. The unmodified procedure
resulted in an estimated Cy— C, that was negative.

 

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

226

TABLE 3

IMPACT OF MARGINAL CHANGES IN THE
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES ON CONTRACEPTIVE
Use, Rurac Ecypt, 1978

 

Partial Elasticity
Derivative? Coefficient?
aay
Variable dX, dX, P,
Fixed costs
HBEDC...... —0.08345 —0.83568
WFEDC...... 0.21326 2.13560
Variable cost
DISTCN ..... 0.00334 ~0.03347
Psychic costs
HWTALK .... 0.42570 4.26384
RELUSE ..... 0.14866 1.48862
Demand factors
HHINC ...... —0.00213 ~—(0.02129
CULTVA .... 0.02576 0.25792
OWNLAND .. 0.36028 3.60771
FARMER ... —0.14326 — 1.43452
EDHAT ...... 0.83665 8.37794
Price
DISTSNS ..... —0.00404 —0.04044
Supply
STRGTH ..... 0.02178 0.21809
*The partial derivative ahs was calculated as
P,(1—P,) By. aX, BP? i
>The elasticity was calculated as =e

sponsive to contraceptive costs. The
measure of psychic costs (HWTALK)
had a partial equal to 0.43, and an estimated elasticity of 4.3. In addition, both
women’s education and the use of contraceptives by relatives were important
at the margin.

Land ownership and the distinction
between the landless and cultivating
families were also important, exhibiting
elasticities greater than unity and partials of 0.36 and —0.14, respectively. Per
capita household income appeared to
have only a modest potential for influencing the motivation to regulate fertility at the margin. However, income
was a major determinant of expected
education, and as noted earlier, contra
Schutjer et al.

Social Biology

ceptive behavior was responsive to educational expectations.

Of the determinants of contraceptive
use examined here, the number of additional children that would be expected
to result from a failure to use contraceptives was the least critical at the margin.
That result likely reflects the relative difficulty families face in estimating potential births averted, compared to estimating the costs associated with contraception and the demand-price variables.

CONCLUSIONS

Women who desire no more children
represent a potentially important clientele for family planning programs in less
developed countries. This study employed a modified microeconomic
framework to explain the use of contraception among rural Egyptian women
who wanted no more children. The findings suggest that contraceptive behavior
was influenced by factors affecting the
demand and supply of children and by
the costs of contraception.

Female education was significantly
related to contraceptive usage, a finding
consistent with contraceptive prevalence surveys. However, it is worth noting that less than 7 per cent of these
women had any formal education and
those who had attended had done so for
a relatively short period of time. Consequently, efforts directed at improving
basic literacy appear to have potential
for increasing the ease of acquiring information about contraception, and
hence, for increasing contraceptive use.

The inclusion of two variables aimed
at measuring psychic costs (or, alternatively, social and cultural acceptability)
of contraception represented a departure from standard microeconomic formulations. More importantly, both of

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

these factors were clearly related to contraceptive use. Women who perceived
relatives to be using contraception were
more likely to use contraception themselves. Similarly, women who reported
ever discussing family planning with
their husbands were more likely to be
current users. Although these findings
should be interpreted cautiously, the
magnitude and consistency of their effects suggest that further research be directed to the importance of social networks involving kin, friends, and other
community members in legitimizing the
use of contraception. Such work would
seem particularly important in cultural
and institutional settings where religious
taboos or the normative system have
proscribed contraception.

Identification of factors affecting the
demand for children and thus indirectly
influencing the motivation for family
limitation represented an extension of
the Easterlin approach. Land ownership, cultivating status of the household,
educational expectations for children,
and household income were all significantly related to contraceptive use, as
was the measure of the potential supply

 

 

Rural Egyptian Women 227

of children. Undoubtedly, the factors
that influence the contraceptive decision
vary between cultures and institutional
settings. It would be inappropriate then
to generalize these results to other developing nations. However, the theoretical approach and empirical procedures
used in this study would appear to have
considerable potential for disentangling
the factors that influence contraceptive
use among women who want no more
children.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research constitutes part of the
Agricultural-Demographic Project of The
Pennsylvania State University. Support for
the research was obtained from the joint
Ford and Rockefeller Foundations’ program
in Population and Development Policy, and
from Project 2665 of The Pennsylvania State
University Agricultural Experiment Station.
Useful comments on an earlier draft of the
paper were obtained from T. Paul Schultz,
Richard Easterlin, David Shapiro, and
Whitney Hicks. A preliminary version of the
paper was presented at the annual meeting
of the Population Association of America,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, May, 1984.

REFERENCES

Becker, G. 1960. An economic analysis of fertility. Jn Universities National Bureau Committee for Economic Research, Demographic and economic change in developed
countries. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Becker, G. S., and H. G. Lewss. 1974. Interaction between quantity and quality of children. In T. W. Schultz (ed.), Economics of
the family. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

CuanG, M. C., R. FREEDMAN, and T. H. Sun.
1981. Trends in fertility, family size preferences, and family planning practice: Taiwan, 1961-80. Stud. Fam. Plan. 12:211228.

 

EASTERLIN, R. A. 1975. An economic framework for fertility analysis. Stud. Fam. Plan.
6:54-63.

. 1978. The economics and sociology of
fertility: A synthesis. In C. Tilly (ed.), Historical studies of changing fertility. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

EASTERLIN, R. A., and E. M. Crimmins. 1981.
An exploratory study of the synthesis
framework of fertility determination with
WES core questionnaire data. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Washington,
D.C.

Hicks, W., 1. GUTIERREZ, R. MADRIGAL, andR.
RopriGuEz. 1981. Contraceptive use in
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

228 Schutjer et al.

Mexico: An analysis of World Fertility Survey data. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Population Association of
America, Washington, D.C.

KHALIFA, A. M., H. A. A. H. Savep, M.N.
EL-KHORAZATY, and A.A. Way. 1982.
Family planning in rural Egypt, 1980: A report on the results of the Egypt Contraceptive Prevalence Survey. Westinghouse
Health Systems, Colombia, MD.

LEIBENSTEIN, H. 1974. An interpretation of the
economic theory of fertility: Promising path
or blind alley? J. Econ. Lit. 12:457-479.

PaLmore, J. P., and M. B. Concepcion. 1981.
Desired family size and contraceptive use:
An 11-country comparison. International
Family Planning Perspectives 7:37—40.

ROsENZWEIG, M. R., and K. I. Worpin. 1978.
Testing the quantity-quality fertility model:
Results from a natural experiment. Discussion paper 228, Yale University Econ.
Growth Center, New Haven.

Social Biology

 

SCHUTJER, W. A., and C. S. SToKEs. 1982. Agricultural policies and human fertility: Some
emerging connections. Pop. Res. Pol. Rev.
1:225-244.

SCHUTJER, W.A., C.S. SToKEs, and J.R.
POINDEXTER. 1983. Farm size, land ownership, and fertility in rural Egypt. Land
Econ. 59:393-403.

STOKES, C.S., W. A. ScHuTJER, and J.R.
POINDEXTER. 1983. A note on desired family
size and contraceptive use in rural Egypt. J.
Biosoc. Sci, 15:59-65.

Stoxes, C.S., and W. A. Scnutyer. 1984. Access to land and fertility in developing countries. In W. A. Schutjer and C. S. Stokes
(eds.), Rural development and human fertility. Macmillan, New York.

WiLus, R. J. 1974. Economic theory of fertility
behavior. [In T. W. Schultz (ed.), Economics of the family. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
