Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Reason for contracepting and choice between
IUD and pill: Implications for the difference in
continuation rates

Karl E. Bauman & Porapan Varavej

To cite this article: Karl E. Bauman & Porapan Varavej (1972) Reason for contracepting and
choice between IUD and pill: Implications for the difference in continuation rates, Social
Biology, 19:3, 292-296, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987998

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987998

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB crs | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Reason for Contracepting and Choice
Between JUD and Pill: Implications for

the Difference in Continuation Rates

Kar] E. Bauman’ and Porapan Varavej

School of Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; and School of
Public Health and Center for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

Studies typically conclude that continuation rates are higher for women who accept
intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUD’s)
than for those who take birth control pills
(Evaluation Unit, unpublished; Hall and
Reinke, 1969; Jones and Mauldin, 1967;
Keeney, Cernada, and Ross, 1968; Koetswang, unpublished; Melton and Shelton,
1971; Siegel et al., 1971; Takeshita, Ann,
and Verbrugge, 1969; Tietze and Lewit,
1971). We are unaware of research which
explains this difference. The speculative
explanations we hear most often have in
common the assumption that acceptors
randomly choose between the pill and IUD,
and therefore something which does or does

_ not occur after the techniques have been

adopted explains the difference in continuation rates. For example, we often hear that
the pill requires motivation for continuation whereas the TUD often does not, and
this differential requirement for motivation

after accepting the methods explains the

difference in continuation rates.
Our thesis for explaining the difference in

* Karl E. Bauman was the Carolina Population
Center Representative at the Mahidol University
Center when this paper was prepared.

IUD and pill continuation rates involves
similar explanatory variables, such as differential motivation required for continuation. However, it is based upon an entirely
different notion in that we propose the
difference in continuation rates may at least
in part be determined before the technique
is adopted. Thus, we suggest that women
do not randomly choose between the IUD
and pill, and the selection variable(s) may
determine the difference in continuation
rates.

Our specific hypothesis is that women
who want to time their next pregnancy
are likely to select the pill, whereas those
wanting no more pregnancies are more
likely to choose the IUD. The logical result of this selection process would be a
lower continuation rate for women who
adopt the pill; relative to those who select
the IUD, as a group those who choose the
pill want a lower continuation rate and are
less motivated to continue. Melton and
Shelton (1971) and Tietze and Lewit
(1971) have also posed this hypothesis
recently.

There is indirect evidence from other
studies that is consistent with the hy
292

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 3

pothesis that pill acceptors include more
spacers than IUD acceptors. First, studies
have shown that women choosing the pill
are younger and have fewer children than
those who select the IUD (David, 1969;
Satterthwaite, 1966; Tietze and Lewit,
1971; Taiwan, 1966). Perhaps this is a
reflection of the relationship between number of living children and desire to space
or stop. Young women with few children
begin contracepting to space their pregnancies and therefore adopt the pill,
whereas older women with more children
begin contracepting to stop any future
pregnancy and therefore adopt the IUD.
That age and parity do not explain all
the variation in JUD-pill continuation rates
is clear from the studies by Melton and
Shelton (1971) and Tietze and Lewit

(1971), suggesting that a variable such as
the desire to space or stop could explain
part of the variation. Second, Tietze’s
analysis (unpublished) indicates that discontinuation for pregnancy is a more frequent reason for termination among women
taking the pill than for those who discontinue the IUD. Melton and Shelton (1971)
found pregnancy to be an explanation for
discontinuation as often among IUD as pill
adopters, but speculated that the relatively
high proportion of pill users discontinuing
for personal reasons might be due to their
desire for pregnancy. Unfortunately, comparing reasons for termination using other
studies is too hazardous due to the differences in populations and classification of
reasons for discontinuation. However, these
two sources of indirect evidence are at least
consistent with the hypothesis that women
who select the IUD are more likely to want
no more pregnancies than women who select
the pill.

Why should women interested in spacing
be more prone to selecting the pill, and
those interested in stopping be more interested in choosing the IUD? We speculate
along several different lines. First, perhaps

Brief Reports

293

women realize that less effort is required
for stopping the pill, so that more of those
who knew they are going to discontinue
take the pill, while relatively few have an
IUD inserted. Second, some physicians tell
women that the pill should be used for only
two or three years, which may make it
more attractive for spacers and the IUD
more appealing to those who want no more
children. Third, IUD insertion usually requires greater initial physical discomfort
than starting the pill. Perhaps women who
want to space their children are less willing
to submit to the relative unpleasantness of
IUD insertion since they plan to have
another baby anyway. Fourth, perhaps insertion of a device is perceived as more convincing proof of pregnancy prevention, and
women who wanted no more children would
be more likely to require convincing proof
than those who want to space their pregnancies. These explanations are speculative,
and we know of no research which examines
them. However, if any or all are true, it
could produce a disproportionate share of
spacers among pill acceptors when compared with IUD acceptors. And, this, in
turn, could produce a higher continuation
rate for IUD acceptors.

We examine one part of this theoretical
scheme in this paper. Our hypothesis is that
women who choose the pill are more likely
to want to time their pregnancies than
those who select the IUD. Confirmation of
this hypothesis would leave to future research the task of discovering if control
for the spacing-stopping variable explains
any of the difference in IUD and pill continuation rates, and if it does, empirical
examination of the reasons.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

We use data from two clinics to test the
hypothesis. The two clinics were chosen for
three reasons: (1) We know that both had
freedom of choice between contraceptive
methods, a prerequisite since we are proDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

294. Brief Reports

posing that differential selection between
techniques by acceptors may explain the
difference in continuation rates. (2) They
serve markedly different types of populations—one has patients from a rural area,
and in the other the patients are predominately from metropolitan Bangkok—and
we felt it would be a more rigid test of our
hypothesis than if we had similar populations. (3) We had relationships with both
organizations, which facilitated data collection and processing.

One hundred and seventy-nine women
from Soongnern, a rural district in Northeastern Thailand, who came to the health
clinic for family planning services between
January and August 1970 constitute one
data set. They were asked if they wanted
any more pregnancies in the future, and
what technique they wanted to adopt.

The 5,669 women who adopted the pill

or IUD at Siriraj Hospital in Bangkok
were asked why they wanted to practice
family planning, and 90% provided the
reason of spacing or stopping. The technique chosen was recorded by the physician.
Studies by the Director of the program at
Siriraj Hospital suggest that the continuation rates for IUD acceptors are higher
than for those who select the pill (Koetswang, unpublished). We have no information on comparative continuation rates in
Soongnern. However, at least one other
study in Thailand found higher continuation rates for the IUD than for the pill
(Evaluation Unit, unpublished).

RESULTS

The hypothesis is confirmed for both sets
of data. In Table 1, we see that Soongnern
women who begin contracepting to space
are more likely to choose the pill (52%)
than are those who prefer no more children
(29%). In Table 2, we see that women who
attended the clinic at Siriraj and adopted

Social Biology

TABLE 1

DeEsIRE TO SPACE OR STOP AND PREFERENCE FOR
UD or Piru: Sooncnern Cuinic*

Per Cent Desme To

METHOD Space Stop
PREFERRED _ (N= 48) (N = 118)

Fill csgeusswsens 05004 52% 29%

TOD as caneoeses pean 48% 70%

* Chi square = 8.16, <0.01. The 13 women who did
uot know the answer to a question are omitted from this
table.

TABLE 2

REASON FOR CONTRACEPTING AND ADOPTION OF PILL
orn JUD: Sirtmay HosprtTar*

REASON FOR

CoNTRACEPTING
MerHop Space Stop
ADOPTED (N = 2,761) (N = 2,367)
PE ey ge eg ghey te 59% 50%
IUD ....ec eee eee 40% 49%

*The 541 women who began contracepting for reasons
other than spacing or stopping are omitted from this table.

the pill to space are more likely (59%)
to have selected the pill than those who
began contracepting to stop having children
(5070).

DISCUSSION

One piece of our thesis for explaining the
difference in IUD and pill continuation
rates is confirmed by these data. Research
with successful followup of IUD and pill
acceptors is needed to see if other links in
the causal chain are true. The most immediate need are analyses which show if
any of the difference in continuation rates
is explained by the spacing-stopping variable. The first analysis we suggest is the
comparison of pill and IUD continuation
rates separately for those who began contracepting to space and stop. We predict a
reduction or elimination of the difference
in continuation rates when viewed within
these two categories. A more definitive de- |
sign, and one which could view the possible

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3

role of selection more generally, would be
to have two groups of subjects for study.
The IUD and pill would be randomly assigned to the first group. The second group
would have free choice of methods. We
would predict no difference in continuation
rates, or a smaller difference, in the first
group, and some difference or a larger one
in the second group.

Confirmation of the theory would pose a
number of program-relevant questions.
First, some programs justify their preference for the IUD on the basis of high
continuation rates relative to the pill. If
the spacing-stopping variable explains the
difference rather than some variable occurring after acceptance, this reasoning
must be reexamined. Second, if continuation
rates are substantially influenced before the
method is adopted, will programs designed
to reduce the differences and introduced
after adoption have a significant impact?

The finding that pill acceptors include
more spacers than IUD acceptors may be
relevant to aspects of family planning research and programs, independent of its
possible relevance to differential continuation rates. First, as mentioned earlier, it
may explain why younger women with few
children are more likely to choose the pill
than those who are older and with many
children. Second, it has been observed that
among women who discontinue, those who
stop using the IUD are more likely to
adopt alternative techniques than those who
stop taking the pill (Takeshita, Ann, and
Verbrugge, 1970) and that women discontinuing use of the IUD have unusually high

Brief Reports

 

295

sterilization rates (Keeney, Cernada, and
Ross, 1968; Satterthwaite, 1966). Although there could be several explanations
for this, one is that the former IUD wearer
may have been more interested in stopping, and therefore has a greater likelihood
of choosing alternative and permanent
methods. Third, will the developing
countries find an increase in demand for
pills if a larger share of the population
becomes interested in spacing? Finally,
do programs which emphasize either the
IUD or pill, but not both, leave women not
practicing since either spacers or stoppers
do not have the technique they prefer?
Again, we call for more research.

SUMMARY

Among women who accepted the IUD or
pill in two programs in Thailand, those
who choose the pill were more likely to do
so to space pregnancies than those who
selected the IUD.

We propose that this differential selection between techniques may at least in
part explain the difference in continuation
rates, a thesis which differs substantially
from the more common one which assumes
random selection between techniques. The
implications of this confirmed hypothesis
for policy and research were discussed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are indebted to Dr. Surporn Koetswang who made the data from Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, available for this analysis. We
appreciate the critical comments on earlier
drafts of the paper from J. Richard Udry,
Dr. Arnold D. Kaluzny, and Oripin Singhadej.

REFERENCES

Davin, A. S. 1969. Nepal: National development,
population, and family planning. Stud. Fam.
Plan, 42:6-16.

EvatuatTion Unir. Family Health Project, Ministry
of Public Health, Bangkok, Thailand. October,
1970, Unpublished data.

Hartt, M. FRANCOISE, and Wirt1amM A. REINKE.
1969. Factors influencing contraception con
tinuation rates: The oral and the intrauterine
methods. Demography 6:335-346.

Jones, Gavin W., and Parker MAautpin. 1967.
Use of oral contraceptives with special reference
to developing countries. Stud. Fam. Plan. 24:
1~12.

KEENEY, GEORGE CERNADA, and JoHw Ross. 1968.
Korea and Taiwan: The record for 1967, Stud.
Fam. Plan. 29:1-9.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

296 Brief Reports

Koretswanc, Suprorn. Unpublished data from
Studies at Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.

MELTOoN, RoserT J., and James D. Suerton. 1971.
Pill versus IUD: Continuation rates of oral
contraceptive and dalkon shield users in Maryland clinics. Contraception 4:319-326.

SATTERTHWAITE, ADALINE P, 1966, Oral contraceptives. Jn Bernard Berelson, Richmond K.
Anderson, Oskar Harkavy, John Maier, W.
Parker Mauldin, Sheldon Jj. Segal (eds.),
Family planning and population program: A
review of world developments. Univ. of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

Srecer, Eart, Donarp THOMAS, ELIZABETH
CouLTer, Ropert TuTHIZL, and Smney CuarrMAN. 1971. Continuation of contraception by

Social Biology

low income women: A one year follow-up.
Amer. J. Pub. Hlth. 61:1886-1898.

TAIWAN EXPERIMENTAL SERIES. 1966. Stud. Fam.
Plan. 13:1-14.

TaxrsHita, Joun Y., Tan Boon Awn, and Lois
M. Versrucce. 1970. West Malaysia: 1969
family planning acceptor follow-up survey,
some preliminary findings. Stud. Fam. Plan.
51:18-23.

Tietze, CHRISTOPHER. Unpublished data presented
at the ECAFE Conference on program evaluation, Bangkok, Thailand, February, 1970.

TieETzE, CHRISTOPHER, and SaRAH LeEwIT. 1971.

Use-effectiveness of oral and Intrauterine contraception. Fert. Steril. 22:508-513.
