Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Some considerations in the methodology of
human behavior genetics

Eiji Inouye

To cite this article: Eiji Inouye (1973) Some considerations in the methodology of human
behavior genetics, Social Biology, 20:3, 241-245, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988049

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988049

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Some Considerations in the Methodology

of Human Behavior Genetics

Eiji Inouye

Institute of Brain Research
School of Medicine
University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Contemporary human behavior genetics
has emerged as a science at the crossroads
of genetics and the human behavioral
sciences. Its principal objectives are the
analysis of genotypes underlying behavioral
variation and the evaluation of the significance of genotypes in human adaptation.
The present paper deals with the first of
these objectives and discusses the availability of several research techniques and
their limitations.

As in other areas of human genetics,
pedigree analyses may be used to disclose
the mode of inheritance of a behavioral
trait. This approach is applicable for those
traits for which phenotypic expressions of
hypothetical genotypes are clearly distinguishable from each other. That is, the
various phenotypes should show a discontinuous, or at least a clearly bimodal, or
multimodal distribution. Unfortunately,
many traits do not have well-defined criteria
that permit the phenotypes to be sharply
differentiated. For example, in studies of
schizophrenia, there are frequently disagreements about the classification of transitional
states between schizophrenia and normality
or between schizophrenia and other psychiatric abnormalities. Furthermore, the con
 

cept of schizophrenia itself is not always
identical among different researchers and
clinicians. Therefore, in applying pedigree
studies for a trait such as schizophrenia,
examination of the subjects should be made
by well-trained researchers so that the
disagreements among them may be minimized. Otherwise, they may be erroneously
dealing with diverse traits under the label
of single entity.

To date, only a limited number of behavioral traits have been successfully analyzed by the pedigree method. They include polymorphic sensory defects, such as
color-blindness, taste-blindness to PTC, and
a variety of rare diseases of the nervous
system. In other common behavioral traits
that are apparently hereditary in origin,
however, it has not been possible to demonstrate Mendelian segregation. Either the
genotypes are not consistently reflected in
the same way in the phenotype, owing to
incomplete penetrance or variable expressivity, or polygenic inheritance is involved.
Nevertheless, complex characters that now
appear to have an unimodal distribution
may be shown, with future technical advances, to exhibit a few allelic phenotypes
that can then be analyzed successfully by

241

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

242

the pedigree method. This has been done,
for example, in pharmacogenetics in the
study of isoniazid inactivation types
(Sunahara et al., 1963).

A second classical method involves family
studies in which morbid risk data for various abnormalities are collected on various
categories of relatives of affected probands,
or for quantitative characters correlational
data are obtained on related individuals.
Using the family study method, it is also
possible to detect pleiotrophy and variable
expressivity of an allele. The family study
method has, for example, enabled the detection of heart lesions in families of probands
with myotonic dystrophy (Caughey, 1963).
Also important is the finding of betweenfamily differences and within-family resemblances in symptomatology, suggesting
genetic heterogeneity within the disease or
the symptom complex rather than variable
expressivity which should be randomly distributed across families. One example of
genetic heterogeneity is that of the socalled atypical psychoses within the broader
spectrum of functional psychoses (Mitsuda,
1967). Various modes of inheritance in
deafness (Waardenberg, 1963) and the
epilepsies (Koch, 1967) are other examples.

In schizophrenia, the hebephrenic and
catatonic subtypes show a higher morbidity
risk among sibs of probands (Schulz, 1932;
Kallman, 1938; Weinberg and Lobstein,
1943), as well as a higher rate of parental
consanguinity (Weinberg and Lobstein,
1943), than does the paranoid subtype.
Such findings do suggest the presence of
genetic heterogeneity within the mental
disorder, or at least the presence of a
modifying gene or genes; but this interpretation is yet to be investigated, as it has
been often claimed that the different subtypes were found in the same family and
within the same individual at different
points in time.

Twin studies, of course, have advantages

Inouye

Social Biology

over investigations of other types of relatives because, barring possible mitotic nondisjunction leading to different cell lines
in monozygotic (MZ) twin partners, the
identical genotypes of such twins afford a
background against which environmental
influences may be compared. Moreover,
problems encountered in comparing biological and behavioral development in persons of different ages (e.g., sibs or parents
and children) are eliminated in twin studies.

The classical twin study method compares concordance and discordance rates for
the phenotype under study in monozygotic
and dizygotic (DZ) twins and provides
estimates of the extent of genetic contribution to the phenotypic variance. In addition,
twin studies may be used in several other
ways to explore genetic complexities underlying certain traits, including behavioral
ones. For example, examinations of twin
samples yield estimates of maximum penetrance which can then be incorporated into
genetic models to test the goodness of fit
data obtained in pedigree studies. It may be
of value, therefore, to carry out twin studies
before undertaking pedigree searches and
family investigations.

A further use of twin data is found in
the assessment of pleiotropy. For relatively uncomplicated pleiotropies where expressivity of the several phenotypic effects
shows little variation among affected individuals, twin studies add no special information. For those conditions in which the
various phenotypic manifestations of pleiotrophy do not occur together so consistently,
however, twin studies may prove especially
helpful. For example, in one pair of MZ
twins, both twins were affected with ichthyosis vulgaris (the so-called “‘fish-skin”
disease) and with mental deficiency. One
member of the pair, in addition, suffered
from epileptic seizures, while the co-twin
did not. This variable association of mental
deficiency and epilepsy with ichthyosis has

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 20, No. 3

also been seen in members of several other
families (Inouye, Haruhara, and Murobuse,
1958). The three symptoms are therefore
ascribed to pleitropism of the gene or genes
involved in ichthyosis vulgaris, and the
specificity of the genotype is seen to vary
among individuals, and even between genetically identical twins.

Variable expressivity in another type of
epilepsy has also been observed in a study
of twins. Although this particular type of
chronic epilepsy had shown 100% concordance in other MZ twins, one pair was
seen in which only one member suffered
from the disorder (Inouye, 1960). Interestingly, though, the co-twin without
seizures exhibited peculiar long-lasting
neurotic and psychotic symptoms. These
psychopathological manifestations led to a
diagnosis of epileptic psychosis or a socalled epileptic equivalent. In fact, this
diagnosis was later confirmed when the
psychotic twin had one spontaneous convulsion, followed by remission of psychic
symptoms.

Twin studies can be useful in separating
several disease entities within a disease
complex by comparing the symptoms of
concordant and discordant MZ twins. Supplemented by findings in other family members and/or in past relevant histories, this
approach has been applied in studies of
epilepsy (Inouye, 1960), schizophrenia
(Rosenthal, 1959; Inouye, 1961), and
neurosis (Ihda, 1961). In these studies,
the findings suggest that concordant pairs
frequently represent a form or forms of the
disorder in which a genetic factor is significant while discordant pairs often represent
phenocopies in which environmental factors
seem to be more important or even decisive
in the manifestation of the disorder.

In twin research, emphasis is often placed
upon evaluation of environmental variables
rather than upon heredity. Examples are
an investigation of MZ twins discordant

Methodology of Human Behavior Genetics

243

for schizophrenia (Pollin et al., 1968), and
a study of perinatal factors relevant to retarded development of motor and intellectual
abilities (Takuma, 1966). In studies of
adopted children of affected natural parents,
as well as in investigations of twins reared
apart, the emphasis is also upon the evaluation of environmental factors. The co-twin
control method is a more elaborate technique which has been applied, for example,
to a study of the relationship between closed
head injury and behavioral anomalies
(Dencker, 1958; Dencker and Léofving,
1958) and to work on the effects of nutritional substances on behavior (Robertson
et al., 1947; Inouye et al., 1966).

Attention should be called to past and
current trends in the behavioral sciences
that have relevance for methodology in
genetic research. Prior to World War II,
there were several voluminous reports on
twin studies in which the degree of concordance between twin partners on certain
personality items was said to have proved
a particular philosophically oriented hypothesis about characterology. In recent
years, the prevailing orientation has been
toward operationalism which tends to disregard interpretation of data on the heritability of personality traits. Data produced
by the pre-war school are too subjective to
be evaluated, and those of the more recent
period consist of an array of figures that are
difficult to assess in relation to the whole
question of human behavior and its variation.

One possible different avenue of investiga-'
tion for the future is based on the assumption that test items that are frequently found
to be concordant in MZ twins may be more
direct expressions of the genotype in the
development of behavioral patterns than are
items that are more frequently found to be
discordant. In a study in which heritabilities
were estimated for the subtests of a variety
of intelligence test batteries, for example,
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

244. Inouye

higher heritability estimates were obtained
for subtests requiring rapid mental functions, verbal memory, calculation abilities,
and spatial arrangement of patterns
(Takuma, 1968). It is possible that these
mental functions are closely related to
genetically-controlled functions of the brain,
on the basis of which intellectual abilities
may develop through interactions with the
environment. In other studies, heritabilities
up to 0.92 have been reported for such
involuntary behavioral traits as number of
eyeblinks during psychological testing or
time-span estimations without external standards (Inouye, 1970). The heritability
estimates were reduced, however, if the test
Situation was changed or if the subjects
were asked to control their behavior
voluntarily. A potentially valuable research
approach, therefore, would be to search first
for behavioral traits with high heritabilities
and then to scrutinize the significance of
these traits for other aspects of human behavior, rather than to construct a philosophical or operational theory first and then
to investigate heritabilities of behavioral
traits suggested by the theory.

Another important area of interest in
human behavior genetics has to do with the
developmental processes through which behavioral patterns and variations evolve from
a genotype. In this connection, physiological
and biochemical correlates of single gene
substitutions are of special interest. Partic
Social Biology

ularly important would be the investigations
of abnormalities of regulatory systems, such .
as the nervous system and the endocrine
system, in individuals with known single
gene substitutions or with abnormal karyotypes. For instance, behavioral and EEG
abnormalities have been demonstrated in
several adult cases of Klinefelter’s syndrome
(Asaka, 1968; Takei, 1970). Both types
of abnormality improved markedly following administration of testosterone, a substitute of the hormone which is normally
secreted by the gonads, but which is seen
to be markedly reduced in Klinefelter’s
patients. After discontinuation of the hormone treatment, both the behavioral and
the EEG abnormalities recurred. The same
type of relapse has been seen following the
administration of gonodotropin, a pituitary
gland secretion which is known to be
usually elevated in the urine of adult
Klinefelter’s cases (Alvin, 1967; Takai et
al., 1966).

Such findings indicate that attention to
and joint studies with other disciplines
should be regarded as indispensable features
of future research in human_ behavior
genetics. At the same time, it may be anticipated that genetics will become a core
discipline in the psychobiology of human
behavior, just as molecular biology became
a focal point in the biological sciences in
general.

REFERENCES

Atvin, P. 1967. The testes, p. 395-445. In Robert
Williams (ed.), Textbook of endocrinology, W.
B. Saunders, Co., Philadelphia and London.

AsakA, A. 1968. Psychiatric study of six psychotic
patients with Klinefelter’s syndrome. Psychiat.
Neurol. Jap. 70:990-1018.

Caucuey, J. E. 1963. The heart in dystrophia
myotonica, p. 48-62. In J. E. Caughey and N. C.
Myrianthopoulos (eds.), Dystrophia Myotonica
and related disorders. Charles C Thomas, Springfield.

Dencxer, S. J. 1958. A follow-up study of 128
closed head injuries in twins using co-twins as
controls. Acta Psychiat. Neurol. Scand. 33
(Suppl. 123): 125.

DENCKER, S. J., and Lérvine, B. 1958, A psychometric study of identical twins discordant for
closed head injury. Acta Psychiat. Neurol.
Scand. 33 (Suppl. 122): 50.

Iupa, S. 1961. A study of neurosis by twin method.
Psychiat. Neurol. Jap. 63:861-892.

Inouye, E. 1960. Observations on forty twin
index cases with chronic epilepsy and their cotwins. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 130:401-416.

. 1961. Similarity and dissimilarity of schizo
phrenia in twins. Proc. III World Congr.

Psychiat. University of Toronto Press, Toronto,

Canada.

. 1970. Twin studies and human behavior

genetics. Jap. J. Hum. Genet. 15:1-25.

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 3

Inouye, E., C. Haruwara, and K. Murosuse.
1958. Ichthyosis vulgaris and neuropsychiatric
symptoms, Psychiat, Neurol. Jap. 60:909-916.

Inouye, E., H. KAmupe, S. Inpa, S. Izawa, I.
Takuma, T. MAsAx1, H. Morisuita, M. Eto,
M. Unrecaki, and M. Kapa, 1966. Effect of
bovine hydrate on mentally retarded children:
A multi-disciplinary clinical experiment using
co-twin control, p. 1-39. In T. Tokizane and
J. P. Schadé (eds.), Progress in brain research,
21B. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

KALLMANN, F. J. 1938. The Genetics of Schizophrenia. Augustin, New York.

Kocu, G. 1967. Epilepsien. Jn P. E. Becker (ed.),
Humangenetik. Thieme, Stuttgart.

Mirtsupa, H. 1967. The concept of “atypical psychoses” from the aspect of clinical genetics,
p. 22-26. In H. Mitsuda (ed.), Clinical genetics
in psychiatry, Osaka Medical College, OsakaTakatsuki.

Poti, W., J. R. Stasenau, A. Horrer, L. R.
Mosuer, and P. Sprmrman. 1968. The NIMH
study of a series of monozygotic twins discordant
for schizophrenia, p. 137-149. In S. Vandenberg,
Progress in human behavior genetics. Johns
Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

Rosrrtson, E. C., C. M. TatHam, N. F. Waker,
and M. R. WEAvrr. 1947. Effect of added thiamine on growth vision and learning using identical twins. J. Neutr. 34:691~—700.

ROSENTHAL, D. 1959. Some factors associated with
concordance and discordance with respect to

Methodology of Human Behavior Genetics

245

schizophrenia in monozygotic twins. J. Nerv.
Ment. Dis, 129:1-10.,

ScHvuttz, B. 1932. Zur Erbpathologie der Schizophrenie, Zeitschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat, 143:
175-293.

SuNAHARA, S., M. Urano, M. Ocawa, S. YosHma,
H. Muxovama, and K. Kawar. 1963. Genetical
aspect of isoniazid metabolism. Jap. J. Human
Genet. 8:93-111.

Take!, H. 1970. EEG of Klinefelter’s syndrome
with psychiatric disorders, and the effect of
testosterone treatment. Psychiat. Neurol. Jap.
72:983-1029.

TAKAT, S., I. Sasaki, M. Hrx1Ta, and G. SUGAWARA.
1966. Klinefelter’s syndrome, with special reference to the difference of clinical symptoms
among different karyotypes. Clin. Endocrin.
(Tokyo) 14:870-876. .

TAKUMA, T. 1966. On the early physical conditions
influencing the development of intelligence. An
analysis of the intra-pair difference in MZ twins,
Jap. J. Psychol. 37:257-267.

. 1968. An experiment on hereditary influence on intelligence by twin study method.
Jap. J. Educ. Psychol. 16:237-240.

WAARDENBERG, P. J. 1963. Genetics and opthalmology. (Vols. I. and II). Charles C Thomas,
Springfield, Ill.

Werterc, I., and J. Losstetn. 1943. Inheritance
in schizophrenia. Acta Psychiat. Neurol. 18:93140.

 

 
