Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Preface: Genetics and the human encounter with
alcohol

Gerald E. McClearn

To cite this article: Gerald E. McClearn (1985) Preface: Genetics and the human encounter with
alcohol, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 143-145, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988604

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988604

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Preface: Genetics and the
Human Encounter with Alcohol

Gerald E. McClearn

College of Human Development,
The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania

Humankind has consumed alcohol
for along, long time, and for a long, long
time has speculated about the relationship between alcohol and heredity. The
issues have included both the questions
of whether heredity influences responses to alcohol and whether alcohol
consumption influences the heredity of
the consumer. These issues have concerned the man in the street as well as
the philosopher; they have been discussed from the pulpit, in legislative corridors, in school-rooms, and in taverns.
They constituted a major concern of the
social reform movements of the early
part of this century, and they have motivated and guided societal attempts to
prohibit or regulate the consumption of
alcoholic beverages.

Obviously, the cogency of any discussion about alcohol and heredity depends
upon the state of knowledge in the areas
of genetics and of alcohol studies separately. In each of these areas, the last
two or three decades have seen remark
This issue is based upon the proceedings of the
Genetics and the Human Encounter with Alcohol!
conference that was held at Union College,
Schenectady, New York, on July 6 and 7, 1984.
The conference was sponsored by an anonymous
donor through Union College and the Society for
the Study of Social Biology.

 

able advances. The relatively small
number of scholars who have been concerned with the interface thus enjoy a
situation in which their area of knowledge is flourishing, and in which the two
parental domains are constantly providing new advances in theory, in substantive knowledge, and in methodology as
bountiful grist for their interdisciplinary
mill.

It was timely for Union College, with
support from an anonymous donor, to
arrange a meeting to review the state of
knowledge concerning genetics and alcohol. The meeting, and these proceedings arising therefrom, provide exciting
views of some of the most salient current
foci of interest.

Several characteristics may be noted
of the work presented here. First, the
historical concern with the effect of alcohol on the hereditary material—alcohol
as a mutagen in contemporary terms—is
no longer topical. All of the research
concerns the role of genes in determining some pharmacological, neurochemical, behavioral, or pathological response to alcohol. Second, it will be seen
that both human beings and animals
have been featured in the research.
Third, it should be noted that alcoholism is the specific target of study in only

143
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

144 McClearn

a few cases. Thus, expressed in the current idiom, animal models are frequently used, and, in both animal and
human research, partial models are employed.

The issue of ‘‘models”’ in alcohol research has been the subject of considerable and continuing discussion, with
opinions being expressed that question
whether animal research can illuminate
the human condition of alcoholism, and
whether research that deals with only a
segment of the totality of alcoholism can
be informative about the whole.

These considerations prompt some
commentary on the logic of the use of
models in addressing problems of human alcohol use, alcohol abuse, and alcoholism.

First, we may consider whether so
human a problem as alcoholism can be
explicated in any degree by observations
on nonhuman animals. In general, an
animal model is employed whenever the
“real thing” is inaccessible to measurement or manipulation. The inaccessibility may be due to economic or ethical
considerations that preclude observations on human subjects (such as those
requiring liver or brain biopsy, for example). Whether any particular animal
model will be useful cannot be determined in advance. Usefulness will depend upon the extent to which the feature or features of alcoholism under
study are part of the determinant sys
tems that we as humans share with other’:

primates, other mammals, other vertebrates. Asa rule of thumb, we might expect that the more apt models would be
those involving our closer phyletic relatives. But only a limited amount of research can afford great ape or monkey
participants. Are the favored rodents
sufficiently like us to be informative?

Social Biology

The validation or invalidation of these
models can only come from their longterm application, and the ultimate verdict will undoubtedly vary depending
upon the feature modeled. Enzyme kinetics or neuronal responses to alcohol
might be modeled more effectively
than, for example, the effects of stress of
interindividual competition on alcohol
consumption. But this is just a personal
guess, and the complexities of mouse or
rat social behavior and the possible relationship of the behavior to alcohol use
should not be underrated or arbitrarily
dismissed as irrelevant to the human
condition.

It is difficult to conceive that all animal model alcohol research will be totally irrelevant to alcoholism. Granted
this, the question is simply how much
and which of the research will be relevant. Only time, and the attempt, will
tell. But in this regard, alcohol model research is no different than any other. If
we knew in advance, the research would
be unnecessary.

Another issue in alcoholism modeling is that of comprehensiveness: To
what extent can the measures used in a
particular study be regarded as characteristic of alcoholism? Can quantity/
frequency consumption measures, or
DUI arrests, or marital strife due to alcohol abuse, or entry in a psychiatric
register be used, separately or collectively, to capture the essence of alcoholism? The question is exacerbated in animal models, of course. How are
withdrawal convulsions, alcohol consumption in a two-bottle choice situation, or roto-rod performance or “‘sleeptime” after an intraperitoneal dose of
alcohol explanatory of alcoholism?

These questions relate to the fundamental considerations of operational

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

definitions and validity. In general, the
concept of validity is invoked whenever
we measure one thing as a substitute (or,
to use another currently fashionable
term, a “marker’’) for another, which is
the “real thing.”’ Thus, the measured
variable is a model in the sense discussed
above, and the present question resolves itself into one of the correlation
between the marker and the validity criterion.

From the point of view of operational
definitions, the issue of validity is
skirted, because the marker is defined as
the real thing. Convulsions in mice
while suspended by the tails after alcohol withdrawal is dependence, if so
defined by the researcher. The operational definition is particularly useful,
perhaps even necessary, when the real
thing is but obscurely perceived or
delineated—as is the case, many would
argue, with alcoholism. The critical
point is that though the logical rules of
operational definitions make each different definition the equal of any other,
no better and no worse, it must be appreciated that the range of generalization of results is correspondingly narrow. Learning about dependence
defined by one operation tells nothing, a
priori, about dependence defined by another operation.

An appreciation of the “real thing” .

emerges only from studies that permit
comparison of more than one definition.
Thus, from considerations both of validity and of operational philosophy, together with substantive appreciation of
the complexity of the determinant systems of alcoholism and other alcoholrelated problems, there is seen to be a
need for multiple measures and for
study of the relationships among them.
The hoary correlation coefficient, long

Preface

145

regarded in some disciplines as a last and
feeble resort when experimental methods could not be applied, arises as a
method of choice for addressing many
of these issues. The robust correlational
methods of multiple regression. factor
analysis, component analysis, discriminant analysis, causal modeling, and
other multivariate techniques can be expected to feature more and more prominently in alcohol research. Examples of
these approaches are to be found in this
volume.

Basically, these considerations call
for a fresh view of variability. The variance that defines the error term in the
traditional t-test or analysis of variance,
and which, therefore, is desired to be as
small as possible, is the sine qua non for
correlational studies. It is, furthermore,
the essential raw material of the geneticist. Not only is the pursuit of knowledge concerning the genetic origins of
individuality in alcohol-related phenomena of basic importance, it is also
the case that genetic methods provide
any investigator of these phenomena
with powerful tools for elucidating the
matter of interest. Parent-offspring, sibling, twin, and adoption designs have
provided such tools in human research,
and the new molecular genetic techniques offer great promise in the very
near future. In animal research, inbred
strains provide stable, repeatable genetic constitutions and selective breeding allows the deliberate tailoring of an
alcohol-related trait to specification.
The increased research power provided
by these techniques of genetic control is
becoming ever more apparent. In the
following pages are some of the best examplars of applications of these techniques. They promise much for the future of alcohol research.
