Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Reply to Mitra's observations on “heterogeneity of
childless families”

Jerome Waller , B. Raja Rao & C. C. Li

To cite this article: Jerome Waller , B. Raja Rao & C. C. Li (1974) Reply to Mitra's
observations on “heterogeneity of childless families”, Social Biology, 21:3, 309-310, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1974.9988126

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988126

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

- Vol. 21, No. 3

 

Reply to Mitra’s Observations on

Communications

309

“‘Heterogeneity of Childless Families’

Jerome Waller, B. Raja Rao, and C. C. Li

Graduate School of Public Health
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

We appreciate the thoughtful comments
of Dr. S. Mitra on our article “Heterogeneity of childless families” (Social Biology,
Vol. 20 [1973], No. 2, pp. 133-138). The
discussion reminds us of the historical situation surrounding the discovery of genetic
linkage. In fitting the expected 9:3:3:1
ratio to the Fs individuals of certain twofactor crosses, the breeders found consistent
deviations from the expected ratios. Such
consistent deviations led to the formulation
of the hypothesis of genetic linkage between
the two factors. Somewhat similarly, in trying to fit a negative binomial to the observed distribution of the number of children of completed families, we found generally good fit but with a consistent excess
of childless families.

Although our paper cites only one set
of data, we have tried the method on a
number of other published distributions
(census data) and found that the number of
childless families is invariably in excess
and is apparently not a random deviation.
It is this consistent excess that leads us
to hypothesize the heterogeneity of the
childless families. Of course, it is open to
other’ interpretations, as any hypothesis
is. We have gone no further than the set
of data permits us to.

Dr. Mitra specifically pointed out four
shortcomings of our model, and we ourselves can think of still others. A model is
never complete; its usefulness is judged by
its goodness of fit with observations. As
Dr. Mitra has noticed, the fit is good in the

case presented, considering the parsimony
of our model. Brief comments on Dr.
Mitra’s four points follow.

1. Dr. Mitra seems to suggest that the
heterogeneity is not limited to childless
families but exists for every family size.
If so, we have made a good start toward
a more complete understanding of the distribution of family size in human populations. In the observed data, the family
size ranges from 0 to 15-++. We hope that
Dr. Mitra is not suggesting that we introduce 15 additional parameters to the
distribution. There is also the matter of
definition. Whether we should define, for
example, a couple having four children but
failing to produce a fifth as sterile or not
is open to question.

2. A negative binomial distribution may
be derived in several different ways. Perhaps it was unnecessary for us to give any
derivation at all, as it is permissible to
make use of a standard and established
distribution in applied problems. The derivation we did give in our paper is, we
thought, one of the simplest, as it is based
on a pure birth process and involves only
two assumptions. Dr. Mitra seems to argue
that the birth of a child cannot affect the
probability of the next birth in the manner
inherent in the model. This is such a moot
point that we can say neither yes nor no.
In either case, it is irrelevant as far as
fitting is concerned.

3. Nearly the same comments may apply to the third point raised by Dr. Mitra.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

310

Although the language employed in our
derivation is X(O) =~7, the latter need
not be an integer in fitting an observed
distribution or in any other type of application. The important feature of a negative
binomial distribution is that it has two
parameters, ~ and r, to be estimated from
the observed data.

4. Dr. Mitra regarded our selection of
data as unfortunate. The set of data we employed for illustration is the most carefully
compiled data we know of. It took Elizabeth and Sheldon Reed no less than fifteen
years to check every birth of every family
recorded in their report (Reed and Reed,
1965). We could have simply copied a census table, but we believe that the data of
Reed and Reed are more homogeneous and

Communications

Social Biology

less biased. As to Dr. Mitra’s final remark
that we have forced a bell-shaped curve
upon a distribution that is nonincreasing,
Wwe may point out that in census data for
women of ages 45 and over the number of
women having one child is consistently
lower than either those having none or
those having two children (U.S. Bureau
of the Census, 1964, Table 2). Hence we
would not characterize the distribution of
number of children as nonincreasing, and
we would characterize the number of childless families as excessive.

We are grateful to Dr. Mitra for his interest in our idea and wish to thank the
editor of Social Biology for giving us the
opportunity to discuss the matter more
fully.

REFERENCES

Reep, E W., and S. C. Reep. 1965. Mental retardation: A family study. Saunders, Philadelphia.

U.S. Bureau or THE CENSUS. 1964. U.S. census

of population: 1960. Subject reports. Women
by number of children ever born. Final report
PC (2)—3A. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

 
