Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Maternal phenylketonuria

Siegfried M. Pueschel

To cite this article: Siegfried M. Pueschel (1985) Maternal phenylketonuria, Social Biology,
32:1-2, 31-44, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988588

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988588

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

 

Maternal Phenylketonuria

 

Siegfried M. Pueschel

Child Development Center

Department of Pediatrics

Rhode Island Hospital

Brown University Program in Medicine
Providence, Rhode Island

ABSTRACT: This paper highlights the significant progress that has been made in the field of
phenylketonuria since Folling described this inborn error of metabolism some fifty years ago. A
retrospective view of the pertinent literature relating to maternal phenylketonuria indicates
that infants born to women with untreated phenylketonuria are at high risk. The author discusses investigations in nonhuman primates that explored placental transfer mechanisms of
aromatic amino acids. The author emphasizes the importance of educating adolescent girls
with phenylketonuria about the intricacies of maternal phenylketonuria. The primary challenge of maternal phenylketonuria will have to be met when females with phenylketonuria who
were detected in early life and who were treated successfully reach the reproductive age. This
ever-increasing population is in need of informed counseling and appropriate dietary management before or when pregnancy should occur. Early introduction of an individually designed
low-phenylalanine diet should prevent the previously observed teratogenic effects and the insult

 

 

to the fetal central nervous system.

In the spring of 1934 two severely retarded children with a peculiar body
odor were examined by Folling, a Norwegian physician and biochemist. Assuming that these children had a metabolic disorder, F6lling started his
investigations and soon uncovered an
increased amount of phenylpyruvic acid
in the children’s urine. He hypothesized
that a perturbation in phenylalanine metabolism was causing the odor and the
mental retardation observed in these
two children. In a short time period of
only five months after Félling had examined the children, he had a scholarly report ready for publication on a new
metabolic disease which he called imbecilitas phenylpyruvica (Falling, 1934). A
few years later, based on their studies in
patients with this metabolic disorder,
Penrose and Quastel (1937) coined the
term phenylketonuria. In 1939 Jervis

31

described the autosomal recessive mode
of inheritance in phenylketonuria. During the subsequent decades, many individuals with significant mental retardation residing in institutions were found
to have phenylketonuria.

The 1950’s and early 1960’s witnessed
extraordinary progress in the understanding of phenylketonuria. Although
the para-hydroxylation of phenylalanine to tyrosine had already been postulated by Neubauer in 1909, Udenfriend and Cooper (1952) demonstrated
in the early 1950’s the presence of the
enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase in
the liver of many animal species including man. In the following year Jervis
(1953) showed that there was a marked
reduction in enzymatic conversion of
phenylalanine to tyrosine in liver tissue
of persons with phenylketonuria. In
1957 Kaufman characterized the hy
 

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015 |

32 Pueschel

droxylation process in detail, and later,
after many years of ingenious investigations, he described the cofactor as an unconjugated pteridine called dihydrobiopteridine (Kaufman, 1957;
Kaufman, 1963).

Also, in the early 1950’s Bickel et al.
(1952) were reporting the effect of a low
phenylalanine diet in the treatment of
patients with phenylketonuria. A few
years later Armstrong and Tyler (1957)
confirmed that biochemical control of
phenylalanine accumulation could be
achieved by dietary means. During the
past twenty-five years, a number of formulas and other special low phenylalanine food items have been developed
which facilitate appropriate dietary
management.

In the 1960’s various screening methods and novel laboratory procedures
were introduced that allowed early identification of children with hyperphenylalaninemia and phenylketonuria (LaDu
et al., 1960; McCaman and Robins,
1962; Walz et al., 1963; Efron et al.,
1964). Among the various screening
tests, the Guthrie Bacterial Inhibition
Assay has been found to be a most useful tool in mass screening of infants and
now is employed in many countries
throughout the world (Guthrie and Susi,
1963). Its easy applicability, low cost,
specificity, and high sensitivity have
made this test very effective in the detection of infants with phenylketonuria.

These developments laid the ground
work for the establishment of many
phenylketonuria programs and clinics
where an interdisciplinary team of professionals provide expert care for children with this metabolic disorder. Thus,
in the past twenty years hundreds of individuals with phenylketonuria have
been identified in early life and have

 

Social Biology

benefitted from appropriate dietary
treatment. These children enjoy good
physical health, and the vast majority
have normal intellectual functioning.
Many of the early-detected females with
phenylketonuria are already at reproductive age, and many more are approaching childbearing age soon. Since
it has been known for almost thirty years
that mothers with untreated phenylketonuria may give birth to retarded offspring, we are facing now a new challenge relating to the care and
management of these young women
with phenylketonuria.

This paper will highlight significant
issues concerning maternal phenylketonuria. We review lessons learned from
previously reported cases and discuss salient research on placental transfer
mechanisms of aromatic amino acids.
We stress that all pertinent information
concerning maternal phenylketonuria
should be provided to the population at
risk. And, finally, we focus on the nutritional management of pregnant women
with this metabolic disorder.

A RETROSPECTIVE VIEW

Since Dent (1956) had suggested that
high blood phenylalanine concentrations in mothers with phenylketonuria
may interfere with central nervous system development of the fetus, many reports on this subject have been published in the medical literature. These
articles indicate that many children born
to mothers with untreated phenylketonuria are mentally retarded, have congenital anomalies, low birth weight, and
microcephaly. In a review of the world
literature! on maternal phenylketonu
1Unfortunately, an accurate analysis of the
data extracted from the literature can be done only
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

ria, Lenke and Levy (1980) found 155
mothers with phenylketonuria or hyperphenylalaninemia who had a total of
524 pregnancies with 423 live offspring
and 101 spontaneous abortions. The frequency of mental, retardation in offspring of mothers who had phenylalanine blood concentrations of more
than 20 mg/dl was 92 per cent, as noted
in Table 1. Even at relatively low maternal phenylalanine concentrations, between 3 to 10 mg/dl, more than 20 per
cent of offspring had significant intellectual handicaps. Another frequent finding was microcephaly, which was observed in 73 per cent of children whose
mothers had high phenylalanine blood
concentrations (> 20 mg/dl). At lower

with difficulty since essential information often is
not provided in the individual reports. Sometimes
the offspring’s mental abilities were estimated or
the IQ was not reported at all, and in a few instances the intellectual assessments were misinterpreted. Occasionally, only one phenylalanine
blood level or a mean phenylalanine level without
range was provided by the author(s) and often no
reference was made relative to the dietary intake.

 

Maternal Phenylketonuria 33

maternal phenylalanine blood concentrations (3-10 mg/dl), 24 per cent of the
offspring were microcephalic. In addition, a large number of children were
noted to have congenital heart disease.
Of the 36 offspring with congenital heart
defects, seven had tetralogy of Fallot,
four had ventricular spetal defect, three
had coarctation of the aorta, two had patent ductus arteriosus, one had a single
ventricle, and another child had an atrial
setpal defect. In 18 children the congenital heart lesion was not specified. Other
congenital anomalies included cataracts, esophageal atresia, hiatus hernia,
cleft palate, syndactyly, intestinal
malrotation, situs inversus, meningomyelocele, hemivertebra, ophthalmological anomalies, agenesis of spleen,
and epicanthal folds. Approximately
half of the children were born with a low
birth weight of less than 2,500 grams.
There was also an increased occurrence
of spontaneous abortions, as 27 per cent
of women who had phenylalanine blood
levels of more than 16 mg/dl miscarried
(Lenke and Levy, 1980).

TABLE 1

ABNORMALITIES OBSERVED IN OFFSPRING OF MOTHERS WITH UNTREATED PHENYLKETONURIA
AND HyPERPHENYLALANINEMIA ACCORDING TO MATERNAL PHENYLALANINE BLooD LEVELS?

PHENYLALANINE BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS

3-10 mg/di
AS8NORMALITIES
fected fected

N N % N oN
Mental retardation .........66- 29 6 21 235
Microcephaly .... 21 5 24 233 «8
Congenital heart
disease .......... 44 0 0 So Od
Birth weight
<2500g ......-. 146 2 13 9 5

*Adapted from Lenke and Levy, 1980.

11-15 mg/dl
Total Af- Af- Total Affected fected

16-19 mg/d] = 20 mg/dl
Af- Total Af- Af- Total Af- Affected fected fected fected
% N N % N N %

22 37) 27-73 172 158 92
35 44 30 68 138 101 73

6 46 ¢ 15 225 27 = 12
56 33. «17 52 89 36 40

 
a

 

 

‘Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

34 Pueschel

Since the majority of these families
had come to the attention of the investigators because the child was mentally
retarded, there exists an ascertainment
bias. Therefore, Levy and Waisbren
(1983) studied the effects of maternal
phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia on 53 offspring from untreated pregnancies in 22 mothers who
had been identified by routine screening
of umbilical cord blood. The authors
found that the intelligence quotient of
the offspring was significantly correlated
with both the maternal intelligence quotient and maternal phenylalanine blood
levels. Mental retardation in offspring
was only present (with one exception)
when the maternal phenylalanine blood
level exceeded 18 mg/dl. If the maternal
phenylalanine blood concentration was
above 20 mg/dl, all offspring had microcephaly. The authors, however, did not
find an increased frequency of congenital heart disease and other congenital
anomalies which Lenke and Levy (1980)
had noted previously. The authors interpreted their data, suggesting that phenylalanine levels above 18 mg/dl would

Social Biology

lead to intellectual limitations in the offspring. If the mother had mild hyperphenylalaninemia, the child would
function well cognitively.

Lenke and Levy (1980) also reported
on females with phenylketonuria who
were treated with a low phenylalanine
diet during pregnancy. Of the 34 pregnancies, treatment was initiated in only
3 instances before conception, in 11
pregnancies the treatment was started in
the first trimester, in 16 pregnancies during the second trimester, and in 4 pregnancies during the third trimester.
There appeared to be a trend toward
higher IQ and normal head circumference in the offspring when the treatment
of the mother was begun prior to or in
early gestation. However, no consistent
relationships were noted between dietary therapy during pregnancy and prevention of abnormalities in the offspring
(Table 2).

Thus, during the past 25 years, information has accumulated in the literature
relating to the outcome of pregnancies
of mothers with phenylketonuria. From
the review of these reports, it is appar
TABLE 2

INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT, MICROCEPHALY, CONGENITAL HEarT DISEASE, AND Low BIRTH
WEIGHT IN RELATION TO INITIATION OF DIETARY THERAPY DURING GESTATION 4

 

Congenital heart Birth

Microcephaly disease weight < 2500
IQ/DQ a
GESTATION Total Af: Af- Total Af- Af- Total Af- Affected fected fected fected fected fected

N xX range N %o % N N %

Before conception 2 0 8100 3 O 0 3 0 0 3 60 0
First trimester 7 103 74-127 10 2 20 11 4 36 9 O 0
Second trimester 13. 8453-108 15 8 §3 16 Z 13 12 4 33
Third trimester 3 79 48-100 3 2 67 4 90 0 2 O 0

2 Adopted from Lenke and Levy, 1980.
 

VNIOaAGEd DY

JO

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

ent that women with classical phenylketonuria who did not have the benefit of
dietary treatment during pregnancy often gave birth to children with mental
retardation, microcephaly, low birth
weight, and congenital anomalies. However, those mothers whose phenylaJanine restricted diet was started before
or early in pregnancy had children
whose physical appearance and intellectual functioning were normal.

SIGNIFICANT RESEARCH IN
NONHUMAN PRIMATES

Ethical and practical considerations
do not permit investigations of maternal
phenylketonuria in humans. In particular, transplacental transfer studies of
phenylalanine cannot be carried out in
pregnant women. Therefore, we initiated investigations that would explore
placental transfer mechanisms of aromatic amino acids using nonhuman primates.

At the gestational age of 115-135
days, crab-eating monkeys and rhesus
monkeys purchased from the New England Regional Primate Research Center underwent an operative procedure.
After a midline abdominal incision, a
hysterotomy was performed in the
lower uterine segment. An oblique fetal
skin incision then was made from the angle of the mandible to the clavicle and
skin flaps were sutured to the uterine
wall to stabilize the operative site and to
prevent leakage of amniotic fluid. A polyvinyl catheter was inserted into the
carotid artery of the fetus. Postoperatively the fetal catheter was protected
from maternal interference by enclosure
into a subcutaneous pocket.

Upon determining the fetal viability,
we began experimentation two to three

Maternal Phenylketonuria 35

days following surgery. Under ketamine
anesthesia a priming dose of phenylalanine and/or p-chlorophenylalanine
was given, followed by an infusion of
these compounds through a catheter
placed in a maternal femoral vein. Approximately 1 ml of blood was obtained
from the mother and 0.7 ml of blood was
taken from the fetus at specified time intervals. After the experiments were
completed, the animals were returned
to their cages. Phenylalanine and tyrosine concentrations were determined by
a modified method of McCaman and
Robins (1962) and/or by ion exchange
chromatography (Spackman et al.,
1958).

When we administered 10 mg/kg
phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg pchlorophenylalanine to the maternal circulation followed by a two-hour infusion
of 100 mg/kg phenylalanine, we observed significantly higher phenylalanine and tyrosine concentrations in
the fetal blood when compared with maternal phenylalanine and tyrosine blood
levels (see Figure 1). This suggests an
active transport mechanism at the placental level pumping aromatic amino acids against a gradient into the fetal circulation. It is postulated that this active
transport system permits increased
amounts of amino acids to cross the placenta unidirectional into the fetal circulation in order “‘to provide optimal nutrition’’ to the fetus. Whereas this
process can be advantageous under normal circumstances, in situations where
an inborn error of amino acid metabolism in the mother causes prolonged
high levels of a certain compound to
over-saturate the amino acid pool in the
embryo/fetus, teratogenic effects and
insults to the fetal central nervous system may occur.

 
“40-08 Decéembér ZU

36 Pueschel

18 PHENYLALANINE

 

infuston

HOURS

Social Biology

TYROSINE

“ee,
Pee eeae,
*e
°
.
%e
®e
te
es

infusion

Fic. 1.—Phenylalanine and tyrosine blood levels (mg/dl) of fetus and mother after injection of 100
mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg p-chlorophenylalanine followed by a two-hour infusion of 100 mg

phenylalanine.

The results of this experiment provide evidence that a high maternal
phenylalanine blood level between 10 to
16 mg/dl will yield an even higher fetal
phenylalanine blood concentration.
Such an increase of 40 to 80 per cent of
phenylalanine concentration above the
maternal level could potentially compromise normal fetal central nervous
system development which is of particular importance during the latter part of
pregnancy when maximal fetal brain
growth takes place. Thus, a high but relatively “‘safe” phenylalanine blood concentration in the mother may cause a
significant rise of fetal phenylalanine

concentration with a potentially harmful
effect upon neural tissues in the fetus.
In another experiment we injected
200 mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg
p-chlorophenylalanine into a maternal
femoral vein followed by a two-hour infusion of 229.2 mg/hr phenylalanine and
27.5 mg/hr p-chlorophenylalanine. As
noted in Figure 2, there was an initial rise
of the maternal phenylalanine blood
concentration up to 50 mg/dl with a
lesser increase of the fetal phenylalanine
blood level. However, once the maternal phenylalanine blood concentration
fell below 32.5 mg/dl the fetal phenylalanine level rose above the maternal one

 
nl SI

y

ownloade

 

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

mg/dl PHENYLALANINE

50

40

.
oe
e?
*
«?

30

Otte tnsesacs

20

Infusion

 

Maternal Phenylketonuria 37

TYROSINE

mother

wa
HOURS XZ
5 )

a
1 2 3 4 5

Infusion

Fic. 2.—Phenylalanine and tyrosine blood concentrations (mg/dl) of fetus and mother after administration of 200 mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg p-chlorophenylalanine followed by a two-hour infusion
of 229.2 mg/hr phenylalanine and 27.5 mg/hr p-chlorophenylalanine.

and remained higher throughout the
rest of the study. Similar, although less
dramatic, changes were observed in maternal and fetal tyrosine levels as noted
at the right side of Figure 2.

Thus, at a critical point of phenylalanine loading (32 to 36 mg/d!) most
transfer sites of aromatic amino acids
appear to be occupied. This saturation
phenomenon does not allow additional
phenylalanine to cross into the fetal circulation. One may hypthesize then that
this mechanism has “protective” functions and under normal circumstances
will prevent too much of a given amino
acid from entering the fetal circulation
which potentially could affect the fetal
central nervous system adversely.

In further investigations we injected
radioactive phenylalanine into the

mother. We again observed a gradient
in the placental transport across the placenta with the fetal phenylalanine levels
being significantly above the maternal
levels. However, if '4C-phenylalanine
was administered into the fetal circulation, the maternal total counts did not
change much and always remained
significantly below the fetal counts
which suggests that the transfer of radioactive material into the maternal circulation occurs by simple diffusion. The
results of these experiments were reported in detail previously (Pueschel et
al., 1982).

During another experiment we first
gave a prime dose of 200 mg/kg
phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg pchlorophenylalanine followed by a twohour infusion of 75 mg/10 ml/hr

 
ichigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Downloaded by [University o

 

Pueschel

38

phenylalanine and 18 mg/10 ml/hr pchlorophenylalanine. We then obtained
amniotic fluid at the same time when fetal and maternal blood were sampled.

mg/d
40
3530
25 : ie
20 :
15 :
10 :
: or
- 3 so”
° Pd
5 : ”
: 7
a
@7
7
¢
. 7

 

chlorophenylalanine.

Prime 1
Infusion J

Fic. 3.—Phenylalanine levels (mg/d!) in maternal blood (
), after administration of 200 mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 me/kg p
amniotic fluid (
chlorophenylalanine followed by a two-hour infusion of 150 mg phenylalanine and 36 mg p
Social Biology

As shown in Figure 3 the phenylalanine
concentrations in maternal blood rose
sharply, reflecting the initial injection of
the prime dose. Despite continuous in
2

HOURS

a es & @ © © @ ee

), fetal blood (
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

fusion for two hours, the maternal
phenylalanine blood levels declined rapidly. The amniotic fluid phenylalanine
levels were initially below the maternal
and fetal blood levels. However, halfway into the experiment the phenylalanine levels in the amniotic fluid exceeded the maternal phenylalanine
blood levels. During the first hour in this
experiment, the fetal phenylalanine
blood concentrations surpassed the maternal blood levels and remained above
both the maternal and the amniotic fluid
phenylalanine levels. There was neither
a constant ratio of phenylalanine levels
between maternal blood and amniotic
fluid nor between fetal blood and amniotic fluid during the five-hour study.
These investigations indicate that amniotic fluid phenylalanine concentrations
will not accurately reflect fetal phenylalanine levels. Thus, amniotic fluid obtained for phenylalanine determination
during the second half of pregnancy will
not be helpful in estimating the fetal
phenylalanine blood levels.

Whereas the above-described shortterm studies focused primarily on placental transfer mechanisms of aromatic
amino acids, we also engaged in longterm investigations which were designed
to provide information on biological and
behavioral assessments of young rhesus
monkeys after intrauterine exposure of
the fetus to high phenylalanine concentrations. Nineteen pregnant monkeys at
the gestational age of 25 to 35 days were
enrolled in these long-term experiments. Monkeys in Group I constituted
a control group which was given a regular SKF monkey diet without phenylalanine supplement. Monkeys in Group
II were on a “low” phenylalanine intake
to achieve blood phenylalanine levels of
approximately 5 mg/dl. Monkeys in

Maternal Phenylketonuria 39

Group III had a “median” phenylalanine intake to achieve phenylalanine
levels of approximately 10 mg/dl. Monkeys in Group IV received a “high”
phenylalanine intake to achieve phenylalanine blood levels of approximately
15 mg/dl. The actual intake of aromatic
amino acids ranged from 300 mg/kg/day
to 1000 mg/kg/day phenylalanine and 30
mg/kg/day to 100 mg/kg/day pchlorophenylalanine, depending on
group assignment. Special pellets had
been prepared by ICN Nutritional Biochemicals and contained 50 g phenylalanine and 5 g p-chlorophenylalanine
per kg of a standard SKF monkey diet.
In addition, the animals received several
Purina Monkey Chow biscuits at each
feeding which took place at 8:30 in the
morning and at 4:30 in the afternoon. A
vitamin C supplement was added to the
drinking water.

Venous blood samples were obtained
at one- to two-week intervals throughout pregnancy. The blood was analyzed
for its phenylalanine and tyrosine content according to the method described
by McCaman and Robins (1962).
Shortly after birth the infant monkeys
were examined and anthropometric
measurements were obtained. At six
months of age the infants were separated from their mothers and placed in
individual cages. Experimental testing
was done using the Wisconsin General
Test Apparatus (Schrier, 1961). Following pre-training the monkeys underwent
behavioral assessment: (a) The ‘‘Adaptation Test” was designed to gauge the
animals’ emotionality and adaptability.
(b) The ‘Simple Discrimination Test”
measured the animals’ ability to learn a
short series of simple two-choice object
discrimination problems. (c) The ‘‘Discrimination Learning Set Formation”

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

40 Pueschel

studied the increase in the rate of learning of individual problems as a function
of the number of problems learned. (d)
The “Delayed Response Test’? measured
the monkeys memory. (e) The
‘‘Delayed-Matching-to-Sample Learning Set’ task investigated complex
learning abilities and short-term memory of the monkeys (Schrier, 1965,
1984).

In the analysis of the results, we did
not find anv statistical difference among
the four study groups in comparing the
infants’ anthropometric measurements.
Moreover, no congenital anomalies
were uncovered during the physical examination shortly after birth of the monkey infants. Also, behavioral testing revealed that the treatment conditions had
little consistent effect on performance.
Although, there was a slight difference
in the mean number of days taken by the
four groups to complete the adaptation
test, the difference was not statistically
significant. In the simple discrimination
test, there was some tendency for
Groups III and IV to learn the discrimination problem more slowly than
Groups I and II. However, the differences between the groups again did not
approach statistical significance. During
the discrimination learning set formation, the treated groups formed a learning set more slowly than the control
group in the second fifty problems, but
the differences were quite small and not
Statistically significant. In the delayed
response as well as in the delayed
matching-to-sample testing, there was
again no significant difference among
the groups. In most tests effects of practice were highly significant (p <0.05 to p
<0.001), but the groups by practice interaction was not significant.

Although we were successful in ren
 

 

Social Biology

dering pregnant rhesus monkeys hyperphenylalaninemic, as noted above,
we did not observe statistically significant differences in biological measures
or in behavioral testing among the respective study groups. The reason for
the negative results could be due to the
“late” induction of hyperphenylalaninemia in our animals at 25 to 35 days postconception. It 1s also conceivable that
the central nervous system of the fetal
rhesus monkey is less susceptible to the
exposure of high phenylalanine concentrations and that there are basic differences of central nervous system maturation and/or vulnerability between
human and nonhuman primates. A
more likely interpretation of our data
relates to the inadequacy of the animal
model that attempted to replicate
phenylketonuria in humans. The rhesus
mothers had high phenylalanine blood
levels during pregnancy, yet they did not
have the inborn error of phenylalanine
metabolism and did not exhibit the resultant metabolic perturbation observed
in humans with classical phenylketonuria. Therefore, caution should be exercised in the interpretation of these data,
and it would be prudent to say that
phenylalanine blood levels up to approximately 16 mg/dl in the pregnant female are “‘safe.”’

THE IMPORTANCE OF
EDUCATING
FEMALES WITH
PHENYLKETONURIA
ABOUT THEIR REPRODUCTIVE
RISKS

In the past the medical approach to
phenylketonuria has primarily focused
on large-scale screening of newborn infants and on maintaining the identified
 

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

children with phenylketonuria on a
phenylalanine-restricted diet. The effective screening and treatment programs have resulted in an everincreasing cohort of children with
phenylketonuria who are physically and
intellectually normal. As these children
develop and grow up, other issues such
as diet discontinuation, academic
achievement, and peer relationships
come more into focus and demand the
attention of the caring professional. In
particular, when adolescent girls with
phenylketonuria approach the reproductive age and face the consequences
of childbearing, they have to be familiarized with the complex problems of future womanhood. Therefore, emphasis
needs to be placed on the education and
counseling of adolescent girls with
phenylketonuria.

Although most children with phenylketonuria have some knowledge of this
inborn error of metabolism, the educational program initially should review
the general aspects of phenylketonuria.
A discussion of the mode of inheritance
in phenylketonuria and an explanation
of such terms as homozygote, heterozygote, carrier status, and genes should be
forthcoming. Furthermore, the metabolic defect, the unavailability of active
phenylalanine hydroxylase to metabolize phenylalanine, and the consequences of treated and untreated situations need to be detailed.

Also, common issues of adolescence
and general aspects relating to the maturing female need to be addressed.
Subjects such as social interaction with
peers, vocational interests, as well as
emotional and physical changes during
adolescence and adaptation to such
changes are important concerns to
young females with phenylketonuria.

Maternal Phenylketonuria 41

Moreover, sex education is as important
for adolescent girls with phenylketonuria as it is for the person who does not
have this metabolic disorder.

Although these general issues are important, the educational program
should be primarily concerned with the
consequences of childbearing in the female with phenylketonuria. The adolescent girls with phenylketonuria need to
know that if untreated during pregnancy, they may give birth to a mentally
retarded child. These young females
should be informed that an increased
amount of phenylalanine coming from
the mother will cross the placenta and
may have a damaging effect upon the
unborn child’s brain. Prevention of
these adverse effects and the dietary approach to maternal phenylketonuria
also need to be discussed.

Such an educational and counseling
program can be of significant help to adolescents with phenylketonuria since
many of them have misconceptions concerning various aspects of this metabolic
disorder and often display anxieties of
what the future may hold for them. In
group meetings, girls with phenylketonuria can share their thoughts and
feelings and are often relieved to meet
others who have similar problems. Also,
parents find it helpful to share with each
other their worries and concerns about
raising an adolescent girl with phenylketonuria.

NUTRITIONAL MANAGEMENT
OF THE FEMALE WITH
PHENYLKETONURIA
DURING PREGNANCY

There are numerous important concerns that need to be taken into account
in the management of the pregnant fe 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

42 Pueschel

male with phenylketonuria including
the quantitative and qualitative composition of a phenylalanine-restricted diet
during pregnancy, special food items
low in phenylalanine, the allowance of
additional natural foods, and the palatability of the formulas offered to individuals with phenylketonuria. Essential
to the low phenylalanine diet is a wellbalanced amino acid mixture that will
contain no or only a minimal amount of
phenylalanine but will provide the necessary nutrients to the mother. There
are numerous formulas on the market.
However, in this country Lofenalac, and
in particular Phenyl-Free, are being used
effectively in the treatment of pregnant
individuals with phenylketonuria. Because Phenyl-Free does not contain any
phenylalanine, more natural foods can
be incorporated into the diet facilitating
easier clinical management of the pregnant female with phenylketonuria. In
addition to the special formulas, there
are other food items low in protein that
can be used in the diet of individuals
with phenylketonuria. These special
products include Aprotein (pasta and
rusks), Paygel (wheat starch and baking
mix), Prono (gelled deserts), and others. Natural foods low in phenylalanine
such as certain vegetables, fruits and
carbohydrates can be used to supplement the diet for the pregnant female
with phenylketonuria. The prescribed
diet should conform with the recommended dietary allowances for nutrients
during pregnancy.

In addition, there are other important factors which need to be taken into
consideration. Those females who have
continued with the low phenylalanine
diet throughout childhood and adolescence most likely will not experience
any difficulties taking the formulas dur
Social Biology

ing the reproductive years. However, if
the low phenylalanine diet has been discontinued previously, the introduction
of an amino acid mixture might cause difficulties since the women might object to
its smell and taste. Therefore, we recommend that the phenylalaninerestricted diet in these females be
started several months prior to conception because at that time, the diet will
likely be better tolerated than if it were
introduced in the beginning of pregnancy when morning sickness might be
an additional complication. Moreover,
there are other pregnancy-related aspects such as increased energy expense,
augmented protein synthesis, altered
fluid and electrolyte metabolism, nausea, vomiting, and food cravings. There
are also economic, social, cultural, religious, and psychological concerns which
need to be taken into account in the
planning of a diet that is not only appropriate in its quantitative and qualitative
components, but also accepted and tolerated well.

In conclusion, ongoing research efforts should provide a better understanding of certain pathogenetic mechanisms in maternal phenylketonuria
which together with appropriate education and counseling of phenylketonuric
females and a well designed nutritional
approach will make it feasible for
women with phenylketonuria to be able
to bear children safely.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Dr. Benjamin T. Jackson and George J.
Piasecki performed the operative procedures on the pregnant monkeys which allowed us to carry out the short-term experiments. Most of the short-term experiments
niversity of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

were done by Joan M. Boylan and George J.
Piasecki. Dr. Allan M. Schrier supervised
the behavorial assessments of infant monkeys during the long-term experiments and
carried out the analysis of the collected data.
Mrs. Mary Andrews collaborated in the design of the optimal approach to dietary management of the pregnant mothers with
phenylketonuria.

Maternal Phenylketonuria 43

This work was supported by NIH Grant
501 HD 10420-02. Part of this investigation
was conducted at the New England Regional
Primate Research Center, Southborough,
Massachusetts which is supported by a NIH
Grant RR 00168 from the Division of Research Resources. I thank Cynthia Clay and
Karen Moreau for their assistance in the
preparation of this manuscript.

REFERENCES

ARMSTRONG, M.D., and F.H. Ty ter. 1955.
Studies on phenylketonuria. I. Restricted
phenylalanine intake in phenylketonuria. J.
Clin. Invest. 34:565.

BICKEL, A., A. J. GERRARD, and E. M. HIckMAN. 1953. Influence of phenylalanine intake on phenylktonuria. Lancet ii:812.

DeEnT, C. E. 1956. Discussion of Armstrong:
Relation of biochemical abnormality to development of mental defect in phenylketonuria in etiological factors in mental retardation. Report of 23rd Ross Conference,
Columbus, Ohio.

Erron, M. L., D. Younc, H. W. Moser, and
R.A. MacCreapy. 1964. A simple chromatographic screening test for the detection
of disorders of amino acid metabolism. New
Eng. J. Med. 270:1378.

Fé.iinGc, A. 1934. Uber Ausscheidung von
Phenylbrenztraubensaure in den Harn als
Stoffwechselanomalie in Verbindung mit
Imbezillitat. Ztschr. Physiol. Chem.
227:169.,

Gutnriz, R., and A. Susi. 1963. A simple
phenylketonuria screening method for newborn infants. Pediatrics 32:338.

Jervis, G. A. 1939. The genetics of phenylpyruvic oligophrenia. J. Ment. Sc. 85:719.

. 1953. Phenylpyruvic oligophrenia deficiency of phenylalanine-oxidizing system.
Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 82:514.

KaurMaN, S. 1957. Enzymatic conversion of
phenylalanine to tyrosine. J. Biol. Chem.
226:511-524.

1963. The

 

structure of the

phenylalanine-hydroxylation cofactor.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 50:1085-1093.

‘ LaDu, B.N., R. R. Howe Lt, P. J. MICHAEL,
and E. V. Soper. 1963. A quantitative mi
 

 

cromethod for the determination of phenylalanine and tyrosine in blood and its application in the diagnosis of phenylketonuria in
infants. Pediatrics 31:39.

LENKE, R. R., and H. L. Levy. 1980. Maternal
phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia. New Eng. J. Med. 303:1202-1208.

Levy, H. L.,andS. E. WaisBren. 1983. Effects
of untreated maternal phenylketonuria and
hyperphenylalaninemia on the fetus. New
Eng. J. Med. 309:1269-1274.

McCamMan, M. W., and E. Rosins. 1962.
Fluorimetric method for the determination
of phenylalanine in serum. J. Lab. Clin.
Med. 59:885.

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1980. Recommended Dietary Allowances. 9th ed.
Washington, D.C. |

NEUBAUER, O. 1909. Uber den Abbau der
Aminosauren im gesunden und kranken
Organismus. Deutsch. Arch. Klin. Med.
95:211.

Penrose, L., and J. H. QuASTEL. 1947. Metabolic studies in phenylketonuria. Biochem.
J. 31:266.

PUESCHEL, S. M., J. M. BoyLan, B. T. Jackson, and G. J. PIASEcKI. 1982. A study of
placental transfer mechanisms in nonhuman
primates using [“°] phenylalanine. Obstet.
Gynec. 59:182-188.

ScurierR, A. M. 1961. A modified version of the
Wisconsin General Test Apparatus. J.
Psych. 52:193-200.

. 1965, Pretraining performance of three

species of macaque monkeys. Psych. Sci
ence. 61:517-518.

. 1984. Learning how to learn: The

significance and current status of learning

set formation. Primates 25:95—102.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

44 Pueschel Social Biology

. 1966. Learning-set formation by three
species of macaque monkeys. J. Compar.
Physio. Psych. 61:490-492.

SPACKMAN, D. H., W. H. STEIN, and S. Moore.
1958. Automatic recording apparatus for
use in chromatography of amino acids.
Anal. Chem. 30:1190.

UDENFRIEND, S., and J. R. Cooper. 1952. The
enzymatic conversion of phenylalanine to
tyrosine. J. Biol. Chem. 194:503.

Watz., D., A. R. FAHRNy, G. Pataki, A.
NIEDERWIESSER, and M. BRENNER. 1963.
Thin layer chromatography of amino acids
in urine. Experientia. 19:213.
