Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Sex differences in vulnerability and maladjustment
as a function of parental investment: An
evolutionary approach

Ada Lampert & Ariella Friedman

To cite this article: Ada Lampert & Ariella Friedman (1992) Sex differences in vulnerability and
maladjustment as a function of parental investment: An evolutionary approach, Social Biology,
39:1-2, 65-81, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1992.9988805

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988805

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 12

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

 
 

Sex Differences in Vulnerability and
Maladjustment as a Function of Parental
Investment: An Evolutionary Approach

 

Ada Lampert and Ariella Friedman

Department of Behavioral Sciences, Ruppin Institute, Emek-Hefer, Israel; and Department of
Psychology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

O15

\ ABSTRACT: Sex differences in aspects of mental health are examined as a function of uneven

& parental investment in children. Relative vulnerability is a new construct mediating the influence

& of parental investment on mental health. Couples (129) in three stages of the family life cycle
9 are measured by scales for parental investment, relative vulnerability, anxiety, depression, and
Q ten psychosomatic syndromes. Results show a path of positive correlations from the parent’s sex
& to fevel of parental investment, to level of relative vulnerability, and to levels of anxiety and
<t depression. Women invest more than men, and hence they are more vulnerable, anxious, and
ce, depressed. They reach the summit of their vulnerability while they have three young children.
"_ Relative vulnerability was found to have positive effects along with the negative ones and to
© affect women in different ways than it does men. Results are interpreted in terms of different
‘S parental strategies selected by evolution for each sex.

T

Michig

Some reviews of the literature con- There seems to be a general inclina‘Scerning sex differences in mental tion to explain these differences behealth (e.g., Garai, 1970; Oakes, 1984; tween the sexes in terms of social learn5 Widow, 1984; Whitley, 1984) indicate ing. Social norms permit women to
‘that the most salient difference is the exhibit their distress, while for men it is
~ higher level of anxiety women have ex- forbidden. These norms are so strongly
@hibited in comparison to men. That rooted in our society that a woman has
twomen are more anxious than men is, to choose, cruelly, between being
3 as a matter of fact, an assumption ac- healthy and masculine, or being femi‘ecepted by the psychological main- nine and disturbed (Erdwins et al.,
ostream (e.g., Maccoby and Jacklin, 1980). No doubt, these social norms
1974; Frank et al., 1985), by the psy- are a powerful force affecting our bechiatry textbooks, (e.g., Freedman et havior, but if they are not just arbitrary
al., 1980; DSM III, 1985), and by the forces, can there be any biological
layperson who knows that “mothers ground from which the norms ultiworry more than fathers.” mately derive? Some authors suggest

But anxiety is not the only differ- that the higher emotional distress of
ence. Depression is known to be more women is connected to being married
common among women (Brown and and having young children. Eme
Harris, 1978; Freedman et al., 1980; (1974) shows that in childhood girls enDSM III, 1985), and there are similar joy better mental health than do boys,
indications about neurotic symptoms and this situation changes only after
in general (Dohrenwend, 1969, 1974). adolescence. Donelson and Gullahorn

65

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

66 Lampert and Friedman

(1977) show that married women are at
the highest risk, suffering many symptoms of tension, while other researchers identify having young children as a
major factor increasing mothers’ tension (Heer, 1978; Rollins and Feldman,
1970; Gillespie, 1971; Richmond,
1976; Brown and Harris, 1978, Nock,
1979; Guttman, 1987).

As Trivers (1972, 1975) indicated,
differential parental investment by
each sex has profound implications for
the evolution of parental strategies.
The concept “parental investment”
(Dawkins, 1976; Mellen, 1981) can be
well understood in terms of time. The
net biological investment per child demands two to three years of the
mother, while from the father one
night is enough. From this oversimplified biological point of view, it is clear
that natural selection should select for
strong devotion of a mother to her children. When our ancient ancestors left
the forest for the dangerous savanna
(Mellen, 1981; Klein, 1989), successful
child rearing became so hard that cooperation of both mother and father
was essential (Shepher, 1978; Betzig et
al., 1988; Lovejoy, 1988). Thus, we
have a combined strategy for the male.
Great care for his children, along with
a temptation for promiscuous affairs,
risking his minimal biological investment only. The mother, on the other
hand, is strongly devoted to her children, emotionally committed to her
high investment, and also has learned
to accept her partner’s help, and to fear
his desertion. Thus, the unequal parental investments create unequal parental strategies, which put the parent who
invests more in a state of “Relative Vulnerability,” by which we mean the apprehension of being deserted and the

Social Biology

feeling of dependency on the partner.
While great distance separates our own
society from that of early man on the
African savanna, there is evidence that
even today men have strong promiscuous or polygynous tendencies (e.g.,
van den Berghe, 1980; Barash, 1981)
and women are threatened by men’s
potential desertion, so that they are
vulnerable relative to their partners
(Satir, 1970; Rossi, 1977; 1984; Bardwick, 1979). This relative vulnerability, if it exists long enough, may interfere with mental health, increasing
levels of anxiety and other emotional
difficulties. Thus, we come to the central thesis of our research (see Figure
1): Sex of parent influences through innate inclinations the amount of parental
investment, which influences through
emotional commitment relative vulnerability, which through anxiety affects
mental health.

We are aware of the “mixed” character of that claim, having biologicalgenetic processes in the first step, along
with an environmental emphasis later
on. This is the way we believe the process works: Starting with biological determinants, human behavior enjoys
great freedom in its expression depending on many varied forces in the
environment. Social norms are part,
quite a powerful part, of the flexible,
changing, environmental conditions
which are influenced by the biological
basic determinants. For instance, social norms which dictate higher care
giving by mothers to their children, in
comparison to fathers, are insuring by
that the initial higher biological investment of the mothers and therefore can
be considered to be selected by evolution. Having these “mixed”’ assumptions in mind, we claim that the sex of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Sex of | Innate Parental Emotional
Parent | Inclination | Investment | Commitment

Parental Investment

67

Relative Anxiety n
Vulnerability Malaaustnocnt

Fig. 1.—The chain of claims connecting parental investment with mental health.

the parent can predict the amount of
care given to children by that parent,
but we are also able to predict that in
spite of the innate inclination of
women to invest a great deal in their
children, and the connection of high investment to vulnerability, still the vulnerability of a woman responds to environmental factors. Such responses
can be expressed in changes of vulnerability along the family life cycle, in accord with changes of the amount of parental investment children need.

Out of this line of reasoning, two hypotheses were derived and tested:

1. There is a path of positive correlations from the parent’s sex to levels of
investment, vulnerability, and maladjustment, and women are inclined to
invest more than do men.

2. Along the family life cycle, there is
the stage of having young children,
where mother’s vulnerability reaches
its summit.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Parental investment can manifest itself in so many different forms that it is
nearly impossible to measure and compare the mother’s contribution to that
of the father. However, Israel has the
kibbutz, which offers the investigator a
homogeneous and highly organized
way of life, with two parents working
all day outside, and with both of them
supposed to take care of their children

in the evenings. More than that, a family of the kibbutz is a social unit, but
not an economic one. Thus, it is possible to measure parental investment in
terms of care giving to children by any
parent, in the evenings, after their
work. Kibbutz is a modern Western
way of life, so that generalization is
permitted. Still another advantage is
the strong egalitarian ideology of the
kibbutz, pushing fathers to take care of
their children along with mothers. Any
difference in parental investment
would therefore be in spite of the lack
of economic dependency between the
parents and the formal egalitarian ideology.

Three groups are included in our
sample:

1.40 couples before marriage, age
17-21 years, who have been in close
relationships for six months or more.

2. 50 married couples with three children, all of them less than 12 years
old.

3. 39 married couples with three children, all of them more than 12 years
old. For this group a ceiling of 55
years old was kept in order to prevent
old-age effects.

Total sum of subjects is 258, and they
were picked at random in 30 different
kibbutzim.

Parental investment.—Parental investment was measured by a questionnaire which is a revised version of Tiger
and Shepherd (1975), indicating a division of parenthood duties between
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

68 Lampert and Friedman

mother and father in the kibbutz. Our
form aimed at the relative aspect, comparing contributions of any parent to
those of the other one. Ten of the items
are ‘“‘care investment” (e.g., giving
food) and six are ‘‘educational investment” (e.g., telling stories). Thus, we
have two scores for each parent, “relative care investment” and “relative
educational investment.” As we already mentioned, parental investment
has many different biological, emotional, and behavioral forms, and we
can measure only an indication of a
much broader phenomenon.

Relative vulnerability. —Relativevulnerability was measured by a new scale
we have developed for this particular
purpose, in which vulnerability is the
perceived fear of being deserted and the
feelings of dependency on the partner—
both in comparison to the fear and dependency of the partner. The core of
the scale, stemming from the theoretical assumptions, is fear of desertion.
Dependency was empirically found to
be in strong relation to the fear of desertion, while three other tested elements, e.g., “giving way,’ had shown
weaker relations. Out of 24 prime
statements elaborating the fear of desertion and dependency, 12 were chosen for the final version, six for every
element, in regard to their alpha values. The subject is asked to mark his or
her agreement with any statement, on
a five-degree scale. All the statements
are relatively phrased, for instance, “‘I
would dare to leave my partner more
than he would dare to leave me,” or in
the opposite. direction, “My dependence on my partner is greater than his
dependence on me.”

Reliability for each item was tested
on ‘“‘Guttman’s lower bounds for true
reliability,” and values range from 0.55

Social Biology

to 0.79. The whole scale shows “‘Guttman split-half”’ reliability of 0.74.

Validity was tested, in the absence
of any appropriate criterion, with a
group of 84 social workers who were
asked to play roles, either of a partner
who fears desertion or of a partner who
feels secure. The responses obtained
this way are highly differentiated:
t (82) = 4.3 P<0.01. As with parental
investment, scores are relative and
bear no information about any absolute state of vulnerability, whatever it
means.

Maladjustment. —Maladjustment
was measured by four scales:

a. “‘Tennessee self-concept scale” (Fitts,
1965) from which we made use of
four scores: “‘physical- self,” ‘‘moralself,” “‘personal-self’ and “familyself.”

b. “‘State-trait anxiety inventory” (Spielberger et. al., 1970) from which we
made use of the trait half of the inventory only.

c. Three items from the anxiety inventory were also used for measuring depression. The items were picked because of their content (e.g., “I am
sad’’), and the subscale was validated
against the Hebrew version of Levitt
and Lubin (1975) scale for depression.

d. 10 large groups of psychosomatic
symptoms were drawn from the psychiatric literature (Freedman et al.,
1980) and served as a self-report measurement: “‘excessive eating,” “intes
tinal disorders,’ “anorexia,” ‘‘cardiovascular disorders,” ‘‘respiratory
disorders,” ‘‘allergic and skin disorders,” ‘“‘rheumatoid arthritis,” “‘peptic ulcer and pyrosis,’’ “‘sleep disorders,” and ‘‘headaches.”

Thus, we have measured maladjustment with scores for four aspects of
self-esteem, anxiety, depression, and
10 psychosomatic disorders.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

PROCEDURE

Interviewers had visited our subjects’ homes, giving them the questionnaires in a fixed order. The couples
were requested to answer without consulting one another and anonymity was
strictly kept. Thirty interviewers from
thirty kibbutzim chosen at random
planned to visit five random couples
each. Some couples refused to answer,
and in some kibbutzim there were not
enough suitable couples for our sample
groups, so that we had 129 couples instead of 150. Subjects finished the
work within 30-40 minutes, believing
the research dealt with the development of marital relationships. The interviewers knew nothing about the
research assumptions, nor the measurements used.

ANALYSIS OF DATA

Considering the path of correlations
we predicted in our first hypothesis,
path analysis technique proved to be of
great value, enabling us to decompose
the variance and attribute its portions
to specific variables. The P values are
correlation coefficients chosen in regard to level of measurement used,
from the point biserial correlation in
the first step up to Pearson correlations
in the last one. In cases where a suppressor variable was present, P is the
beta coefficient of partial correlation.

Differences between the sexes were
tested by the ¢ test, and the variance
according to stage in family life cycle
was tested by analysis of variance.

RESULTS
First HyYPotHuHesIs

In order to show the chain of variables as predicted by our first hypoth
Parental Investment

69

esis, we shall present two kinds of results. One is a path of correlations
starting with the parent’s sex and ending with adjustment variables. The second is simply higher levels for women
in all these variables as compared to
men. These two kinds of results are
presented in Figure 2.

Fifty couples with three young children are analyzed in Figure 2. Mean
values for each variable are indicated
by ‘“f’ for females, and by ‘‘m’” for
males. The arrows of correlations are
pointing out directions of influence we
have assumed out of our theoretical
frame of reference, without, of course,
any unequivocal “‘proofs” from the
data.

We can see that sex of the parent
might predict strongly the portion of
the total “‘care investment” and quite
well the portion of ‘‘educational investment.” The latter is more stereotypically masculine (Parsons, 1955), since
fathers are more easily engaged in this
kind of parenthood, and the segregation by sex there is less sharp.

In any case, it is the mother who invests more ‘‘care’’ than the father does
(t(98) = 15.85, P<0.01) and also
more “education” than the father
(t (98) = 7.71, P<0.01). Going on,
we see the influence of relative parental investment on relative vulnerability, with females who are mothers
more vulnerable than fathers (ft
(98) = 6.22, P<0.01). Because of the
correlation between sex and vulnerability, we have to decompose the variance in order to capture the exact relations of the three variables: sex,
parental care (as an example for investment), and vulnerability (Figure 2).
The effect coefficient is the overall influence of sex on vulnerability, via care
investment, in an “ideal experiment,”
70 Lampert and Friedman

   

fx=4.92

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Decomposition of Variance
Sex and Vulnerability via Care:

effect coefficient
causal direct
causal indirect

 

Social Biology

      

_ Fic. 2.—Path analysis for the correlations between parent's sex and mental health (N = 100).

P = regression coefficients or beta, all significant, p < 0.01.

BR
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol, 39, No. 1-2

which controls all the rest of the world.
To this overall influence, sex contributes, directly, the small portion; parental investment contributes, indirectly,
much more. In other words, it is the
parental investment and not the sex of
the parent, that affects relative vulnerability.

As we see to the right in the middle
of Figure 2, it was revealed unexpectedly that relative vulnerability of parents affects mental health positively as
well as negatively. In the positive zone,
it raises one’s family-self, which is
higher for women (t(98) = 2.53,
P<0.01) as a function of their higher
vulnerability. The normal-self is also
raised by vulnerability in the positive
zone, but difference between the sexes
is not significant. In the negative zone,
we see the price one pays if one invests
more: anxiety (higher for mothers,
t(98) = 2.44, P<0.01); depression
(higher for mothers, 1¢(98) = 3.44,
P <0.01); low personal-self (lower for
mothers, 1(98) = 1.69, P< 0.05); and
low physical-self (lower for mothers,
not significant). |

The psychosomatic symptoms we
have measured among the adjustment
variables, failed to show significant relations with vulnerability or a difference
of means between the sexes. There is
one exception concerning cardiovascular disorders, which will be presented
under the heading “‘Other Results.”

We are able now to conclude that
women are inclined to invest more in
their children than men do, that their
higher investment exposes them to a
relative vulnerability, which may interfere with their mental health in some
ways while affecting it positively in
other ways.

Parental Investment 71

SECOND HYPOTHESIS

The second hypothesis may enrich
our central claim testing in two ways.
First, it is an alternative examination
for the path of correlations, with the
advantage of escaping the problematic
parental investment measurement. Instead of measuring it, the amount of
parental investment is manipulated by
sampling three stages of the family life
cycle: before marriage (no investment); with three young children (summit of investment); and after raising
children (less investment). The prediction is that vulnerability of mothers in
comparison to fathers reaches its peak
while they have young children. Second, it is a way to show how vulnerability responds to environmental
changes. Although vulnerability may
stem out of innate inclinations to invest
a lot, it is still flexible enough to change
with the situational conditions surrounding the actual giving of care. Figure 3 shows vulnerability in three
stages of family life cycle, by sex.

The mirror effect expressed by Figure 3 is a function of the relativity of
our vulnerability scale, and one has to
remember that it is a measurement of
the gap between the parents and not
the absolute values of each. The existence of three young children causes the
deepest gap in vulnerability between
the parents. Before and after this stage
the sexes are more similar, and vulnerability has less to do with parental investment. Analysis of variance for the
interaction between sex and stage
shows significant values: F (2) = 4.56,
P<0.05. It may be stated again that
the greater role mothers take in their
childrearing exposes them, when they
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

72 Lampert and Friedman

MEAN VULNERABILITY SCORE

Before With 3
marriage young
children

 

Social Biology

Female @————-®
Male @e—— -@

After
raising
children

Fic. 3.—The relative vulnerability by three stages and by sex (N = 258).

are investing, to the effects of relative
vulnerability.

OTHER RESULTS

By analyzing the data, we found
that the ‘relative vulnerability” is
manifold, having different kinds of influences, not only because of its positive and negative zones, but also because it affects mothers in other ways
than it affects fathers. Some major
such differences are presented in the
following figures. First is the physicalself by sex as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4 presents the relations of
physical-self and relative vulnerability
via anxiety, by sex. It can be seen that
the physical-self of women (sense of
being healthy and _ attractive) is
strongly influenced by their vulnerability, and a vulnerable woman suffers a
decline in this aspect of her self
esteem, while for men the influence is
much weaker. But more than that, the
decomposed variance, in the tables,
shows that all influence for women
stems directly from vulnerability, while
for men most of it stems from anxiety.
That means again, that it is vulnerability that damages mothers’ physical-self
while for fathers this direct effect does
not exist.

Another aspect of differential influence of relative vulnerability for each
sex was found in the personal-self
(sense of being worthy and valuable) as
shown in Figure 5. By controlling anxiety, we found that relative vulnerability strongly damages the personal-self
of women. Looking at the lower table,
we see that controlling anxiety for men
produces a positive (!) direct effect of
vulnerability on personal self. In other
words, the more a woman is vulnera 

 

  

Vol. 39, No. 1-2 Parental Investment

 

         

Decomposition of Variance
Vulnerability and Physical Self via Anxiety

 

     
     
   

effect coefficient
causal direct
causal indirect

Physical Self

   

       
  
 
    
   
 
 

 

Decomposition of Variance
Vulnerability and Physical Self via Anxiety

effect coefficient
causal direct
causal indirect

Physical Self

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Fic. 4.—Path analysis for the relations of relative vulnerability with physical-self, via anxiety, by
sex (N = 100).

ble, the less she is pleased with herself, _ first let us present one more surprising
while the more a man is vulnerable the sex difference.

more he is pleased with himself. We The psychosomatic symptoms we
are going to suggest some explanations have measured as part of the adjustfor these ‘‘strange’’ differences be- ment variables failed, as a general rule,
tween the sexes in our discussion, but to show significant relations with vul
   
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

74 Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

WOMEN:

     
     
      
   

Decomposition of Variance
Vulnerability and Personal Self via Anxiety

 

   

effect coefficient
causal direct
causal indirect

Relative
Vulnerability

Personal Self

MEN:

     
     
      
   

Decomposition of Variance
Vulnerability and Personal Self via Anxiety

 

   

effect coefficient
causal direct

p=—51 causal indirect

Relative
Vulnerability

p=.10

Personal Self

Fic. 5.—Path analysis for the relations of relative vulnerability with personal-self, via anxiety, by
sex (N = 100).

nerability, but when we analyze the
data by sex there is one symptom that
does reveal an interesting relation. The
cardiovascular disorders, abnormal
blood pressure, and any kind of heart
dysfunction are positively connected to

men’s vulnerability and negatively to
women’s vulnerability. This pattern of
opposing relations is found, among our
variables, once, and only once more,
with the moral-self, which relates positively to the cardiovascular disorders

 
Vol. 39, No. 1-2

of men and negatively to these of
women. Figure 6 presents the relations
of these three variables, by sex.

The difference between males and
females, concerning the relationship of
vulnerability to cardiovascular disorders via moral-self, is short and clear.
The effect coefficient for women is
negative (means good health), while
for men it is positive (means bad

‘0 health). The vulnerable man pays, as
= Figure 6 is suggesting, for his vulnerability, by cardiovascular disorders
Ewhich are mediated partially by his
oO * . .
3 moral-self. The meaning of this mediA cation will be discussed in the next sec© tion.

CONCLUSIONS AND
DISCUSSION

1. The inclination to invest, more or
= less, in the children is strongly predicted
«= by sex, and mothers invest more than
fathers. The high correlation we have
Z found between the parent’s sex and the
.2 amount of parental investment by each
~ parent draws a clear picture. Women
pare the sex who invest more, much
y more, even if the measurement ignores
'g the biological aspects of pregnancy,
giving birth, and nursing. This phe=nomenon is especially salient within
Athe kibbutz background, because of
the lack of economic dependency between the parents, and the egalitarian
ideology (Tiger and Shepher, 1975;
Shepher and Tiger, 1982) which does
have an effect on the contribution of
fathers to their children, but it is still
less than that of mothers. We did not
find even one couple where a father
does more than a mother, even though
both of them work all day outside. One
may, of course, explain these results in

Michigan] at 13:44

Parental Investment 75

terms of social norms, and we think
rightly so. But if one tries to explain
why these are the social norms, and
why they are so common all over the
world (van den Berghe, 1979), then an
evolutionary view seems appropriate.

Once it was biologically fixed that
mother invests more than father
(Dawkins, 1976), natural selection
should prefer mothers who increase
their investment more and more. Social norms are, in this respect, twofold: On one hand they are the cognitive collective product and expression
of the coevolutionary process (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981; Alexander,
1990), unifying genes, and mind, and
culture rather than separating them.
On the other hand, social norms are a
subject matter for our free will and values and, as such, indicate the dynamic
nature of human evolution, of which
we are at the same time both products
and shapers. One may put things in an
even more complicated way. The last
two million years of evolution pushed
human fathers to participate more and
more in childrearing (Mellen, 1981;
Lovejoy, 1988; Klein, 1989) and egalitarian ideologies are part of that very
process, but the ancient biological base
is still a real challenge for these new
winds, demanding strong determination on the reformers’ part.

2. The higher parental investment of
mothers in comparison to fathers exposes them to threat of desertion, and
they become more vulnerable in the
marital relationships. Levels of relative vulnerability are, as predicted,
strongly connected to levels of investment, and therefore women are more
vulnerable. Any kind of exchange
model (e.g., Homans, 1961; Thibaut
and Kelley, 1959; Blood and Wolfe,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

76 Lampert and Friedman

WOMEN:

   

Moral Self

Relative =_4
Vulnerability P=

p=—.32

MEN:

  
       
     
    
   
   

Moral Self

P=,

Relative
Vulnerability

 

Decomposition of Variance
Vulnerability and Cardiovascular
Disorders via Moral Self

  

     
  
 

Cardiovascular
Disorders

Decomposition of Variance
Vulnerability and Cardiovascular
Disorders via Moral Self

Cardiovascular
Disorders

 

Social Biology

    
   
 
   

  

effect coefficient
causal direct
causal indirect

26

   

effect coefficient
causal direct
causal indirect

Fic. 6.—Path analysis for the relations of relative vulnerability with cardiovascular disorders, via

moral-self, by sex (N = 100).

1960; Winch, 1971; Safilios-Rothschild, 1976) may well explain the lesser
interest of a partner with a lesser investment and his easier decision, or
temptation, to go away. But in order to
explain why the less interested partner

is usually the father, and why women
enter, again and again, such a kind of
partnership, we prefer to think in
terms of a long path, starting at biological structures which influence social norms and in a way shape the par
 
2015

tH
2
5

oO
oO

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 De

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

ents’ bargaining. Being the more
interested partners, women feel themselves in danger of desertion, feel
themselves dependent on _ their
spouses, and these are the feelings we
have called “relative vulnerability.”
The higher interest women have in
their children, and hence in the partnership, is a function of both what she
had invested in the past and what a new
start will demand of her in the future
(Dawkins, 1976). The fear of desertion
is, of course, a function of the great
help fathers are giving, which mothers
have learned to expect. Evolution that
encourages fathers to participate more
and more in childrearing is increasing
by that very move the mothers’ expectations and fears.

3. The state of relative vulnerability
is liable to interfere with mental health,
increasing levels of anxiety and depression. We have started our paper with
the uneven figures of anxiety and depression according to sex, and now we
are able to say that mothers in our sample are suffering from more anxiety
and deeper depression than fathers do,
and these are connected to relative vulnerability. The logic is simple. Relative
vulnerability is a state of apprehension,
of uncertainty, perhaps of helplessness, and all of these increase anxiety
and depression (Brown and Harris,
1978). Thus, we find that very basic
normal functions—like being a mother
who invests in children more than does
a father and is in a state of relative
vulnerability—are capable of causing
emotional symptoms. On the other
hand, we are not saying that we have
any information regarding incidences
or epidemiology. All our women are
healthy, would not enter any incidence
statistics, and the relations of relative

Parental Investment

77

vulnerability to anxiety and depression
among them cannot be interpreted in
clinical terms without further examinations.

4. Along with emotional damage,
relative vulnerability also causes positive healthy effects by strengthening the
family and the moral-self. At first look,
this last conclusion seems to contradict
our prediction of negative effects as a
result of relative vulnerability. Nevertheless, we feel that these results are
consistent with the evolutionary frame
of reference. Family and moral-self are
evaluations one makes of one’s self in
regard to social norms dictating ‘“correct” behavior, especially marital behavior. When these evaluations grow
positively along with increasing relative vulnerability, which grows with parental investment, then we can look at
these social norms, or rules of ethics, as
mechanisms that encourage the parents to invest more. The culture
(Barkow, 1980, 1989) and morality
(Ullock and Wagner, 1980) become essential parts of human evolution, selecting all along the way the best available mechanisms to guarantee
successful parental investment. One
may always predict a delicate balance
between the selection of means which
increase genetic profits on one hand
and means which counter the price of
such profitable means on the other
hand. If parental investment is a profitable mean, and relative vulnerability
(with anxiety and depression) is the
price, then morality is the counter
mean. The positive and negative zones
of Figure 2 are a topographic expression of such a balance.

Religious morality traditionally supports the weak as a kind of compensation for their vulnerability. As such,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

78 Lampert and Friedman

morality seems to be the product of
good minds with a well developed
sense of justice. But when parental investment enters the picture, we begin
to wonder if morality is more than that.
After all, any factor, cultural or genetic, capable of motivating human behavior is a subject for natural selection
(Lumsden, 1989); and morality is
doubtless such a factor. Thus, we assume, parents who are encouraged by
moral laws to continue their efforts of
investing in their children could do a
better job. Such a line of reasoning
takes the copyrights for morality from
Judaism and Christianity far back to
the African savanna, but the function
is the same. Giving prizes to the vulnerable, celebrating the weak, encouraging them to go on. In other words,
one may see the family and moral self,
raised by the state of relative vulnerability as psychological mechanisms that
strengthen the parents in the hard task
of caring for their children.

5. Relative vulnerability responds
sensitively to situational changes, and
the woman reaches the summit of her
vulnerability, when she has young children. Figure 3 shows the rise and fall of
the woman’s relative vulnerability in
accord with the different stages of the
family life cycle. Apart from the support these results give to our central
thesis, showing the connection between parental investment and vulnerability without measuring parental investment, two facts are of special
interest.

First, although we consider vulnerability to be a product of different parental investment and different parental strategies selected by evolutionary
processes, it is obvious that vulnerability cannot be considered to be a “‘fem
 

Social Biology

inine trait” since it changes along the
female life span, depending on what
she is doing rather than on what she Is.
Second, in all stages, women are more
vulnerable than men, even before they
marry. That means that some amount
of sensitivity does exist as a special
feminine trait.

Are the first and the second contradictory claims? In a way, they are contradictory, but that is the nature of our
mixed thesis, assuming innate inclinations resulting from parental strategies
(women are the sex who has to be sensitive to the danger of desertion, to
identify the vulnerability, and perhaps
take fit measures to prevent it) along
with great freedom to respond to the
situation in which one is acting. As a
matter of fact, flexible reactions to the
environment are innate abilities selected by evolution.

6. In some aspects relative vulnerability affects women in other ways than
men. It damages the physical-self of
women more than that of men, decreases the personal-self of women and
increases that of men, and affects positively the cardiovascular function of
women and negatively that of men.
Looking at Figures 4 and 5, one gets
the impression that relative vulnerability means different things to women as
opposed to men. The vulnerable
woman is most sensitive to her
physical-self, suffers damage to her
personal self, while the vulnerable man
enjoys a better personal-self. These
differences can be well understood in
terms of different parental strategies.
The high investment of women commits them strongly to their children
and hence to the marital unit. Knowing
the smaller commitment of her spouse
and the temptation he feels toward
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 39, No. 1~2

other women, a wife enters a state of
relative vulnerability, fearing the attractiveness of any other women
around her, and feels a decline in her
own attractiveness and self-satisfaction. There is some contribution here
to the well-known phenomenon of a
greater concern by females about their
attractiveness in comparison to males
(e.g., Eme, 1974; Pomerants, 1979;
Townsend, 1989). The next step of interpretation, assuming that the woman
is doing whatever seems appropriate to
increase her attractiveness to the male,
is saying that her concern should predict measures a wife takes in order to
prevent the potential desertion threatening her (like being more coquettish).

The story of the vulnerable man is
different. Although he is vulnerable
because he invests much in his children, he is by no means investing more
than his spouse does; hence his fear of
desertion is smaller and so is his need
to increase his attractiveness. He has
another type stress. If evolution by
means of natural selection did encourage fathers, who had to cope with the
hard life in the savanna, to assist their
wives in childrearing (Mellen, 1981;
Lovejoy, 1988), then acute conflict
should emerge within the males’ motivational system. Along with this ‘“‘new”’
trend of fatherhood, there is still room
for the ancient maleness, pursuing easy
genetic profits by inseminating as many
women as possible without helping

Parental Investment

79

them to look after the children. The
moral code serves to give powerful
support to the male who becomes a
good father, increasing his positive
personal-self, but the conflict, we believe, is still there. The good father is a
male who neglects other opportunities
around him and has to repress those
drives which go counter to familial devotion. Cardiovascular disorders have
been partially attributed to strict selfcontrol (Appels, 1979), and therefore
we suggest a positive connection of
men’s vulnerability (see Figure 6) to
cardiovascular disorders as an expression of the conflict in their parental
Strategies and the need of the vulnerable man to repress the promiscuous
male. The mediation of the moral-self
in these connections supports the idea.
The fact that for women the connections are reversed indicates the absence of conflict between the new
moral rules and the ancient parental
strategies of mothers, always investing
a lot and highly devoted.

One may ask why evolution could
not pick up a clear course for fathers
too, preferring, for instance, the devotion of the father to his family? Our answer is simple. Evolution plans nothing. Every successful trait continues
and because of the minimal initia] biological investment of the father, promiscuity can succeed even in the era of
heavy qualitative investments of two
parents for every child.

REFERENCES

ALEXANDER, R. D. 1990, Epigenetic rules and
Darwinian alogarithims. Ethol. Sociobiol.
11:241-303.

AppLes, A. A. 1979. Psychosocial model of the
pathogenesis of coronary heart disease. Ged
rad: Tijdschrift voor Psychologie 7:6~21.

Barasu, D. P. 1980. Human reproductive strategies: A sociobiologic overview. In J.S.
Lockard (ed.), The evolution of human social
behavior. Elsevier, New York.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Lampert and Friedman

——-. 1981. Sociobiology: The whisperings
within. William Collins Sons and Co., Glasgow.

Barpwick, J. M. 1979. In transition. Holt, Rinehart, and Wilson, New York.

Barkow, J. H. 1979. Biological evolution of culturally patterned behavior. Jn J. S. Lockard
(ed.), The evolution of human social behavjor. Elsevier, New York.

. 1989. The elastic between genes and culture. Ethol. Sociobiol. 10:111-130. [000c]
BetziGc, L., M. BorGeERHOFF MULDER, and P.
TurRkE (eds.). 1988. Human reproductive behavior. Cambridge University Press, Lon
don.

Boop, R.O., and D. M. Wo tre. 1960. Husbands and wives: The dynamics of marriage
living. Free Press, Glencoe.

Brown, G. W., and T. Harris. 1978. Social origins of depression: A study of psychiatric disorder in women. Tavistock Pub., London.

Dawkins, R. 1976. The selfish gene. Oxford
University Press, New York.

DOHRENWEND, B., and B. DOHRENWEND. 1969.
Social status and psychological disorder.
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York.

. 1974, Social and cultural influences on
psychopathology. Jn M. Rosenzweig and L.
Porter (eds.), Annual review of psychology,
25. Palo Alto, California.

DoneEtson, E., and J. E. Guitanorn. 1977.
Women: A psychological perspective. John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York.

DSM III. 1985. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders. Third edition.

Eme, R.F. 1974. Sex differences in childhood
psychopathology: A review. Psychol. Bull.
86:574-599.

Erpwins, C., A. Smarr, and R. Gross. 1980.
The relationship of sex-role to self concept. J.
Clin. Psychol. 36:111~—115.

Fitts, W. H. 1965. Tennessee self concept scale
(manual). Counselor Recordings and Tests.
Nashville.

FRANK, S.J., P. A. ToweLL_, and M. Huyck.
1985. The effect of sex role traits on three
aspects of psychological well being in a sample of middle aged women. Sex Roles
12:1073-1087.

FREEDMAN, A. M., H. I. Kapitan, and B. J. Sanpox. 1980. Comprehensive textbook of psychiatry (3rd ed.). Williams and Wilkins Company, Baltimore.

Garal, J. E. 1970. Sex differences in mental
health. Genet. Psychol. Monog. 81:123-142.

GILLespteE, D. 1971. Who has the power? The
marital struggle. J. Marr. Fam. 33:445-458.

GUTTMANN, D. 1987. Reclaimed powers: Toward a new psychology of men and women in
later life. Basic Books, New York.

HEER, D.N. 1963. Dominance and the working
wife. In I.F. Nye (ed.), The employed

 

 

Social Biology

 

mother in America. McNally and Co., Chi
cago.

Homans, G.C. 1961. Social behavior: Its elementary forms. Harcourt Brace, New York.

KiEIn, R. G. 1989. The human career: Human
biological and cultural origins. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Levitt, E. E., and B. Lubin. 1975. Depression:
Concepts, controversies, and some new facts.
Springer, New York.

Lovesoy, O. C. 1988. Evolution of human walking. Sci. Amer. 259(5):82-89.

LumspEN, C. J. 1989. Does culture need genes?
Ethol. Sociobiol. 10:9-28.

LumspEN, C.J., and E.O. Witson. 1981.
Genes, mind, and culture. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Maccosy, E., and C. Jackin. 1974. The psychology of sex differences. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

MELLEN, S. L. W. 1981. The evolution of love.
S.H. Freeman and Company, Oxford and
San Francisco.

Nock, S. L. 1949. The family life cycle: Empirical or conceptual tool? J. Marr. Fam. 41:15~
25.

Oakes, R. 1984. Sex patterns in DSM III. Amer.
Psychol. 39:1320-1322.

Parsons, T. 1955. Family structure and the socialization of the child, p. 35-131. Jn T. Parsons and F. R. Bales (eds.}, Family, socialization and interaction process, III. Free
Press, Glencoe.

PomMeRANTS, S.C. 1979. Sex differences in the
relative importance of self esteem, physical
satisfaction, and identity in predicting adolescent satisfaction. J. Youth Adol. 8:51-61.

RICHMOND, M. L. 1976. Beyond resource theory:
Another look at factors enabling women to
affect family interaction. J. Marr. Fam.
38:257-266.

Rotuins, B. C., and H. Fetpman. 1970. Marital
satisfaction over the family life cycle. J.
Marr. Fam. 32:20-28.

Rosst, A. B. 1977. A biosocial perspective on
parenting. Daedalus 106:1-32.

. 1984. Gender and parenthood. Amer.
Sociol. Rev. 49:1-19.

SAFILIOS-ROTHSCHILD, C. 1976. A macro and micro examination of family power and love:
An exchange model. J. Marr. Fam. 38:355362.

SaTIR, V. 1970. Marriage as a human actualizing
contract. In H. A. Otto (ed.), The family in
search of a future. Meredith Corp., New
York.

SHEPHER, J. 1978. Reflections on the origins of
the human pair bond. J. Soc. Bio. Struct.
1:253-264.

SHEPHER, J., and L. Ticer. 1982. Kibbutz and
parental investment. Jn P. A. Hare, H. Herbert, V. Blumberg, V. Kint, and M. Davies
(eds.), Small groups: Social-psychological

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

processes, social action and living together.
John Wiley and Sons, New York.

SPIELBERGER, C. D., R. L. Gorsucn, and B. E.
LusHENE. 1970. Manual for the state, trait
anxiety inventory (self evaluation questionnaire). Consulting Psychologist Press, Palo
Alto, California.

THIBAUT, J. W., and H. H. KELtey. 1959. The
social psychology of groups. Wiley, New
York.

TiGcer, L., and J. SHEPHER. 1975. Women in the
kibbutz. Brace, Jovanovich, Harcourt, New
York.

TOWNSEND, J. M. 1989. Mate selection criteria.
Ethol. Sociobiol. 10:241-—253.

Trivers, R. L. 1972. Parental investment and
sexual selection. /n B. Campbell (ed.), Sexual selection and the descent of man, 1871
Parental Investment $1

1971. Aldine, Chicago.

ULLock, B., and N. N. Wacner. 1980. The evolution of human sexual behavior. Jn J.S.
Lockard (ed.), The evolution of human social
behavior. Elsevier, New York.

VAN DEN BERGHE, P. L. 1980. The human family:
A sociobiological look. Jn J. S. Lockard, The
evolution of human social behavior. Elsevier,
New York.

. 1979. Human family systems, an evolutionary view. Elsevier, New York.

Wivom, C. S. 1984. Sex roles and psychopathol]ogy. Plenum, New York.

WHITLEY, B.E. 1983. Sex-role orientation and
self- esteem: A critical meta-analytic review.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 44:765-778.

Wincu, F. R. 1971. The modern family. Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, New York.

 
