Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Defining and measuring the supply of children:
Some anthropological considerations

Sarah F. Harbison

To cite this article: Sarah F. Harbison (1983) Defining and measuring the supply
of children: Some anthropological considerations, Social Biology, 30:1, 32-40, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1983.9988514

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988514

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Defining and Measuring the Supply of Children:
Some Anthropological Considerations

Sarah F. Harbison

Population Issues Research Center
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania

 

ABSTRACT: Recent versions of the economic theory of fertility have attempted to make the
framework more generally applicable to all types of populations through an explicit treatment
of supply considerations in combination with an analysis of the determinants of demand.
Easterlin has suggested that the supply of children to an individual couple is determined by
biological constraints in combination with the Davis-Blake intermediate variables and with
mortality patterns. However, anthropological studies of household structure, fertility,
adoption, and migration point to a broader definition of the supply of children and to a more
dynamic view of the ways in which supply and demand for household members are adjusted

over the life-cycle of the household.

Over the past several decades, research on the economics of fertility has
proliferated. Early studies (Liebenstein, 1957, 1974; Becker, 1960) emphasized the demand for children, pointing
out that demand for children, as for any
commodity, is determined by income,
price, and tastes. Of these three factors,
the economists have paid the most attention to income and prices, assuming
for the most part that tastes remained
constant. Numerous studies have evaluated the impact on fertility of various
measures of income and the costs of children relative to other goods.

This demand-oriented approach has
been criticized by many as applying only
to modernized, contracepting populations and not to the typical less developed country (LDC).

In an attempt to make economic
models of fertility more generally relevant, Easterlin (1975) and his colleagues
(Easterlin et al., 1980) have developed
an expanded economic framework
which includes supply considerations as
well as demand factors.

32

A more comprehensive economic framework remains the best point of departure
for systematic fertility arfalysis. Such a
framework, however, must be able to include the principal concepts of demographers, sociologists, and other scholars of
human fertility, and it must be relevant to
fertility behavior in a wide range of circumstances, past and present—to the
trends, differentials, and fluctuations in —
fertility observed throughout human history (Easterlin, 1975, p. 54).

According to Easterlin, the supply
(or production) of children in a noncontracepting population 1s determined by
biological constraints on fertility in combination with mortality, morbidity, nutrition, and the “intermediate variables” (Davis and Blake, 1956). He
suggests that in the course of modernization there is a shift from supply-constrained fertility to demand-constrained
fertility. In other words, ‘“‘the process of
modernization alters not the rationality
of the individual, but the nature of the
problem from one of having too few
children to one of having too many”
(Easterlin, 1975 p. 54). In the early
 

Vol. 30, No. 1

stages of development, fertility is supply
constrained by C, (supply), with demand (or Cz) above it. As development
proceeds, supply may exceed demand
and is equated to it through contraception (Easterlin, 1975, pp. 54-53). Excess
demand gives way to excess supply.

The various components of the demand for children, including both values
(psychological and economic) and costs

(Production and consumption) have
=been analyzed and debated in eco“nomic, anthropological, and psychologSical literature (Arnold et al., 1975; Hofofman and Hoffman, 1973; Mueller,
41973; Nag, 1972; and others). While
ccthere are still important disagreements
qabout this topic, the issues have been
‘widely discussed and differences in in=terpretation made clear. The concept of
rathe supply of children, however, has not
Sheen so thoroughly scrutinized.
The purpose of this paper is to con2 sider sociocultural, demographic, and
6 economic factors related to the supply of
children in traditional or premodern
o 8 populations and to discuss the implicaEtions of this essentially anthropological
“literature for the Easterlin model and
Seconomic models of fertility in general.
8 This review will focus on four issues: the
S appropriate unit of analysis; the source
gof supply; the time-frame for the study
Sof supply; and the micro (or family)
mechanisms for the adjustment of supply within the framework of a macro (or
societal) population equilibrium.

Let

UNIT OF ANALYSIS

Implicit in the economic framework
proposed by Easterlin is the assumption
that the appropriate unit of analysis in
the study of both supply and demand is
the individual couple. Although he does
refer to the household and the family as

Supply of Children

 

33

the unit within which maximization occurs, Easterlin uses ‘‘couple’’ interchangeably with ‘‘household’’ (Easterlin, 1975, p. 54-55). For example,
Easterlin uses “the total number of surviving children to a representative martied couple as the principal dependent
variable” (Easterlin, 1975, p. 54). It
may seem somewhat strange to suggest
that the unit of production (and hence
the appropriate unit of fertility analysis)
is other than the individual couple.
However, cultural institutions such as
adoption, fosterage (see Carroll, 1970,
and Brady, 1976, for excellent reviews),
and kinship obligations expand the appropriate unit of analysis to the extended family, and to the larger society.
Focusing on births to an individual female or to a couple ignores one of the
major characteristics of many traditional and developing societies. Individuals frequently live in households comprised of extended families of one type
or another. The household, typically

part of a larger unit such as the lineage

or clan, is the unit within which resources, including children, are produced, allocated, and shared. Furthermore, this household unit is linked to
other such units in the society through
ties of kinship, marriage, and other culturally determined reciprocal obligations.

Kinship systems may expand the appropriate unit of analysis by the way in
which terms are assigned to various categories of relatives. For example,
Hoebel (1960, p. 23) points out that a
Cheyenne man would call the children
of his brothers and male cousins by the
same kinship terms as his own children.
This identification with the same kinship
term does not imply that there are no
differences between a man’s biological
offspring and the children of his brother.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

34 Harbison

The term does, however, imply certain
financial and behavioral obligations on
both sides. As Robert Lowie pointed
out, “if a term embraces a number of individuals, the probability is that the
speaker is linked to all of them by the
same set of mutual duties and claims,
though their intensity may vary with the
closeness of the relationship” (1968, p.
39). Kinship systems of this sort have actually been widespread in the history of
populations (see Bohannan and Middleton, 1968) and imply a broadening of the
concept of supply of children.

Easterlin’s assumption that the nuclear couple is the appropriate unit of
analysis is brought further into question
by the wide variability in marital arrangements and household structure
documented by sociologists and anthropologists. For example, Blake (1961)
has demonstrated the depressing effect
of unstable unions in Jamaica on fertility. Davis and Blake (1956) have outlined the effects of various types of family structure on fertility, with particular
emphasis on those factors which promote high fertility. Gray and Gulliver
(1964) present a collection of African
studies dealing with aspects of matrilineage, polygyny, residence patterns, and
the structure of the family. These
studies, among many others, indicate
that there is wide variability in the
definition of the family group, in the cultural definition of who children belong
to, and in the sociocultural definition of
rights and obligations of various categories of relatives to children.

There has been considerable debate
in the literature concerning the impact
of extended family structure on fertility
(Nag, 1962; Davis and Blake, 1956;
Lorimer, 1954; Burch and Gendell,
1971), but this is not the main concern
here. Rather the importance of taking

 

Social Biology

variability in family structure into account when attempting to evaluate the
utility of economic models of fertility for
developing populations is emphasized.
Burch and Gendell’s (1971) methodological suggestions are relevant here:

It will be essential to distinguish between
coresidence and kin interaction, to define
more carefully the various types of family
structure, to keep the time reference for
fertility (current or cumulative) congruent with that of family structure (crosssectional or longitudinal), to take into account marriage patterns, and last but
hardly least, to be more alert to the possibility of contrary causal factors (Burch
and Gendell, 1971, p. 102).

SOURCE OF SUPPLY

Given these brief remarks about the
complex networks of families, kinship
ties, and social obligations that are characteristic of traditional societies, the
suggestion that it is not the individual
woman who is the sole source of supply
of children may not seem so surprising.
Although Easterlin assumes that supply
of children to the household is determined by the physiological capacity of
the couple to reproduce, combined with
social customs which determine age at
marriage and other exposure variables,
this assumption is not appropriate in
many populations. If the extended
household is the subsistence unit within
which labor and goods are allocated and
the demand for children determined,
then it is the reproductive potential of all
of the women living in the household
which represents the internal source of
supply of children to that household.

In addition to the births of the several
women of reproductive age living in a
household, children may be acquired by
adoption and fosterage. Easterlin mentions this in passing (1975, p. 56) but asDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 1

sumes it is “quantitatively unimportant.” Actually it is a widespread practice
in many traditional and modern societies, and the advantages of the practice
have been well documented:

Viewed from the perspective of emotional, social, and economic situations
which motivate people to adopt children,
adoption is a multipurpose social mechanism with which people may implement
their needs and designs through relationships with their kinsmen. Adoption may
be to acquire children and to relieve parents of the burden of their children’s support. Adoption can be used to provide
children with parents and siblings. Adoption may be used to acquire land or taro
plots and to withhold them from another,
to acquire heirs, and to establish, maintain, or sever social relationships with
kinsmen and to promote change. It may
be a means of acquiring prestige, political
support, financial credit, labor, or emotional succor (Lieber, 1970, p. 203).

In other words, adoption provides an
additional way of recruiting household
members, augmenting the number of
births to the female members of the
household with additional children.
Contrary to what Easterlin suggests,
the practice of adoption seems to have
been widespread throughout history in
societies with many different types of social organization. The prevalence of
adoption has been documented in Africa, New Guinea (Lorimer, 1954;
Ware, 1977), China (Wolf, 1980), Polynesia (Brady, 1976; Carroll, 1970;

‘Mead, 1930), the Caribbean (Clarke,

1966; Blake, 1961), and Japan (Davis,
1963; Hanley, 1977; Lee, 1977). In evaluating the importance of adoption in
Tokugawa, Japan, Lee points out the
widespread practice of adoption: ““Combining data from four villages, there
were almost half as many adoptions as
marriages. The adoptions were used to
compensate for child deaths, to divest

Supply of Children 35

families of ‘excess’ children, and to ensure the existence of a male heir” (1977,
p. 10). Although adoption varies in importance among societies, Marion Levy
has suggested “‘some form of adoption is
universal in all known societies” (1966,
p. 425).

Adoption as an alternative form of
group recruitment serves multiple functions. Silverman (1970, p. 13) has
pointed out that “culture copes with the
insufficiencies of nature.” Where there
is a “gap” in the desired household age
structure, adoption may be used to remedy the situation. Numerous welldocumented studies indicate that adoption works in this way (Brady, 1976;
Carroll, 1970). Carroll points out that
there is a demonstrated correlation ‘“‘between the rate of adoption and the rate
of infecundity”’ (1970, p. 11). In a study
of the Nukuro, Carroll also found that
adoption was related to the failure of the
female to bear a child: “‘all childless
married couples who had been married
five years or more had adopted at least
one child”’ (1970, p. 121).

Adoption may be used to replace infants and children who have died, to acquire children of a desired age, or to relieve parents of too many children.
Carroll has suggested that infertility is
not the only explanation of high adoption rates: ‘‘many people adopt other
peoples’ children after their own have
grown up, or to complete a family with
young children of a particular sex, or to
substitute for a deceased child” (1970,
p. 12). In addition to broadening the
source of supply of household members,
adoption may serve numerous social
and political purposes as well. The creation of political alliances (Brady, 1976),
the fulfilling of kinship obligations, and
the adjustment of household size to
changing resources are all possible func
 
 

 

 

 

36 Harbison

tions of adoption. As Brady (1976, p.
271) has pointed out, “‘by creating new
or reinforcing existing kinship relations,
adoption actualizes or extends the range
of sociability, resource sharing, and
population survival.”

In contrast to Easterlin’s assumption
that the supply of children to a household is determined by the number of
births to an individual woman combined

with infant mortality, it seems clear that
in many traditional societies the supply
“of children to a household is determined
y the age and fertility patterns of the
gwomen of the household and infant
Anortality patterns, as well as the ability
sef the household to acquire infants and
cshildren from outside sources. This abilcity is determined by the kinship system
‘and social, political, and economic sta‘tus of the household in the context of a
particular cultural system.
ca

THE TIME-FRAME FOR THE
STUDY OF SUPPLY

_& The analysis of the demographic
‘Structure of the household requires a
nsideration of biological, social, and
‘Scological factors. Individuals have ba‘ies not only to have babies, but to have
OO.
Zhildren, young adults, and eventually
‘adults who may (or may not) remain
within the household. In traditional soCleties, a particular household structure
is desired as well as a certain number of
births. If this is the case, then the appropriate time frame for fertility analysis
(including both supply and demand factors) is the life-cycle of the household.
At this point it is virtually impossible to
discuss supply factors independent of
demand factors.
An ecological-demographic approach to these issues suggests that at
each stage in the life-cycle of the house
versity of Mic

Social Biology

hold, supply of personnel must be adjusted to the labor requirements and to
the social and economic resources of the
household. In any society there will be
differences among households in both
the supply of and demand for children,
even if modern methods of contraception are absent. Differences among
households in the age distribution and
fecundity of married women, as well as
differential requirements for supply in
households of different economic and
social status, can motivate transfers of
infants and children of various ages.
Adjustment of household structure
includes both recruitment when new
members are needed and removal of
surplus members. The mechanisms of
adjustment vary for different age and
sex groups at different stages in the life
cycle of the household. Infants can be
provided to the household either by
birth or by adoption. Excess infants may
be put up for adoption or, in some societies, may be killed. As children grow
older, losses through mortality may be
replaced through adoption and fosterage. Typically, as children become
young adults, some household members
are removed by the process of migration
or marriage. Hooper summarizes the
development process of the household
and the role that adoption and migration
play in Tahiti:
Having raised, fed, and cared for their
children while they were young and helpless, the parents can expect their children
to repay the obligation in kind as the children establish their own marital unions,
This obligation falls equally upon all children, yet not all of them can remain
within the household after they have established their own marital unions. Some
will undoubtedly leave the community altogether, particularly those who belong
to sibling groups who do not have land.

Others settle within the community, either in new households, or in those to
Vol. 30, No. 1

which their spouses already belong. Yet
at least one must remain within the natal
- household, bringing in his or her spouse,
so that the household acquires the three
generational span which it will maintain
until the death of the members of the
older generation. . . . In Maupiti, where
the emigration of young people is so common, the adoption of grandchildren is a
mechanism through which the economically necessary sequence of household
development is maintained (Hooper,

i __:1970, p. 68).

R

In addition to planning for the cure rent and future labor force needs of the
3 household, social obligations must be

Q provided for as well. For example, in
© many traditional societies, daughters
&) are exchanged among lineages for mar“ riage. “‘Adoption provides a means for
obtaining women for subgroups within a
‘S lineage who have no daughters” (Brady,
= 1976, p. 282). In addition, son survivor= ship provides motivation for acquiring,
< through birth or adoption, a male child
© who will come of age at the appropriate
‘Z time. The main lesson of all this for
S modeling supply aspects of fertility is
5 that births, rights to adopt, and “specific
‘>, obligations to give up children in adop“ tion are merely part of more general obligations between certain categories of
kin: this seems evident in all societies
that practice adoption on a large scale”
(Carroll, 1970, p. 14).

Thus, the balance between Cy (demand for children) and C,, (supply) is a
dynamic one which may shift over time.
The determinants of demand are diverse, including value and cost of children, size of the family holdings, family
structure, kinship structure and obligations, demand for labor within the
household labor force, relative status of
the household within the larger society,
and preferences and values associated
with family size. Any one or more of

8

d

oO
co
3
©
—
c
S
©
A

Supply of Children 37

these factors may shift at a particular
time. Adoption is one possible adjustment mechanism:

Adoption is an adaptive mechanism for
equitably distributing people relative to
the variable requirements for personnel
that domestic and descent groups are
likely to develop in the course of exploiting their physical and cultural environments over time (Brady, 1976, p. 271).

In other words, adoption is a resource management strategy. There
must be fairly strong adoptive advantages to the practice because, as Hooper
(1970) has pointed out in his review of
Polynesian populations, adoption is extremely widespread, being found in a
wide variety of social and economic conditions. It is common in relatively
wealthy as well as poorer communities
and it is “common among the urban
wage laborers of Papeete and the peasant communities of the outer islands”
(Hooper, 1970, p. 66). The flexibility
that adoption provides the household to
expand or contract in time of greater or
lesser personnel needs and greater or
lesser resources is an obvious advantage.

MICRO ADJUSTMENTS AND
MACRO EQUILIBRIUM

The Easterlin framework assumes
that each household attempts to reach
its own fertility equilibrium such that demand and supply are equated. Thus
when supply constraints result in relatively low fertility on the average,
households do not contracept and excess demand exists. Similarly, at a later
point in development, ‘“‘a household
wishing to reduce family size must necessarily adopt some technique of fertility limitation” (Easterlin, 1975, p. 56).
As we have seen, this view is too narrow
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

38

and ignores the exchanges among
households in children which routinely
occur in all societies, but particularly in
premodern ones. These exchanges can
be presumed to allocate children from
households with excess supply to ones
with excess demand. In other words it is
not necessary that all households begin
with an equilibrium situation (supply= demand), only that society as a whole
be capable of achieving such an equilibrium after the redistribution or transfer
mechanisms have come into play. Thus,
the concept of a ‘‘market”’ for children
(or family members) in the society as a
whole is relevant.

In this larger context, some households are ‘‘buyers’’ and others are
‘‘sellers.”’ A middle-class peasant
farmer who lacks sons can adopt one,
buy one, or have a daughter marry one.
This can occur as well even if natural
sons exist but more family labor is desired. Poor landless families can get rid
of “excess” fertility by selling, loaning
out, or giving away children to relatives
or families with excess demand. If we
think of children as a marketable good,
then a household can always obtain its
optimum fertility (or family age-sex
structure).

This logic suggests that where it is
possible for family units to trade in the
existing overall supply of children, then
the aggregated demand and supply must
be equated and the market cleared. To

_ think of an overall excess demand for

children is no more helpful than to think
of premodern societies as having an excess demand for modern consumer
goods or any other given commodity.
The crucial point is that in all societies, traditional and modern, there are
biological and sociocultural mechanisms
which adjust supply and demand. The
adjustment mechanisms occur within

Harbison

Social Biology

the household, which forms the link between individual behavior and needs
and the larger society. There is a wide
range of mechanisms available to any
given household for the purpose of increasing or decreasing household personnel of all ages.

The term “multiphasic response,”
used by Davis (1963) to describe the various factors which contributed to the
rapid fertility decline in Japan after
World War II, is relevant here. Abortion, contraception, delayed marriage,
and migration were all a part of the multiphasic response. Davis suggests that
“families tended to use every demographic means possible to maximize
their new opportunities and avoid loss of
status. An understanding of this process
in population theory has been hindered
by a failure to see the multiphasic character of the response... .”’ (Davis,
1963, p. 366).

SUMMARY

Although Easterlin assumes that contraception is the most important way in
which supply is adjusted to demand, a
review of anthropological and sociological literature indicates that adoption,
marriage patterns, and migration, as
well as variations in kinship systems may
also be used to influence the supply of
children. These mechanisms become
more evident when supply ts analyzed in
the context of the life-cycle of the household.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am grateful to Dr. Thelma Baker, Dr.
Warren Robinson, and Dr. David Shapiro,
for helpful comments on an early draft to this
paper. Useful suggestions for revisions were
made by several reviewers.

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 1

Supply of Children

39

REFERENCES

BEcKER, G. 1960. An economic theory of fertility analysis, p. 209-231. In Demographic
and economic change in developed countries. National Bureau of Economic Research. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.

ARNOLD, F. et al. 1975. The value of children: a
cross national study. East-West Pop. Inst.,
Honolulu.

BLAKE, JupITH. 1961. Family structure in Jamaica. The social context of reproduction.
The Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois.

BOHANNAN, P., and J. MIDDLETON 1968. Kinship and social organization. The Natural
History Press, New York.

Brapy, Ivan (ed.). 1976. Transactions in kinship. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

. 1976. Adaptive engineering: An overview of adoption in Oceania. In I. Brady
(ed.), Transactions in kinship. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

Burcu, T., and M. GEeNDELL. 1971. Extended
family structure and fertility: Some conceptual and methodological issues. /n S. Polgar
(ed.), Culture and population. Schenkman
Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.

CALDWELL, JOHN. 1977. The persistence of high
fertility. Dept. of Demography, Australian
National University, Canberra.

CarRROLL, V. (ed.). 1970. Adoption in Eastern
Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

. 1970. Adoption on Nukuro. Jn V. Car
roll (ed.), Adoption in Eastern Oceania.

Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

. 1970. What does adoption mean? In V.
Carroll (ed.), Adoption in Eastern
Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

CLARKE, E. 1966. My mother who fathered me.
Allen and Unwin, London.

Davis, K. 1963. The theory of change and response in modern demographic history.
Pop. Index 29(4):345-366.

Davis, K., and J. BLAKE. 1956. Social structure
and fertility: An analytical framework.
Econ. Develop. Cult. Change, 4:211-235.

EaSTERLIN, R. A., R. A. PoLiak, and M. L.
WacutTeER. 1975. An economic framework
for fertility analysis. Stud. Fam. Plan.
6:(3):54-64.

. 1980. Toward a more general economic model of fertility determination: endogenous preferences and natural fertility.
InR. A. Easterlin (ed.), Population and economic change in developing countries.
Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Gray, R. F., and P. H. Gutriver. 1964. The
family estate in Africa: Studies of the role of
property in family structure and lineage

 

continuity. Routledge and Kegan Paul,
London.

HANLEY, SUSAN B. 1977. The influence of economic and social variables on marriage and
fertility in eighteenth and nineteenth century Japanese villages. In R. D. Lee (ed.),
Population patterns in the past. Academic
Press, New York.

HoeseL, E. Apamson. 1960. The Cheyennes,
Indians of the Great Plains. Holt, Rhinehart
and Winston, New York.

HorrMan, L. W., and M. L. Horrman. 1973.
The value of children to parents. Jn J. T.
Fawcett (ed.), Psychological perspectives
on population. Basic Books, New York.

Hooper, ANTHONY. 1970. Adoption in the Society Islands. Jn V. Carroll (ed.), Adoption
in Eastern Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press,
Honolulu.

Kincston, M. H. 1980. China men. Ballantine
Books, New York.

LEE, R. L. (ed.). 1977. Population patterns in
the past. Academic Press, New York.

LEIBENSTEIN, H. 1957. Economic backwardness and economic growth: Studies in the
theory of economic development. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

. 1974, An interpretation of the economic theory of fertility: Promising path or
blind alley. J. Econ. Lit. 13(June):457-479.

Levy, M. 1966. Modernization and the structure of societies. Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton.

LieBer, M. D. 1970. Adoption on Kapingamarangi. In V. Carroll (ed.), Adoption in
Eastern Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press,
Honolulu.

LorIMER, FRANK. 1954. Culture and human fertility. UNESCO, Paris.

Lowte, Roserrt. 1968. Relationship terms. Jn
P, Bohannan and J. Middleton (eds.), Kinship and social organization. Natural History Press, New York.

Meap, M. 1930. Social organization of Manua.
Bernice B. Bishop Museum, Honlulu.

MUELLER, E. 1973. Economic cost and value of
children: Conceptualization and measurement. In J. T. Fawcett (ed.), The satisfactions and costs of children: Theories, concepts, and methods. East-West Population
Institute, Honlulu.

Nac, Monl. 1962. Factors affecting human fertility in nonindustrial society: A crosscultural study. Yale Univ. Publications in
Anthropology, New Haven.

. 1972. Economic value of children in ag
ricultural societies: Evaluation of existing

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

40

knowledge and an anthropological ap
proach. Jn James Fawcett (ed.), The satis
factions and costs of children: Theories,
concepts, and methods. East-West Center,

Honolulu.

. 1975. Population and social organization. Mouton, The Hague.

PoLGaR, STEVEN (ed.). 1971. Culture and population. Schenkman Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.

SILVERMAN, M. 1970. Banaban adoption. In V.

 

Harbison

Social Biology

Carroll (ed.), Adoption in Eastern
Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

Wake, HELEN. 1977. Economic strategy and
the number of children. In J. Caldwell (ed.),
The persistence of high fertility. Department of Demography, Australian National
University, Canberra.

Wo LF, ARTHUR. 1980. Marriage and adoption
in China. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford,
Calif.
