Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

A model of fertility motivation, desires, and
expectations early in women's reproductive
careers

Warren B. Miller & David J. Pasta

To cite this article: Warren B. Miller & David J. Pasta (1988) A model of fertility motivation,
desires, and expectations early in women's reproductive careers, Social Biology, 35:3-4,
236-250, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988704

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988704

 

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

A)
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

A Model of Fertility Motivation,
Desires, and Expectations Early in
Women’s Reproductive Careers

 

Warren B. Miller and David J. Pasta

Transnational Family Research Institute, Palo Alto, California; and DMA Corporation,
Palo Alto, California

ABSTRACT: We propose a general model of the relationships connecting fertility motivations,
desires, and expectations in which motivations are antecedent to desires, which in turn are
antecedent to expectations. We describe differences in the model as it applies to women early in
their reproductive careers, specifically, after marriage but before their first birth and after their
first birth but before their second. We test the model with data from 311 just-married and 318
just-mothered women, using LISREL to estimate structural equations for both groups. The
general model fits the data well. There are three primary differences in the model with respect to
the two groups of married women. How soon a woman expects her next child affects how many
children she expects only among the just-married woman. The number of children expected by
the woman is the only antecedent to how soon she expects her next child among the
just-mothered women. Both positive and negative maternal motivation has effects among the
just-married women, but only negative maternal motivation has effects among the
just-mothered women. These and other differences are discussed in terms of psychological and

situational developments occurring early in women’s reproductive careers.

In two recent reports, Miller described the results of research that dealt
with fertility behavior and its antecedents (Miller, 1986a, b). These reports
focused on two specific types of behavior: (1) regularity of contraception and
(2) proception (i.e., attempting to
achieve conception). They demonstrated that each of these two types of
behavior was an important, separate determinant of the occurrence of conception. The reports also demonstrated that
expectations about future childbearing,
both about the total number of children
and about the timing of the next child,
were major antecedents to both contraceptive nonuse and proceptive behavior. Taken together, these reports describe two major causal pathways along
which childbearing expectations affect

fertility. In the current report, we will
extend these causal pathways further
back in time by exploring a model of the
relationships connecting fertility motivations, fertility desires, and both child
number and child timing expectations.
In order to understand how these pathways are structured in the early stages of
reproductive careers, we will examine
data from two groups of women: justmarried women with no children and
married women who have just borne
their first child.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

MOoDEL RATIONALE

There have been a number of approaches to modeling the relationship
between fertility attitudes or motiva
236
—|
=
©
N
Some
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
N
av.
om
=
—
CS
‘gt
wO
oN
—
ao
O
=
Cd
©
>
—
—
N
_
oO
>
os
c
=
va)
OQ
co
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

tions and fertility itself (Adler, 1979;
Miller, 1981). The more successful of
these approaches have included individual intentions or expectations as intermediates between attitudes/motivations
and fertility (Davidson and Jaccard,
1976; Beach et al., 1982; Beckman et
al., 1983). In the research reported
here, we have followed the lead of these
previous approaches by utilizing both

attitudes/motivations and intentions/ex- .

pectations in our model. We have also
incorporated a third psychological construct, namely fertility desires. A brief
description of all three constructs will
help to clarify the differences among
them.

Attitude and motivation are trait
concepts, while desire, intention, and
expectation are state concepts. Attitudes and motivations refer to the disposition people have to think and feel in
certain ways. In the research reported
here, we are concerned primarily with
motivations. They are conceptualized as
traits that provide the push to action.
When actualized from their latent (dispositional) form, they manifest themselves aS more or less conscious desires.
Desire is a state concept because it describes a person’s state of mind or what
he/she wants at a particular point in
time. Desires may or may not lead to intentions and expectations, depending
upon other intrapsychic and situational
influences. For example, you may desire
a(nother) child but not intend to have
one because you believe you are too old
or unable to afford it. Intentions and expectations are also state concepts, de
Fertility

Motivations

Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

Fertility

Desires

237

scribing either the behavior that a person intends or expects to pursue in the
future or the goals that he/she intends or
expects to achieve. Although it is possible to make distinctions between behavioral intentions and expectations, the
evidence from fertility survey research
suggests that they function very similarly (Ryder and Westoff, 1971). Only
expectations are utilized in this report
because the interview questions that
generated the data were framed exclusively in those terms. However, virtually
everything said about expectations can
be assumed to apply as well to intentions.

These relationships among motivations, desires, and expectations are illustrated schematically in Figure 1. As it
stands, this model is largely self-evident
and of limited value. However, it provides the basis for developing a more
complex and interesting model through
extension and refinement of the concepts. To begin the refinement, fertility
motivations may be divided according to
whether they are positive or negative.
Positive motivations provide the individual with a push toward having children, while negative motivations provide a push in the opposite direction.
Fertility motivations may also be divided according to whether the motivation is general or specific. A general motivational trait is similar to the ““G” or
general factor of intelligence, also
known as IQ. Just as IQ represents an
individual’s overall mental ability as distinct from a variety of specific mental
skills in different functional areas, so too

Fertility

Expectations

Fic. 1.—A schematic illustration of the relationship between fertility motivations, desires, and expec
tations.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

238 Miller and Pasta

a “G” or general fertility motivation
represents an individual’s overall push
toward or away from having children. In
this report we utilize two general motivational traits, which we call Positive
and Negative Maternal Motivation. As
might be expected, they have a moderate negative correlation. We will leave
for subsequent reports an examination
of the contribution of specific childbearing motivations to our general model.

Fertility desires may be divided into
the individual’s own desires and the perceived desires of his or her spouse. We
postulate in our model that the individual’s own desires are determined to a
large degree by his or her own motivations. These motivations, however,
have also been shown to affect the individual’s perceptions of his or her
spouse’s desires through the process of
projection (Miller, 1981). For this reason, and because both homogamy (like
marrying like) and mutual influence
during the course of marriage tend to
produce similar desires within couples,
fertility desires and perceived fertility
desires of the spouse tend to be positively correlated with each other. In
spite of this fact, we expect each to have
a separate effect on an individual’s fertility expectations. In other words, the
number of children expected by an individual is a function of both the number
of children desired by the individual and
the number he or she perceives the
spouse as desiring. If a woman wants
three children and her husband wants
only one, she is more likely to expect
two than three.

Fertility expectations and the fertility
desires that partially determine them
may usefully be divided into several categories, including those concerned with
the number, timing, and gender of children. In this report we do not consider

Social Biology

gender expectations because of limitations in the data set that we utilize and
because we are concerned with individuals early in their reproductive careers
for whom child gender generally has not
yet become a major issue. We do consider both number and timing expectations which, as we have already suggested, are partially determined by the
corresponding desires and perceived
spouse desires. In addition, each expectation may affect the other. For example, on an intuitive basis and on the basis
of earlier research by Bumpass and
Westoff (1970), it seems likely that the
number of children expected would affect how soon the next child is expected,
with the expectation of more children
leading an individual to expect the next
one sooner. It is also possible that the reverse is true, namely that how soon the
next child is expected affects how many
are expected. However, even though it
is plausible that, for example, women
who expect their next child sooner might
expect more children than those who expect their next child later, the limited evidence that has been reported to date
does not support the existence of such a
causal effect (Miller, 1981). In any case,
we leave that question open for empirical examination.

One final element that should be
added to our elaboration of the model
shown in Figure 1 is age, which has effects on several components of our
model. Miller (1981) observed that
greater age is correlated with lower positive motivation and higher negative motivation for childbearing in a sample of
women aged 18 to 27. He also found that
greater age was associated with the expectation of fewer additional children
and the expectation that the next child
will arrive sooner.

Figure 2 is a schematic illustration of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

       
 
    
     
   
 
     

Positive
Maternal
Motivation

Negative
Maternal
Motivation

 

Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

Perceived Spouse
Child Number

Child Number

Perceived Spouse
Child Timing

Child Timing

239

Desires

    

 
 
 
 

Child Number
Expectations

I

Child Timing
Expectations

Desires

    

  

Desires

Desires

Fic. 2.—A schematic illustration of the elaborated fertility motivation-desire expectation model.

the fertility motivation-desire-expectation model as we have outlined it thus
far. The figure accurately represents our
general model but does not take into account differences that may be expected
to occur as individuals move through
their reproductive careers. In this report
we are interested not only in testing the
general model but also in detecting the
existence of differences between married women who have no children and
women who have one child. There are
reasons to postulate significant differences between these two groups of
women at each of the three steps of the
motivation-desire-expectation sequence. Consider first the expectation
step. For the recently married, childless
woman, timing the start of her reproductive career is a major concern. How
much time should she give the marriage
before a child is introduced into the picture? How soon can a child be afforded?
Should she delay childbearing for the
sake of her career? Answers to these
and other questions will determine how

soon she expects her first child, which in
turn may well affect the number of children she expects. On the other hand,
once she has had her first child, a woman’s expectations about the timing of the
next child may no longer have much effect on her number expectations because the question of when she should
launch her reproductive career has already been settled.

Consider next the desire step in our
model. A report by Udry (1982) explores whether early reproductive career differences exist with respect to fertility desires. He concludes that
normative pressures for and against
childbearing have their strongest effects
at zero parity. If this 1s true, then perceived spouse desires should have a
greater impact for married women who
have not yet begun childbearing than for
women who have already had their first
child.

Consider finally the motivation step
in our model. There is evidence for the
existence of early reproductive career
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

240 Miller and Pasta

differences in fertility motivation. Fawcett (1978), citing both his own research
and that of others, concludes that positive motivations are generally higher
and negative motivations generally
lower for one-child women than for
childless women. Although he was discussing specific positive and negative
utilities reported by his subjects, his observations do suggest that our general
motivational trait measures may follow
a similar pattern.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data that were analyzed in testing the model described above were collected during the Psychology of Reproduction (POR) Study. The latter was
begun in 1972 and used a prospective
design to collect data from approximately one thousand San Francisco Bay
Area women through interviews and
self-report inventories and questionnaires. The focus of the investigation
was on the psychological and behavioral
aspects of marriage, sexuality, contraception, childbearing, and gender role
activities. The data have already been
extensively analyzed, and the results of
these first analyses are available in a
monograph (Miller, 1981). Although
these data are approximately 15 years
old at the present writing, we do not believe they are dated with respect to providing a good test of our general model.
We will comment further in the discussion section about specific findings that
might have been different if more contemporary data had been analyzed.

In this report we are concerned with
two subsamples of the POR study: a
group of 311 just-married women with
no children (initially interviewed 4 to 6
months following their first marriage)
and a group of 318 just-mothered
women who had just borne their first

Social Biology

child within their first marriage (initially
interviewed 4 to 6 months following that
first birth). Within both of these groups,
age was stratified from 18 through 27,
with approximately 30-35 women at
each age level. All of the women were
Caucasian, English-speaking, U.S. citizens. Each group consisted of a probability sample of women from a designated geographic area within two
adjacent urban/suburban counties in the
San Francisco Bay Area. All socioeconomic levels typical of urban/suburban
United States were present in this area
and are well represented in the two subsamples. Because the POR study focused on the psychological antecedents
to childbearing, any woman known to
be infertile was screened out of the sample.

When we compared the two subsamples on a set of demographic and personal background variables, no significant differences were found with
respect to age, religion of upbringing, or
most recent type of employment (classified according to Hillingstead, 1957).
However, the following significant differences were found: The just-married
women reported lower frequency of religious worship, higher levels of education achieved, and lower total annual income in comparison with the
just-mothered women.

Although each subject was interviewed four times, data from only the
initial interview are considered in this
report. The initial interview was conducted in person, using a combined
structured and semistructured format.
The interview was designed to elicit information about the woman’s demographic and family background and
about a variety of her current motivations, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors
relevant to reproduction. The interview
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

lasted one hour and was followed by the
administration of a battery of self-report
inventories and questionnaires. For a
discussion of the woman’s demographic
and family background, see Miller,
1981, or, in less detail, Miller, 1986b. A
detailed treatment of reliability of the
structured interview and of the construction, reliability, and validity of the
self-report inventories is available in the
appendices to Miller, 1981.

During the initial interview each
woman was asked how many children
she actually expected to have and how
soon she expected to have her first child
(for the just-married subsample) or her
second child (for the just-mothered subsample). Table 1 shows summary statistics on these variables for the two subsamples. In the table, those women
never expecting a(nother) child were excluded from the summary statistics of
the child timing variable. However, in
the multivariate analyses reported below they were included by placing them
in a category beyond what otherwise
would have been the highest category,
namely “60 months or more.”

Among the self-report inventories

Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations 241

administered during the initial interview, the only one of relevance for this
report was the Maternal Attitude Questionnaire. This instrument contained
two sections. The first consisted of a list
of 32 items that described more or less
desirable aspects of childbearing. The
second consisted of a list of 26 items that
described more or less undesirable aspects of childbearing. The respondents
were asked to rate how desirable or undesirable each item was. The respondent’s average score on the 32 desirable
items provided a measure called Positive Maternal Motivation. Her average
score on the 26 undesirable items provided a measure called Negative Maternal Motivation. Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for these two measures
(N = 966) had the values of 0.91 and
0.94, respectively. Four-week testretest reliability scores (N = 46) were
0.87 and 0.80, respectively. The justmarried subsample’s mean scores on
these two measures were 2.54 and 2.70.
The correspondent scores for the justmothered subsample were 2.90 and
2.46.

In order to test the general model dis
TABLE 1

SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR TWO FERTILITY DESIRE VARIABLES AND TWO FERTILITY
EXPECTATION VARIABLES BY SUBSAMPLE

Just-married (NV = 311)

Modal
VARIABLES Mean Category

How many children deSITE 2... eee eee eee 2.27 2
How many children desired by husband ......... Lek z
How many children expected .......... cee eee ee 2.08 Zz
How soon next child expected (in months)? ...... 34.9 37-48

SUBSAMPLE
Just-mothered (N = 318)

% Choosing Modal % Choosing
Mode Mean _— Category Mode
56.1% 2.53 2 46.6%
54.7% 2.58 2 49.4%
63.4% 2.40 2 54.4%

17% 25.6 13-18 20%

*Three per cent of the just-married subsample and 6 per cent of the just-mothered subsample indicated they never expected

a(nother) child and were excluded from the summary statistics.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

242

cussed above and illustrated in Figure 2,
we used version VI of the LISREL program developed by Joreskog and Sorbom (1984). This data analytic tool utilizes a maximum likelihood method of
estimation. For present purposes, it has
the advantage of estimating a large number of equations simultaneously and of
accommodating ordinal as well as interval variables. During our analysis, we
assumed that error variances were uncorrelated. The seven variables included in the analysis were age, Positive
and Negative Maternal Motivation, and
the two desire variables and two expectation variables included in Table 1.
The data analysis proceeded as follows. First, using a single correlation
matrix based on the data from both the
just-married and the just-mothered subsamples combined into a single sample,
we tested the fit of the model shown in
Figure 2 to the data. The goal of this step
was to make an initial estimate of the parameter coefficients and reduce the size
of the overall chi-square as much as possible. Second, using separate correlation matrices from each of the justmarried and just-mothered subsamples’
data, we tested the fit of the model to the
two sets of data separately. In this second step we set the pattern of variable
relationships to be the same for both
data sets but left the parameter coefficients free to vary. After only a few iterations we developed a slightly modified model that worked well in both
subsamples but with localized specification errors (as judged by the modification indices and normalized residuals’)

1Modification indices and normalized residuals
are measures provided by LISREL that allow a detailed assessment of a model’s fit to the data. The
former represent the expected decrease in the chi
Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

that were associated with only one or the
other of the subsamples. Third, we repeated step two but constrained all coefficients to be equal for both data sets.
The goal here was to determine the effect of constraining the model for both
subsamples to be equal. Several further
modifications of the model were introduced during this step. Fourth, we again
allowed the parameter coefficients to
vary across the two subsamples. Our
purpose was to identify coefficients that
were Significant when constrained
across two subsamples but which were
not significant for one subsample when
unconstrained. As a result of this step
we further refined the general model to
fit the data by dropping several nonsignificant coefficients for each subsample. Fifth, we again applied equality
constraints to those coefficients that
were present in both the just-married
and the just-mothered versions of the
model. Our goal was to identify coefficients present in both versions of the
model for which modification indices
and normalized residuals indicated a
significantly better fit would occur were
they not constrained to be equal. One
such coefficient was identified and allowed to vary freely. At the conclusion
of these steps, we tested the two modified versions of the model on the data
of the two subsamples. This final test indicated an extremely good fit to the data
for each subsample and a highly satisfactory endpoint for the combined analysis.

square goodness-of-fit statistic if a fixed or constrained parameter is relaxed and all other parameters are held fixed at their estimated value. The
latter are residual variances and covariances for
every pair of observed variables in the model, normalized by their estimated standard deviation for
comparison purposes. Both measures are guides to
specification errors in the model.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

RESULTS

The structural equation models that
were developed during our analysis of
the just-married and just-mothered data
are given in Tables 2 and 3. Not shown
in the tables are the correlations between the two desire variables and between the two motivation variables,
which were 0.57 and —-0.24 respectively,
for both subsamples. A schematic illustration of each model is presented in
Figures 3 and 4. Notice that the box representing the child timing desires variables is retained in both figures, even
though no data was available on these
two variables for inclusion in the analysis. In order to suggest the hypothesized
role of the child timing desires variables
as intermediate between the motivation
and expectations variables, we have
drawn the lines connecting the motivation and expectations in Figure 3
through the child timing desires box.

The goodness-of-fit index for the two
subsamples was 0.989 and 0.978 respectively. The root mean square residuals
were 0.038 and 0.053. These are both
highly satisfactory end-points, although
they do suggest a slightly better fit to the
data for the just-married subsample.
Only two modification indices were
greater than 5 (5.6 and 5.3), both of
which are far from statistical significance. Only two normalized residuals
were greater than 2 (2.1 and 2.1), which
implies that all deviations can be assumed to be due to chance. Although
none of these four values is significantly
elevated, all had to do with the relationship between the motivation variables
and the timing expectation variable in
the just-mothered subsample. They suggest a slight but nonsignificant tendency
for the motivation variables to predict

Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

243

the timing expectation variable. This
undoubtedly accounts for the slightly
worse fit of the just-mothered model.
For the combined analysis of the two
subsamples, the chi-square with 31 degrees of freedom was 37.25. This has a
probability level of 0.203, indicating
that deviations of the data from the two
versions of the model were at the level of
chance.

A description of the findings presented in Tables 2 and 3 and illustrated
in Figures 3 and 4 follows. In the justmarried subsample, how soon the next
child is expected is predicted by four
variables. The more children the
woman expects, the higher her positive
motivation to have children, the lower
her negative motivation, and the older
she is, the sooner she expects her next
child. How many children she expects is
also predicted by four variables. The
sooner she expects her next child, the
fewer children she and her husband desire, and the lower her positive motivation, the fewer the number of children
she expects. How many children she desires is predicted by the two maternal
motivation variables, with higher positive motivation and lower negative motivation leading her to desire more children. The same relationship holds for
her perception of the number of children desired by her husband: higher
positive motivation and lower negative
motivation lead her to perceive his
wanting more children. Finally, greater
age is associated with less positive motivation and more negative motivation for
childbearing.

In the just-mothered subsample, how
soon the next child is expected is only
predicted by the woman’s child number
expectations, with the expectation of
more children leading her to expect her

 
 

vee

 

—

oO

QI

an

o

O

5 TABLE 2

oO

A STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL FOR THE JUST-MARRIED SUBSAMPLE

Ss Standardized SPE/ Multiple R?

N Parameter Standard for

st Estimate Error Dependent

m Equation Number Predictor Variable(s) Dependent Variable (SPE) Ratio Variable

3 ‘rer rerererer How many children expected How soon next child expected —0.385 —9.625 0.287

= Positive Maternal Motivation —0.249 —4,527 Lee =
S. Negative Maternal Motivation 0.235 4.434 f=
es Age —0.334 —6.423 5 i a
‘_ 2 cea bY ke neans How soon next child expected How many children expected 0.188 4.821 0.641 E
> How many children desired 0.539 15.853 tae ry
v= How many children desired by B
~ husband 0.308 9.625

= Positive Maternal Motivation 0.221 5.973 was

© DS 2944 cman xn wea Positive Maternal Motivation How many children desired 0.265 4.907 0.164

2 Negative Maternal Motivation ~0.244 —5.083 _—

5 4 ceccceeeeees Positive Maternal Motivation How many children desired by

— husband 0.229 4.164 0.117

Ss Negative Maternal Motivation —0.203 —5.205 ass

3 D snauessneaewe Age Positive Maternal Motivation —0.246 — 6,308 0.061

Z OB cee cee eeeees Age Negative Maternal Motivation 0.210 5.385 0.044

°

2

5

©

A

yn
8.
P
mo
2.
9
a

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Equation Number

STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL FOR THE JUST-MOTHERED SUBSAMPLE

Predictor Vanable(s)

How many children expected
How many children desired
How many children desired by
husband

Negative Maternal Motivation
Negative Maternal Motivation
Negative Maternal Motivation

Age

TABLE 3

Dependent Vanable

How soon next child expected
How many children expected

How many children desired
How many children desired by
husband

Positive Maternal Motivation
Negative Maternal Motivation

Standardized
Parameter
Estimate
(SPE)

—0.385
0.539

0.308
—0.089
—0.350

—0.203
—0.105
—0.246

0.210

SPE/
Standard
Error
Ratio

—9.625
15.853

9.625
—2.543
~7.447

—5.205
—2.500
— 6.308

5.385

Multiple R2
for
Dependent
Vanable

0.161
0.646

0.126
0.063
0.061
0.044

 

p-€ “ON “SE “IOA

suoiejoedxq pure ‘sartsaq, ‘uoNneANOoy AjI]1719.4

Svc

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

246 Miller and Pasta Social Biology

   
    
    
       
    

 
   

How Many
Children Desired
0229 by Husband

fos
How Many
Children

    
   
 

  

 
  
      
   
   
   
 
 
    
   

  

 
 
   
      
  
  

  
   

  
 

Positive How Many

~.246 Maternal 7 Desired Children

Motivation d Expected

Age <>

\ ( ~224 188 ~~. 385

Negative How Soon

Maternal How Soon Next Child

Motivation Next Child Desired Expected

by Husband

  

How Soon
Next Child
Desired

Fic. 3.—A schematic illustration of the structural equation model for the just-married subsample.

  
    
   
  

  

How Many
Children Desired

by Husband - 308

57
How Many
Children
Desired

 
 
 
  
   
 

 
 
  
   
 

 
  
   

  
    
  

Positive
Maternal
Motivation

How Many
Children
Expected

=e 385

    
    
 

Age

   

“oe 24

   
   
    
   
    
 
  

  
    
   

     
   

2210 Negative Bow Soon
Maternal Row Soon Next. Child
Motivation Next Child Destred Expected

by Husband

     
   

How Soon
Next Child
Desired

Fic. 4.—A schematic illustration of the structural equation model for the just-mothered subsample.

next child sooner. How many children vation leading her to desire fewer
she expects is predicted by three varia- children. Greater negative motivation
bles. The fewer children she and her also predicts that she perceives her hushusband desire and the greater herneg- bandas wanting fewer children. Greater
ative childbearing motivation, the fewer age does the same. Finally, as in the justchildren she expects. Negative motiva- married woman, greater age is assocition is the only predictor of child num- ated with less positive and more negaber desires, with greater negative moti- __ tive childbearing motivation.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No, 3-4

DISCUSSION

Both the version of the model developed for just-married women and the
version developed for just-mothered
women confirm our general model of
the motivation-desire-expectation sequence, illustrated in Figures 1 and 2.
Specifically, both demonstrate that maternal motivations affect the number of
children a woman desires and the number she perceives her husband as desiring. Both demonstrate that both of these
child-number desires separately affect
the number of children she actually expects. Both demonstrate that childnumber expectations affect child timing
expectations. Because of limitations in
the data set, the role of child timing desires in this sequence could not be
tested.

Beyond these confirmations of our
general model, the results of the
LISREL analysis provide interesting insights into how the motivation-desireexpectation sequence varies according
to the early marital and reproductive life
cycle status of the woman. When
women who have just married and have
yet to have their first child are compared
with women who have just had their first
child within marriage, three important
differences are apparent. First, it is only
in the just-married women that child
timing expectations affect child number
expectations. What is especially noteworthy is that this effect is opposite to
what we discussed in the rationale section as plausible but uncertain. What we
find is that just-married women expecting their next child sooner expect fewer,
not more, children. The mechanism
does not seem to be what we suggested
earlier, namely that just-married
women who expect more children do so
in part because they expect to have their

Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

 

247

first child sooner and therefore expect to
have more time for childbearing.
Rather, it seems to be that they expect
fewer children because, expecting their
first child sooner, they can complete
their childbearing sooner. It may be
conjectured that they want to complete
childbearing so that they can move on to
other activities (such as labor force participation, educational and careerrelated pursuits) that are not compatible
with having a large family. In other
words, some just-married women may
not be postponing but rather speeding
up childbearing for the sake of careers.
Because this finding may be dated, it
would be of interest to see if it persists
today when child-care institutions are
stronger and women may feel more
comfortable combining childbearing
with career activities.

A second important difference between the two versions of the model is
that among the just-mothered women
the number of children expected is the
only antecedent to how soon they expect their next child, while among the
just-married women, age, Positive Maternal Motivation, and Negative Maternal Motivation are also antecedents. Because the two motivation variables are
assumed to act through child timing desires, their absence in the just-mothered
women suggests either that they have
relatively little impact on child-timing
desires in that group or that the desires
themselves have little impact on childtiming expectations. Perhaps both are
true. In any case, if we accept the assumption that motivation acts through
child timing desires, it appears that before the birth of the first child, timing desires and age assume importance along
with number expectations in determining timing expectations. On the other
hand, with the arrival of the first child,

 

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

248 Miller and Pasta

the number of children expected becomes the only consideration (among
the variables in the model) in the timing
expectations for the next child.

These findings are entirely consistent
with Bumpass and Westoff’s (1970) conclusion that the length of birth intervals
was determined primarily by desires for
a given family size and for a specific span
of childbearing. They are also consistent
with our earlier inference that some
just-married women hasten childbearing for the sake of a career. We may integrate these interpretations as follows.
Before her first child, when a woman is
setting her child-timing expectations,
she may consider how many children
she wants, over what period of time (the
span) she wants to be involved in childbearing, and how soon she wants to
launch her reproductive career. Once
her first child is born, and the childbearing span has begun, her primary consideration in subsequent timing is how
many children she expects to have.

The third and final important difference between the two versions of our
motivation-desire-expectation model is
that Positive Maternal Motivation has
no effects in the just-mothered women
in contrast to the multiple effects it has
in the just-married women. On the
other hand, Negative Maternal Motivation has similar effects in both subsamples, with the exception that its direct effects are on child-timing expectations in
the just-married but on child-number
expectations in the just-mothered.
These differences appear to contrast
with the earlier cited results of Fawcett
(1978). Our findings suggest that after
the birth of the first child and the
childrearing experiences that follow it,
the general motivational push toward
childbearing may be relatively more
satisfied, leaving the general motiva
Social Biology

tional push away from childbearing in a
stronger position to determine future
childbearing expectations. Of course
these observations apply only to the two
“G” factors or general motivations. The
relative importance of more specific
positive and negative motivations toward having a first or second child remains to be explored.

We conclude, then, that the three
major differences between the justmarried and the just-mothered versions
of our general model confirm our thesis
that the motivation-desire-expectation
sequence undergoes reproductive life
cycle changes. What of other findings?
One difference between the justmarried and just-mothered models that
we had expected to find did not appear.
Perceived spouse desire did not have a
greater effect in the just-married
women. Thus, we failed to find support
for Udry’s (1982) contention that normative pressures are most important
during the interval before couples
launch their reproductive careers.

For both the just-married and the
just-mothered woman, maternal motivation affects how many children she
perceives her husband as desiring. In a
previous analysis (Miller, 1981), it has
been shown that much of this effect of
the woman’s own motivation remains
after controlling for the husband’s actual child number desires. The present
findings, therefore, confirm that to some
extent the woman projects her own
childbearing motivations when assessing the desires of her husband.

The effect of age on the woman’s perception of her husband’s childbearing
desires probably involves a different
process. In the analysis cited just above,
Miller found that the husband’s age was
another factor independent of his actual
desires that influenced the woman’s per
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

ceptions. This suggested that women
mistakenly assume that greater age reduces men’s desire for children. Because the woman’s age is highly correlated with her husband’s age, it seems
likely that the same mistaken assumption is at work in the current findings.
Why this age effect is only apparent
among the just-mothered women is not
clear. Perhaps it is related to the ascendance of negative maternal motivation after the first child is born.

One aspect of the present findings
not anticipated in our original model is
the direct effect of motivation on childnumber expectations. In the justmarried women it is Positive Maternal
Motivation, and in the just-mothered
women it is Negative Maternal Motivation, that bypass child-number desires
to affect expectations directly. The implication is that, depending on where
the women are in their reproductive career, one of these two general motivational traits influences them to expect either more or fewer children than they
and their husbands actually desire. This
conclusion rests on the assumption that
factors other than general motivation
determine child number desires.

One finding that holds for both subsamples is that older women have less
Positive Maternal Motivation and more
Negative Maternal Motivation. The
problem with interpreting this simply as
a causal effect of age on motivation is
that both subsamples were selected by
age (the just-married by age at marriage, the just-mothered by age at first
birth). It is, therefore, quite possible
that the association between age and
motivation represents, at least in part,
the fact that women who marry or have
their first child at an older age have less

Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

249

Positive and more Negative Maternal
Motivation than those who do so at a
younger age. Therefore, the causal effect probably moves in both directions,
and it would require a different sample
to sort out the relative strength of these
two effects.

There are two important caveats regarding our findings. First, it should be
noted that much of our discussion focuses on the differences between the
just-married and just-mothered subsamples and draws conclusions about
the effects on women of moving through
their reproductive careers. However,
the differences in the two versions of the
model could result from subsample differences unrelated to parity. Therefore,
these findings should be confirmed by
studying one sample of women longitudinally, that is, both before and after the
birth of their first child. A second caveat
has to do with our intentional exclusion
from the model of specific childbearing
motivations and other predictors of
childbearing desires and expectations.
Although we believe that such an exclusion is justified in this initial effort, many
questions that arose in the discussion of
findings might well be answered and
many uncertainties clarified by including the specific motivations and other
variables. Accordingly, we plan to expand the present model to include them
in a subsequent report.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper is based on a study funded by
the National Institutes of Child Health and
Human Development, Center for Population Research, under the following grants
and contract: RO1~HD-06266, RO1-—HD09887, and NO1—-HD-82831.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

250 Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

REFERENCES

ADLER, N. E. 1979. Decision models in population research. J. Pop.: Behav. Soc. Environ.
Iss. 2:187—202.

Beacu, L. R., A. Hore, B. D. Townes, and
F.L. CAMPBELL. 1982. The expectationthreshold model of reproductive decisionmaking. Pop. Environ.: Behav. Soc. Iss.
§:95-108.

BECKMAN, L.J., R. AIzENBERG, A.B. ForSYTHE, and T. Day. 1983. A theoretical
analysis of antecedents of young couples’
fertility decisions. Demography 20:519533.

Bumepass, L. L., and C. F. WEsTorrF. 1970. The
later years of childbearing. Princeton Univ.
Press, Princeton, N.J.

Davipson, A.R., and J.J. Jaccarp. 1976.
Social-psychological determinants of fertility intentions, p. 131-137. InS. H. Newman
and V.D. Thompson (eds.), Population
psychology: Research and educational issues. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

FAwcETT, J. T. 1978. The value and cost of the
first child, p. 244-265. In W. B. Miller and

L. F. Newman (eds.), The first child and
family formation. Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill, NC.

HOLLINGSHEAD, A. 1957. Two factor index of
social class. Ms. New Haven, CT.

Joreskoc, K.G., and D. Sorsom. 1984.
LISREL VI: Analysis of linear structural relationships by the method of maximum likelihood. Scientific Software, Inc. Mooresville, IN.

Miter, W. B. 1981. The psychology of reproduction. National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA.

. 1986a. Why some women fail to use

their contraceptive method: A psychologi
cal investigation. Fam. Plan. Persp. 18:27
32.

 

 

. 1986b. Proception: An important fertility behavior. Demography 23:579-594.

Ryper, N. B., and C. F. Westorr. 1971. Reproduction in the United States, 1965. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ.

Upry, J. R. 1982. The effect of normative pressure on fertility. Pop. Environ.: Behav. Soc.
Iss. 5:109-122.
