Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

First presidential addressbehavior genetics
association April 6, 1973

Theodosius Dobzhansky President

To cite this article: Theodosius Dobzhansky President (1999) First presidential
addressbehavior genetics association April 6, 1973, Social Biology, 46:3-4, 219-227, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1999.9989003

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9989003

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

First Presidential Address!
Behavior Genetics Association
April 6, 1973

Is Genetic Diversity Compatible
With Human Equality?

Theodosius Dobzhansky, President

Department of Genetics
University of California
Davis, California

It is often alleged, even by some reputable scientists, that biology has demonstrated that people are born unequal. This
is sheer confusion—biology has proven
nothing of the sort. Indeed, every person
is biologically, genetically, and therefore
irrevocably different from every other.
However, genetic diversity is not tantamount to inequality. And vice versa—
equality of opportunity, or of status, or
economic equality are not predicated either on genetic identify or on genetic diversity. Monozygotic twins, though genetically similar, may engage in different
occupations and achieve unequal socioeconomic status. Human equality and inequality are not biological phenomena
but sociological designs; genetic diversity
is a biological reality. Equality before the
law, political equality, or equality of opportunity, stem not from genes but from
religious, ethical, or philosophical wisdom or unwisdom. Equality may be
granted to all members of the species
Homo sapiens, or only to some and withheld from other people, on the ground of
some sensible or specious reasoning or

‘Reprinted from Social Biology, 1973, Vol. 20, No.
3, pp. 280-288.

Behavior Genetics Association, 1973

219

caprice. By contrast, genetic diversity
cannot be brushed away, even if this were
desirable, which it is not.

Genetic diversity on the one hand, and
equality or inequality on the other, are independent in principle. And yet they are
by no means mutually irrelevant. The rationale of human equality is not to make
everybody physically or psychologically
alike, or engaged in the same work or occupation. On the contrary, the purpose is
to derive from the available diversity of
humans the greatest possible benefits to
the society, as well as to the individuals
concerned. Plato in The Republic apprehended that, since different persons have
different abilities, they achieve their own
greatest well-being, and also make greatest contributions to the common good,
when they develop their particular skills
to the fullest extent. This simple truth has
since been recognized by thinkers as diverse as J. S. Mill, Marx, Lenin, Mahatma Gandhi, and perhaps even Mao Tse
Tung. But it raises a host of formidably
difficult problems. Davis and Moore
(1945, p. 124) speak of “the requirement
faced by any society of placing and motivating individuals in the social structure.
As a functioning mechanism a society

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

220

must somehow distribute its members in
social positions and induce them to perform the duties of these positions. It must
thus concern itself with motivation at two
different levels: to instill in the proper individuals the desire to fill certain positions,
and, once in these positions, the desire to
perform the duties attached to them.”

ENVIRONMENTALISM AND
HEREDITARIANISM

The doctrine of environmentalism appeals strongly to many social scientists.
Its extreme form is the myth of tabula
rasa, the blank slate. All human beings
are deemed to possess the same potentialities at birth; they become different persons owing to varied upbringing and
training, and generally to varied circumstances of their lives. If this were true,
people would be interchangeable. When
brought up in a certain way, any individual could be conditioned for any function
or role in the social system. But even if
everybody were born tabulae rasae, it
would still be necessary to devise a great
variety of conditioning programs 4a la B.
F, Skinner, to manufacture the requisite
motivations for different placements and
socioeconomic functions. Individuals
could, however, be chosen for different
upbringing and training by means of a
lottery or some equally arbitrary method.

The polar opposite of the tabula rasa
myth is the myth of genetic predestination. Darlington (1969) has provided a
modern version of this myth. To perform
adequately the duties of any given social
position, one has to be born with a special genetic endowment appropriate for
that position. Traditional caste and rigid
class societies attempted to organize
themselves on the basis of the genetic
predestination myth. A society was to be
composed of genetically specialized pop
First BGA Presidential Address

 

Social Biology

ulations and subpopulations. More than
two millennia of caste system in India
constitute the grandest genetic experiment ever performed with human materials. An attempt was made to transform
the myth into reality. Bose (1951, p. 110)
describes it as follows: “The careful way
in which the tradition of close correspondence between caste and occupation was
built up is clear indication of what the
leaders of Hindu society had in mind.
They believed in the hereditary transmissibility of character, and thought it best
to fix a man’s occupation, as well as his
status in life, by means of the family in
which he had: been born.” The results of
the Indian experiment should be studied
carefully by geneticists, psychologists,
and sociologists, but such studies are still
waiting to be done. One does not know
whether some average differences between the caste populations in cognitive
or technical skills do or do not exist. But
what is quite certain is that the experiment as a whole failed to achieve its
purpose. No rigid genetic specialization
for their traditional occupations has developed in Indian castes. A former “untouchable” is a cabinet minister in the
government of India. Of course, genetic
rationalizations of the caste and rigid
class societies were (and still are) used
more often by those who like to keep
their privileges than by those really concerned about the welfare of their society.
Neither the tabula rasa nor the genetic
predestination myths withstand critical
examination. It is more and more widely
recognized by those familiar with social
biology that there are limits to interchangeability of people. Individuals with
different genetic endowments often derive greatest satisfaction and are most
effective in different occupations. This
does not contradict the basic fact that
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

the development of the human psyche is
remarkably plastic. The plasticity is determined by the human genotype; it is a
distinctive characteristic of the species
Homo sapiens, being a product of unrelenting action of natural selection in human evolution, for perhaps two million or
more years. Why has selection induced
this plasticity? The human species is
biologically unique, in that its adaptedness rests on the foundation of culture acquired by every individual during his lifetime. Man is genetically adapted to live
in environments created by culture, and
he creates new environments for further
adaptation. A “cultureless” human would
not be merely a freak, he would not survive. Culture is not inborn, but the ability
to acquire culture is genetic. Since culture
is acquired by learning from other humans, the ability to learn is built into
every nonpathological human genotype.

EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY AND
MERITOCRACY

For at least several centuries, there has
been a world-wide trend from rigid class
societies to more and more open class
structures. The changes are rapid in some
societies and relatively slow in others;
temporary setbacks have occurred in
some places. The generality of the trend
is nevertheless unmistakable. Emperor
Nicholas I of Russia declared in 1827
“that nobody should aim to rise above
that position in which it is his lot to remain.” He was one of those who wished
that social classes would stay fixed forever. Separate schools were established
for children of the gentry, townspeople,
and peasants. Policies of similar nature,
though disguised in less brazen verbiage,
were common in the more “advanced”
countries of Western Europe. Although
sympathizers with such policies are still

Behavior Genetics Association, 1973

221

not uncommon, even in allegedly “democratic” countries, only few governments
dare to admit openly their existence. The
apartheid policy in South Africa is a conspicuous exception. Anyway, a majority
of people, in the realms of capitalist West
as well as communist East, accept, at
least in words though often not in deeds,
equality of opportunity and meritocracy
as commendable social arrangements.

Positions that persons obtain in a society under equality of opportunity are
achieved through ability and willingness
to exercise it. With inequality, positions
are ascribed rather than achieved. The ascription occurs on the basis of social
class, family status, race, religious or professional affiliations of the parents, etc.
Eckland (1967, p. 180) defines meritocracy as “a society in which positions are
allocated on the basis of ‘talent’ (plus ‘effort’) rather than class or social advantage.” Meritocracy and equality of opportunity usually go together, since the
former is almost necessarily the outcome
of the latter.

There are various degrees of equality
or inequality of opportunity and of meritocracy. The traditional caste societies of
India rejected equality between castes,
but could hardly deny it to persons of the
same caste. Somewhat less rigid were
the feudal societies of Europe and closed
privileged classes of more recent vintages. They did their best to discourage
social mobility but could not prevent it
altogether. Successful warriors, competent
or adroit officials, paramours, sycophants,
and others who knew how to please their
superiors moved upward. In a generation
or two their offspring became proud
bearers of aristocratic “traditions” and
guardians of purity of aristocrat “blood.”
With the growth of capitalism, accumulation and loss of wealth became powerful
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

222

forces of social mobility and of gene flow
between would-be closed classes.

It is difficult to decide which of our
contemporary societies are closest to the
ideal of equality, because this ideal is
more often accepted in theory than
realized in practice. Examples of such divergence of theory and practice are not
lacking in the United States. And yet,
equality has undeniably gained ground,
even within living memory of those now
old or middle-aged. Take educational
opportunity as an example: about 50% of
14-17 year olds in the United States were
attending high schools in 1930, compared
to 90% or more in the 1960s. In 1910
only 5% of youth aged 18-21 were in
college, compared to about 40% in the
1960s. The U.S.S.R. reduced illiteracy
from 70% in 1920 to about 2% in 1960
and decreed ten years of obligatory
schooling for children and youths. It is
nevertheless hard to tell whether equality
of opportunity is on the whole greater in
the U.S.S.R. and its orbit than in the
United States. How things stand in China
is quite obscure. The situation is quite
variable in the so-called Third World.
For example, in Indonesia only about half
of the children ever go to any school,
and less than 20% complete elementary
schooling.

Social, economic, and __ political
changes often have genetic consequences.
Social scientists, not to speak of politicians, are rarely aware of the feedback
relationships between biology and sociology and politics. It behooves social biologists and behavior geneticists to help supply such awareness. It is a fair statement
that whenever a character variable in human populations has been at all adequately studied, genetic as well as environmental components in its variability
have been brought to light. This applies

First BGA Presidential Address

Social Biology

to characteristics of all sorts—physical,
physiological, and psychological—from
skin color, stature, and weight, to intelligence, special abilities, and even to
smoking habits. Of course, the relative
magnitudes of the genetic and environmental components are vastly different
for different characteristics. The manifestation of blood types depends relatively
little on the environment, while scholastic
achievement or musical ability are so obviously dependent on the environment
that the involvement of genetic conditioning in the development of these characteristics continues to be the subject of
inconclusive debate.

The statement that there is a genetic
component in the variability of a given
trait does not always mean that the mode
of its inheritance is understood. A trait
that “runs in families” may be palpably
genetically conditioned, and yet it is often unknown whether that trait is monogenic or polygenic, dominant, recessive
or intermediate, let alone what its heritability may be in different environments
and different populations. Take, for example, the genetic conditioning of criminality. The very suggestion that genes
have anything to do with crime is abhorrent to many people. This is because of a
miscomprehension. Genetic conditioning
of criminality does not mean that the sole
way to avoid being a criminal is to be
born free of “criminal” genes. Nor does it
mean that the carriers of some genotypes
are fated to be criminals. It is possible,
and indeed probable, that those branded
criminals in our society would be lawabiding citizens, perhaps even admired
leaders, in other societies. In some primitive tribes (though not in others), pugnacious and aggressive individuals may be
regarded heroes; elsewhere they will perhaps be successful military commanders;
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

but in a peaceable society they would be
only debauchees or malefactors. Anyway,
those who utter locutions like “inheritance of criminality” are not necessarily
believers in genetic predestination. Inheritance of criminality may signify nothing
more than that in any given environment,
people with similar or identical genotypes will behave more similarly on the
average than will people with diverse
genotypes.

At this point, I shall make an assumption involving a frank value judgment. A
society benefits from the fullest development of genetically conditioned and socially useful talents and abilities of its
members. How can this salutary goal be
achieved? In Aldous Huxley’s “Brave
New World” anti-utopia it was achieved
by breeding genetically specialized varieties of humans, as well as by appropriate
management of their development. Caste
and rigid class societies attempted something in principle not too dissimilar. They
relied on aristocracies and craftsmen
clans, rather than on meritocracies. They
failed more or less dismally. The reasons
why they failed are fairly obvious. Genetic talents of all kinds are dispersed
throughout the social structure, in all
strata of the social pyramid. Without
equality of opportunity many, perhaps
most of these talents, remain unutilized.
This is true even if the incidence of some
abilities and talents would happen to be
greater in some socioeconomic classes or
races than in others. The evidence for the
above statement comes, among other
sources, from the destruction of old elites
during various revolutionary upheavals
(e.g., in Russia). What was feared to be
an intellectual decapitation did not result
in any permanent genetic impoverishment. New elites were promptly recruited
from the formerly undeveloped masses.

Behavior Genetics Association, 1973

223

The way to make use to the fullest
extent of the available pool of genetic talents and abilities is acceptance of meritocracy and equality of opportunity. Anybody should be entitled to aspire to any
position or role in the society. Obviously
not everybody will realize his aspirations.
The realization will depend on, among
other things, the genetic endowments of
the aspirants. These “other things” are
luck and willingness to work and exert
efforts in pursuit of the chosen goal. The
willingness may have some genetic component as well. Ideally, every person
would elect the occupation or career for
which she or he is most qualified genetically. The ideal is far from always realized, but mistakes are correctable if
discovered early enough. It is silly for a
tone-deaf person to wish to become a
professional musician or composer. Some
otherwise bright people do not easily
master mathematics. A shorty is unlikely
to excel in basketball, and a fatty in
sports where speed is essential. However,
making headway in the process of training or work is a source of pleasure, and
nonsuccess of displeasure. Given anything like equal opportunity, relatively
more people will become located in occupations that suit them than they would if
the opportunity is restricted or denied.

To evaluate people according to any
single scale of abilities, be that their IQs
or anything else, is grossly misleading.
Human abilities are not unidimensional
but multidimensional. An outstanding talent in some sphere may go together with
a surprising incapacity in other respects.
Is it really necessary that a boxing champion or a baseball hero achieve highgrades in “academic” subjects in school?
Or is a powerful musculature and splendid muscular coordination essential for
college preparation or for an academic

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

224

career? It would be interesting to assemble data on IQ scores of high achievers in
occupations that do not obviously require
high marks in general school and college
training. I know of no such data. Anyway,
it is probably safe to say that a musical
virtuoso need not be a proficient boxer
or vice versa, and a poet need not be a
mathematician or vice versa. Success and
excellence can be and in fact are achieved
in different ways. However, equality of
opportunity should maximize the probability that persons with pronounced abilities of different kinds will become located in their preferred and preferable
niches in the social edifice.

APTITUDE AGGREGATIONS

Equality of opportunity, or simply
equality, has been the watchword of those
who championed human dignity and justice. This has been true at least since the
Age of Enlightenment and the American
Declaration of Independence, although
the basic idea of human equality goes
back much farther, even to antiquity
(Muller, 1963). Though obviously not put
in practice everywhere, the precept of
equality has made during the nineteenth
and the current century enormous strides
toward universal acceptance.

By a singular misapprehension, partisans of equality have usually espoused
varieties of the tabula rasa myth, while
those who favor inequality believed in
some forms of genetic predestination.
This is quite illogical. If all people were
as similar at birth as monozygotic twins,
then it would not matter who is to be
trained to do what. Conversely, equality
of opportunity constitutes a practical
recognition and acceptance of the fact of
genetic diversity. The line dividing those
who favor equality from those wishing to
conserve inequality should be drawn

First BGA Presidential Address

Social Biology

somewhere else. The issue is whether
every individual ought to be evaluated on
his own merits or whether the social class
or race of his ancestors suffice to define
what he is likely to achieve.

Adoption of equality of opportunity as
a social policy has genetic consequences
which are rarely understood either by the
champions or by the opponents of this
policy. As pointed out above, in a meritocracy the place achieved by an individual in the society is a function of his
manifested ability. However, the variance
of abilities has a genetic component.
Therefore, the achieved role, status, and
economic level will to some extent be
functions of the individual’s genes. The
occupational elites formed under equality
of opportunity will tend to be genetic
elites, while in caste societies social stratifications were genetically gratuitous.
Formation of genetic elites is probable at
least in the long run, even though Jencks
et al. (1972) find that the correlation
between intelligence (“cognitive skills’)
test scores and the occupational status in
the United States is relatively weak. The
same authors (p. 220) find that in the
United States “The most genetically advantaged fifth of all men appear to have
incomes about 35 to 40 percent higher
than the most genetically disadvantaged
fifth.” Scarr-Salapatek (1971, p. 1225)
aptly characterizes the situation thus:
“The greater the environmental equality,
the greater the hereditary differences between levels of the social structure. The
thesis of egalitarianism surely leads to its
antithesis in a way that Karl Marx never
anticipated.”

Does it follow that all that equality of
Opportunity could accomplish will be replacement of social classes based on accidents of birth by genetically different and
thus even more unalterably fixed social
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

classes? This 1s not necessarily so. I have
suggested (Dobzhansky, 1973) that under
complete equality of opportunity there
will be formed aptitude aggregations,
which in important respects will be novel
phenomena, unlike any social classes
with which we are familiar. Suppose that
equal opportunity will create a situation
where every trade, craft, occupation, and
profession will at a given time include all
or most persons genetically qualified for
the respective occupations. It is probable
that in these aggregations few if any individuals will be homozygous for all the
genes that make them prefer the respective occupations. Human populations,
and in fact those of most sexual and outbreeding species, are genetically far too
heterogeneous for such homozygosis. In
every aptitude aggregation and in every
generation, the Mendelian recombination
will therefore keep producing individuals
with genotypes that favor occupations
other than those of their parents. In traditional social classes, even relatively open
ones, parents liked to have their children
“inherit” their occupation and their status.
This tends to frustrate the correspondence
between occupation and genetic predisposition. It would make more biological
as well as sociological sense if the aptitude aggregations will exchange parts of
their progenies in accord with the proclivities and qualifications of the latter.
Precise assignment of individuals to
aptitude aggregations according to their
genetically conditioned proclivities seems
utopian at present. Perhaps the greatest
obstacle is that the upbringing and training of children is usually managed in nuclear families by the parents of the respective children. The home environment
and family background play important
roles in the formation of a child’s habits
and tastes, not to speak of his physical

Behavior Genetics Association, 1973

225

health and development. But home environments depend to some extent on the
genetic endowments of the parents as
well as of the children. The resulting
feedbacks make the relations between the
genetically conditioned cognitive skills,
education, and social status staggeringly
complex.

Jencks and collaborators (1972) have
made strenuous efforts to unravel these
feedbacks and covariances.' They find (p.
138) that in the United States “One of the
ways economically successful families
try to help their children retain their privileges is by making sure that their children
‘get a good education.’ Such efforts are
moderately successful. The correlation
between a white child’s educational attainment and his father’s occupational
status is almost 0.50.” This is no doubt
even more true in many countries other
than the United States. Different kinds of
education were traditionally designed for
scions of different socioeconomic classes,
or else education was one of the privileges of the upper class alone. A radical
departure from these time-honored ways
is being tried in countries otherwise as
different as the Soviet Union, China, and
Israel. When both parents are employed,
the child care is more and more likely to
devolve on communal nurseries and
schools. Trained professionals can then
provide undiscriminatory direction for

'T became acquainted with the admirable work
of Jencks and his colleagues (1972) only when my
own book entitled Genetic Diversity and Human
Equality was in the page-proof stage. In a way, the
present article is an extended comment by a geneticist on the work of these distinguished social scientists. My admiration is tempered only by a regret
that Jencks and his colleagues confound human
genetic diversity with inequality, in the title as well
as throughout their book. What they refer to as “inequality in cognitive skills” is to a large extent the
genetic diversity of cognitive skills in human populations.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

226

the development of socially useful potentialities of their charges. How successful
these experiments will be remains to be
seen. They entail sharp alterations of the
parent-child relationships that are traditionally regarded “normal” or “natural.”

BEYOND EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY

Suppose that two persons with approximately similar genetic endowments were
brought up, one in an advantaged and the
other in a disadvantaged home environment. Quite clearly, these two persons
did not have equal opportunities. To be
“equal” in fact as well as in name, equal
opportunity has to extend for more than a
single generation. Strangely enough, this
simple fact is often ignored in discussions
of human equality. |

An impediment that is even more serious for realization of human equality in
the face of genetic diversity is that some
socially valued abilities are relatively
abundant while others are scarce. Rather
few people can become, for example,
musical virtuosi or conductors of symphony orchestras. Many more can perform well, or at least acceptably, as farmers, manual laborers, clerks, waiters, or
janitors. The possessors of abilities that
are rare but greatly appreciated are likely
to achieve high status and large incomes.
This is even more true in societies that
permit social mobility than in rigid class
societies.

Why should it be that almost everybody can be trained as a manual laborer,
but only few can learn to conduct symphonies? This is one of the simple
questions that do not have really simple
answers, and furthermore no detailed discussion of this problem can be given in
the present article. Reference has already
been made above to what is probably
the most fundamental and distinctive trait

First BGA Presidential Address

 

Social Biology

of the species Homo sapiens. This is the
human educability or trainability, established by an unrelenting pressure of natural selection in the course of human evolution. People can be trained for many
more kinds of work than any animal, wild
or domestic, can possibly be. Yet the educability is not limitless. Some individuals
have special abilities that others simply
do not have, or have some abilities developed much above the population average.
The adaptedness of the human species for
its way of life is based on culture and educability. The developmental plasticity
which results from the educability is,
however, supplemented by genetic diversity. Some individuals take to certain
kinds of training and work with ease and
pleasure, while other individuals have
little or no success in the same kinds of
training. The myths of tabula rasa and of
genetic predestination are both equally
deceptive; the truth is found in-between.
Equality of opportunity does not by
itself lead to equality in educational attainments, occupational statuses, and incomes. The important study by Jencks et
al. (1972) provides a much needed analysis of the interactions of these variables
with genetic diversity and with each other
in the United States. The precept of equal
opportunity does not seem to most Americans incompatible with inequalities in
virtually every sphere of life, because
(p. 3) “some people are more competent
than others, and this will always be so,
no matter how much we reform society.
Many also believe that competence should
be rewarded by success, while incompetence should be punished by failure.” In
particular (p. 16), “The principal arguments against equalizing incomes is that
some people contribute more to the general welfare than others, and that they
are therefore entitled to greater rewards.”
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

Jencks and his collaborators find however
that the data examined in their book (p.
262)

show that neither genetic inequality nor
disparities in family backgrounds dictate
anything like the degree of economic inequality now found in American society. It
is true that genetic diversity almost inevitably leads to considerable variation in
people’s cognitive skills. But variation in
cognitive skills need not result in any significant degree in income inequality, even
in a society where income depends to a
large extent on competitive advantage.

The conclusion is warranted that the
genetic diversity can be made compatible
with equality of opportunity. Suppose,
however, that a fair approximation to an
equality of opportunity is reached. Would
this mean that a society needs no further
improvement in the direction of equality?
The answer hinges on one’s ethical standards and political ideals. At present,
most of the world is still far removed
from the equal opportunity stage. Closer
approaches may then be regarded the
proximate goals of social and political action.

One may however wish to peer beyond
the equal opportunity horizon. Jencks et
al. (1972) have done so and come upon a
multitude of intractable problems. None
of these problems are really new, but they
are rarely considered in the context of
genetic diversity. Jencks et al. have done

Behavior Genetics Association, 1973

227

this only partially, probably because to
them the genetic diversity is merely one
more kind of inequality, albeit the kind
particularly resistant to all attempts to
control it; yet inequalities are man-made
social designs, while the genetic diversity
is a part of nature. Here I can do no more
than to refer the reader to Jencks et al.
and conclude by quoting the last paragraph of their concluding chapter (p. 265):

In America, as elsewhere, the general
trend over the past 200 years has been towards equality. In the economic realm,
however, the contribution of public policy
to this drift has been slight. As long as
egalitarians assume that public policy cannot contribute to economic equality directly but must proceed by ingenious manipulations of marginal institutions like the
schools, progress will remain glacial. If we
want to move beyond this tradition, we
will have to establish political control over
the economic institutions that shape our
society. This is what other countries usually call socialism.

Let me reiterate once more that whether |
you do or do not “want to move beyond
this tradition” is a problem very largely
of ethics, and only marginally of genetics
and biology.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was the Presidential Address,
read at the Third Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association on April 6, 1973
at Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

REFERENCES

Bose, N. R. 1951. Caste in India. Man in India
33:107-123.

DARLINGTON, C. D. 1969. The evolution of man
and society. Allen and Unwin, London.

Davis, K., and W. E. Moore. 1945. Some principles of stratification. Republished 1970 in E. O.
Laumann, P. M. Siegel, and R. W. Hodge (eds.),
The logic of social hierarchies, Markham,
Chicago.

DOBZHANSKY, T. 1973. Genetic diversity and human equality. Basic Books, New York.

ECKLAND, B. K. 1967. Genetics and sociology.
A_ reconsideration. Amer. Sociol. Review
32:173-194.

JENCKS, C., et al. 1972. Inequality. A reassessment
of the effect of family and schooling in America. Basic Books, New York.

MULLER, HERBERT J. 1963. Freedom in the Western
world. Harper and Row, New York.

SCARR-SALAPATEK, S. 1971. Unknowns in the LE.
equation. Science 174:1223-1228.

eee

 
