Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Kin relatedness and church fissioning among the
“Nebraska” Amish of Pennsylvania

James P. Hurd

To cite this article: James P. Hurd (1983) Kin relatedness and church fissioning
among the “Nebraska” Amish of Pennsylvania, Social Biology, 30:1, 59-66, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1983.9988516

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988516

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
Mon, rat Benner wr 4.

Kin Relatedness and Church Fissioning Among the
‘“Nebraska’’ Amish of Pennsylvania

?
§ own

gaverecicenist

s&

wh _
+ %&

«, ieaimnmantitbe ood

rman 8 te
4 mE
EPA RY gE gy

3 Brod, A edtnn wsotdton,

2
woo GR :

wR
# »
eenek
Pg &
eiita
* »
See nas Bs
wae MOGs POR By
soe i nnasr

?
(
My,

James P. Hurd

Department of Anthropology
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania

= = ABSTRACT: A model of group fissioning, applied by Mange (1964) to a Hutterite population and
“iby Chagnon (1975) to an Amazonian Indian population, is applied to the “Nebraska” Amish
© community i in Central Pennsylvania. Genealogical data were collected on 228 living, married
Sindividuals and their known ancestors in two new churches resulting from the fission of a
Schurch in 1978. The acrimonious fissioning of the church produced increased levels of
Qintrachurch genealogical relatedness in the two new churches formed, as compared to the level
oo of relatedness in the original church, with a greater increase for male/male relatedness than for
cy female/female relatedness. This general increase in relatedness, documented for three human
“2 populations and also for fissioning groups of rhesus macaques, conforms to predictions from

—kin selection theory.

The thesis of this paper is that when a
akin-oriented society fissions, individuals
‘S tend to regroup with close relatives and
= separate from more distant relatives.
This thesis is based on a body of theory
zB developed i in evolutionary biology, par® Sticularly theories of kin selection (Ham‘silton, 1964; Maynard Smith, 1964). Kin
selection theorists predict that there is a
Oo biological reason for cooperation be2 tween related individuals, whatever the
é 3 additional cultural reasons may be. The
Darwinian concept of individual fitness
© is expanded to include the concept of inclusive fitness. Inclusive fitness means
that individuals “‘weigh”’ the costs and
benefits of their behavior, considering
not only their own survival and reproduction, but also that of their near relatives with whom they share a proportion
of genes identical by descent. There
have been several attempts to test these
theories with respect to human social
behavior (e.g., Tiger and Fox, 1971;
Irons, 1979).

higan] at

59

During the course of my field work
among the “‘Nebraska”’ Amish of Central Pennsylvania, the question arose as
to whether the fissioning of Amish
churches would be congruent with the
theory of inclusive fitness and whether
fissioning would lead to higher withingroup kin relatedness. The latter had
been demonstrated for a Hutterite isolate (Mange, 1964) and for the Yanomam6 of Venezuela (Chagnon, 1975).
Mange showed that R (“‘average genetic
covariance,” somewhat analogous to
Wright’s Coefficient of Relationship as
used below) increased an average of 27
per cent for males and 47 per cent for females as the result of the fission of Hutterite colonies (Mange, 1964).

Chagnon developed a model to explore the role of genealogical kinship
(putative or accepted genealogical
links) in generating cohesion or “‘solidarity” ina Yanomam6 village. Solidarity was defined as “‘the ability of members of a local group to live together with
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

60

a sufficient degree of amiability so they
can settle their differences . . . and continue to remain a distinct local group”
(Chagnon, 1975). The model is based on
calculations of relatedness between
pairs of individuals as discussed below
and predicts that as a village grows in
size, the closeness of genealogical relatedness among its members appears to
decrease. After a village fissions, the relatedness (and presumably the “‘solidarity”) in each of the daughter villages increases over what it was in the combined
mother village. This increase in withingroup relatedness is an invariable aspect
of newly-fissioned Yanomam6 villages
(Chagnon, 1981).

A Yanomam6 village is politically autonomous and has no effective higher
level of authority to obey. An Amish
church district has no higher religious
authority to obey and is autonomous
with respect to naming new ministers,
disciplining errant members, and approving church rules. Just as Barnes suggested that African models of social organization seemed not to fit New
Guinea data (Barnes, 1962), Chagnon
argued that ecological models developed in New Guinea (Vayda, Rappaport) and applied to lowland South
America (Harris, Ross, Gross) did not
seem to fit as well as a biosocial model
(Chagnon, 1980). Here, I argue that the
model of fissioning applied to the Hutterites and to the Yanomam6 can be applied to other groups, because it is based
on a general biosocial propensity of human kinship groups.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Over 85,000 Amish individuals live in
the United States and Canada. Along
with the Hutterites and Mennonites,
they share Anabaptist roots that reach

Hurd

Social Biology

back to sixteenth-century Germany and
Switzerland (Hostetler, 1980). The
Anabaptists (represented today by the
Amish, Hutterites, Mennonites, and
Brethren), embraced pacifism, separation from the world, baptism of believing adults only, and a simple farming
way of life. Today, the Mennonite
churches are the most highly acculturated to the greater U.S. society. Hutterites live a more separated life on communal farms. The Amish have
family-owned farms where they use agricultural machinery developed in the
last century, with the horse providing
the only traction power in the fields. The
Nebraska Amish of Central Pennsylvania are the most faithful of all Pennsylvania Amish to religious tradition and
custom and use technology simple even
by Amish standards.

The Nebraska Amish church is so
named because an Amish bishop from
Nebraska organized the church in Mifflin County in 1880. Their communities
are located in Mifflin, Centre, Snyder,
and Union counties in Central Pennsylvania.

Figure 1 shows the geographic locations of the three present-day Nebraska
Amish churches.

The three churches are designated
CZA, SYA, and RYA to preserve a
measure of anonymity. The church districts are geographic entities and represent groups of families that meet for biweekly worship in the farm home of one
of the members. The CZA church is
composed of ML, WD, and PM church
districts; the RYA church is composed
of PR and WA church districts; and the
SYA church is composed of LL, CL,
and MC church districts.

The churches themselves are constellations of church districts that exchange

_ministers, share similar church rules,

 

 
 

Vol. 30, No. 1

  
     
  

    
 

 

Countles a

  

Churches:
centre

  

    
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
   

 
 

istricts} and RYA church (2 districts).

3:39 Q8 Decer

and form endogamous mating groups.
"Note that the boundaries of several of
the church districts almost coincide with
the boundaries of the districts of other
thurches. Before 1933, the Nebraska

mish constituted a single church. An
‘gcrimonious fission in 1933, and another
a 1978, produced the three churches
‘which exist at present, referred to in this
ppper as the SYA, CZA, and RYA
-ehurches. This paper analyzes the fission

at occurred in 1978 in the old CZA
€hurch, which resulted in the establishment of the present-day CZA church
and the RYA church.

In both the Yanomam6 and the Hutterite cases, fission involved a geographic separation, with part of the
group moving a distance away to found
anew unit. In the case of the Amish, the
fissioning is sociological in that at the
moment of the fission there was no geographic movement of the dissenting factions but rather a social reorganization
of the worshipping group.

In order to apply the fissioning model
to the Nebraska Amish, it was necessary

/ unlon \

CZA ~-~--- /
5a
RYA ———)-——+- \j ,,
geen 7
PM PR
/
_Z
— __

Kin Relatedness 61

       
  

“
Pion

\
Cee
/

PENNSYLVANIA

 

Fic. 1.—The Nebraska Amish in Central Pennsylvania: CZA church (3 districts), SYA church (3

to obtain a measure of kin relatedness,
or “solidarity,” in the church. The measure used was the mean Coefficient of
Relationship (R) between all possible
pairs of individuals in the old CZA
church. The same calculation was then
made for all possible pairs of individuals
within the two new churches and all possible pairs of individuals between
churches (i.e., where one member of
the pair was in one church and the other
member was in the other church). In order to calculate the value of R, it was
necessary to calculate first the Coefficient of Inbreeding (F) (Wright, 1922):

(1)

The value of 11 is the number of genealogical steps from ego’s first parent to
the common ancestor, n2 is the number
of genealogical steps from ego’s second
parent to the same common ancestor,
and F, is the inbreeding coefficient of
this common ancestor. The formula inside brackets is applied to each different
pathway through each common ances
F=)[(0.5)"+2+1(14+F,)|

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

62 Hurd

tor, and the results are summed, to give
F. The value of Fis based on the number
of ancestors common to both of ego’s
parents, and their genealogical distance
from ego, and measures the probability
that alleles at the same genetic locus will
be identical by descent. The calculation
of Fis dependent on complete genealogical trees going back five generations for
each individual. For the Nebraska
Amish sample, these trees, or pedigrees, are 91.1 per cent complete five
generations from ego.

The Coefficient of Inbreeding is calculated on genealogical relatedness, is
dependent on the generational depth of
the pedigree, and will be identical to biological relatedness only insofar as putative genealogical relationships reflect
actual biological relationships. In the
case of the Amish these two types of relatedness are highly likely to be identical. There is no divorce; all marriages
are monogamous; the group has strict
sexual mores; almost all couples marry
immediately if they conceive a child out
of wedlock; and finally, the high degree
of personal interaction in the community allows close monitoring of illicit liaisons.

The Coefficient of Relationship (R)
represents the probability that alleles at
homologous loci in two individuals will
be identical by descent (Wright, 1922).

2F;

V (1+ F) (1+F)

F=Coefficient of Inbreeding (see Formula 1); i=the first individual in the
dyad; and j= the second individual. F; is
the first individual’s Coefficient of Inbreeding; F, is the second individual's
Coefficient of Inbreeding, and F; is the
Coefficient of Inbreeding of the off
Rj = (2)

Social Biology

spring (real or hypothetical) of the two
individuals. The value of R is an index of
the proportion of genes any two individuals share in common.

For our purposes, R is a measure of
how closely any two individuals are biologically related. Because pedigrees are
truncated at five generations, the value
of R will be less than if the pedigrees
were deeper. However, the derived values for R are entirely adequate for our
purposes here since we are interested in
relative, not absolute, levels of relatedness between individuals.

During 1979-80 I collected genealogical and demographic data on all Nebraska Amish individuals, including 228
currently-married individuals in the old
CZA church. R was calculated for all
possible pairs of the 228 individuals.
These people are the independent
decision-makers in Amish society and
would be the individuals who choose a
new church at the time of a fission. Had
children been included, the levels of relatedness would have been even higher
because of the close relationships within
the nuclear family. Finally, the mean relationship of all pairs, or dyads, was calculated. This mean relationship expresses how closely on average any two
community members are related, and
thus it is an overall measure of the degree of relatedness in a group. For simplicity I consider the 1980 population in
the combined CZA and RYA churches
to be the same population that existed in
the old CZA church in 1978 at the time
the church fissioned. There were fewer
than ten individuals who died, married,
or migrated between 1978 and 1980.

RESULTS

Before the fission, the old CZA
church was composed of 228 married inVol. 30, No. 1

dividuals. After fission, 142 (62.3 per
cent) of the married individuals remained in the CZA church, 86 (37.7 per
cent) formed the new RYA church. No
marriages dissolved as a result of the
fission. The immediate consequence of
the fission was that instead of all individuals meeting in one farm home for biweekly church services, the two factions
began meeting in separate farm homes.
nihe fission did produce a strain toward
= geographic relocation, because individu“als who found themselves “displaced”
tended to eventually move if they could
olocate suitable farmland nearer the cenoO
Ater of their worshipping community. The
cefission also had the effect of segregating
athe gene pool, since subsequently mates
ciwould be chosen primarily from within
~sthe boundaries of the new churches.
Table 1 summarizes the kinship information before and after the fission.
‘“‘Number of dyads” refers to all posSsible pairs of individuals. “Per cent of
Sdyads related” is the per cent of all dy
—_

University 9 I Michiga an

by [

Kin Relatedness

63

ads that have at least one ancestor in
common, or alternatively, the average
per cent of the population that each individual is related to. Prior to the fission
there were 25,878 possible dyads in the
sample. Of these dyadic pairs, 90.4 per
cent were related. This high number of
related pairs indicates a closed population with few immigrants. Relatedness
between pairs is complex. On the average, a pair of individuals is related in five
different ways or via five different genealogical pathways. By measuring relatedness between all possible dyads and
then averaging, we obtain a Mean Coefficient of Relationship (R) for the dyads
in general. This average measures the
probable relatedness between two individuals drawn at random from the sample. The mean relationship between all
possible pairs is 0.0648. For comparison, the relationship between first cousins is 0.1250, and 0.0312 between second
cousins.

The “‘after fission’’ part of the table

TABLE 1

(COMPARISON OF ALL DyYADsS FoR 114 MARRIED MALES AND 114 MarRRIED FEMALES BEFORE AND
AFTER THE FISSIONING OF THE CZA CHURCH IN 1978

nloade

AFTER FISSION

Dyaps BeErore FISsion Within-church Between-church
= Dyads Dyads
CO  — ————  ——  ——————_... a

QAI! dyads
No. Of dyads 25 ou name nusameras 25,878 13,666 12,212
% of dyads related............ 90.4 92.2 88.3
Mean coeff. of relat. (R)....... 0.0648 0.0767 0.0514
Male/male dyads
No. of dyads .......-......0.. 6,441 3,388 3,053
% of dyads related............ 92.7 94.4 90.8
Mean coeff. of relat.(R)....... 0.0690 0.0848 0.0515
Female/female dyads
No. of dyads ................. 6,441 3,388 3,053
% of dyads related............ 88.3 90.6 85.7
Mean coeff. of relat. (R)....... 0.0609 0.0709 0.0499

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

64

demonstrates the sorting of individuals
into groups where they are more closely
related to individuals within their new
church than they are to individuals in the
other new church. The difference is apparent in the comparison of all dyads
within new churches, as opposed to dyads that cross church boundaries. The
important fact is the increase in relatedness within churches after the fission,
and the decrease in relatedness between
churches (see Fig. 2).

After the church fissioned, there
were 13,666 possible dyads between individuals in the same church. Each individual was related to an average of 92.2
per cent of the individuals in his or her
new church, and as a result of the fission,
the mean Coefficient of Relationship
(R) between dyads rose from 0.0648 to
0.0767.

12,212 possible dyads existed across
church lines, with each individual being
related on average to 88.3 per cent of individuals in the opposite church. The

-09

BCBMCWKKW

DYADS

Hurd

GW

male/male

Social Biology

mean value of R for these dyads fell to
0.0514. The mean relatedness for all
possible pairs within both new churches
is 49.2 per cent greater than the mean relatedness for all possible pairs between
churches. A t-test for the difference between two sample means demonstrates
this statistically significant difference
(t= 23.096; pr.<0.001).

Because the Amish are ‘‘patrifocal’’
in their ideology and practice, we would
expect that married males would have a
disproportionate influence on choice of
church membership at time of fission
compared to married females. The bottom portion of Table 1 shows the sex differences with regard to relatedness.
Both before and after the fission, males
had slightly more relatives of the same
sex than females had and were more
closely related to these male relatives
than females were to their female relatives. There were 6,441 male/male dyads before fission, with a mean R value
of 0.0690. After fission, the mean value

[| within churches

Z

between churches

WMDBRKK. .,Q,

female/female

Fic. 2.—Mean Coefficients of Relationship (R) within and between churches after the 1978 fission of

the CZA church.

 
Vol. 30, No. 1

of R for 3,388 male dyads within
churches rose to 0.0848, 64.7 per cent
higher than the mean R for all betweenchurch male/male dyads (0.0515). A ttest demonstrated, the statistical
significance of this difference
(t=14.478, pr.<0.001). There were
6,441 female/female dyads before
fission with a mean R value of 0.0609.
After fission, the mean value of R for
_within- church female/female dyads rose
=to 0.0709. The mean R for these dyads
(Was 42.1 per cent higher than the mean
BR for between-church female/female dyfads (t= 9.53, pr.<.001).
2 The significant fact here is the comarison between male and female patoterns of relatedness after fission.
ereas the mean R for females was
42.1 per cent greater within than be‘tween churches, the mean R for males
was 64.7 per cent greater within than be“dween churches (see Fig. 2). These data
Suggest that males preferentially re‘@roup with other close male relatives at
the expense of females regrouping with
aheir female relatives—a reflection, and
‘perhaps measure, of the “patrifocality”
“of Amish society (see Chagnon, 1981,
or similar findings on the patrilineal
‘Yanomam6). These findings contrast
Svith the Hutterite data, where at time of
‘dission, female within-group relatedness
ose more than that of the males
Mange, 1964).

DISCUSSION

The analysis demonstrates that, after
the fission of the CZA church, individuals were more highly related to members of their new church than they were
to members of the old combined church.
It is clear that the basis of church fission
is not geographic. An examination of
Figure 1 reveals that the three church af
 

Kin Relatedness 65

filiations are not contiguous geographic
entities. Indeed, each affiliation has
church districts in two separate areas,
and six of the eight church districts are
substantially overlapped with church
districts of another affiliation.

In addition to the overall patterns of
relatedness, there were striking differences between male/male and female/
female relatedness. Male/male relatedness within the new churches was
absolutely and relatively higher than
was female/female relatedness, reflecting the “‘patrifocality” of Amish society
(Fig. 2). To the extent that genealogical
kinship reflects group solidarity or cohesion, this method allows us to measure
solidarity in a group where genealogical
kinship is an important factor in individual behavior. The increased levels of relatedness in the new churches, and the
male bias in this relatedness, lead us to
believe that “‘patrilineages” of brothers
may be the cohesive groups that remain
together at the time of Amish church
fission. Hutterite fissioning presents an
interesting contrast in that, although
Hutterite postmarital residence is patrilocal, at the time of community fission
the relatedness of wives increases more
than that of husbands (Mange, 1964).

The increased relatedness in the new
Nebraskan churches can be seen as a
tendency for individuals to ‘“‘circumscribe” (defined by Chagnon, 1968) a
group of close kinsmen within a social
boundary (in this case, the worshipping
community), and, by default, exclude
less-closely-related kin. This worshiping, kin-related group that forms and reforms as a result of fissions in the Amish
church gives us a clue to the success and
survival of the Amish way of life.

The study of macaque social groups
by Chepko-Sade and Olivier (1979)
demonstrates the same increase in

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

66

group relatedness after fissioning. The
discovery of the same kin behavior in
three human societies and in macaque
social groups is striking and conforms to
predictions from kin selection theory.
This mode of fissioning produces two
distinctive gene pools whose genetic
characteristics and evolutionary careers
may be quite different. It may also suggest a mechanism of evolutionary
change pervasive in ancestral hominid
populations.

Hurd

Social Biology

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research for this paper was supported by a grant from the Hill Foundation
for Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University, and a NEH granttoJ. A. Hostetler,
who provided valuable counsel during the
field-work process. I am indebted to Thomas
Melancon, Pennsylvania State University,
for designing a computer program to allow
tracing and linking of these pedigrees for
each pair of individuals in the sample, and
for help in the analytical process. For constructive comments on the text I thank C.
Clogg, R. Eckhardt, and T. Baker.

REFERENCES

Barnes, J. A. 1962. African models in the New
Guinea highlands. Man 2:5-20.

CHAGNON, N. A. 1968. The culture-ecology of
shifting (pioneering) cultivation among the
Yanomam6 Indians. Jn Proceedings of the
Eighth International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences. September. Tokyo, Japan.

. 1975. Genealogy, solidarity, and relat
edness: Limits to local group size and pat
terns of fissioning in an expanding popula
tion. Yearbook of Phys. Anthrop., Vol. 19.

. 1980. Highland New Guinea models in

the South American lowlands. Jn R. Hames

(ed.), Studies in hunting and fishing in the

neotropics, Issue No. 2 (K. Kensinger, se
ries editor, Working papers on South American Indians). Bennington College, Vermont.

. 1981. Terminological kinship, genealogical relatedness, and village fissioning
among the Yanomam6@ Indians, p. 490-508.
InR.D. Alexander and D.W. Tinkle (eds.),
Natural selection and social behavior: Recent research and new theory. Chiron Press,
New York.

CHEPKO-SADE, B. D., and T. J. OLIvErR. 1979,
Coefficient of genetic relationship and the
probability of intragenealogical fission in
Macaca mulatta. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.
5:263-278.

 

 

 

HamiLton, W. D. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behavior. II. J. Theoret. Biol.
7:17-S2.

HostTet_er, J. A. 1980. Amish society. The
Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

Hurp, J. 1981. Mate choice among the Nebraska Amish of central Pennsylvania.
Ph.D. dissertation. Pennsylvania State
Univ., University Park.

Irons, W. A. 1979. Cultural and biological success, p. 257-272. InN. A. Chagnon and W.
A. Irons (eds.), Evolutionary biology and
human social behavior: An anthropological
perspective, Duxbury Press, North Scituate, Mass.

MANGE, A. 1964. Growth and inbreeding of a
human isolate. Hum. Biol. 36(2):104—133.

MAYNARD SITH, J. 1964. Group selection and
kin selection. Nature 20(4927):1145—1147.

MELANCON, T. F. 1981. Marriage and reproduction among the Yanomam6 Indians of
Venezuela. Ph.D. dissertation. Pennsylvania State University, University Park.

TIGER, L., and R. Fox. 1971. The imperial animal. McClelland and Steward Ltd., Toronto.

WRIGHT, S. 1922. Coefficients of inbreeding
and kinship. Amer. Natur. 56:330-338.

 
