Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Automobile accidents and birthdays: An
attempted extension of the “death dip” hypothesis

Phillip R. Kunz & Carla Williams

To cite this article: Phillip R. Kunz & Carla Williams (1983) Automobile accidents and birthdays:
An attempted extension of the “death dip” hypothesis, Social Biology, 30:1, 106-108, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1983.9988521

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988521

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
Automobile Accidents and Birthdays:
An Attempted Extension of the ‘‘Death Dip”’

Hypothesis

Phillip R. Kunz and Carla Williams

Department of Sociology
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah

variables were carefully controlled.

3:39 08 December 2015

Several studies have found a relation— ship between the birthday and death
& date. Fischer and Olin (1972) argued
S that people put off death to correspond
‘<= with what they termed “emotionally= invested deadlines” which are specific
« and important to the person. They de> Scribed those cases where former Presi‘4 dents of the United States died on the
> Fourth of July, America’s birthday. One
5 has to be careful of selected cases, how> ever, unless the selection process is ran= dom for the universe being studied. The
3 studies of Hilgard (1953) and Hilgard
and Newman, (1961) describing death
= patterns where a child died on the death
A date of a parent may be a post-hoc explanation using cases that fit.

Using better methodology, Phillips
and Feldman (1973) found a ‘“‘death
dip” or a reduction in the expected number of deaths just prior to Yom Kippur
in cities of high Jewish population. Another study done by Phillips (1972)
found a similar “‘death dip” for famous
people such as royalty, persons listed in
Who Was Who, Four Hundred Notable
Americans, and Aristocracy of the
World, 1967. The “‘death dip” finding is
explained by the rationale that people

ownloa

 

ABSTRACT: Although recent studies have found a relationship between one’s birthday and such
events as suicide, mortality, and accidents, this study of automobile accident reports in one of
the Mountain states found no relationship between the drivers’ birthdays and the accidents. The
expected increase in automobile accidents following birthdays did not occur, even though other

postpone death to witness a birthday because of its importance or significance to
them.

Kunz and Summers argued from
Durkheim’s (1980) premise that this
“death dip” should hold for people who
were not public notables. Durkheim’s
premise states:

There can be no society which does
not feel the need of upholding and
reaffirming at regular intervals the collective sentiments and collective ideas which
make its unity and personality. Now this
moral remaking cannot be achieved except by means of reunions, assemblies,
and meetings where the individuals, being closely united to one another,
reaffirm in common their common sentiments; hence come (religious and political) ceremonies. .. .

An individual, in his turn, if he is
strongly attached to the society of which
he is a member, feels that he is morally
held to participating in its sorrows and
joys; not to be interested in them would
be equivalent to breaking the bonds uniting him to the group. .. .”

Using a random sample of deaths
from a metropolitan area of 753,000
people, Kunz and Summers (1980) examined the times of death separated
into quarters of the year following the

106

 
NY
—
S
a
an
8
E
D

oO
oO

wnloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 D

°
A

Vol. 30, No. 1

birthday. A death was classified as in
Quarter One if it occurred in the first
three months following the last birthday
anniversary, in Quarter Two if in the
fourth through sixth months, and so on.
Their data showed that almost half of
the people died in the first quarter after
their birthday whereas fewer than ten
per cent died in the quarter before the
birthday—irrespective of cause of
death. This death pattern even obtained
for accidental death and suicide. Kunz
and Summers did not find such a pattern
for homicide victims nor Korean war casualties; rather, in these latter two categories, nearly twenty-five per cent died
in each quarter, as would be predicted
by chance.

Examining a different aspect of this
type of research, Phillips (1972) found
an increase in motor vehicle fatalities
following well-publicized suicides. He
suggests that these increases are in fact
“concealed suicides” which he explains
in terms of a theory of suggestion. Whatever the theory, one can argue that man
apparently can modify the “accidental”
properties of death and in this case of an
auto accident.

We argue, then, that since there is an
apparent relationship between birthdays and date of death, including death
by accidents, there should be a relationship between birthdays and automobile
accidents, whether the latter result in
deaths or not.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Data were obtained from the Highway Accident Reports file for 1979 for
one of the Mountain States. This computerized file permitted selection of accident reports from urbanized counties
along the heavily populated Wasatch
Front area of Utah and for rural counties as well. Data for relevant variables

Brief Reports

107

were printed, and the three cases listed
last per page were used for the study if
all pertinent information was listed. Accidents were listed in order of occurrence for each county, and the cases
were systematically obtained. However,
within the time and locality frame, the
sample was random, A total of 2,093
cases were used in the study.

Variables for which data were available included the date of the accident,
birth date of the driver, number of vehicles involved, driver alcohol, type of accident, severity of accident, road surface, light conditions, weather, roadway
character, and contributing circumstances.

The quarter in which the accident occurred was determined by the day of the
driver’s birthday and counting the first
three months as Quarter One, the second three months as Quarter Two, and
soon.

RESULTS

Examination of the data indicates
that the accidents included in this sample do not follow the predicted pattern:
25 per cent of the accidents fell in the
first quarter, 25 in the second, 27 in the
third, and 23 in the fourth quarter. Obviously there was no significant difference in automobile accidents by quarters following drivers’ birthdays. One of
the problems with these data is that we
were able to examine the data for only
one driver rather than for both, and it is
possible that the driver at fault would be
the one for whom the pattern ought to
hold while the other driver or drivers involved could be compared to the homicide and war victims reported by Kunz,
in that they may not have contributed to
the accident.

We attempted to take this problem
into account by examining the data for
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

108

those accidents with only one vehicle involved. This produced no real change in
the finding already reported of no increase in accidents after a driver’s birthday.

In an attempt to force the pattern for
automobile accidents into the predicted
pattern, we controlled all of our variables, considering only those accidents
which took place with good driving conditions of every type such as dry roadways, clear weather, good visibility and
so on. Nonetheless, the rather even pattern across quarters did not change.
Consideration of other variables such as
the number of vehicles involved and the
type of accident—a collision with another vehicle, with a fixed object, a
train, or running off of the roadway,
etc.—also did not lend support to our
hypothesis. A check on roadway conditions, light conditions, and weather conditions also failed to change the reported finding.

We must conclude on the basis of the

Kunz

Social Biology

analysis that our hypothesis is not supported by the data and methods that we
used. Inasmuch as the pattern of increased deaths following birthdays obtained for accidental deaths, one might
ask more about accidents in general.
Which kinds of accidents and under
what conditions do and do not fit the
pattern described earlier? It is possible
that automobile fatalities may fit the
pattern, while minor automobile accidents may not. Perhaps there are so
many contributing factors when accidents involving automobiles are involved that our analysis technique did
not sort out these factors in enough detail to establish the pattern. It may also
be possible that our data represented a
biased sample of the population.

We suggest further study of a relationship between birthdays and accidents in general to establish the validity
and reliability of the other studies done
so far in this area of research.

REFERENCES

Bates, M. M. 1977-78. On the relationship
between yearly events and time of death:
Random or systematic distribution? Omega
3:165-177.

Cersus, B. 1970. Seasonal variation in some
mentat health statistics: suicides, homicides,
psychiatric admissions, and institutional
placement of the retarded. J. Clin. Psychol.
26:61-63.

DURKHEIM, E. 1961. The elementary forms of
religious life, p. 475-476. Collier Books,
New York.

FiscHER, H. K., and B. M. OLIN. 1972. Psychogenic determination of time of iliness or
death by anniversary reactions and emotional deadlines. Psychometrics 32:170—
173.

Hitcarp, J. R. 1953. Anniversary reactions in
parents precipitated by children. Psychiatry
16:73-80.

Hiicarp, J. R. and M. F. Newman. 1961. Evidence for functional genesis in mental illness. J. Nerv. Men. Disord. 132:3.

Kunz, P. R. 1977, And a time to die. Mountainwest. 3:36.

Kunz, P. R. and J. SuMMErs. 1979-80. A time
to die: a study of the relationship of birthdays and time of death. Omega 10:231-289.

Puitiies, D. 1972. Deathday and birthday: An
unexpected connection, p. 64-65. In J. M.
Tanur (ed.), Statistics: A guide to the unknown. Holden-Dong, San Francisco.

Puituips, D. P. and K. A. FeLpMAN. 1973. A
dip in deaths before ceremonial occasions:
Some new relationships between social integration and mortality. Amer. Sociol. Rev.
38:678-696.

Rosenzweic, S. 1970. The day of Freud’s
death: A thirtieth anniversary note. J. Psychol. 74:101-117.

SucuMan, E. A. 1968. The ‘“‘hang-loose”’ ethic
and the spirit of drug use. J. Hlth. Soc. Behav. 9:146-155.

Wess, E. 1958. The clinical significance of the
anniversary reaction. Gen. Practit. 17:117—~
119.

 
