Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Genetic influences on acquisition of tolerance to
alcohol

V. Gene Erwin

To cite this article: V. Gene Erwin (1985) Genetic influences on acquisition of tolerance to
alcohol, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 222-228, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988610

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988610

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Genetic Influences on Acquisition
of Tolerance to Alcohol

V. Gene Erwin

 

 

Alcohol Research Center and School of Pharmacy,

University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado

ABSTRACT: This paper provides a general review of the nature of tolerance to alcohol and describes specific studies designed to evaluate genetic influences on the acquisition of tolerance.
Both environmental and genetic factors are involved in acquisition of either acute or chronic
tolerance. Studies showing inbred strain differences in rates of acquisition of tolerance in mice
are prima facie evidence for genetic influences, but the possible interactions between genes and
environmental factors have not been investigated. Potential relationship between acutely and
chronically acquired tolerance to alcohol is discussed.

Animal models have been invaluable
in examining and defining the processes
of tolerance to and dependence on alcohol. This paper will be confined to a discussion of tolerance. A significant body
of literature has accumulated which describes both acute and chronic tolerance
to ethanol in laboratory mice, rats, and
dogs (Kalant et al., 1971; Goldstein,
1980). Of interest is the relative absence
in the literature of studies describing the
development of acute and chronic tolerance to ethanol in human subjects. Since
the early work of Mellanby (1919) in
England, it has been believed that acute
tolerance rapidly develops in humans as
well as in animals; indeed, acquisition of
acute tolerance probably has important
effects on human consumption of alcohol.

Many individuals have experienced
the acquisition of tolerance. For example, naive persons usually are greatly affected by alcohol, showing an initially

poor ability to cope with its inebriating
effects, but ability to compensate for
these effects increases as the person becomes more experienced in alcohol consumption. Unfortunately, this observation has not been studied extensively in
the laboratory (see Wilson and Plomin,
this volume). Coping with the acute effects of alcohol is undoubtedly involved
in any experimentation on the acquisition of tolerance by animals or by human subjects (Kalant et al., 1971; Melchior and Tabakoff, 1984).

Several types of tolerance must be
considered in any study. These include
rapidly acquired functional (behavioral)
tolerance and chronic functional tolerance, as well as both acute and chronic
metabolic tolerance. Experimentally,
each type of tolerance must be further
defined in terms of pharmacological response to alcohol. For example, specific
pharmacological responses for which investigators have measured various types

222

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

of tolerance include the hypothermic effect of alcohol; its anesthetic effect, as
revealed by loss of the righting response
(sleep time); and its intoxicating effect,
as measured by loss of the aerial righting
response (Moore and Kakihana, 1978;
Tabakoff and Ritzman, 1979; Erwin et
al., 1980; Crabbe et al., 1982). The
question addressed in this paper is to
what extent the acquisition of tolerance
is genetically influenced and how the acquisition of tolerance may be correlated
with other alcohol-related behaviors
and actions that are similarly influenced
by genotype.

Hypothetical relationships among
various effects of alcohol and alcoholism
are illustrated in the Venn Diagram
shown in Figure 1. In this diagram the
center circle hypothetically represents
the domain of alcoholism, and each of
the other interrelated circles represents
specific actions of alcohol or alcoholrelated behaviors. For example, voluntary ethanol consumption (VEC), acute
functional tolerance (AFT), and initial
sensitivity (IS) are undoubtedly interrelated within the sphere of alcoholism, although some of their interrelationships
may not be within the alcoholism domain. The extent to which functional
tolerance is related to the other behaviors or effects (e.g., voluntary ethanol
consumption), or to the domain of alcoholism itself, is unknown. We can only
hypothesize that there are given relationships among these various effects of
alcohol and that initial sensitivity and
the acquisition of tolerance are related
to alcoholism by mechanisms that have
not yet been identified. A marked genetic influence on alcoholism has well
been established, and genetic influence
on initial sensitivity to alcohol and on
the acquisition of tolerance has been

Genetic Influences on Alcohol Tolerance 223

well documented (Broadhurst, 1978;
Erwin and McClearn, 1981).

Over the past several years, the
mechanisms of acquisition of tolerance
to alcohol and other CNS depressants
(e.g., the opiates) have become more
difficult to understand in that both
environment-dependent and environment-independent components have
been found to be involved in the acquisition of tolerance (Kalant et al., 1971;
Melchior and Tabakoff, 1984). The
environment-dependent component of
tolerance can be dispositional, i.e., due
to an increase in the rate of metabolism
of alcohol, or it can be functional, in
 

Fic. 1.—Venn Diagram showing hypothetical
relationships among various effects of alcohol and
alcoholism. The center circle represents the domain of alcoholism; other circles represent voluntary ethanol consumption (VEC), acute functional
tolerance (AFT), initial sensitivity (IS), acute
metabolic tolerance (MT), chronic functional tolerance (CFT), and withdrawal severity (WS).
224

volving a change in tissue sensitivity to
alcohol. The environment-independent
component is due to the direct effect of
the drug on the CNS and has been observed in isolated nerve cells, in whole
brain preparations, and in in vivo studies. It is clear, however, that environmental factors can influence the acquisition and expression of tolerance.
Studies to date indicate that acquisition
wn of tolerance to alcohol is a polygenically
© determined trait (Rigter and Crabbe,
5 1980). However, the number of genes
has not been estimated for this trait as it
has for initial sensitivity, nor has there
been an estimate of the heritability of
the acquisition of tolerance to alcohol.
Evidence presented by Tabakoff and
Ritzmann (1979) has shown a very distinct genetic influence on the development of acute tolerance, particularly tolerance following a single dose of
ethanol. In these studies acute tolerance
is defined as the difference between the
brain alcohol concentration when the
righting response is regained compared
to the concentration observed at the
time of loss of the righting response
‘>, (i.e., a single dose or within-dose tolerance). Tabakoff and Ritzmann compared the acquisition of acute tolerance
in C57, C3H, DBA, SS, LS, and F,
crosses derived from LS and SS mice;
C57 mice acquired a greater tolerance
than did C3H or DBA. These data are
prima facie evidence that single-dose
tolerance is under genetic influence.
Another paradigm that has been
used to study acquisition of tolerance is
the repeated administration of ethanol
and observations of decrements in responses to a given ethanol dose. For example, Grieve et al. (1979) compared
the development of the acquisition of
tolerance to repeated injections of 1 g/

by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 Decemb

Downloaded

 

Erwin

Social Biology

kg ethanol, using loss of balance as the
measure, and found that C57 mice more
rapidly acquired tolerance than did TO
Swiss or DBA mice. An important question is whether this rapidly acquired tolerance is related to the acquisition of
chronic tolerance, and these authors
have proposed that chronic tolerance is
a summation of the increments of acute
tolerance which are residual between
ethanol doses. It is clear that the kinetics
of acute tolerance and chronic tolerance
are quite different. First, the acquisition
of acute tolerance is much more rapid
than the acquisition of chronic tolerance, and, more importantly, the rate of
decay of acute tolerance appears to be
more rapid than the rate of decay of
chronic tolerance. The half-life (t,,) for
withdrawal severity and chronic tolerance in Swiss mice was 6 to 8 hours in a
study by Goldstein and Kakihana
(1974).

In our laboratory we have shown that
after repeated injections of ethanol
there are inbred strain differences in
rates of acquisition of tolerance, with
C57 and C3H mice acquiring tolerance
more rapidly than DBA or BALB
strains (see Fig. 2). The elimination of
alcohol and the decline in the rapidly acquired tolerance are shown in Figure 3.
The decline in tolerance parallels the decline in the blood alcohol level, indicating that a major component of the rapidly acquired tolerance has a rapid
turnover. This rapidly acquired tolerance is not a metabolic or dispositional
tolerance, although that may develop as
well, but rather represents a decrease in
brain sensitivity to ethanol-induced impairment as measured by the balancing
task. Of interest in these studies, however, is that significant (approximately
15 per cent) tolerance remained 12
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

500

450

400

350

Blood Ethanol (mg/d)

0 | 2

Genetic Influences on Alcohol Tolerance

225

 

O——O C3H
&——A DBA
eo——® BALB
A—- —& C57

3 4 S

TIME (hours)

Fic. 2—Comparison of rates of acquisition of tolerance in four inbred strains of mice. Mice were injected intraperitoneally with 2 g ethanol/kg body weight and placed on a dowel rod. When the animals
could balance themselves on the rod for 1 minute, blood samples were taken to measure blood alcohol
concentrations. Animals then received another injection of ethanol (1 g/kg), and a second blood sample
was taken when the mouse reached the same pharmacological endpoint (i.e., maintenance of rod balance
for 1 minute). These procedures were repeated at each of the times indicated for each strain. The progressively higher blood alcohol levels required to achieve a similar pharmacological endpoint are defined as

rapidly acquired functional tolerance.

hours after alcohol withdrawal. One
might interpret these results to be consistent with the proposal of Littleton
(1980) that chronic tolerance results
from the accumulation over time of the
small increments of tolerance that develop with each ethanol administration.

Crabbe et al. (1982) have examined
the genetics of the acquisition of tolerance to the hypothermic effects of ethanol. In these studies animals were ad
ministered alcohol for 8 days and their
sensitivity to alcohol was tested at 3, 5,
and 8 days. Out of the 15 inbred strains
tested, about two-thirds of the strains
showed a progressive development of
tolerance to the hypothermic effects of
alcohol. Four strains showed no tolerance acquisition, and four others actually showed some “negative” tolerance,
1.€., an increase rather than a decrease
in sensitivity. The authors estimated a
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

226

@—e TOLERANCE
O-—O BLOOD ETHANOL

lOO®

80

60

40

Retention of Tolerance
(Hi

20

%

Erwin

Social Biology

100

20

+>-—_________—_-4

D

©
Blood Ethanol (% of Levej al
Regaining Righting Response)

0 4} 2 3 4 5 6

— 8 9 10 FT l2

Time (Hours) After Regaining Righting Response

Fic. 3—Rates of alcohol clearance and decline in tolerance in C3H mice. C3H mice were made toler
ant as shown in Figure 2, and the rate of alcohol clearance was determined. in a separate group of tolerant
mice, a challenge dose of ethanol was administered at the times indicated and blood alcohol levels were
determined at the pharmacological endpoint as described for Figure 2. Blood alcohol levels below those

of fully tolerant animals were taken to indicate a decrease in tolerance.

genetic correlation (7) of 0.69 between
initial sensitivities to the anesthetic and
hypothermic effects of ethanol. Acquisition of chronic tolerance to ethanolinduced hypothermia represented a
functional tolerance and was independent of changes in alcohol metabolism.
Erwin et al. (1980) reported phenotypic relationships among voluntary ethanol consumption, initial CNS sensitivity, acute tolerance, and metabolism of
ethanol in a genetically heterogeneous
stock of mice (HS/Ibg). A highly significant and replicable correlation between voluntary consumption and acute
tolerance was observed. There was no

correlation, however, between initial
CNS sensitivity as measured by rod balance and either ethanol consumption or
acquisition of acute tolerance. We have
recently completed studies to extend
these observations to the acquisition of
chronic tolerance and relationships between chronic tolerance and voluntary
ethanol consumption, as well as measures to dependence such as severity of
seizures during withdrawal and hypothermia. HS/Ibg mice were tested to determine the phenotypic correlations
among a number of alcohol-related responses, including hypothermia, loss of
righting response, voluntary ethanol
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 32, No. 34

consumption, acquisition of chronic tolerance, and severity of withdrawal following a 7-day period of ethanol consumption. The results clearly indicated
that the two withdrawal measures, seizure severity score and hypothermia,
were highly correlated (r = 0.68). However, chronic tolerance and the two
withdrawal measures were not significantly correlated. These observations
are consistent with those of Tabakoff
and Ritzmann (1977), who demonstrated that acquisition of tolerance to
and dependence on ethanol were separable responses. It would appear from
these observations that the acquisition
of tolerance and the expression of withdrawal following chronic alcohol ingestion may be mediated by independent
neurochemical mechanisms. This is an

Genetic Influences on Alcoho! Tolerance

227

important observation in that much of
the pharmacology literature would suggest that chronic tolerance and dependence are tightly coupled processes.

In summary, it is well documented
that the acquisition of tolerance to alcohol is subject to both environmental and
genetic influences and that the acquisition of acute tolerance is phenotypically
correlated with voluntary ethanol consumption in mice, but not with withdrawal severity. The extent to which acquisition of tolerance is genetically
influenced remains to be determined.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by
NIAAA Grant AA-03527 as part of the Alcohol Research Center of the University of
Colorado.

REFERENCES

BROADHURST, P. L. 1978. Drugs and the inheritance of behavior: A survey of comparative
psychopharmacogenetics, Plenum, New
York.

CrasB_E, J.C., J. S. JAaNowsky, E. R. YounG,
A. Kososup, J. Stack, and H. RIGTER.
1982. Tolerance to ethanol hypothermia in
inbred mice: Genotypic correlations with
behavioral tesponses. Alcoholism: Clin.
Exper. Res. 6:446-458.

Erwin, V.G., and G. E. McCvLearn. 1981.
Genetic influences on alcohol consumption
and actions of alcohol, p. 405-420. In M.
Galanter (ed), Currents in alcoholism, Vol.
VIII. Grune & Stratton, New York.

Erwin, V.G., G. E. McCrearn, and A. R.
KusE. 1980. Interrelationships of alcohol
consumption, actions of alcohol., and biochemical traits. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 13 (Suppl. 1):297-302.

Go.psTEIn, D. B. 1980 Pharmacology of alcohol. Oxford Press, New York.

GOoLpsTEIN, D. B., and R. KAKIHANA. 1974. Alcohol withdrawal reactions and reserpine
effects in inbred strains of mice. Life Sci.
15:415-425.

GRIEVE, S.J., P. J. GRIFFITHS, and J. M.
LiTTLETOoN. 1979. Genetic influence on the
rate of development of ethanol tolerance
and the ethanol physical dependence syndrome in mice. Drug Alc. Depend. 4:77~86.

KALANT, H., A. E. LEBLaNc, and R.J.
GipBins. 1971. Tolerance to, and dependence on, some non-opiate psychotroic
drugs. Pharmacol. Rev. 23:135-191.

LITTLETON, J. M. 1980. The assessment of
rapid tolerance to ethanol, p. 53-79. In H.
Rigter, andJ. C. Crabbe, Jr. (eds). Alcohol
tolerance and dependence. Elsevier/NorthHolland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam.

Me cuior, C. L., and B. Tasaxorr. 1984. A
conditioning model of alcohol tolerance, p.
5-16. In M. Galanter, (ed). Recent devel
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

228 Erwin

opments in alcoholism, Vol]. 2. Plenum,
New York.

ME.tansy, E. 1919. Alcohol: Its absorption
into and disappearance from the blood under different conditions. Med. Res. Council
(Great Britain), Special Report Series, No.
31.

Moore, J. A., and R. KAkIHANa. 1978.
Ethanol-induced hypothermia in mice: Influence of genotype on development of tolerance. Life Sci. 23:2331-2338.

Social Biology

Ricter, H., and J. C. Crasse, Jr. (eds). 1980.
Alcohol tolerance and dependence.
Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press,
Amsterdam.

TABAKOFF, B., and R. F. RITzMann. 1977. The
effects of 6-hydroxydopamine on tolerance
to and dependence on ethanol. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Ther. 203:319-331.

. 1979. Acute tolerance in inbred and se
lected lines of mice. Drug Alc. Depend.

4:87-90.

 
