Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Low-fertility childbearing decision making

Deborah Oakley

To cite this article: Deborah Oakley (1986) Low#fertility childbearing decision making, Social
Biology, 33:3-4, 249-258, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988643

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988643

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 6

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

   

Deborah Oakley

School of Nursing
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Low-fertility Childbearing Decision Making

    

 

ABSTRACT: It is often assumed that childbearing decisions involve conscious consideration of
alternatives. This study was an investigation of whether community-college enrollees
(N = 419) aged 18 to 36 years old had thought about the low fertility options of having no or one
child. Only half had considered one or both options. Selected characteristics of the decision
making process were also examined. Discriminant analysis showed that the variables contributing significantly to distinguishing among the options-considered groups included the degree of
consciousness about making childbearing decisions in general, religiosity, and the importance
of three variables that measured the values and cost of children: new experiences that children
can provide, generalized costs of children, and achievement of a role identity through parenthood. Outcomes associated with the low-fertility options considered were also studied.

Among women in their peak reproductive years, the shift toward low fertility options has been dramatic. An increasing proportion of women in their
20’s expect to have two, one, or no children; a decreasing proportion expect to
have three, four, or five or more. In the
United States in 1982, 70 per cent of
ever-married women 20 to 24 years old
expected to have two or fewer children,
compared to 44 per cent in 1971 (National Center for Health Statistics, 1983,
1973).

Modern contraceptives make reproductive decisions possible. Having two
children has become the normative
choice, and it is now relevant to study
decision making about low-fertility options: the ideas of having no children or
one child. Do most people specifically
consider low-fertility options? Theories
about the decision making process in
general posit a series of decision making
steps, starting with conscious recogni
249

tion of choice as an issue. In decision
making, this first step is referred to as
awareness of choice, or recognizing a
problem or need (Brim et al., 1962;
Janis and Mann, 1977). If theories about
the decision making process apply to
childbearing, there should be widespread recognition that personal choice
about having children is possible. This
first step initiates the subsequent decision making phases: information gathering, development and evaluation of alternatives, choice, action, and reevaluation. Without the initial step, there
would be no trigger to activate decision
making, so that options would go unrecognized and choices would never actually be made.

Theories about the decision making
process also indicate that once an issue is
recognized as a matter of choice, action
alternatives should be generated. While
decision making theory does not specify
how many, or how similar, the options

 

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

250 Oakley

should be, more than one would be required to make a decision a choice. Prescriptive programs to improve decision
making under uncertainty have generally been designed to promote making
choices among multiple similar options
(Beach et al., 1976), but the few studies
of how people actually do make decisions in real life settings have focused on
the number, rather than on the similarity, of options considered.

Past studies of reproductive decisions
indicate that some people lack awareness about choice. Most who are aware
consider a limited number of options. In
one U.S. study, 26 per cent of the parent
couples and 6 per cent of the nonparent
couples studied said they had made no
active decision about having or not having children (Ory, 1978). Silka and
Kiesler (1977) also concluded that consciously considering alternatives was not
typical in their study group of 21 couples
intending to remain childless, 21 intending to have children, and 19 unsure
couples. Busfield and Paddon (1977)
observed that their sample of 290 British
couples tended to take the idea of having children for granted. Oakley’s analysis (1980) of data from 66 primiparous
pregnant women clients of a London
clinic showed further that these women
typically felt that women had to have babies as part of their feminine role, so
that decision making was generally irrelevant. Beckman (1978) characterized
some couples as slowly drifting into parenthood, while Hollerback (1980) used
the phrase passive fertility decision
making for people who did not even recognize possible fertility choices.

As for more specific reproductive behaviors, Steinhoff (1978) and Rosen and
Benson (1982) found that the number of
alternative ways considered to resolve
an unplanned pregnancy varied. In

Social Biology

Steinhoff’s U.S. study of abortion clinic
and maternity patients, all of whom
were single at the time of conception, 57
per cent of the 91 women who obtained
abortions had considered the other alternatives of marriage, single parent- |
hood, or adoption, but only one of the
27 who became mothers had seriously
considered abortion. In Rosen and Benson’s study of adolescent partners, the
31 young women who kept the baby
were more likely to feel that their partner saw no problem or decision to be
made. Among the total number of
males interviewed (19), 22 per cent considered only one alternative outcome,
but 29 per cent considered at least four.

Luker’s study (1975) of abortion patients in a California clinic showed that
denial of sexual activity, fear of parents’
finding out about their daughter’s sexual
activity, and misestimating probabilities
of pregnancy all contributed to limiting
the contraceptive alternatives considered.

Mumford (1983) found in his study of
vasectomized men that they had begun
serious consideration of a vasectomy
only after completing or going beyond
their desired family size. Until that time,
they had generally ignored information
about the procedure.

These findings about reproductive
decision making are consistent with new
research on decision making in general
(Wright, 1984), Prescription about the
“best” way to make decisions is now differentiated from description about how
people actually go about making their
decisions,

Since decision making theory may be
an adequate guide to understanding decision processing for some, but not all
people, one aim of the exploratory study
reported here was to examine the decision making process about explicit con
 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

sideration of low-fertility options. Because previous research on related
topics suggested that consideration
might not be universal, the major focus
of this study was on determining factors
tassociated with explicit consideration of
low-fertility options. It was hypothesized that low-fertility decision makers,
those who explicitly considered the options, would differ in demographic, attitude, and other decision processing
characteristics. Research on reproductive, as well as other decisions, shows
that those who recognize options are
more educated and less traditional.
Generally, these traits are associated
with different values and decision processing characteristics.

Finally, it was also hypothesized that
having considered the low fertility options would be positively related to using more effective birth control methods
and negatively related to the number of
children expected.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Respondents for this study were enrolled in a middle-western community
college in the United States—a sampling
source that was likely to have adequate
representation of persons expecting to
have two or fewer children, and thus to
have considered the low fertility options. A recruitment letter was sent to a
one-in-three simple random sample of
pnrollees stratified by sex and zip code.
Twenty-eight per cent offered to participate, providing a convenience sample of
223 women and 196 men, all of whom
were interviewed personally, usually in
their homes. Demographically, they
were similar to county residents of the
same ages.

The variable measuring the lowfertility alternatives considered was con
Low-fertility Decision Making

251

structed from a series of three questions.
These questions determined whether
people had thought or had always assumed they would or would not have
children; whether they had thought
about having just one child. The constructed variable then showed the extent
to which options were considered, ranging from those who were assumers
through those who had thought about it
but had not considered either of the two
low-fertility options explictly, and those
who had considered one but not the
other, to those who had considered
both.

In accord with theories about the
childbearing decision process (Burch,
1980), the idea of self-conscious, deliberate decision making was operationalized by an eight-item scale of consciousness about decision making. Cronbach’s
alpha for this scale was 0.72, indicating
adequate internal reliability.

Other aspects of the decision process
that were measured included the timing
and ways in which the alternatives were
considered: the age at which the respondent first thought about having children;
whether or not the respondent reported
having “requirements” for things to be a
certain way before having children; and
a measure of current salience of thinking
about having (more) children. These
variables were initial ways to examine
components of the way low fertility
ideas are considered, whatever the number of alternatives.

Demographic variables included age,
sex, religion, religiosity, marital status,
expectations for completed education,
measures of work status and work history, and current personal income. Attitude variables included the number of
children wanted when the respondent
was growing up, the amount of satisfaction they felt they would derive from
  

 

  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

 

 

 

252

having a(nother) child, whether or not
they felt there was a maximum age for
childbearing, and a set of five variables

_ produced from 49 benefit and cost items

derived from Hoffman and Hoffman’s
(1973) work on the values of children as
adapted by Bram (1978). The five factors were identified by factor analysis,
using varimax rotation after a principal
axis solution. These five factors accounted for 45 per cent of the variance in
the 49 items and dealt with generalized
costs, new experiences, interruption of
partner’s career or education, parenthood role identification, and fears associated with having children,

The current method of contraception
and the number of children expected
were the outcome variables.

The analysis was conducted in three
phases. First, the decision making process was described. Next, discriminant
analysis was used to determine characteristics associated with explicit consideration of the various low-fertility
choices. This statistical technique was
used because the aim was to determine
factors that identified differences among
the decision making groups. All variables used in this part of the study met requirements for use in discriminant analysis (Klecka, 1982), and were used as
either interval or dichotomous measures. Finally, bivariate statistical tests
were conducted to see whether low fertility decision making was related to the
outcome variables.

RESULTS

Thirty-five per cent never thought
about whether or not to have children,
but instead just assumed they would; another 5 per cent assumed they would not
have any. In other words, 40 per cent of
the sample never entered into any deci
 

Oakley

    

   
 

   

Social Biology

sion making process about the idea of
having children at all. They could not
generate low-fertility options because
they never thought about an opportunity to choose. This group was labeled as
assumers.

Ten per cent reported they had
thought about whether or not to have
childrén but said they had not considered either of the low-fertility options
specifically. Presumably, they considered higher fertility options, which were
not examined in this study. This group
was labeled as thinkers.

Only 27 per cent of the sample considered both having none and having
one child. This group was labeled as
having considered both options. Among
those considering just one option, but
not both, 16 per cent considered only
the single option of having no children
(the no-child option only group), while 7
per cent considered only the single lowfertility option of having one child (the
one-child option only group).

Half of the respondents (27 + 16 + 7
per cent) had explicitly considered both
or at least one of the low fertility options. That is, they had proceeded to the
low fertility option consideration phase
specified in theories about how people
go about making decisions, but individuals differed as to how many low fertility
options they considered. Although 27
per cent had considered both, another
23 per cent had considered only one op- tion. ~

Responses to the items comprising
the decision making consciousness scale
are shown in Table 1. Most (83 per cent)
chose the most or most nearly conscious responses for a majority of the
items, and 22 percent did so for all eight
items in the scale.

As for timing, Table 2 shows the distribution of ages for the first thoughts
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4 Low-fertility Decision Making 253
TABLE 1
PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONSES TO ITEMS CONSTITUTING SCALE FOR CONSCIOUS
DECISION MAKING
APPLIED
ITEM Definitely Somewhat Little Bit Not at All
Term “decision making” about whether or
not tohave any children .............. 60.3% 21.5% 9.6% 8.6%
Term “decision making” about total
number of children to have ............ 56.7 24.9 10.5 7.7
Term “decision making” about when to
have children ...........cc cee eeeeeee 54.3 24.3 10.7 10.2
There are/were no real decisions ....... 7.9 9.3 17.4 65.4
Having children is/was carefully
thought out ........ ee eee eee ee eee 59.2 24.7 7.7 8.4
Having children is/was just part of life ... 13.7 23.6 23.4 39.3
Circumstances just decide(d) .......... 10.9 23.1 24.8 41.3
I feel/felt that I have/had control over the
SitWation vo... cece eee eee ee eee eee 49.2 35.5 10.1 5.3
TABLE 2
PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF AGES FOR First THOUGHTS ABouT HAVING CHILDREN
PER CENT
Below 10 10-17 18-20 21-25 Over 25 Not
ITEM years years Years Years Years sure
First thought about having
(N= 249) 2... cc eaeee 3.6% 36.5% 29.3% 21.3% 9.2% 0.0%
First thought about having
no children
(N=179) ............ 1.1 27.9 32.4 28.5 8.9 1.1
First thought about having
one child
(N=218) ............ 2.3 9.6 31.2 35.8 21.1 0.0

about having children, first thought

about having no children, and first
thought about having one child. Most
people reported they had started thinking about these issues after they had
reached age 17. Before that age, very
few considered the idea of having one
child, although a larger proportion had
already considered the idea of having

none. (The number reporting for each
of these variables is reduced because of
the branching structure of the questionnaire. If respondents reported they had
always assumed they would have children or had never thought specifically
about the options of none or one, it did
not make logical sense to ask these
follow-up questions. )

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

254

The vast majority (82 per cent) said
they had requirements before they
would have children. In order, the requirements stated by more than half the
respondents were an adequate income
(69 per cent), a good relationship with
their partner (66 per cent), good health
(56 per cent), marriage (55 per cent),
good feelings about being a parent (53
per cent). Other items included good
feelings about self (50 per cent), a good
job (43 per cent), education completed
(38 per cent), a good job for the respondent’s partner (37 per cent), home ownership (21 per cent), some minimum age
(19 per cent), childcare arrangements
(19 per cent), and other items (12 per
cent).

One-third (32 per cent) of the sample
reported that recently they had thought
a lot about having (more) children. Another 32 per cent had thought about it
some, 20 per cent had thought about it a
little, and 16 per cent not at all.

To determine the variables that could
best discriminate among the groups that
comprised the dependent variable (as
sumers, thinkers, no-child option, one
child option, both no and one-child options), the nine variables that
demonstrated a statistically significant
bivariate relationship were entered into
a forward, stepwise discriminant function analysis. As shown in Table 3, the
degree of consciousness about childbearing decision making, the degree of
religiosity, and the importance of new
experiences gained through children,
costs of children in general, and identification with the parental role all contributed significantly to discriminating
among the groups at alpha <0.05.
Whether or not the respondent expected to complete some education beyond four years of college contributed
further discriminatory power when the

Oakley

Social Biology
TABLE 3
STEPWISE DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS
Step and Variable Name F-stat. Signif.
1 Conscious decision making ... 12.47 <0.001
2 Importance of new experiences from having children .. 4.83 < 0.001
3 Religiosity ............... 3.42 0.009
4 Importance of general costs
ofchildren ............... 2.80 0.026
5 Importance of parenthood
TOE IGEN .n ew oe iwwen wae 2.45 0.045
6 Expected education
completed .............. 2.10 0.080

alpha criterion was weakened to 0.10 for
inclusion. According to the F statistic,
each group was significantly different
from all others, except that assumers
and those having considered only the
one-child option were not significantly
different from each other in this sample.
In addition to investigating some determinants of the options considered, I
did an analysis to test whether the dependent variable groups might be related to certain outcomes associated
with fertility behaviors, including proportions expecting to have at least one
child, the total number expected, and
the current contraceptive method.
Proportions have or expecting to
have at least one child are shown, by options considered, in Figure 1. For the
purpose of illustration, the top branches
of the decision tree show those who reported that they had thought about
whether or not to have children, further
subdivided according to whether or not
they had specifically considered the option of having none, and then the option
of having only one. Those who said yes
to both questions are in the top
branches. In the fourth “column” or
branching sets, current parents are distinguished from nonparents, and finally

 

 

 

ak

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No, 3-4 Low-fertility Decision Making 255
Proportion who
have or expect

Considered Considered Parents now Expect to have at least
having none having one a(nother) one child
yes
<< ys no —> 86.6%
yes yes
no — no
yes yes
no <= << po — > 71.9%
yes
no —_ no
thinkers yes
< yes <o > 60
yes yes
no <= h
no

say
no <— : —_"

97.6%

yes

——___ yes —_ no > 90.6%
assumers yes
no << no

Fic. 1.—Proportion expecting at least one child by low-fertility options considered,

those who expect to have (more) are differentiated from those not expecting
(more). The leaves of the decision tree
can then be grouped into six major categories. The childless intending to remain childless are scattered at every
fourth node, starting from the top. The

- top group are then those who consid
ered all options. Of the 112 in that
group, 87 per cent had or expected to
have at least one child. The next group
down are those who specifically considered the option of having no children,
but did not seriously consider the idea of
having just one. Of the 65 persons in
that group, only 72 per cent had or ex
 

pected to have at least one child. For
those who considered having one but
not having zero, the percentage was 97
per cent. The other two groups also had
higher proportions having or expecting
to have at least one child. Using the test
for differences in proportions, J found
the proportion of the no-child option
(but not one) group who expected to
have at least one child was significantly
lower than that of all the other groups.
The total number of children expected was also significantly, if modestly, related to the options considered
(F = 7.27, p<0.001, eta = 0.26) so
that assumers and thinkers expected the

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

256 Oakley

highest number (X = 2.25) and those
having considered both options expected the lowest (X = 1.71).

The relationship of the low-fertility
options considered to contraceptive
methods used at the time of interview
was also examined. Respondents were
presented with a list of all methods as
part of their respondents’ booklet and
asked to mention the letter corresponding to the method they currently used.
Chi-square analysis showed significant
relationships between low-fertility options considered and diaphragm and
sterilization use. Users of diaphragms
were more likely to have considered all
options, and nonusers were more likely
to have heen assumers. There was little
difference in the proportions having
considered either of the single options,
no children or one. In contrast, those using female sterilization as a contraceptive method were more likely to have
been assumers. Of the 14 reporting this
method, 10 were assumers and two of
the others said they had thought about
whether or not to have children but had
not specifically considered either of the
low-fertility options.

DISCUSSION

The descriptive results showed that
the decision process varied, in that 40
per cent said they never were even
aware of a choice about having children
and only 27 per cent had explicitly considered both low-fertility options. The
discriminant analysis showed that certain measures of decision processing,
value, and demographic characteristics
distinguished among those who thought
about low fertility options more, as compared with less, explicitly.

Are these differentiating characteristics merely identifiers of different

Social Biology

groups, or may they be related to some
causative circumstances?

Variables such as religiosity may
work through agenda setting of what
gets considered in people’s thinking. |
Perhaps those who attend religious services most frequently had mutually
shared values, which were then reinforced and maintained through their frequent participation. These reinforcements could have kept the participants’
thinking in the channel that was most acceptable to the group—adhering to the
norm—or otherwise limit the scope of
thought. This interpretation is consistent with Merwin and Pol’s finding
(1983) that women who changed their
childbearing intentions, during a fiveyear period, from some to no children,
were likely to place less importance on
religion.

If religiosity is viewed as a reinforcement mechanism, this could explain
why the frequency of attending religious
services, but not the major religious
identification, was related to the number of low-fertility options considered.
If it were the values alone, then Catholics should probably have more homogeneous decision patterns than those
with the more diverse Protestant, Jewish, or no religious identifications. In
this study Catholics were not significantly different in the low-fertility options considered, as compared with the
other religious groups. The reinforcement experience by those attending relligious services more often could be an
explanation for the effect of religiosity.

The association between conscious
decision making and having considered
low fertility options may simply mean
that the same personality types made
conscious decisions and thought comprehensively (not the same attribute, as
indicated by an eta of 0.35). However, it

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

seems plausible that a more conscious
thought process about childbearing
might have led to a greater likelihood of
considering low-fertility options, which
in turn was linked to differences in the
number of children expected. Since considering the possibility of no child and of
one child was associated with choosing
lower fertility, an increase in conscious
childbearing decision making might
have demographic effects in the group
studied.

Three of the variables that measured
the costs and benefits of children did
contribute to discriminating among almost all the groups, but their main
power was derived from the divergence
of one decision making group from all
the others. Those who had thought
about whether or not to have children
but had not considered the two lowfertility options felt that costs of children
were less important and role identity
through parenthood more important
than did all the other groups. For the
new experiences variable, the group
that had considered childlessness but
not having one child, placed less value
on new experiences gained through parenthood. It appears then that values and
costs of children differed primarily for
the thinkers and the childless-only
groups, and that the other groups were
not so distinct in their ratings on these
variables.

The finding that diaphragm users
were more likely, and sterilization users
were less likely, to have considered lowfertility options probably indicates that
these two methods were useful for
rather different types of contraceptors.
The diaphragm users tended to have
considered more options. In contrast,

Low-fertility Decision Making 257

sterilization users in this sample tended
to have been assumers, perhaps making
this decisive contraceptive choice precisely because they had not considered
the low-fertility options.

Overall, the results reported here
add further evidence that complex
models of decision-making are not universally appropriate for investigating
real-life fertility choices. Certainly, for
many of the respondents studied here,
childbearing decisions did not start with
a base of zero, and many had not evaluated nearby low-fertility alternatives.

Further research that measures consideration of all fertility options may
help delineate just which pairs of options are most commonly considered.
For those who consider some alternatives but not others, particularly if they
avoid the next-best choice, decision theory needs to be supplemented with
some way to explain how people choose
the alternatives to consider. Theory also
needs to be developed to explain how
people become aware that they have
any choice at all about the low fertility
options. The ways in which topics reach
the agenda of personal thinking need to
be known if we are to understand the
real meaning of reproductive choice.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was supported in part by a
grant from the Center for Population Research, NICHHD (R01-HD14611). Special
appreciation is extended to those who provided professional assistance in data gathering and management: Barbara Austin, Corinne Haslett, Anh Le, Laurence Magder,
Elisabeth Moore, Jessica Mugambwa,
Penny Pierce, and Jonathan Urla.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

258 Oakley

 

Social Biology

REFERENCES

BEacH, L. R., B. D, Townes, F. L. CAMPBELL,
and G. W. KEarTING. 1976, Developing and
testing a decision aid for birth planning decisions. Org. Behav. Human Perform. 15:99116.

BEcKMAN, L. 1978. Couples’ decisionmaking
processes regarding fertility. Jn K. Taeuber,
L. Bumpass, and J. Sweet (eds.), Social demography. Academic Press, New York.

BraM, S. 1978. Through the looking glass: Voluntary childlessness as a mirror of contemporary changes in the meaning of parenthood. Jn W. Miller and L. Neuman (eds.),
The first child and family formation. Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina.

Brim, O. G., D.C. Grass, D. E. Lavin, and
N. GoopMaNn. 1962. Personality and decision process. Stanford University Press,
Stanford, California.

Burcu, T. 1980. Demographic behavior: Interdisciplinary perspectives on decisionmaking. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.

BusFIE_p, J., and M. Pappon. 1977. Thinking
about children: Sociology and fertility in
post-war England. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Horrman, L. and M. Horrman. 1973. The
value of children to parents. In J, Fawcett
(ed.), Psychological perspectives on fertility. Basic Books, New York.

HOLLERBACK, P. 1980. Power in families’ communication, and fertility decision-making.
Population and Environ. 3:146-173.

Janis, I., and L. MANn. 1977. Decision making:
A psychological analysis of conflict, choice,
and commitment. Free Press, New York.

Kiecka, W.R. 1982. Discriminant analysis.

 

Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, California.

Luker, K. 1975. Taking chances: Abortion and
the decision not to contracept. University of
California Press, Berkeley.

Merwin, M., and L. G. Pot. 1983. Childlessness; A panel study of expressed intentions.
Soc. Biol. 30(30):318-327.

Mumrorp, S. 1983, The vasectomy decisionmaking process. Stud. Fam. Plan. 14;83-88,

NATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS,
1973. Birth expectations and fertility: June
1972. Curr. Population Reports, Series P20, No. 248.

. 1983. Fertility of American Women;
June 1983. Curr. Population Reports, Series P-20, No. 395.

Oak ey, A. 1980. Women confined: Towards a
sociology of childbirth. Schocken Books,
New York.

Ory, M. 1978. The decision to parent or not:
Normative and structural components, J.
Marr. Fam. 40:531-539.

Rosen, R. H., and T, BENSON. 1982. The second class partner: The male role in family
planning decisions, Jn G. L. Fox (ed.), The
childbearing decision. Sage Publications,
Beverly Hills, California.

SILKA, L., and §. Kiester. 1977, Couples who
choose to be childless. Fam. Plan. Persp.
9:16-25,

STEINHOFF, P. 1978. Premarital pregnancy and
the first birth. Jn W. Miller and L. Newman
(eds.), The first child and family formation.
Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina.

Waricut, G. 1984. Behavioral decision theory.
Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, California.
