Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Comment on a Review of The Intellectual
Migration (Fleming and Bailyn) by William Petersen

Marianne E. Bernstein

To cite this article: Marianne E. Bernstein (1971) Comment on a Review of The Intellectual
Migration (Fleming and Bailyn) by William Petersen, Social Biology, 18:4, 435-437, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1971.9987954

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987954

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 4

Comment on a Review of

Communications

435

The Intellectual Migration (Fleming

and Bailyn) by William Petersen

Marianne E. Bernstein
Boston, Massachusetts

In the March 1970 issue of Social Biology
(p. 68-70) appears a review by William
Petersen of a book by Donald Fleming and
Bernard Bailyn entitled The /ntellectual
Migration. Quite aside from the fact that
Professor Petersen criticizes the book as
such, the book review contains statements
dealing with the character and action of
the anti-Nazi refugees which are inaccurate
and detrimental to their good name and
reputation enjoved among scientists.

Firstly Professor Petersen indicates that
many of the immigrating scholars would
have come to the United States in order to
better themselves financially even if the
advent of Nazism had not forced them to
immigrate. As a former resident of the
university town of Gottingen (S. Hannover) I am able to cite at least two cases
where this is not so. In 1928 my father,
Felix Bernstein, was offered a professorship
in statistics at Harvard University but
turned down the offer since his children did
not wish to emigrate. On the founding of
the Institute of Advanced Study at Princeton, the chair of mathematics was offered
to Professor Hermann Weyl who turned
down the offer, also for family reasons.
Four years later both Bernstein and Weyl
were refugees in the United States and the
post Professor Weyl accepted at the Institute was somewhat less well paid than the
one he had turned down before 1933.

Professor Petersen voices the opinion
that especially refugee psychologists and
psychiatrists came to the United States
after 1933 for monetary reasons. Since no
psychiatrists from Goettingen went to the
United States, I have to confine my rebuttal to the case of Franz Kallmann. In

the memoirs on his life printed in this
journal some years ago, no mention was
made of the fact that he came to the United
States for monetary reasons, and it must
be kept in mind that by emigrating he and
all the other refugee professors were forced
to leave their personal fortunes in Germany
because of the Devisen laws.

Dr. Petersen states that in Germanic
Europe Jews were unable to advance
academically. The very opposite is true;
in Goettingen, except for David Hilbert,
all members of the departments of mathematics and physics, especially the heads of
the institutes of mathematics, physics, and
statistics were Jewish or non-Aryan. Similar conditions prevailed at other universities
and also in the field of medicine and
chemistry, though maybe not in Bavaria.
The very fact that so many professors were
dismissed (see the book by Fleming and
Bailyn) disproves Professor Petersen’s assertion.

According to Professor Petersen the
refugee professors were especially “adept
at academic in-fighting.” This would mean
that they were able to obtain as good or
better paying university positions than
native Americans. Unfortunately, the very
opposite was the case. For instance, Felix
Bernstein for three years and Max Nussbaum from 1933 till his death received a
yearly salary at Columbia University of
$4,000 at a time when full professors at
Columbia University received $8,000; most
refugee professors were hired at salaries
substantially below those of their American
colleagues of equal age and experience.
Only the women refugee professors (e.g.,
Emmy Noether at Bryn Mawr and ProDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

436

fessor Bieber at Barnard) teaching at
women’s colleges were treated as well as
American women professors. As a matter
of fact, many refugee scholars experienced
long periods of unemployment in the
United States, e.g., Max Dehn (mathematics), Paul Hertz (physics), Felix Bernstein (statistics), and S. Peller (medicine)
and had to be supported by their wives,
some of them working as maids or cleaning
women.

Professor Petersen states that the refugee scholars should not be labelled “‘innocent victims of an oppressive regime”;
he states that “few were liberal democrats
enough to support the Weimar republic.”
The book by Fleming and Bailyn reproduces an article from the Manchester
Guardian from the spring of 1933 with a
list of professors dismissed until then by
the Nazi regime. For Goettingen six professors are cited; with all of them I have
been personally acquainted. Five of these
had been active in the Democratic Party of
Germany, one had been an active Social
Democrat. One, Felix Bernstein, had been
one of the 49 founding members of the
Democratic Party, a member of the cabinet
of M. Erzberger, actively engaged in every
election campaign in the years of the
Weimar republic, and the vice chairman of
the Democratic Party for Southern Hannover. The dismissals in the spring of 1933
were all “legalized” by the declaration
in their letters of “suspension” (bis auf
das weitere beurlaubt) that the professors
were politically unreliable; dismissals for
reasons of non-German race were started
a year later.

Professor Petersen claims that the
Frankfurt sociologists, Marcuse, Horkheimer, Adorno, et al., were of the totalitarian left during the Weimar republic. In
fact, the institute with which these sociologists were connected was supported by
two Protestant labor organizations (in
Communications

Social Biology

formation from Professor Wolfgang Freitag, a recent Ph.D. from the University of
Frankfurt). If Marcuse may possibly now
be classified a left-wing revolutionary, this
was not the case in the days of the Weimar
republic and was never the case with Professors Adorno and Horkheimer. I am sure
the U.S. occupation forces in Frankfurt
would not have allowed the rehiring in 1948
by the University of Frankfurt, which
they were supporting financially, of both
Professor Horkheimer and Adorno if they
had believed them to be Communists.
Those returnees to post-war Germany who
really were Communists, like Bertold
Brecht, went, naturally, to East Germany.
I quote from a letter of Nov. 23, 1970 by
Qwen S. Rachleff, director, European Affairs Department Antidefamation League
of B’nai B’rith: “Clearly they (the German Jewish educators) were forced out of
their homeland by the onslaught of
Nazism. It is egregious, indeed, to attempt
to denigrate their flight by saying that it
was that they were perhaps seeking better
financial and social rewards in the United
States.”

Professor Petersen asks two more questions about the scholars who emigrated
from Germany after 1933 which, I believe,
may be answered together. He wishes to
know what, if anything, distinguishes these
immigrants to the United States from
earlier immigrants and, secondly, what
made some but not all return to Germany
or Austria after the defeat of Nazism. I
know of no group of immigrants to the
New World where the head of the family
had an average age of about 50 years
(Einstein was 54 years, James Franck was
51 years, Margarete Bieber was 54 years,
Felix Bernstein was 55 years, Richard
Courant was “only” 44 years). Their
average annual income in Germany at the
time of their forced retirement was
about $8,000, and they expected to be re
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 4

tired at full salary within ten to twelve
years time. Thus, when they came to the
United States they only had ten to twelve
years left to contribute to a teacher’s pension fund. As a result, except for those at
the New School for Social Research where
special arrangements were made for them,
the great majority of refugee scholars
found their pension income at the age of
65 to be somewhere between $30 and $100

Reply

William Petersen

Depariment of Preventive Medicine
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio

The Nazi holocaust has resulted, understandably but unfortunately, in a continuing tendency to view the past in terms of
simplistic stereotypes. Instead of the complex reality, in which Party, state, and
army fought each other sometimes viciously, and in which many supposed
zealots were thoroughly corruptible, Nazi
society is still usually pictured as entirely
monolithic. The victims of Nazism, similarly, differed greatly in their politics, their
motivations for leaving Europe (if they
did), their personalities, and their behavior.
One of the criticisms I made of Fleming
and Bailyn’s compendium is that it lacked
some of this richness, and Dr. Bernstein
now demands that the stereotypes be restored.

I wish she had read my short review
a bit more carefully, since many of her
points are based on nothing more than an
extrapolation of my particulars into too
broad generalizations. IJ wrote that it “was

Communications

 

437

a month, less than even welfare payments
in New York City. This lack of security in
old age was the chief inducement for most
of the refugee scholars who went back to
claim their German pensions. For the
younger scholars there were offers of positions of a rank higher than they could
ever expect to obtain as outsiders with
foreign accents in the United States.

not always the case” that refugee migrants
were motivated “exclusively by political
oppression”; in her paraphrase, “many”
immigrating scholars came to the United
States only “in order to better themselves.”
I wrote that the extraordinarily cordial
welcome that psychoanalysts received in
this country induced many of them #¢o
stay—not, as Dr. Bernstein translates,
that they ‘came’ for monetary reasons. I
wrote very specifically of two persons—
Paul Lazarsfeld and Franz Boas—that
they were “adept at academic in-fighting.”
In Dr. Bernstein’s extension, this appears
as: “According to Prof. Petersen the refugee professors were especially ‘adept at
academic in-fighting.’ ”

Her points about the political views of
the refugees are perhaps the crux of Dr.
Bernstein’s letter. I wrote that “the intellectuals’ innocence was partial’; she
represents me as having written that “the
refugee scholars” were not innocent vic