Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

Kenneth A. Bennett

To cite this article: Kenneth A. Bennett (1976) Book notes, Social Biology, 23:1, 98-100, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1976.9988213

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988213

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Book Notes

GENETICS OF MAN: By Paul Amos Moody.
Second edition. W. W. Norton and Company, New York, 1975. 507 pp. $9.95
(hardbound),

Although this edition has been extensively rewritten, those familiar with the
first edition will find that Moody’s clarity
of style and comprehensive coverage have
remained unchanged, Written for college
students with no previous biological training, the book represents a complete survey
of the fundamentals and applications of
Mendelian genetics to humans. In addition,
it contains new sections on how chromosomes are identified, on somatic cell genetics, and on inborn errors of metabolism.

THE TITANIC EFFECT, PLANNING FOR THE
UNTHINKABLE: By Kenneth E. F. Watt.
Sinauer Associates, Inc., Stamford, Connecticut, 1974. 268 pp. $3.95 (paperbound).

The title and author of this book could
well lead one to the assumption that this
work is related to the effects that resource
depletion, overpopulation, and other aspects of ecological mismanagement will
have on modern societies. However, this
book is about economic problems in the
United States, how they have arisen, and
how they are associated with the environment and quality of life. In particular,
Watt discusses and documents such problems as market saturation, rising food costs,

98

 

inflation, resource misallocation, and numerous others. Concluding with several
scenarios for the future, Watt argues effectively that the revered dogma of economic
growth may have to be abandoned in the
near future.

PEOPLE, POWER, AND Poticy. A NEw VIEW
ON PoPULATION: By Jose Hernandez.
National Press Books, Palo Alto, California, 1974. 287 pp. $10.95 (hardbound); $5.95 (paperbound).

Hernandez takes a Third World approach in this general introduction to population studies. He divides his book into
four basic sections: ‘‘What Makes Populations Tick,” “How Populations Change,”
“Population Theories,” and ‘Population
Problems and Solutions.” His stated purpose is to explore a new approach to population theory from the standpoint of the
world’s poor as opposed to that heavily influenced by traditional Western thought.
This approach leads to an interpretation
of population processes that emphasizes the
contrasts between poverty and affluence.

VASECTOMY AND VASECTOMANIA: By David and Helen Wolfers. Mayflower Books
Ltd., Frogmore, St. Albans, 1974. 266
pp. $1.95 (Canada) (paperbound).

This is an especially valuable book for
those men in the general public considerDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 1

ing a vasectomy, in addition to those with
only a casual interest in the subject. The
Wolfers have produced a highly readable
and well-documented book on the history,
biology, and psychology of this birth control method. This is not a book that
strongly advocates the operation, but one
in which the known facts and data are presented so that individuals may arrive at a
free and rational choice of birth control
Strategy.

BIOLOGY FOR SURVIVAL: By Rosalyn Kane
and George A. Wistreich. Glencoe Press,
Beverly Hills, California, 1974. 421 pp.
$6.95 (paperbound).

Biology for Survival is a book that combines reprinted articles with original text.
It attempts to integrate biological, chemical, and physical principles in order to
facilitate an understanding of the causes,
current status, and consequences of today’s
critical environmental problems. A common theme appears throughout the book:
Solutions for such environmental problems
can be found only by developing new conceptual approaches. Accompanied by an
Instructor’s Guide and written in a semitechnical manner, this book should be suitable for undergraduate students with no
prior ecological or biological training.

Human BioLtocy AND BEHAVIOR: AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE: By Mark
L. Weiss and Alan E. Mann. Little,
Brown and Company, Boston, 1975.

This textbook is designed for an introductory course in physical anthropology
for undergraduate college students. Following a brief history of the discipline are
chapters on evolutionary fundamentals,
primate evolution and behavior, human pa
Book Notes

99

leontology, genetics, human variation (both
genetic and morphological), and aspects of
adaptation in modern human populations.
The book is up-to-date and well-balanced
in its coverage and emphasizes adaptation
and evolution as the two major themes.

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS AND SELECTIVE
ABORTION: By Harry Harris. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1975. 101 pp. $6.00 (hardbound).

Harris uses the term “selective abortion”
to refer to abortions carried out specifically
because the fetus has been shown to be
affected by a particular abnormality or has
a high probability of being affected. After
a brief introduction, he discusses various
abnormalities and how they can be detected
prenatally by existing techniques. The second chapter deals with the possible consequences of selective abortion on the genetics of populations. The third and final
chapter examines from an ethical viewpoint
the advantages and limitations of such
techniques. The book may be highly recommended to both physicians and geneticists involved in genetic counseling.

DEATH OF A DocMA? THE AMERICAN
CATHOLIC CLERGY’s VIEWS OF CONTRACEPTION: By Maurice J. Moore. Community and Family Study Center, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1973. 142
pp. $2.00 (paperbound).

The immediate purpose of this short but
sophisticated book is to examine the current moral attitudes of Catholic clergy on
contraception. Data derived by means of
several questionnaires are analyzed statistically, and several interesting results
emerge. Among these is the central finding
that over half of the Catholic clergy in

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

100

the United States are at variance with the
church’s official stand on contraception.
About 30 per cent of the clergy felt that
the use of contraceptive devices was best
left up to the involved individuals, and
roughly 40 per cent adopt this stance in
their confessional procedures.

Ecotocy, EVOLUTION, AND POPULATION
BroLocy. Readings from Scientific American: Introductions by Edward O. Wilson. W. H. Freeman and Company, San
Francisco, 1974. 319 pp. $12.00 (hardbound); $5.95 (paperbound).

The thirty-four reprints in this reader
are arranged into four sections: “The Evolutionary Process,” “The Multiplication
and Dispersal of Species,” “The Growth
and Interaction of Populations,” and “Ecosystems.” Wilson has judiciously selected
articles to illuminate certain fundamentals
of evolutionary biology and introduces
each section with a commentary on the
meaning and appropriateness of the pa
Book Notes

Social Biology

pers included therein. As with other Scientific American readers, this collection
will be useful as collateral reading for undergraduate courses in population biology
and evolution.

GENETIC AND REPRODUCTIVE ENGINEERING: Edited by Darrel S. English. MSS
Information Corporation, New York,
1974, 147 pp. $9.00 (hardbound).

This book of readings consists of fourteen reprinted articles contained within the
following four sections: ‘Genetic Engineering: Present Progress and Procedures,”
“Genetic Engineering: Future Prospects,”
“Reproductive Engineering: Intervention
in Development,” and “Bioethics: Who
Decides What.” Intended for college students majoring in scientific and nonscientific disciplines, the papers range in depth
from articles taken from scientific journals
to popular expositions from Saturday Review.

KENNETH A, BENNETT

 

 

 

 
