Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The role of technology in cultural evolution

Robert S. Merrill

To cite this article: Robert S. Merrill (1972) The role of technology in cultural evolution, Social
Biology, 19:3, 240-247, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987991

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987991

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles @

wa Citing articles: 2 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

The Role of Technology in Cultural Evolution

Robert S. Merrill

Department of Anthropology
University of Rochester
Rochester, New York

Before starting this paper, I must explain
how I use the term “cultural evolution.”
I use it as a general descriptive term for
the history of human cultures. Washburn
and Lancaster (1968, p. 216) have stated
this view in a way appropriate to this symposium:

The statement that we may study human
biological history, human cultural history,
and the interrelations of the two should
mean precisely the same thing as that we
may study human biological and cultural
evolution. Understanding comes from the
study of the data, and no information is
added by using the word “evolution” in
preference to the word “history.”

The aim of this paper is to examine
some recent anthropological work concerning cultural evolution and sketch the direction I believe this work is taking us.t Some
concept of the nature of cultural evolution

1TI owe many of the ideas in this paper to two
people. For years now René Millon’s provocative
remarks about Kenneth Bock have set me to
rereading him until I think I may be beginning
to understand him. At any rate, I have certainly
been influenced. For a year I had the opportunity
to work with Dorothy Willner while she sought
to systematize her rich and varied data on how
things really happen in this world (e.g., Willner,
1969). Ever since, I have been trying to find
ways to incorporate that picture in my thinking.
I have not gotten very far, but my thinking has
been changed by the attempt. Finally, I want to
thank René Millon and Allan Hoben for helpful
comments on an earlier draft.

 

‘“

is necessary before the role of technology
within it can be assessed. Therefore, I
organize the paper around ideas about
cultural evolution and then select examples
which will help shed light on the role of
technology. To keep the paper within
bounds, I will restrict myself to cultural
evolution since the rise of modern man, and
I will not deal with the interrelations between human biological evolution and cultural evolution. These interrelations are
dealt with elsewhere in this symposium.

The paper is organized as follows. I first
state some general propositions about
cultural evolution on which there seems to
be growing agreement. I then examine some
recent work on hunting-gathering societies,
and on the rise of civilizations, in an effort
to assess the direction such work is going.
I argue that this work indicates that we
should search for regularities in how
cultural change occurs rather than for regularities in its course or paths. Then, by
means of an examination of selected aspects
of two ethnographic cases, I show some of
the directions we can go when we search
for mechanisms of sociocultural change. I
close with brief comments on implications
of the argument for anthropological theory
and for our conception of the role of technology in cultural evolution.

240

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3

Recently, views about cultural evolution
have developed in American anthropology
which differ appreciably from some of the
views proposed earlier. In particular, I
believe there is a growing consensus on the
following four propositions which I have
selected and reformulated from Service’s
recent book, Cultural Evolutionism (1971,
Chaps. 1, 2; see also Service, 1968). First,
cultural evolution occurs through changes
in single societies. There is no separately
abstractable process for culture as a whole
like that described by Leslie White (1959).
Second, advancement, or the development
of more complex societies, is neither the
inevitable nor the only possible path of
long-run change. Service, for example, adds
such possibilities as devolution, specialization or involution, stabilization, and revolution. Third, there is no single “primemover” of the evolutionary process (Service,
1971). There is no one fons et origo from
which everything flows. After examining
technology as a possible prime-mover, Service reaches the following conclusions
germane to this paper (1971, p. 25):

. . some kind of technological production
of necessities, especially of food, is required
for any society. In the context of evolution
such production is an enabler, so to speak,
without which an increase in size and density
could not take place. But a necessity or an
enabler is not necessarily a mover. Many
stabilized societies could produce much more
than they do, but it does not follow that
they necessarily will, nor that if they did

that they would necessarily “evolve” in
some sense.

The fourth proposition is that the following elements influence every situation of
cultural change: (a) the existing cultural
and other characteristics of the society involved; (0) the habitat—the physical and
biotic milieu of the society; and (c) what
we might call, modifying Lesser (1961),
the “societal field” of surrounding societies
and cultures.

This is a considerably more complex

Technology in Cultural Evolution

241

view of cultural evolution than has usually
been held in the past. Accepting it means
facing this question: If the paths of cultural
evolution are so varied, and if the factors
that influence change are so many and so
variable, then where do we find lawful
regularity? What sorts of regularity are
there in cultural evolution? I believe this is
a really serious question. It is rendered
even more serious because many of the
regularities that have been proposed have
not held up very well in the face of more
intensive scrutiny. Let me outline two instances.

My first example is recent work on
hunting-gathering societies, especially that
found in the two National Museums of
Canada symposia edited by Damas (1969a,
19696) and in the symposium on Man the
Hunter (Lee and DeVore, 1968). Huntinggathering groups are closely dependent on
sources of subsistence. Therefore, one would
expect to find regular relationships between, on the one hand, conditions affecting
subsistence—such as technology, habitat,
and external opportunities—and, on the
other hand, basic societal features such as
settlement patterns and community patterns. Yet, as more work, and more sophisticated work is done, the picture becomes
more complex. There are a larger number
of significant kinds of variation among
band societies than was previously thought,
rendering earlier typologies inadequate
(Damas, 1969@). Careful study of such
variations shows they cannot all be accounted for as adaptations to subsistence
conditions. Additional “social” and “historical’? factors have to be brought into the
picture. Perhaps the most striking illustration of this fact is found in Damas’ comparative work on the Central Eskimo
(1968, 1969a, 1969).

My second example is work on early
civilizations starting with Robert Adams’
(1966) outstanding recent book comparing
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

242 Merrill

ancient Mesopotamia and_ pre-Spanish
central Mexico. Of particular interest are
Adams’ conclusions about the growth of
early states (Adams, 1966, p. 12):

I also believe that the available evidence

supports the conclusion that the transforma
tion at the core of the Urban Revolution lay
in the realm of social organization. And,
while the onset of the transformation obviously cannot be understood apart from
its cultural and ecological context, it seems
to have been primarily changes in social institutions that precipitated changes in technology, subsistence, and other aspects of
the wider cultural realm, such as religion,
rather than vice versa.
Adams thus makes many modifications
of Steward’s (e.g., 1955) earlier conclusions. But he does keep Steward’s multilineal framework. In his summary, Adams
stresses the similarities and parallels in
process and form between the two sequences
of state development. However, in the body
of the book he also pays close and careful
attention to the many differences, some of
which he characterizes as “profound,” “significant,” and “important” (e.g., Adams,
1966, pp. 52, 65, 130).

Looking at these differences, I am impressed by Adams’ evidence which indicates that they are very systematic. The
features that seem peculiar to Mesopotamia
seem to be closely related to each other
and to conditions peculiar to Mesopotamia.
And the same holds true for those features
peculiar to the Mexican sequence. Thus,
if Adams had set out to show the processes
of emergence of the state in, say, ancient
Mesopotamia, he could have constructed a
quite complete yet coherent and intelligible
account showing the close interrelations
between Mesopotamian conditions, details
of how institutions developed, and the particular forms they took. I would guess that,
if he had tried to do this, he would also
have found it possible, or even necessary,
to include some of the “civilizational” culture content he largely placed in the back
Social Biology

ground in his book. Adams’ comparative
analysis of similarities in process tends to
obscure significant aspects of how change
took place in each case.

These conclusions seem supported by the
evidence in René Millon’s fascinating review of work on “Early Civilizations of the
New World” (1968). Millon shows the
many curious patterns of similarity and
difference among different New World sequences, indicating how systematic analysis
could clarify interrelations between different
aspects of civilizational development in
each case. His account thus suggests that
each New World development had a high
degree of internal coherence.

There seems to me to be a general lesson to be learned from this recent work
on hunting-gathering societies and on early
civilizations. The lesson is that it is much
easier to understand cultural changes when
we consider whole concrete societies in their
full settings. Where we get in trouble is in
trying to simplify such situations by
selecting a relatively small number of
causally significant variables. When we do
this, we are forced to leave out a lot of
what is going on. Therefore, our regularities
tend to break down as we study further,
because we find cases where variables we
left out influence those we have selected.

This conclusion seems to put us further
and further into the lap of history with no
indication of where we might find regularities. However, a possible direction can
be derived by examining the analogous
problem in biology, and by remembering
the work of the man whom we honor in
this symposium. Surely Darwin’s chief contribution was the theory of natural selection which is the central core of the modern
theory of biological evolution. Now, that
theory is a general theory of how species
change, and, also, of how species persist.
Yet, though the theory is general, every
instance of speciation or other evolutionary
Vol. 19, No. 3

change has to be studied in all its concrete
particulars. There is no a priori restriction
on what features are relevant or what kinds
of sequences occur. Furthermore, consider
what biologists do when they find phenomena analogous to cultural parallelisms
or convergences, or analogous to the kind
of relationship between cultural specialization and evolutionary potential that Service proposes (1971, Chap. 3; see also
Sahlins and Service, 1960, Chap. 5).
‘© Biologists do not take such regularities,
&i when empirically established, as explanations. Instead, they are taken as pheE nomena to be understood. Biologists try
3 to discover how such empirical patterns
>, can be accounted for by the operation of
< natural selection under special kinds of
“circumstances (see Simpson, 1953, 1967).
— Biological changes which exhibit no such
= patterns are explained in the same way.
S All of this suggests that what we should
look for in the study of cultural evolution
‘S are general regularities in the specific de‘6 tails of ow concrete sociocultural situations change. Obviously, this is by no
3 means a new idea. An explicit and thought‘< ful presentation is given by the social psy> chologist Donald Campbell (1965, 1970).
& He argues, as I have, for moving away
p> from theories about the course of cultural
= evolution to theories of “the processes which
'§ produce it” (Campbell, 1965, p. 22).
© However, in developing his argument,
Campbell combines a focus on social
change processes with the use of direct
analogies to the mechanisms of biological
evolution. He develops what he calls a
“variation-selective-retention” model. Goldschmidt (1959) has argued less formally
for similar analogies, while Alland (1967,
1970) has attempted to place cultural evolution fully within a biological framework.
Vayda and Rappaport (1968) have suggested a generation-selection model based
on Lotka (1945).

Technology in Cultural Evolution

243

Examination of these and similar approaches to the study of culture-change
processes indicates that using direct biological analogies may not be the most
productive way to proceed. Such analogies
tend to obscure the necessity of studying
the details of how social and cultural
changes actually take place. Whatever else
may be relevant in a society’s history,
sociocultural mechanisms are always involved in the acceptance of new practices
or institutions and in their maintenance,
modification, replacement, or disappearance. It is Aow these changes happen that
we really need to study and think about.
As Barth (1967, p. 661) has said, we need
“sreater attention to the empirical study
of the events of change.”

How, then, are we to study the events
of sociocultural change? What modes of
analysis will help uncover general change
mechanisms? It would be very useful to
have a systematic assessment of available
concepts and data bearing on these questions. However, that cannot be attempted
here. Instead, I want to examine a few
small-scale cases to show some of the directions in which we can go when we focus on
the details of how cultural change happens.
I will try to bring out their theoretical
implications both generally and for assessing the role of technology.

As a first example, let us look at one
change among the Siane of highland New
Guinea: the consequences of their adopting steel axes for clearing and fencing
gardens. As Salisbury (1962, p. 109)
makes clear, using steel axes was a significant technological change, because, among
other things, it cut the time to do axe work
to about a third or a fourth of that required previously. The problem is to explain what the Siane did with the newly
available time. This is no easy task because
men could use their time in many different
ways. They could alter their ways of gar 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

244. Merrill

dening, or where they chose to garden, or
the size and number of gardens, or their
amount of sleep, and so forth. What they
did choose was none of these. The Siane
kept garden production essentially constant. This choice reduced the fraction of
men’s potential “work” time spent on subsistence production from about 80% to
about 50%. This released time was mainly
devoted to increased warfare (until that
was stopped) and to greatly increased participation in ceremonial exchanges (Salisbury, 1962, p. 118-119).

To explain this use of extra time, Salisbury devotes most of his book to a
combination of economic and _ structural
analysis to determine the system of alternatives recognized by the Siane and the
way in which alternatives were evaluated.
His approach is thus similar to work using
decision models (e.g., Keesing, 1970; Izmirlian, 1969), and to Barth’s (1967)
“senerative” analyses of time and resource
allocation. And, like Barth (1967) examining Fur household organizations, Salisbury went beyond an analysis of Siane
categorical and evaluative criteria as they
operated directly. He was able to show that
the criteria themselves derived from Siane
concepts about different kinds of social
activities. These concepts could then be
shown to explain recategorizations and reevaluations which took place as situations
changed. Salisbury’s profound analysis deserves presentation in detail, but that must
be left to another occasion.

From Salisbury’s work and other work
like it can be derived an important general
conclusion. Many actions we interpret as
fairly direct manifestations of sociocultural
rules or categories probably really reflect
situationally determined variants of more
fundamental concepts. Such concepts can
account for alterations of rules and criteria
as situations change. This means that a
substantial fraction of what we describe as

Social Biology

change does not involve change in the full
cultural sense but rather variant expressions of more basic unchanged institutions.
Such a widened view of institutions points
to an important general mechanism underlying a wide range of changes in conduct.

Now let us turn to another example—
Frank Cancian’s provocative analysis
(1965) of changes and disequilibrium in
the cargo system of the municipio of Zina- .
cantan in Chiapas, Mexico. Cargos are
religious offices whose duties are carried
out by different people each year. Over the
past several decades, both the population
and per-capita income of Zinacantan have
increased. This has made many more people both interested in and able to undertake the financial and other burdens of
cargos, including the more expensive and
prestigeful cargos. However, the traditional
cargo system consisted of a fixed number
of cargo offices to be filled each year. The
institution did not contain, as part of its
ordinary and regular operation, any mechanism for adjusting to pressures for increased participation.

Let us stop and consider this point. As I
interpret it, Cancian’s data show that there
were limits on the adaptive capabilities of
the cargo system. This does not mean there
were no adjustive mechanisms. There were,
for example, a variety of institutionalized
mechanisms for filling cargo positions if
there was an apparent shortage of persons.
Nevertheless, there were limits, and, when
one comes to think about it, it is evident
that this must be a very general phenomenon. It is extremely unlikely, if not impossible, for an institution to be so well
adapted that it is able to function effectively under any and all circumstances.
This point has been recognized theoretically, but, so far as I know, it has not been
systematically pursued in anthropology.
Francesca Cancian (1960) explicitly uses
the idea of adaptive limits in developing a
Vol. 19, No. 3

functional analysis of change. She, in turn,
obtained the idea from Nagel’s (1956)
formal analysis of functionalism. Herbert
Simon (1947, 1957, 1969) has made extensive use of the idea in a wide variety of
forms and contexts.

From the standpoint of studying mechanisms of cultural change, it is clear that
the idea of the adaptive limits of institutions is very important. For example, if
one institution’s adaptive limits are
reached, its failure to operate as usual is
likely to affect the operation of other institutions. Should such effects cause other
institutions to reach their adaptive limits,
a whole set of institutional changes could
be started by the one initial change. Sys~, tematic efforts to define the adaptive limits
<<, as well as functions of institutions are likely
~ to improve our understanding of how so—cieties work, especially in situations of
& change.
>. ~=s Let_ us now go back to the Zinacantan
=. case and ask what actually happened. The
‘© answer is that a series of definite institu£ tional changes were made. The number of
© cargos in the cargo system was increased
‘= (Cancian, 1965, p. 162-165). In addition,
™ an elaborate waiting-list system was devel2B oped which made possible more orderly
2 handling of the increasing pressure, and
S some indirect reduction of the pressure
itself (Cancian, 1965, Chap. 15). One
A especially interesting feature of these

changes is that some of the ways in which

the numbers of cargos were increased look
as if they involved preexisting culturechanging institutions which were triggered
into action by the difficulties caused by the
pressure on the cargo system. The most
well-defined institution of this sort, and the
one which could be activated repeatedly,
worked as follows. A resident of a hamlet
dreamt that a particular saint wanted to
come to the hamlet provided a properly
cared-for chapel was prepared for him in

08 December 2015

1

1

Univ

Technology in Cultural Evolution

245

advance. The chapel was built and, though
the saint has not come, pictures were obtained for the chapel and cargos established (Cancian, 1965, p. 165). This
mechanism of social change is linked to
pressures on the cargo system as a whole
through the fact that the dreamer had to
convince his neighbors to provide the resources to establish the chapel and to
accept the responsibility in having new
cargos which had to be filled by hamlet
residents. Thus, the willingness of a hamlet
to undertake such changes is sensitive to
the resources and desires of hamlet members for greater cargo participation.

This aspect of the Zinacantan case suggests another general mechanism of cultural change: the existence of definite
culture-changing institutions which are
triggered into operation when particular
kinds of difficulties develop in the functioning of existing institutions. As in the
case of adaptive limits, this idea can be
related to wider theory. Such second-order
change mechanisms can be analyzed using
the systems theory concept of “control
hierarchies” which has recently been applied, in a somewhat different way, by
Rappaport (1971) in his analysis of ritual.
The systematic search for such second- and
possibly even higher-order change mechanisms should enlarge still further our
knowledge of how societies adapt.

It is clear, however, that these do not
exhaust the inventory of change mechanisms. Some of the changes in Zinacantan
appear to involve less routine kinds of
innovations. Furthermore, Zinacantan is
reaching the point where the adaptive
limits of all the known institutional mechanisms will be reached; yet the cargo system will not be restored to its previous
mode of functioning. Additional change is
clearly in the offing. Examination of cases
of more radical cultural change should,
therefore, reveal additional processes.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

246 Merrill

Let me now summarize the general conclusions which are suggested by the two
ethnographic cases and by the earlier discussion. It is my hope that the case discussions have given you some idea of what
a sociocultural process approach to the
study of cultural evolution might be like.
I think the examples indicate that such an
approach, despite its focus on the particulars of particular cases, is likely to lead
to the isolation of mechanisms of change of
some generality and interest. I also believe
such an approach will contribute to our
general understanding of how societies
work.

Beyond this, the direction such work
seems to take us has a broader significance.
For a number of years now Kenneth Bock
(1952, 1955, 1956, 1963, 1966) has been
telling us that, despite all the many changes
in theory, anthropologists still base their
thinking about the relationships between
historical events and change or evolution
on assumptions which go back to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. As I
understand him, he thinks we always try
to abstract from, or otherwise ignore, the
concrete messiness of the ways events
happen and seek some other realm of
greater order and simplicity. This, he believes, is fundamentally wrong. There is no
such realm. Such order as there is lies in
relationships among events and nowhere
else. It seems to me that, as we probe more
deeply into concrete processes of change,
we are coming closer to Bock’s views. If
so, his corollary should also follow, that
we should look much more deeply into
documented history than we have already
begun to do.

Turning back now to the body of this
paper, the materials I have dealt with also

Social Biology

have implications for views about technoiogy. They indicate that technology is a
factor which, along with others, affects the
alternatives available in a society. This
suggests a picture of the role of technology
which, though in many ways quite obvious,
is drastically different from that prevailing
in much current discussion. Let me end
this paper by sketching that picture as I
see it.

Technologies are means for doing things.
As such, they are inert, passive—just there.
By themselves they do nothing. Only when
people use a technology in some way does
it have an impact on human life. However,
knowing that a technology is used tells us
almost nothing about its effects. What we
really need to know is the way of life of
the people who are using it and the places
they make for it in their schemes of things.

A technology is adopted when people or
groups find it desirable and possible to
change what they are doing in ways that
involve particular uses of that technology.
Such people and groups are the active, initiating elements in the change in technical
practices. Moreover, it is not the technology alone, but what these people do, which
influences further change. Beyond that, it
is the circumstances of the societies involved, and how they work, which determine the wider effects of a technology on
cultural evolution. To assess the role of a
technology we need to know a great deal
about it so we can envision its problems
and possibilities (see Merrill, 1968). But
we cannot say anything about the actual
effects connected with a particular technology until we understand why people do
what they do with it. On this subject we
know relatively little; but I think we are
at the point where we can start to find out.

 
Vol. 19, No. 3

Technology in Cultural Evolution

247

REFERENCES

ApAMs, Rosert McC. 1966. The evolution of
urban society, Aldine, Chicago.

ALLAND, ALEXANDER, Jr. 1967. Evolution and
human behavior. Natural History Press, New
York. .

. 1970. Adaptation in cultural evolution:
An approach to medical anthropology. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

BaRTH, FREDRIK, 1967. On the study of social
change. Amer. Anthropol. 69:661-669.

Bock, KrennetH E, 1952, Evolution and historical
process. Amer, Anthropol. 54:486-496.

. 1955. Darwin and social theory. Philos
ophy of Science 22:123-134.

 

 

 

 

 

-” 1956. The acceptance of histories:
& Toward a perspective for social science. Univ.
N of California Press, Berkeley.

D . 1963. Evolution, function, and change.
Amer. Sociol. Rev. 28:229~237. (Reprinted in
= S. N. Eisenstadt (ed.), Readings in social evolu9 tion and development. Pergamon, New York.)
Q . 1966. The comparative method in anthro
co.~OdoO#pology. Comp. Stud. Soc. Hist. 8:269-280.

° CAMPBELL, Donatp T. 1965. Variation and selec
tive retention in socio-cultural evolution, p. 19
49. In Herbert R. Barringer, George I. Blanks.

ton and Raymond W. Mack (eds.), Social

change in developing areas. Schenkman, Cambridge, Mass.

. 1970. Natural selection as an epistomo
logical model, p. 51-85. In Raoul Naroll and

Ronald Cohen (eds.), A handbook of method

in cultural anthropology. Natural History

Press, New York.

© CANCIAN, FRANCESCA. 1960. Functional analysis
of change. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 25:818-826.

7 CANCIAN, Frank. 1965. Economics and prestige
in a Maya community: The religious cargo
system in Zinacantan. Stanford Univ. Press,
Stanford.

Damas, Davin. 1968.
societies, p. 111-117. In Lee and DeVore (eds.),
Man the hunter. Aldine, Chicago.

. 1969a. Characteristics of Central Eskimo

band structure, p. 116-138. Ix D. Damas (ed.),

Contributions to anthropology: Band societies.

National Museums of Canada, Bulletin 228,

Anthropological Series 84, Ottawa.

. 19696. Environment, history and Central
Eskimo society. In D. Damas (ed.), Contributions to anthropology: Ecological essays. National Museums of Canada, Bulletin 230,
Anthropological Series 86, Ottawa.

GOLDSCHMIDT, WALTER. 1959. Man’s way: A preface to the understanding of human society.
Holt, New York.

IZMIRLIAN, HARRY, Jr. 1969. Structural and
decision-making models: A_ political example.
Amer, Anthropol. 71:1062-1073.

KEESING, Rocer M. 1970. Kwaio fosterage. Amer.
Anthropol. 72:991-1019,

 

f Michigan] at 13:33

[University

 

Downloaded by

 

The diversity of Eskimo .

Lee, RicHarp B., and Irven DeVore (eds.). 1968.
Man the hunter. Aldine, Chicago.

LrEssER, ALEXANDER, 1961. Social fields and the
evolution of society. Southwest. J. Anthropol.
17:40-48,

Lorxa, Atrrep J. 1945. The Jaw of evolution as
a maximal principle. Hum. Bio). 17:167-194.
MERRILL, RoBerT S. 1968. Art. Technology I. The
study of technology. International Encyclopedia
of the Social Sciences. Macmillan, New York.

Mitton, René. 1968. Art. Urban revolution II.
Early civilizations of the New World. International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences.
Macmillan, New York.

NAGEL, ERNEST. 1956. A formalization of functionalism. Zn Ernest Nagel, Logic without
metaphysics. The Free Press, Glencoe, IIl.

Rapparort, Roy A, 1971. Ritual, sanctity, and
cybernetics. Amer. Anthropol. 73:59-76.

Sawutns, Marswatt D., and Erman R. SERVICE
(eds.). 1960, Evolution and culture. Univ. of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

SALISBURY, R. F. 1962. From stone to steel: Economic consequences of a technological change
in New Guinea. Cambridge Univ. Press, New
York.

SERVICE, EtMAN R. 1968. Art. Evolution IV. Cultural evolution. International Encyclopedia of
the Social Sciences. Macmillan, New York.

. 1971. Cultural evolutionism: Theory in
practice. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New
York.

Simon, HerserT A. 1947. Administrative behavior:
A study of decision-making processes in administrative organization. Macmillan, New York.

. 1957. Models of man: Social and rational.

Wiley, New York.

. 1969. The sciences of the artificial. M.I.T.
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Suvpson, GeEorRGE GAYLorD. 1953. The
features of evolution. Columbia Univ.

New York.

. 1967. The meaning of evolution.
ed.) Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

STEWARD, JuLiAN H. 1955. Theory of culture
change: The methodology of multilinear evolution. Univ. of Illinois Press, Urbana.

Vaypa, ANDREW P., and Roy A. Rappaport. 1968.
Ecology, cultural and noncultural, p. 477-497.
In James A. Clifton (ed.), Introduction to cultural anthropology. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.

WasuHpurn, S. L., and JANE B. LANCASTER. 1968.
Art. Evolution III. Human evolution. International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences.
Macmillan, New York.

WHite, LEstie A. 1959. The evolution of culture:
The development of civilization to the fall of
Rome. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Wriuttner, DorotHy. 1969. Nation-building and
community in Israel. Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, N.J.

 

 

 

major
Press,

(Rev.

 

 
