Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Multivariable causal modeling in alcohol use
research

John R. Nesselroade & J. Jack McArdle

To cite this article: John R. Nesselroade & J. Jack McArdle (1985) Multivariable causal modeling
in alcohol use research, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 272-296, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988614

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988614

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Multivariable Causal Modeling
in Alcohol] Use Research

 

John R. Nesselroade and J. Jack McArdle

Department of Individual and Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania; and Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia.

ABSTRACT: For a variety of reasons, multivariate approaches to the study of behavioral phenomena have received increased attention during the past several decades. These include: (1)
greater awareness of the value of studying relationships among concepts defined over several
variables rather than focusing on single variates as indicators of important constructs; (2) more
sophistication in mathematical and statistical analysis; and (3) wider availability of computers
and improved computer programs. Although once largely identified with “exploratory” analysis methods, multivariate applications are now found across a wide range of exploratory to explanatory activities. Currently, one of the most popular applications of the multivariate orientation concerns the development and testing of explanatory models of relationships among
variables that feature a distinction between latent and manifest variables. To some extent these
methods have already been employed to model: (1) drug and alcohol use; (2) genetics-behavior
relationships; and (3) case study dynamics. In both exploratory, descriptive application and
hypothesis testing multivariate methods promise to be of considerable value in developing a
fuller understanding of biological and behavioral mechanisms involved in patterns of alcohol

use.

The convergence of two lines of activity defines the central focus of this paper. One line has to do with the enunciation and subsequent development of the
multivariate perspective on the study of
behavior. The other, which is related to
the first but is somewhat more specific,
involves the development and application of a subset of multivariate correlational methods, especially causal modeling procedures, for application in social
and behavioral science. Rather than
presenting novel aspects of multivariate
analysis, the discussion to follow will involve reviewing salient features of these
two themes and identifying common aspects that bear on alcohol use research.

A multivariate orientation to the

study of behavioral phenomena has, especially since the 1950’s, been an important influence on the way issues and
problems are conceptualized and studied. Many behavioral scientists have
urged the adoption of multivariate perspectives in the conduct of research.
Cattell, however, more than any other
person, made clear that “the multivariate approach” is indeed a conceptual
framework for thinking about behavior
and how to study it and not just a bag of
analytical tricks (e.g., Cattell, 1957,
1966b, 1979, 1980; see Horn, 1984, for
overview). The theme is played out in
various writings that, in admitting to an
inherent complexity of behavioral phenomena, (1) warn of the futility of trying

272
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 34

to capture important psychological concepts with single observable variables or
“indicators”; and (2) emphasize the
value of defining outcomes or other behavioral manifestations in terms of patterns of relationships among several variables. In alcohol use research, for
example, Wanberg and Horn (1983)
identified 15 different dimensions underlying self-reported symptoms and

     
 

Occasions
(k=l to (7

Multivariable Causal Modeling

273

other drinking behavior variables. The
multivariate complexity of alcohol use
patterns underscores the diversity of the
manifestations as well as the likelihood
of different etiologies and the probable
necessity of multiple approaches to
treatment.

The data box (Cattell, 19662), a representation of which is given in Figure 1,
identifies various relational systems and

| Datura

 
   
 

Variables

Cpl to p)

‘,

Fic. 1.—The “covariation chart” or “‘data box” (after Cattell, 1966a). Each datum, d,,, is simultaneously defined by person, variable, and occasion: R-technique involves covarying variables over persons
(for one measurement occasion); P-technique involves covarying variables over occasions (for one person); and T-technique involves covarying occasions over persons (for one variable).
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

274

derivative covariation techniques and
provides a systematic framework for discussing several aspects of the multivariate study of behavioral phenomena.
These include design, measurement,
and data analysis procedures. R- and Ptechniques, in particular, as they are
represented in Figure 1, are the covariation approaches that bear most directly
on the present discussion. T-technique,
which involves the covariation of variables defined over persons who have
been measured on one variable over
many occasions, is identified but will not
be further discussed. R-technique involves the covariation of variables
defined over persons who have been
measured one time each. P-technique
involves the covariation of variables
defined over occasions with all measurements being based on the individual
case. Thus, R- and P-techniques are
forms of cross-sectional and longitudinal designs, respectively. The two kinds
of information produced thereby are
conceptually related (Cattell, 1963;
1966c) and, under particular statistical
frameworks, formal expectations of
their relationships can be derived (Nesselroade, 1983a, 1983 b).

Further specification of the relationships between cross-sectional and longitudinal data is a major need in social and
behavioral science. For example, in the
arena of personality research the distinction between trait and state rests, in
part, on these relationships (Nesselroade, 1983a). In developmental research, understanding the relationships
between changes (longitudinal information) and differences (cross-sectional information) is a central objective (e.g.,
Baltes et al., 1977). We may ask, for instance: Do individuals change along dimensions that are also appropriate for

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

describing the nature of differences
among individuals? In that regard, an
area of growing concern in both substantive and methodological multivariate research is the utilization of P-technique
designs in the pursuit of nomothetic laws
(Lebo and Nesselroade, 1978; McArdle, 1982; Zevon and Tellegen, 1982;
Nesselroade and Ford, 1985). Also, we
may ask: How replicable across different individuals are the patterns of intraindividual change and variability that
are derived from P-technique studies?
Recent research indicates that substantial agreement can be found among intraindividual change patterns determined by P-technique analyses (Zevon
and Tellegen, 1982; Nesselroade and
Ford, 1985).

One of the relatively recent crystallizations of method in which a multivariate orientation has played an integral
part is the line of activity encompassed
by the label “causal modeling with latent variables” (see, €.g., Bentler, 1980,
1986). It involves the formal statistical
estimation and testing of the goodness
of fit to empirical data of models of
causal relationships hypothesized to obtain among latent variables (see, e.g.,
Jéreskog and Sérbom, 1979; Horn and
McArdle, 1980; Schaie and Hertzog,
1982). This development, which has its
own unique history, spans many disciplines, including genetics (e.g., Wright,
1921).

At the present time in social and behavioral science, causal modeling with
latent variables is very much in the limelight as an alternative to manipulative
experimentation for trying to build explanatory models and to test them
against empirical data in a rigorous and
systematic fashion. The approach has
seen ready application in a wide variety

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

of substantive areas, including those of
drug and alcohol use (Aneshensel and
Huba, 1983). These generic modeling
procedures have also been used to study
genetic influences on behavior (e.g.,
Eaves et al., 1978; Fulker, 1979; McArdle et al., 1980).

The objective of the present paper is
to review selected aspects of both the
multivariate orientation to the study of
behavior and causal modeling procedures and to highlight features of their
communality that pertain to research on
alcohol use. Three selected applications
of modeling to the study of alcohol use
will be presented.

THE MULTIVARIABLE
ORIENTATION

The study of relationships among
variables is, of course, central to science. The major assumptions that underlie how one believes that the matter
should be approached are often only implicit in one’s behavior. That is, viewing
events as inherently multifaceted and
complexly determined is one thing.
Whether one attempts to apprehend the
myriad relationships by multivariate design and analysis methods or by means
of classical, randomized, bivariate experimental design is quite another. Often, the label multivariate has been construed as synonymous with descriptive,
exploratory research; the so-called
“correlational” approach. We believe
that this Jabe] with its associated surplus
meaning does not accurately reflect contemporary affairs. The literature, graduate training practices, and general lore
in psychology have tended to stress fundamental distinctions between manipulative experimental and differential (or
correlational) approaches to the study

Multivariable Causal Modeling

275

of behavior (e.g., Cronbach, 1957,
1975). However, developments in the
formalization of design properties and
analysis procedures have tended to blur
considerably the distinction between explanatory and descriptive, exploratory
approaches in the past twenty years or
so (Nesselroade and Labouvie, 1985).
The multivariate orientation represents an attempt to improve on the way
we study behavior. It has led to a number of valuable gains in the definition
and clarification of measurement, design, and analysis issues and has fostered
the development of a line of methodological innovations by which to deal
with the empirical questions arising
therefrom. For example, the multivariate orientation leads to a number of considerations that bear importantly on the
study of changes (e.g., developmental
processes) as well as on the evaluation of
differences. Many of these issues do not
emerge clearly in a bivariate format.
Among them, for example, are concerns with measurement equivalence
(Labouvie, 1980) and invariance of relationships among variables over different
subpopulations (Meredith, 1964; Nesselroade, 19835; Horn et al., 1983).

ASSUMPTIONS UNDERLYING THE
MULTIVARIABLE APPROACH

In line with prior discussions by Cattell (19665), Coan (1966), and others,
Baltes and Nesselroade (1973) defined a
multivariate approach to the study of
developmental phenomena as embodying three assumptions. These are: (1)
Any dependent variable (or consequent) is potentially a function of multiple determinants; (2) any determinant
or antecedent has potentially multiple
consequences; and (3) the study of multiple antecedent-consequent relation
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

276

ships provides a useful model for the organization of complex systems. These
three assumptions appear, at least on
the surface, to run counter to bivariate
research practice. Conceptually, they
provide a means for defining both
“causes” and “effects” in terms of patterns of relationships among several variables. Appropriately illustrative of the
point, given the general focus of this series of papers, are McClearn’s (1983)
characterizations of polygenic inheritance and pleiotropy. In the former, one
phenotype is influenced by several
genes; in the latter, one gene influences
many phenotypes.

DIMENSIONS OF RESEARCH DESIGN

Within the framework of a multidimensional comparison scheme, Cattell
(19665) systematically identified and
discussed multivariate and bivariate research designs. He argued that the differences that have led to quite divergent
practices in aspects of conceptualization, research design, and data analysis
are not accurately portrayed by the traditional dichotomy experimental versus
correlational. He also made it clear that
the label multivariate should not be considered to be synonymous with the label
correlational.

The dimensions identified by Cattell
along which research designs can be dif
ferentiated include:

(1) bivariate versus multivariate in num
ber of variables;

(2) presence versus absence of manipula
tion;

(3) simultaneity versus succession of ob
servations;

(4) degree of situational background con
trol;

(5) representativeness of choice of varia
bles; and

(6) representativeness of subjects or ex
perimental units.

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

The number of possible combinations of levels of these six dimensions attests to a rich variety of design possibilities. In the context of life-span
development and aging research, Nesselroade and Labouvie (1985) discussed
the linkage of these dimensions to
Campbell and Stanley’s (1966) concepts
of internal and external validity of research design.

MULTIVARIATE COMPOSITES AND
FACTORS

Analytically, the multivariate approach is rendered operational by combining two or more variables into
‘“‘meaningful”? composite variables,
most often in a linear, additive fashion.
Although the linear and additive aspects
are somewhat constraining, they are
temporary boundaries that more powerful computers and better statistical estimation procedures will help to enlarge.
In preparation for a more detailed look
at the nature of structural modeling procedures, it will be helpful to consider
briefly the criteria by which linear combinations are formed.

A distinction that is often made in
discussions of multivariate analysis procedures and one which will illustrate different kinds of linear combinations is
that between principal components and
principal factors. Principal components
are derived variables that are formed by
weighting and summing observed variables according to particular criteria. For
example, Y;, in the expression

Ye = Dy X + byX2 +

2. t OX, (1a)

would be a principal component of the
set of observed variables, X;, X2,...,
X,, provided that the weights, by, by,
etc., are chosen so that Y; manifests certain optimal attributes related to the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 32, No. 3~4

variance of the X’s and Y;,’s covariance
with the other principal components of
the set of X’s. The nature of the relationships between observed variables and
principal components is such that one
can also solve for each observed variable, X;, as a linear combination of the
full set of n principal components as
symbolized in Equation (1b). That is,

Xj = wyrY) + WY +

wee t WY (1b)

By contrast, principal factors are
defined according to the model

X= Wh +t...
+ Lk, + U,,

(2)

where X; is an observed variable that is
accounted for as a weighted combination of k hypothetical variables or common factors, Fi, 2, ..., Fy anda
unique factor U;. The weights, 1), 1), .

. , 1, that define the contribution of
each factor to the variance of the observed variable, Xj, are referred to as
factor loadings. Subsequently, the complete matrix of factor loadings will be
symbolized as L.

Both the principal component and
the principal factor expressions involve
observed variables, X’s, but in the principal components case the X’s are themselves combined. In the principal factors
case, it is the hypothetical factors that
combine to account for the X’s. This is
an important theoretical distinction
that, when not observed, creates a great
deal of confusion.

In general, two major kinds of criteria are used to define the linear combinations of variables that are developed
in multivariate research. They can be
classified as internal and external to the
set of variables from which the composites will be formed. Internal criteria include those used to determine, for ex
Multivariable Causal Modeling

277

ample, principal component or factor
analytic solutions, clusters, and multidimensional scaling outcomes. They are
internal in the sense that the resolution
achieved derives from the interrelationships of the variables in the set being analyzed. One seminal application in psychology involves Spearman’s (1904) use
of factor analysis to characterize the interrelationships of ability performance
measures in terms of a single general
ability dimension,

By contrast, external criteria are employed in techniques such as multiple
regression, canonical correlation,
MANOVA, and discriminant function
analysis. These latter methods involve
the combining of a set of variables so as
to maximize the relationships between
composite variables defined on the set
and one or more variables that are external to the set from which the composite
is being derived. Obviously, the internal
structure of the variables from which the
composite is formed plays a role in determining the specific nature of the composite, but the fact remains that it is constructed in relation to at least one
variable that is external to the set. In
multiple regression, for example, a linear composite of predictor variables is
formed that best predicts (correlates
most highly with) some external criterion measure (e.g., predicting graduate
school performance from GRE scores,
undergraduate GPA, etc.).

These ideas concerning composites,
which reflect, by and large, the analysis
of cross-sectionally measured individual
differences, are rather familiar ones. In
the sequel we will attempt to broaden
the discussion somewhat by focusing
more On intraindividual change and variability, while maintaining a concern for
between-persons differences. The
causal modeling to be discussed will be
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

278 Nesselroade and McArdle

seen to involve both internal and external criteria. Before proceeding to an examination of causal modeling issues,
however, we will attend to some aspects
of data aggregation that bear on the general research issues on which the conference is focused.

AGGREGATION OF DATA

Discussions of the differences between traditional experimental and differential approaches to the study of behavior have been influential in
articulating the role that individual differences have already played, and can
be expected to play, in the study of lawful relationships (Cattell, 1966b; Cronbach. 1957, 1975). Attempts at rapprochement have been sporadic and not
generally successful and the distinction
continues to be rather widely observed.
Although both “experimentalists” and
“individual differences types” can point
to discoveries to be positive about, pessimistic conclusions regarding current
levels of knowledge development and
the ultimate generality of lawful behavioral relationships (Cronbach, 1975;
Sinnott, 1981; Gergen, 1984) provide a
reason for occasional reflection about
what we can hope to accomplish in the
study of behavior. Any need for caveats,
however, can be interpreted to reflect
on the way we study behavioral phenomena as much as on the fundamental
nature of behavior.

An area of concern on which we wish
to focus briefly has to do with the simple
pooling of data across persons in order
to estimate relationships such as the covariances or correlations among variables on which inferences regarding lawful relationships are based. In brief, this
kind of aggregation presupposes a conti
Social Biology

nuity of meaning of variables from person to person that translates into: (1)
whether or not the variables are the
same for each observational entity (e.¢.,
persons); and (2) whether or not the nature of the relationships among variables is the same for each observational
entity. Let us consider each question
briefly.

Labouvie (1980) examined issues of
equivalence both at the measurement
variable and the construct levels and explored the use of multivariate approaches to resolve them. The central
question here has to do with the extent
to which the nature of variables with respect to the individual cases justifies
pooling data for the purpose of estimating covariances, correlations, or other
population parameters where population definition rests on multiple organisms rather than, say, multiple occasions for a single organism. Concern for
the meaningfulness of such operations
has been evident for several decades
(e.g., Guilford, 1952) although in practice it is still largely ignored. Such concerns, however, have deepened on the
part of differentially-oriented researchers in part, at least, because of empirical
work conducted in the P-technique tradition (Cattell and Scheier, 1961; Cattell, 1963; Luborsky and Mintz, 1972;
Lebo and Nesselroade, 1978; McArdle,
1982; Zevon and Tellegen, 1982; Nesselroade and Ford, 1985).

Related to the same versus different
variables question, but in some respects
more compelling, is the question of
whether or not the nature of relationships among variables is the same, in
some sense, across persons. The development of prediction schemes that involve moderator variables and, in the
extreme, personalized beta weights tesDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

tifies to the realization that pooling individuals can, in some cases, obscure
rather than stabilize estimates of relationships (cf. Pruzek and Frederick,
1978). For example, Tucker (1966) developed procedures for simultaneously
defining generalized process curves and
individualized weights for combining
them to account for the observed
changes in each individual. This work
further illustrates a concern to maintain
an awareness of individual differences
above and beyond pooled dimensions of
performance and change. Zevon and
Tellegen’s (1982) arguments for an
idiographic/nomothetic approach to the
development of behavioral laws are supportive of the importance of these questions about the nature of variables and
the generality of their interrelationships.

The points just raised are intended to
sensitize the reader to ways of broadening traditional individual differences
concerns in order to improve our accounts of behavior and behavior
change. Combining such concerns with
a multivariate orientation to measurement, design, and analysis issues leads
to many avenues yet to be explored in
the search for lawful relationships that
account for behavior. We now turn to an
examination of selected aspects of
causal modeling that offer some promise
for the further exploitation of individual
differences information in the pursuit of
explanatory schemes.

CAUSAL MODELING IN SOCIAL
AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

Whether because of ethical constraints, inaccessibility of variables, or
the inherent complexity of a system, it is
not always possible to implement classi
Multivariable Causal Modeling 279

cal randomized, manipulative, experimental designs. Indeed, in comparing
classical experimental and multivariate
experimental research designs, Cattell
(19665) identified as one of the primary
differences their relative standing on the
manipulative versus non-interfering dimension. Although at the time Cattell
was concerned more with differences in
what could be accomplished with the
use of factor analysis and related correlational procedures in contrast to analysis-of-variance-based experimentation,
his discussion applies to the methods
currently referred to as causal modeling.
Describing how these advanced tools
can and should be used involves questions that are complex and difficult to
answer directly. A variety of mathematical and statistical model building devices and plans have been defined by,
among others, Bentler (1980), Jéreskog
and Sérbom (1979), McDonald and
Krane (1979), and Horn and McArdle
(1980).

Causal modeling procedures offer a
Statistical approach to testing the goodness of fit between a specific network of
hypothesized causal relationships and
empirical data. In implementing such a
test, systems of equations that describe
the hypothesized relationships are developed with a sufficient degree of specification that their ability to account for
the empirical interrelationships among a
set of variables can be rendered dubiOuS; i.e., it is possible to falsify the
model. The equation system is then
solved with the values of free and constrained parameters of the system being
estimated in light of both the empirical
data and the values of the fixed parameters specified in the model. A statistical
verdict concerning the goodness of fit
can be used to evaluate the plausibility

 
 

 

280

of the model. Modeling procedures can
also take the form of comparative evaluation of alternative plausible causal
models against the same data set. It is
important to realize that decisions in either case can lead to disconfirmation but
not confirmation of models. In a concluding stage of model building, the final
parameter values are relinked to the
original substantive concepts.

MEASUREMENT MODELS

A simple example of one kind of
© causal model is represented pictorially
A in Figure 2. It illustrates the distinction
% between observed variables and latent
© variables that is often made in causal
© modeling applications. We will briefly
consider the major aspects of that distinction.

The observed variables, which are
used to “mark’’ the unobserved or latent
variables, play a key role in the modelfitting procedure. Those two classes of
variables and the relationships between
them constitute what some have labeled
the measurement model (e.g., Bentler,
1980; Jéreskog, 1979). In principle, the
measurement model is analogous to the
common factor model given by Equa
mber 2015

a

—_

L,= Ln =

Downloaded by [University of Michigan

@aooonon un
e2ox*nnunooodo
“AnHoaoaoodaoeo
OX oaoaonunn
ooerrooxgo
uuoox ooo

tion (2). Many of the concerns about the
nature of the relationships between variables and factors that have arisen in the
context of factor analysis apply here as

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

well. For instance, the definition and
representative sampling of the content
domains of the latent variables typically
require a multivariate measurement system. Having a sufficient number of valid
observables to define the factor or latent
variable adequately is necessary if a rigorous test of the hypothesized causal
network is to occur. Moreover, there
are statistical advantages that accrue
from the use of multiple indicators of the
constructs but these can be negated to a
large extent by a poor choice of measures. In that sense, the longstanding
concerns of factor analysts regarding
such issues as heterogeneity versus
homogeneity of marker variable sets remain pertinent to the modeling situation.

A major question that arises in practical applications is ‘‘What should a
measurement model look like?” Answers to this question are an everpresent concern of causal modelers.
Some guidelines are provided by eighty
years of work on factor analysis (see,
e.g., Spearman, 1904; Cattell, 19662).
For example, given the eight manifest
variable and three latent variable model
presented in Figure 2, we can write three
alternative factor pattern matrices as

ss
>
(

(32)

00
mh
hh
hm
sh
s 0
hs
0s

CFOWre 4a”

where the three columns represent Figure 2’s S, N, and A, respectively. The
symbols “‘s,” “m,” and “h” represent

factor loading coefficients that may be

 

 
Vol. 32, No. 3-4 Multivariable Causal Modeling 281

     
 
  
    

 

a i 7)
Me. - 45 A 0-5
: <: : a

    

tii Liiit

 

Se Se Bet a iS at Pa
eR RR FB

46 88 {8 3 r le 13

(02) (64) (Bt) (Ay (83) (83) (G3) (G5)

Graphic Key:

i" Manifest (Giver) Variable

‘ Latent (Hidden? Variable

——p = Asymmetric (Regression) Parameter
Qh = Summetric Covariance) Parameter

Labelled Values are Naxamum~Likelihood
Estimates (with Standard Errors?

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Parameters not Jabelled are Unit-valued

 

Fic. 2.—Latent variable path model of within-occasion (P-technique) factor model (after McArdle,
1982). Labels of latent variables are prefixed by C (common factor). Common factors include CS (PsychoJogical State), CN (Narcissism-Comfort), and CA (Alcohol Interest). Ss are specific factors. Manifest variables represent daily recording of Eight State Questionnaire levels of Stress (ST), Depression (DE), Fatigue (FA), and Arousal (AR); and Motivational Analysis Test levels of Alcohol Interest—Integrated
(AI), Alcohol Interest- Unintegrated (AU), and Narcissism-Comfort~Integrated (NJ) and Unintegrated
(NU). Values represent final maximum-hkelihood parameter estimates with standard errors in parentheses.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

282

estimated from the data, and the ‘‘0” elements represent predefined “‘fixed”’
zero relationships (1.e., “‘hyperplanes’’).

Taken collectively, the pattern of
zero and non-zero loadings defines a
multivariate hypothesis about the number and nature of the relationships between the latent and manifest variables.
The first loading matrix, L,, defines a
multivariate hypothesis that is particularly simple; the manifestations are each
presumed to be the result of only one
common, underlying latent construct
(one non-zero element per row). The
first factor is proposed to account for
four manifestations, while the other two
factors are posited to account for only
two manifest variables each. The simplicity of this pattern hypothesis, sometimes referred to as a “simple structure”
pattern (see Jéreskog and Sérbom,
1979; cf. Thurstone, 1947) makes it particularly easy to characterize the nature
of the latent variable: The loading pattern can be understood, and given a label to match, in terms of the natural
erouping of the variables. Thus, in the
simple example presented in Figure 2,
factor three may be considered “alcohol
interest” (labeled A) because it is presumed to be the only direct underlying
source of the manifest measures of “‘interest in alcohol” (labeled AJ and AU;
for details see McArdle, 1982).

The other two hypothetical loading
matrices are more complex. In matrix
Lm We pose a set of non-zero loadings
that contain all of the prior eight “‘s”
loadings, but we also add three new
loadings labeled “m.” The representation of the latent variables remains simple with respect to five manifest variables, so these five may still be used
simply to mark the factors. But new
loadings labeled “zm” are introduced on

- Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

a new factor for three of the manifest
variables. The inclusion of two non-zero
loadings for a manifest variable implies
that it is constituted from two operationally distinct sources—an arrangement
that bears a striking resemblance to the
familiar genetic representation of pleiotropy (see McClearn, 1983). In any case,
this pattern matrix, L,,, may be considered to be of medium complexity because the new factors may turn out to be
relatively more difficult to label and understand.

The final loading matrix presented,
L», includes both the simple loadings,
“s,”’ and the medium loadings, “7,”
and further includes a third set of loadings, “h.”’ In a typical application this
global pattern is referred to as an “unrestricted” factor loading pattern; that is,
the minimum number of zeroes required for statistical identification is hypothesized. However, because the three
marker variables remain “simple,” the
original simple factors defined by L, are
not confounded (or collapsed) with one
another. So, although other “rotations”
may yield the same level of fit, this configuration represents a particular factor
orientation that is defined by a minimum hyperplane which can yield maximum information about the non-zero
loadings. It follows that this particular
loading pattern is of high complexity because five of the eight manifest variables
may load on all three latent factors.

The configuration of these three
loading patterns can be described in
terms of the increasing complexity of interpretation, in terms of the increasing
number of parameters required, or by
the way simpler alternatives are
“nested” inside one another (i.e., L,isa
proper subset of L,, etc.). There are
other important aspects of these meaDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

surement models such as the statistical
estimation of the free parameters. but
for now we simply want to recognize
that these are all valid measurement
model choices in a model-building process. That is, these three alternative factor loading patterns represent specific
knot points on a much broader continuum of possible measurement models.

STRUCTURAL MODELS

The latent variables and their hypothesized interrelationships can be
said to comprise the structural model
(Jéreskog and Sérbom, 1979) to be eval
(

ma 16

      
  

~46
(05)

yfeseuenens

Multivariable Causal Modeling

   

283

uated. These relationships, which specify the causal linkages among latent variables or constructs, may be either
unidirectional or bidirectional. They
can also simply represent correlated,
but not necessarily causally related, variables. A simple example of a structural
model is presented graphically here as
Figure 3.

As before, a major question that
arises in practice is “What should a
structural model look like?” Also as before, answers to this question are an
ever-present concern; sdme guidelines
are provided by nearly seventy years of

ind ‘CAt#¢ ib;

( 2

Fic. 3.—Path model of within-occasion latent variable regression (after McArdle, 1982). Factor model

is shown in Figure 2.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

284

path analysis (see Wright, 1921; McArdle and McDonald, 1984). Now, for example, given the three latent variables
presented in Figure 3, we can use path
analysis concepts to represent the asymmetric or causal relationships among the
latent variables as ‘‘S,” “‘N,”’ and “A,”
and write three alternative latent variable path matrices P; as

P,=1000
000

s 00

where; as before with the L; matrices,
the elements of path matrix P; are describable with free parameters “‘s,”’
“m,” and “h” and fixed parameters “0.”

The first model, P,, illustrates a very
basic path concept. Here, the first factor, labeled ‘‘S” for ‘Psychological
State,’’ is posited to be the only cause of
the third factor, labeled “‘A”’ for Alcohol Interest.”” Among other hypothetical restrictions, this model explicitly presumes that there is no direct effect of the
second factor, labeled “‘N’”’ for ‘‘Narcissism,” upon the A factor. Any possible
indirect effect of N upon A would depend on the pattern of background correlations posited in further matrices
(which for brevity are not presented
here; but see McArdle and McDonald,
1984).

The second path model, P,,, is considered to be of medium complexity because it contains the simple model given
by parameter “‘s,” and further allows, as
signified by parameter ‘‘m,”’ a direct effect of factor N on factor A. This represents the particular path pattern diagrammed in Figure 4,

The third path model, P,, is considered to be of high complexity because it
contains both the simple and the medium complexity parameters and fur
Pig =

Nesselroade and McArdle

000
000
s m0

Social Biology

ther posits four “h”’ parameters representing additional direct effects as well
as complex “non-recursive” or feedback
mechanisms. This final model, which
may represent a theoretically defensible
position, is so intricate that it is usually
difficult to identify on a mathematical or
Statistical basis (but see Kenny, 1979;
McArdle, 1981, 1982).

P,= 00k
hOjh

smh

(35)

These three alternative path models
illustrate the broad range of possibilities
available with the latent variable path
concept. At the same time, they represent the variety of possibilities that the
model builder needs to consider.

CAUSAL MODELS

Taken together, the measurement
and the structural models can_be said to
represent a causal system that might or
might not be tested against empirical
data. As opposed to focusing solely on
observed or manifest variables, a wellspecified measurement model permits
one to interrelate “‘errorless”’ latent variables in the structural component
(Huba and Bentler, 1982; cf. Martin,
1982). The resulting verdict may be that
the model is not disconfirmed or it may
be that the model should be rejected asa
plausible representation of how observed and latent variables are related.

The linkage of the measurement and
structural components into one model
creates new questions, viz, ‘““What
should my combined causal model look
like?” The inherent complexity of this
problem is realized when we view the
possible combinations of the three loading matrices L; of Equation (3a) with
the three path matrices P; of Equation
 

4
—
©
N

H
oO

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 Decemb

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

(3b); even in this simple example we can
create nine different alternative causal
models.

One way to deal with this emergent
causal complexity is to relate both components to a broader modeling strategy.
In our example the strongest a priori
causal model described above is represented by the combination of L, and P,.
This combination of a simple measurement model with a simple path model
leads to the simplest explanation. Unfortunately, it is often the case that, unless some care is taken to proscribe the
experimental variables, this causal
model is rejected as being “too simple”’
for the problem at hand. Alternatively,
the weakest a priori causal mode] that
may be directly estimated is represented
by the combination of L, and P,,, and
this combination can be used to provide
maximum fit. But, again, unless some
care is taken to provide for internal replicability, the mathematical and statistical basis of the model may be too “‘unstable” for a definitive interpretation.
Perhaps the most salient point to be
made here is that mixtures of these loading models and path models represent
flexible alternative views on the meaning and interpretation of latent variables
themselves (James et al., 1982; cf.
McArdle, 1984a, 1984b).

Modification of the initial model is
possible and may lead to a significant improvement in the goodness of fit.
Clearly, however, ad hoc modifications
shift the emphasis from confirmatory toward exploratory analysis and require
some independent assessment such as
by cross-validation techniques (Cliff,
1983; Nesselroade and Baltes, 1984).
With several marker variables, for example, there is the possibility that more
than one factor is involved in accounting

Multivariable Causal Modeling

285

for extant common variance. These possibilities can be accommodated by the
modeling procedures but they may be
“forced” onto the solution due to an initially poor fit (see, e.g., McArdle and
Horn, 1981).

The dependence of the measurement
and the structural components on each
other is germane to our discussion. Ifthe
two components of the causal system
are estimated simultaneously, they both
contribute to the goodness of fit (or lack
thereof) of the model to the data. In
principle, if one or the other component
represents a poor fit, the entire model is
jeopardized. It may be possibile, however, to disentangle these sources in
many ways, the most familiar of which is
by sequential fitting procedures (see
Bentler, 1980). Nevertheless, the two
aspects underscore the importance of
having valid “indicators” or ‘‘marker’”’
variables for constructs if tests of explanatory schemes are to be productive.

Thus, causal modeling with latent
variables is a clear extension of multivariate analysis procedures in two ways:
(1) Multiple indicators are utilized to
provide a more valid representation of
the latent variables; and (2) the hypothesized models can include multiple antecedent and multiple consequent latent
variables. In the context of discussing
the pluralistic orientation that seems to
characterize much of life-span developmental research, Dixon and Nesselroade (1983) recognized both the
merit and timeliness of causal modeling
techniques. They observed, however,
that although it is not clear whether this
particular chapter of methodological
history will be long or short, it clearly
will not be the last. However, for researchers whose scientific questions do
not admit of answers derived from ma
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

286 Nesselroade and McArdle

nipulative, randomized experimental
research paradigms, it is important that
all possible value be wrung from these
methods even as we inexorably move on
to alternatives. SS

ILLUSTRATIONS OF MODELING

To illustrate how causal modeling
with latent variables can contribute to
the development of explanatory
schemes in the field of alcohol use, some
examples of applications of modeling
will be presented. Of course, we do not
wish to downplay the excellent prior
work produced using other methods
that represent latent variable modeling
using traditional multivariate techniques (see, e.g., Foster et al., 1972;
Horn et al., 1974; Wanberg et al., 1977;
Skinner, 1979, 1981). Here, however,
we will simply overview three examples
from the contemporary modeling literature on alcohol consumption, genetic influences, and individual systems analySiS.

CAUSAL MODELING OF ALCOHOL
CONSUMPTION

Huba and Bentler (1982) reported on
the development and testing of explanatory models of alcohol and drug use. In
addition to a construct of Alcohol Use,
their models involved a set of psychosocial antecedents that included the constructs of Rebelliousness, Perceived Behavioral Pressure, and Intimate Culture
Support.’A simplified representation of
their models is presented in Figure 4.

The R-technique measurement
model included the following constructs
and their indicators: Intimate Culture
Support (number of friends who cheat
on an important exam, number of
friends who might quit high school,

 

Social Biology

number of friends who cut class); Rebelliousness (6-item, self-reported Law
Abidance scale; 2-item, peer-rated Law
Abidance scale; 6-item, self-rated Liberalism scale; 2-item, peer-rated Liberalism scale); Perceived Behavioral Pressure (number of friends who drink beer
or wine at least once a month, number
of friends who drink hard liquor, number of friends who give the participant
beer or wine); and Alcohol Use (beer,
wine, and liquor use frequencies).

The structural model, as represented
in Figure 4, reflected the hypotheses
that Rebelliousness and Alcoho! Use at
Year I had direct influences on Alcohol
Use at Year II, that Rebelliousness at
Year I also had an indirect effect on Alcohol Use at Year II that was moderated
by Intimate Culture Support and Perceived Behavioral Pressure, that Intimate Culture Support indirectly influenced Alcohol Use at Year II through
Perceived Behavior Pressure, and that
Perceived Behavioral Pressure had a direct influence on Alcohol Use at Year
If.

After a series of model fitting and
testing estimation procedures were carried out, Huba and Bentler (1982) concluded, for example, that the influence
of Rebelliousness and Perceived Behavioral Pressure on subsequent Alcohol
Use complements the way it influences
previous Alcohol Use. The influence of
Intimate Culture Support characteristics on subsequent Alcohol Use was
found to be moderated through Perceived Behavioral Pressure rather than
influencing it directly.

MODELING GENETIC INFLUENCES

Many common-sense notions about
alcoholism center on theoretical differences between the genetic and environDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 32, No. 3-4 Multivariable Causal Modeling 287

~ r

ee 54
CR, $$ Cl, |

           
 
  

poner eagem.,

CR

  

 

BD

CA

 

Chie —* pg

Fic. 4.—Latent variable path model of relationships among personality, subculture, and alcohol use
(R-technique) factors (after Huba and Bentler, 1982, p. 191). Labels of common factors are prefixed with
C. Subscripts 1 and 2 designate year of testing. R = Rebelliousness, J = Intimate Culture Support,
P = Perceived Behavioral Pressure, andA = Alcohol Use. D,, Di, and D, are latent disturbances acting
on the common factors. Chi-square = 84; df = 63;z = 1.8.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

288

mental determinants of alcohol use.
There has been a wide range of studies
of genetic disposition to alcoholism
based on psychophysical responses. Indeed, this work ranges from traditional
multivariate analyses of the EEG (e.g.,
Propping et al., 1981; Begleiter et al.,
1984) to the examination of “flushing”
(e.g., Johnson et al., 1984). In terms of
causal modeling techniques, a general
approach to the genetic and environmental determinants of behavior was
detailed by Eaves et al. (1978) and
Fulker (1979).

An example of causal modeling
methodology applied to alcohol use was
presented by Martin et al. (1981). In
that study, 79 pairs of monozygotic
(MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins, aged 18
to 35 years, were initially administered a
number of psychomotor tasks. Next, all
subjects drank a diluted dose of ethanol}
(0.75 g/kg body weight). These subjects
were then measured on the same psychomotor tasks once each hour for the

ensuing 5 hours. A variety of alternative
causal models is proposed by Martin et
al. (1981) to account for the patterns of
covariation. One of their models is diagrammed in Figure 5.

The basic model attempts to account
for the observed covariation of the first
four time points of measurement (i.e.,
Ty to T3) on a simple arithmetic task by
introducing a variety of T-technique
based measurment models. In the
model of Figure 5, latent variables are
introduced to represent: (1) a “‘generalgenetic” influence (labeled Dr) common to all measures; (2) a “generalenvironmental” influence (labeled EF,
common to all measures; (3) an
“alcohol-genetic” influence (labeled
Dra) common only to the post-alcohol
times of measurement; and (4) four
“specific-environmental” factors (not

Nesselroade and McArdle

 

Social Biology

labeled here). Note the correspondence
of this genetic-factor model to concepts
based on the actions of a “‘polygenic inheritance’? mechanism (McClearn,
1983).

The analysis was designed to provide
only preliminary results. The authors
suggested that the “alcohol-genetic factor loadings were small but of borderline
significance” (p. 95). They concluded
that individual environmental effects
and broad genetic differences were
more salient determiners of performance on the tasks being investigated (see
also Martin et al. 1985a, 1985b).

Of course, we have not here detailed
many critical assumptions of the genetic
modeling (but see Eaves et al., 1978)
and there remain many ways to expand
upon this basic work. In one such attempt, McArdle et al. (1980) introduced
the simultaneous estimation of genetic
latent variable models with an invariant
phenotypic measurement model and
longitudinal latent variance decomposition. They further showed how this
combined model could be specified, estimated, and fitted using available structural equation programs (e.g.,
LISREL). Martin et al. (1984) have
since overviewed additional research on
this topic.

MODELING INDIVIDUAL CAUSAL SYSTEMS

The intensive case study of problems
diagnostically classified as “episodic alcoholism” is usually clinically indicated,
but there are other good reasons to consider the case-study design as a useful research tool. For example, recent multivariate research on alcoholism (e.g.,
Horn, 1978; Skinner, 1981) shows that
the population of persons with alcoholrelated problems is highly heterogeneous with respect to individual life
courses and problem behaviors. These
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol]. 32, No. 3-4 Multivariable Causal Modeling 289

POR

A ae
$

Ep; Dai Pea
Ay ay td Wales ele}.

E
_——{

4 a E 4

ge St

ty t f
P P P P

Fic. 5.—A genetic-alcohol model of across-occasion (T-technique) factors (after Martin et al., 1981).
P, proportions are fixed parameters from genetic theory. Other estimates are maximum-likelihood ones
standardized across MZ (N = 21) and DZ(N = 15) between- and within-pair matrices (chi-square = 31
with 25 df; z = 0.9).

kinds of studies have also shown that _ tial diagnosis” based on ‘multiple synsuccessful treatment of problems can drome” models. Thus, it may be approresult from the application of “‘differen- priate to characterize the treatment of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

290

alcohol-related dependencies in terms
of “different strokes for different folks”
(Skinner, 1981, p. 75). Furthermore,
the “episodic” classification supports
the behavioral tendency towards high
fluctuation which, again, lends credence
to the use of the case-study design.

Although we have previously discussed the basic intraindividual design
structure termed P-technique, there
have not been many applications of this
methodology in either the alcohol use or
latent-variable causal modeling literature. However, in one preliminary application of dynamic P-technique,
McArdle (1982) reported a variety of
structural equation models for the analysis of data from a single “‘episodic alcoholic” subject.

The data analyzed by McArdle
(1982) were originally collected and reported by Birkett and Cattell (1978). In
the original data collection, daily observations on variations in motivational
traits and emotional states were recorded over a period of 92 consecutive
days. The subject was a 54-year-old,
married, professional man, whose
drinking and social history were highly
representative of the “episodic alcoholic’”’ classification. In a 95-minute
daily testing session with a skilled clinician, the subject was asked to respond to
standardized test stimuli and to keep a
diary. The basic variables used in the
modeling study included multiple measures of the subject’s emotional state,
interest in self, and interest in alcohol
(actual drinking was prohibited). More
details on the measures are found in
Birkett and Cattell (1978).

McArdle (1982) fitted a model containing three major latent variable subcomponents: (1) an “invariant” factor
measurement component, (2) a non
Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

linear “trend” component; and (3) an
over-time “dynamic-lag’’ component.
The basic measurement model for these
data has already been presented in Figure 2 and discussed in the earlier sections. but with this in mind we recognize
a potentially valuable move away from
the ‘“‘concurrent-time’’ structural
model, as given by Figure 5S. That is,
with multivariate time-sequenced data
we can move toward a model representing both non-linear ‘‘trends”’ in the
mean levels and “Jagged-time” dynamic
paths. The parameters resolved for the
latter component are presented graphically in Figure 6. The most critical feature of this dynamic component is the
representation of the salient causal
pathways for all three latent variables as
they affect one another over time. The
effects upon latent variables measured
“today” (i.e., C,;-9) are understood to
emanate from those same latent variables measured “‘yesterday” (i.e., C,_1)
and “one-week ago”’ (i.e., C,-7).

The structural illustration of Figure 6
helps to illustrate both the basic benefits
and the complexities of modeling the individual case. In effect, we might wish to
characterize this individual, especially in
contrast to other individuals, by his final
model parameters. Molenaar (1985)
provided a more sophisticated statistical
model using this same basic approach.
As McArdle (1982) reported, this particular model fits the data well and the
parameters displayed (in both Figs. 2
and 6) are all large relative to their
standard errors. However, even the
strongest effects are very small. So, although the design and model merge
well, we still have not developed a satisfactory understanding of the basic
causal mechanisms that are operating
within even this single individual.
 

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

  

,

+ 746 CN
t-7:

a

t-7!

Multivariable Causal Modeling

etecases eeege
4

“08

@eadaga

iad
=o

291

ereseeoe seran
4

CA
t-7:

a

     

 

  
      

 

       

QY

S

N

3

&

3

A

26 CS. 4 CA

Co Yi

- : 5 7 , t-1:

8 U

a

&

ao

oO

S - 20 1 “17

o (i) vn (ie)

> (12)

z ~22| | 1? a 21

5 C1} OD (i) (10)

&

2 ics. ‘ON eveveurag eevee

3 pi CN ig——__——__pCA_:

z :“t! 23 :' t-0! -39 te

is an os anees (89) cuaganpepenees (18) teieis t “0:

©

a f A f 9 f} cg
(14) “ae (14) (16)

Fic. 6.—Final dynamic path model of single subject’s daily alcohol interest. Factor model of Figure 2 is
invariant over all days. Only lags of one day (t-1) and one week (#-7) were modeled. Factor stationarity is
assumed for all lags, including #-0 (after McArdle, 1982). Chi-square = 381; df = 252;z = 5.0; T = 85.

are more appropriately engaged in
model building than model testing. Be
that as it may, the multivariate orientation we have just described offers a general methodological framework for ex
CONCLUSIONS

Many would argue that theoretical
developments regarding alcohol use are
currently at the level where researchers

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

292

plicitly bringing together the rich variety
of antecedents and observable manifestations that appear necessary to “‘capture” the phenomenon of alcohol use.
The illustrations presented earlier indicate how the multivariate orientation as
reflected in structural modeling with latent variables can be applied to the study
of antecedents and consequents of alcohol use-related behaviors. The antecedents include genetic as well as environmental information and the models can
be applied at both the group and individual level. The recognition that it is possible to build and test such models should
not be permitted to obscure the fact that
there are several requirements on which
these procedures must rest if they are to
be used fruitfully.

First, it is clear that model testing is
indeed model testing and not model
building only if there is available a sufficiently well articulated theory that permits the derivation of explicit, testable
empirical implications. Otherwise,
these high-powered statistics get turned
to the task of exploratory rather than explanatory work. This is not to denigrate
exploratory, descriptive work. Rather,
the point is that exploratory and explanatory tasks involve different activities
and different criteria of success and, to
the extent that it is possible, these activities should be distinguished from each
other. A “worst-case scenario” in this
regard involves the inadvertent (or deliberate) interpretation of the outcomes
of exploratory analyses as confirmatory
or hypothesis testing outcomes (Nesselroade and Baltes, 1984).

Second, the idea of modeling causal
relationships among “error-free” conStructs is an appealing one. However,
success in that arena will depend, to a
large extent, on the quality of the

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

marker variables or indicators for the
constructs that one is able to provide.
The history of multivariate research in
psychology reflects concern for domain
specification and definition and how to
sample in a representative manner from
such content domains in order to guarantee proper coverage of the major dimensions (Cattell, 19662). Concepts
such as simple structure (Thurstone,
1947) represent important tools for resolving such matters as adequacy of domain coverage, and they have not yet
been smoothly assimilated by the modeling procedures.

Third, the promise of modeling techniques for apprehending geneticsbehavior linkages will rest to a great extent on the “indicators” that can be
devised to represent genetic and, of
course, non-genetic influences. Classification schemes such as mono- versus
dizygotic twins offer one approach to
constructing such variables. More complex schemes such as those focused on
the decomposition of covariances and
the MAVA designs of Cattell that utilize
several different family constellations
are also possibilities to be explored (see,
e.g., Loehlin, 1979).

In any case, the Statistics development aspect of modeling is blossoming.
New computational and estimation algorithms, including robust ones for nonnormally distributed data, are appearing (Browne, 1984). It remains to be
seen whether the quality of our measurement variables and the precision of
available theories will keep up with the
technical developments. If so, then
multivariable modeling procedures involving latent variables may help to advance our understanding of relationships such as those between genetics and
behavior that have important theoretiDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

cal and practical consequences for understanding alcohol use.

With regard to modeling alcohol-use
mechanisms more effectively, it might
also be the case that we need to develop
novel ways of considering multiple variable combinations.

No single set of traits invariably defines
alcoholism. Just as light can consist of
both waves and particles, just so alcoholism can exist both as one end of a continuum of drinking problems and as a specific disorder. Alcoholism can simultaneously reflect both a conditioned habit
and a disease; and the disease of alcoholism can be as well defined by a sociological model as by a medical model....
Thus, alcoholism is a construct of a higher
order of complexity than, say, pregnancy
or measles. (Vaillant, 1983, p. 308)

Obviously, the problems associated
with understanding alcohol use are complex; so complex in fact that the attendant data analytic challenges may very
well threaten the basic foundations of

 

Multivariable Causal Modeling 293

contemporary multivariate analysis.
But, if for no other reason than this one
alone, we see the need to enter the joust
wearing our most advanced multivariate
armor and vigorously engage this troublesome problem of the human condition.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Preparation of this manuscript was accomplished in part while the senior author
was spending a sabbatical leave at the MaxPlanck-Institute for Human Development
and Education, Berlin, FRG. The support of
the MPI is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks
are due Jennifer Harris for her valuable comments on an earlier version of the manttscript. Sherry Corneal provided technical assistance with the preparation of the
references.

The second author’s research has been
funded by the National Institute on Aging
(NIA Grant AG-04701, with J. L. Horn)
and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism (NIAAA Grant AA~
05743).

REFERENCES

ANESHENSEL, C. C., and G. J. Husa. 1983. Depression, alcohol use, and smoking over one
year: A four-wave longitudinal causal
model. J. Abnor. Psychol. 92:114~150.

Bactes, P. B., and J. R. NESSELROADE. 1973.
The developmental analysis of individual
differences on multiple measures, p. 219251. In J. R. Nesselroade and H. W. Reese
(eds.), Life-span developmental psychology: Methodological issues. Academic
Press, New York.

BALTES, P. B., H. W. REESE, and J. R. NESSELROADE. 1977. Life-span developmental psychology: Introduction to research methods.
Brooks/Cole, Monterey, Calif.

BEGLEITER, H., B. Porsesz, B. Bivari, and B.
Kissin. 1984. Event-related brain potentials
in boys at risk for alcoholism. Science.
225:1493-1495.

BENTLER, P.M. 1980. Multivariate analysis
with latent variables: Causal modeling.
Ann. Rev. Psychol. 31:419-456.

 

. 1986. Causal modeling via structural
equation systems. In J. R. Nesselroade and
R. B. Cattell (eds.), Handbook of multivariate experimental psychology. Plenum,
New York.

BirKETT, H., and R. B. CaTrext. 1978. Diagnosis of the dynamic roots ofa clinical symptom by P-technique: A case of episodic alcoholism, Multivar. Behav. Res. 3:173-194.

BROWNE, M. 1984. Asymptotically distribution-free methods for the analysis of covariance structures. Brit. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 37:62-83.

CaMPBELL, D. T., and J. C. STANLEY. 1966. Experimental] and quasi-experimental designs
for research. Rand McNally, Chicago.

CATTELL, R. B. 1957. Personality and motivation structure and measurement. World
Book Co., New York.

. 1963. The structuring of change by P
and incremental-R technique, p. 167-198.

In C. W, Harris (ed.), Problems in measur
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

294

ing change. University of Wisconsin Press,

Madison, Wis.

. 1966a. The data box: Its ordering of to
tal resources in terms of possible relational

systems, p. 67-128. in R. B. Cattell (ed.),

Handbook of multivariate experimental

psychology. Rand McNally, Chicago.

. 19665. Multivariate behavioral re
search and the integrative challenge.

Multivar. Behav. Res. 1:4-23.

. 1966c. Patterns of change: Measure
ment in relation to state-dimension, trait

change, lability, and process concepts, p.

355-402. In R. B. Cattell (ed.), Handbook

of multivariate experimental psychology.

Rand McNally, Chicago.

. 1979. Personality and learning theory,

Vol. 1. The structure of personality in its en
vironment. Springer, New York.

. 1980. Personality and learning theory,

Vol. 2. A systems theory of maturation and

structured learning. Springer, New York.

. 1982. The inheritance of personality
and ability: Research methods and findings.
Academic Press, New York.

CaTTELL, R. B., and I. H. Scueter. 1961. The
meaning and measurement of neuroticism
and anxiety. Ronald Press, New York.

CuirF, N. 1983. Some cautions concerning the
application of causal modeling methods.
Multivar. Behav. Res. 18:115-126.

Coan, R. W. 1966. Child personality and developmental psychology, p. 732-752. In
R. B. Cattell (ed.), Handbook of multivariate experimental psychology. Rand
MeNally, Chicago.

CRONBACH, L. J. 1957. The two disciplines of
scientific psychology. Amer. Psychol.
30:116-127.

. 1975 Beyond the two disciplines of
scientific psychology. Amer. Psychol.
30:116-127.

Dixon, R.A., and J. R. NESSELROADE. 1983.
Pluralism and correlational analysis in developmental psychology: Historical communalities, p. 113-145. Jn R.M. Lerner
(ed.), Developmental psychology: Historical and philosophical perspectives. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J.

Eaves, L. J.,K. Last, P. A. YounG, andN. G.
Martin. 1978. Model-fitting approaches to
the analysis of human behavior. Heredity
41:371-376.

Foster, F. M., J. L. Horn, and K. W. WanBERG. 1972. Dimensions of treatment outcome: A factor-analytic study of alcoholics’
responses to a follow-up questionnaire.
Quart. J. Stud. Alc. 33:1079-1098.

FUuLKER, D. W. 1979. Some implications of biometrical genetical analysis for psychological

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nesselroade and McArdle

 

Social Biology

research, p. 337-380. In J. R. Royce and
L. P. Mos (eds.), Theoretical advances in
behavior genetics. Sijthoff & Noordhoff,
Germantown, Md.

GERGEN, K. J. 1984. Experimentation and the
myth of the incorrigible, p. 27-42. In V.
Sarris and A. Parducci (eds.), Perspectives
in psychology experimentation: Toward the
year 2000. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Hillsdale, N.J.

GLENN, N.D. 1981. Age, birth cohort, and
drinking: An illustration of the hazards of
inferring effects from cohort data. J. Gerontol. 36:362-369.

Guttrorp, J. P. 1952. When not to factor analyze. Psychol. Bull. 49:26-37.

Horn, J. L. 1978. Comments on the many faces
of alcoholism, p. 1-40. Jn G. Marlatt, P. Nathan, and T. Lobert (eds.), Alcoholism:
New directions in behavioral research and
treatment. Plenum, New York.

. 1984. To set the stage. Multivar. Behav. Res. 19:115—120.

Horn, J.L., and J.J. McArpie. 1980. Perspectives on mathematical/statistical modeling (MASMOB) in research on aging, p.
503-541. In L. Poon (ed..), Aging in the
1980’s. American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.

Horn, J. L., K. W. WANBERG, and G. Abas.
1974. Diagnosis of alcoholism: Factors of
drinking, background and current conditions in alcoholics. Quart. J. Stud. Alc.
35:147-175.

Horn, J.L., J. J. McArpie, and R. Mason.
1983. When ts invariant not invariant? A
practical scientists’ look at the ethereal concept of invariance. Southern Psychol.
1(4):179-188.

Husa, G. J., and P. M. BENTLER. 1982. A developmental theory of drug use: Derivation
and assessment of a causal modeling approach, p. 149-203. In P. B. Baltes and
O. G. Brim, Jr., (eds.), Life-span development and behavior, Vol. 4, Academic Press,
New York.

JaMEs, L.R.,S. A. Mutaix, and J. M. Bretr.
1982. Causal analysis: Assumptions, models
and data. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills,
Calif.

JOHNSON, R. C., C. T. NaGosut, S. Y. ScuwitTERS, K.S. Bowman, F.M. AHERN, and
J. R. Witson. 1984. Further investigation of
raciaVethnic differences and of familial resemblances in flushing in response to alcohol. Behav. Genet. 14:171-178.

JOrEsKoG, K. G. 1979. Statistical estimation of
structural models in longitudinaldevelopmental investigations, p. 303-351.
In J.R. Nesselroade and P.B. Baltes

 

 
[University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

y

Downloaded b

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

(eds.), Longitudinal research in the study of
behavior and development. Academic
Press, New York.

JOrREsKoG, K. G., and D. Sdérpom. 1979. Advances in factor analysis and structural
equation models. Abt Books, Cambridge,
Mass.

Kenny, D. A. 1979. Correlation and causality.
Wiley, New York.

LABOUVIE, E. W. 1980. Identity versus equivalence of psychological measures and constructs, p. 493-502. In L. W. Poon (ed.),
Aging in the 1980’s: Psychological issues.
American Psychological Association,
Washington, D.C.

Leso, M. A., and J. R. NessELROADE. 1978. Intraindividual differences dimensions of
mood change during pregnancy identified in
five P-technique factor analyses. J. Res.
Personal. 12:205-224.

LOEHLIN, J. C. 1979. Combining data from different groups in human behavior genetics,
p. 303-334. In J. R. Royce and L. P. Mos
(eds.), Theoretical advances in behavior genetics. Sijthoff & Noordhoff, Germantown,
Md.

Lusporsky, L., and J. Mintz. 1972. The contribution of P-technique to personality, psychotherapy, and psychosomatic research, p.
387-410. In R. M. Dreger (ed.) Multivariate personality research: Contributions to
the understanding of personality in honor of
Raymond B. Cattell. Claitor’s Publishing
Division, Baton Rouge, La.

Martin, J, A. 1982. Application of structural
modeling with latent variables to adolescent
drug use: A reply to Huba, Wingard, and
Bentler. J. Personal. Soc. Psycho}. 43:598~

a

© Martin, N.G., J.B. Grsson, J. G. OAKESHOTT, A. B. Wirks, G. A. STARMER,
J.Craic, and J. Perv. 1981. A twin study of
psychomotor performance during alcohol
intoxication: Early results, p. 89-96. In L.
Gedda, P. Parisi, and W. E. Nance (eds.),
Twin research 3: Epidemiological and clinical studies. Alan R. Liss, New York.

Martin, N.G., R. Jarpine, and L. Eaves.
1984. Is there only one set of genes for different abilities? A reanalysis of the National
Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test
(NMSOQT) data. Behav. Genet. 14:355370.

Martin, N.G., J. G. Oaxesuott, J. B. Gisson, G. A. STARMER, J. PERL, and A. V.
WILks. 1985a. A twin study of psychomotor
and physiological responses to an acute dose
of alcohol. Behav. Genet. 15:305-347.

Martin, N.G., J. Pert, J. G. OaKeEsHorrT,
J.B. Gipson, G. A. STARMER, and A. V.

Multivariable Causal Modeling

 

 

 

 

295

Wiiks. 19855. A twin study of ethanol metabolism. Behav. Genet. 15:93-—109.

McArb Le, J.J. 1981. Book review: Correlation and causality. Appl. Psychol. Meas.
§:275-280.

. 1982. Structural equation modeling of

an individual system: Preliminary results

from ‘‘A case study of episodic alcoholism.”

Grant proposal to the National Institute on

Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA

AA-05743).

1984a. On the madness in his method:

R. B. Cattell’s contributions to structural

equation modeling. Multivar. Behav. Res.

19:245-267.

. 1984b. Simple structure or simple dynamics: Remodeling complex factor patterns using longitudinal and multiple group
structural equation models. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Psychometric Society. June, Santa Barbara, Calif.

McArp_E, J.J., and J. L. Horn. 1981. Structural equation models of Gf-Gc intelligence
theory. Invited paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, August, Los Angeles, Calif.

McArn Le, J. J., and R. P. McDonaxp, 1984.
Some algebraic properties of the Reticular
Action Model for moment structures. Brit.
J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 37:234~-251,

McAropte, J.J., J. P. CONNELL, and H.H.
GoLpsMITH. 1980. Structural modeling of
stability and genetic influence: Some results
from a longitudinal study of behavioral
style. Behav. Genet. 10:487 (abstract).

McCLearn, G. E. 1983. Genetic factors in alcohol abuse: Animal models, p. 1-30. In B.
Kissen and H. Begleiter (eds.), The biology
of alcoholism, Vol. 7. The pathogenesis of
alcoholism: Biological factors. Plenum,
New York.

McDONALD, R. P., and W. R. Krane. 1979. A
Monte Carlo study of local identifiability
and degrees of freedom in the asymptotic
likelihood ratio test. Brit. J. Math. Stat.
Psychol. 32:121-132.

MErepiTH, W. 1964. Notes on factorial invariance. Psychometrika 29:177-185.

Mo enaar, P.C. M. 1985. A dynamic factor
model for the analysis of multivariate time
series. Psychometrika 50:181-202.

NESSELROADE, J. R. 1983a. Some implications
of the trait-state distinction for the study of
aging: Still labile after all these years. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the
American Psychological Association, August, Anaheim, Calif.

. 1983b. Temporal selection and facto
rial invariance in the study of development

and change, p. 60-87. In P. B. Baltes and

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

296 Nesselroade and McArdle

O.G. Brim, Jr. (eds.), Life-span development and behavior, Vol. 5, Academic Press,
New York.

NESSELROADE, J. R., and P. B. Bates. 1984.
From traditional factor analysis to
structural-causal modeling in developmental research, p. 267~—287. In V. Sarris and A.
Parducci (eds.), Perspectives in psychological research: Toward the year 2000. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J.

NESSELROADE, J.R., and D.H. Forp. 1985.
Multivariate, replicated, single-subject designs for research on older adults: Ptechnique comes of age. Research on Aging
7:46-80.

NESSELROADE, J.R., and E. W. LasBovuvie.
1985. Experimental design in research on
aging, p. 35-60. In J. E. Birren and K. W.
Schaie (eds.), Handbook of the psychology
of aging, 2nd edition. Van Nostrand
Reinhold, New York.

ProppinG, P., J. KRUGER, and N. Marx. 1981.
Genetic disposition to alcoholism: An EEG
study in alcoholics and their relatives. Hum.
Genet. 59:51-59.

Pruzex, R.M., and B.C. FRepDERIcK. 1978.
Weighting predictors in linear models: Al!ternatives to least-squares and limitations of
equal weights. Psychol. Bull. 85:254-266.

SCHAIE, K. W., and C. HERTZOG. 1982. Longitudinal methods, p. 91-115. Jn B.B.
Wolman (ed.), Handbook of developmental psychology. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.

SKINNER, H. A. 1979. A multivariate evaluation of the Michigan Alcoholism Screening
Test. J. Stud. Alc. 40:831-844.

. 1980, Factor analysis and studies of al
 

 

Social Biology

cohol: A methodological review. J. Stud.

Alc. 41:1091-1101,

, 1981. Primary syndromes of alcohol
abuse: Their measurement and correlates.
Brit. J. Addict. 76:63—76.

SINNOTT, J. D. 1981. The theory of relativity: A
metamodel for development? Hum. Dev.
24:293-311.

SPEARMAN, C, 1904. General intelligence objectively determined and measured. Amer. J.
Psychol, 15:201-293.

THURSTONE, L. L. 1947. Multiple factor analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Tucker, L. R. 1966. Learning theory and multivariate experiment: Illustration by determination of generalized learning curves, p.
476~S01. In R. B. Cattell (ed.), Handbook
of multivariate experimental psychology.
Rand McNally, Chicago,

VAILLANT, G. E. 1983. The natural history of
alcoholism: Causes, patterns, and paths to
recovery. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Wanserc, K. W., and J. L. Horn. 1983. Assessment of alcohol use with multidimensional concepts and measures. Amer. Psychol. 38:1065-1069.

WANBERG, K. W., J. L. Horn, and F. M. FosTER. 1977. A differential assessment model
of alcoholism: The scales of the Alcohol Use
Inventory. J. Stud. Alc. 38:512-543.

WRIGHT, S. 1921. Correlation and causation. J.
Agricultural Res. 20:557-585.

ZEVON, M.A., and A. TELEGEN. 1982. The
structure of mood change: An idiographic/
nomothetic analysis. J. Personal. Soc. Psycho]. 43:111-132.

 
