Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Invited discussion: Genetics in epidemiology

Helen Abbey , Richard H. Ward & Leon Gordis

To cite this article: Helen Abbey , Richard H. Ward & Leon Gordis (1979) Invited discussion:
Genetics in epidemiology, Social Biology, 26:2, 154-160, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988373

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988373

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Invited Discussion: Genetics in Epidemiology

Helen Abbey

Department of Epidemiology

School of Hygiene and Public Health
The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland

Is epidemiology a tool which the
geneticist studying human populations
can use to sort out more precisely the nature of genetic effects? Or, is genetics a
tool which the epidemiologist can use to
sort out the importance of environmental
risk factors influencing the manifestation
of a disease or other deleterious effect?
Judging from the papers which have been
presented, the answer to both of these
questions is “‘yes”’.

Epidemiology is a necessary tool for
sorting out the relation of risk factors to
disease or other deleterious effects when
experiments of the kind performed in laboratory genetics cannot be done. Clearly,
in human genetics the environment in
which the genetic effect is operating cannot be held constant nor can the appropriate mating classes be ordered. And, in
fact, the mating categories often cannot
even be identified. As the epidemiologist
defines disease entities more specifically
by subdividing them according to clusters
of risk factors, so also he subdivides disease entities into groups within which the
genetic mechanisms can be more precisely
defined.

The tools described in the previous papers have been of two types: those relating
to the analysis of the data, i.e., mathematical or statistical tools, and those relating to the collection of accurate data. An
example of the first is the discussion of the

merits of the generalized single-locus
model for segregation analysis versus
mixed models which include cultural inheritance, polygenes, and major loci. Although these models are indeed useful
tools, in reality the geneticist is plagued by
small numbers and small sizes of families,
as well as by the typical problems of epidemiological studies, including bias of ascertainment, lack of uniformity of definitions
and of collection procedures, missing values, misclassification, and others. A question which has not been addressed by the
proponents of elegant mathematics to
differentiate among the proposed geneticenvironmental mechanisms is: To what
extent is the potential discriminatory
power lost or the conclusions rendered
misleading because of these and other
deficiencies in the data themselves?

The study of the epidemiology and
genetics of schizophrenia in this series of
papers is an example in which enormous
amounts of epidemiological input is required before testing elaborate geneticenvironmental models will provide meaningful insights as to the factors which are
operating. The problems of defining the
disease in a uniform manner and of the ascertainment of cases are clearly apparent.
The authors noted that, for example, estimates of prevalence were affected by the
data collection process, and even more by
the concept of the investigator of what

154

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

constituted a case. It would seem premature to look for specific modes of genetic
action until the observations can be made
more precisely than is presently possible.

What has the epidemiologist to learn
from genetics? From the papers which
have been presented, two areas emerge.
First is that mathematical or descriptive
models are useful. They force one to sort
out what factors are thought to be operating and to specify the presumed mode of
operation. Furthermore, they point out
the types of data which would be needed
to test the relation between the models
and reality, and perhaps even more important, the developers and users of such
models cannot avoid facing the fact that
the truth is more complex than the mathematics. For example, the idea that many
genetic conditions operate like a constitutional democracy is a pleasing one, but
leads to the reflection that constitutional
democracies may in fact operate quite
differently than the rules for their operation would suggest.

The second area in which genetics can
be useful to the epidemiologist has been
emphasized in two of the previous papers.
In both of these, genetics was used as a
tool. In the first of these, genetic markers

 

Invited Discussion 155

were being monitored to measure changes
in the environment. As more markers are
identified by the geneticists, this tool
should become more and more important
for studying the effect of environmental
factors on disease. In the second paper,
twins, a genetic condition, were being
used, not to study genetic contributions to
disease, but rather to study environmental
contributions.’ This is a new twist but an
exciting one and suggests that other
genetic effects may also be used in this
way.

In summary, the papers presented here
have shown that the sciences of epidemiology and human genetics are useful
tools—each for the other discipline. A
geneticist who plans to do human population studies should have a skilled epidemiologist as a part of his team or he should
acquire these skills for himself. At the
other end of the spectrum, the epidemiologist should look at genetics as a tool
by which he can identify and quantify environmental factors for which his present
measurement techniques are inadequate.

1“The Swedish Study of Smoking-Discordant
Twins,” by Rune Cederlof, Department of Environmental Hygiene, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden, was presented at the symposium but was
not available for publication here.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Invited Discussion: Genetics in Epidemiology

Richard H. Ward

Department of Epidemiology
School of Medicine
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington

While “genetic epidemiology”’ has become an increasingly popular term since
late 1974, the integration of epidemiological principles into genetic models actually
dates back to Weinberg’s classic paper of
1912 which laid the foundation of human
statistical genetics. In turn, the subsequent work of early pioneers, like Apert
and Bernstein, which dealt with the problem of ascertainment, also embodied epidemiological principles. Likewise, the later developments initiated by Bailey,
Smith, and Morton, among others, can be
viewed as the incorporation of modern
statistical principles in deriving analytic
tools to handle epidemiological concerns
in a genetic setting. It is thus not surprising
that the current interest in “genetic epidemiology” is largely concerned with the
derivation of statistical techniques to handle complex data sets.

Unhappily, there has been far less attention paid to the adequacy of study design with respect to uncovering the underlying biological factors involved in
etiology. This is unfortunate, since any
successful epidemiological investigation
requires that the disease being studied
must be placed in its biological context.
The biological context delimits the hypotheses and determines the overall study
design as well as identifying the variables
to be measured and the subsequent statistical manipulations. Without a biological

 

statement of the problem, the correct epidemiological questions cannot be
identified, and the results of applying
genetic statistics will lack biological inference. If “genetic epidemiology” is to
mean more than merely the application of
genetic statistics to data collected by epidemiologists, there should be a greater focus on study design. It would also help to
define the position of “genetic epidemiology”’ in the health sciences.

The importance of developing a better
perspective of how genetic epidemiology
can contribute to the health sciences is indicated by the fact that although the number of genetically defined disease states
has increased exponentially since
McKusick’s first catalog, the genetic burden of ill health remains undefined and
unquantified. This situation arises because: (1) For the most part, we have little
knowledge about the distribution of
defined Mendelian/Chromosomal diseases in specific populations, in terms of
age-specific incidence rates broken down
by sex, geographic area, ethnic origin, etc.
(2) For the great number of common diseases, where single gene lesions only
make a minor contribution to overall morbidity, the proportionate attributable risk
of genetic factors cannot be specified in
terms of etiological involvement. The development of genetic epidemiology holds
considerable promise for answering both

156
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

these questions, but only if the field is correctly perceived in its health science context.

To this end, it would be helpful to consider the concept that diseases are distributed along an etiological spectrum ranging
from the purely genetic to the purely environmental. Six etiological classifications
of disease can thus be recognized—Mendelian, Chromosomal, Miultifactorial-high heritability, Multifactorial~low heritability, Infectious Agents,
Environmental Hazards. Within each of
these categories the distribution of the
genetic burden by age, sex, etc., will be
unique, and the pattern will also differ for
various populations. In addition, the strategy for research will differ by category,
partly as a function of the perception of

 

Invited Discussion 157

how the burden is distributed and partly
because of the requirements inherent in
the etiological nature of the disease. In
any event, epidemiological principles
should be incorporated into the study design with a quasi-experimental design chosen whenever the aim is to identify causal
factors. Sample units should have epidemiological justification and phenotypic information should be maximized. Lastly,
hypothesis testing should proceed in a
hierarchical fashion since no single analysis can provide a definitive answer. To
the extent that geneticists and epidemiologists collaborate in setting up and testing
the hierarchical succession of hypotheses,
the burgeoning field of genetic epidemiology should yield the promise that has
been prophesized by its advocates.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Invited Discussion: Genetics in Epidemiology

Leon Gordis

Department of Epidemiology

School of Hygiene and Public Health
The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland

This symposium is testimony to the
common interests shared by genetics and
epidemiology. Indeed, many questions
cannot be explored without the use of
methodologies from both disciplines. For
this reason, there is a great need for increased collaboration between geneticists
and epidemiologists in both research and
training.

Before discussing the question of how
such needs might be met, I should also like
to mention that such collaboration 1s essential if the two disciplines are to contribute to the critical questions involved in environmental control—particularly in the
occupational setting. In this regard, I
should like to draw a distinction between
genetic screening as it is now widely accepted and what I should like to term “‘environmental screening.”

Genetic screening may be defined as a
search in the population for persons
possessing certain genotypes that (1) are
already associated with disease or predispose to disease and (2) may lead to disease
in their descendants. The persons in the
first category are identfied so that medical
management may be provided, while
those in the second group are ascertained
so that reproductive options may be discussed.

Environmental screening, on the other
hand, I would define as a search in the
population for persons who are at risk for
disease upon exposure to a certain en
 

vironmental agent or class of agents because of (1) a specific genotype, (2) preexisting disease, or (3) simultaneous or
prior exposure to other environmental
agents. Such screening has particular relevance to the occupational setting since an
across-the-board reduction in permissible
standards for given environmental agents
associated with the work place may ultimately prove to be highly destructive to
social and economic functioning of communities. It may be more reasonable to
identify subsets of the worker population
who are at risk so that appropriate constructive action can be taken for them.
Just as we have genetic counseling, environmental counseling could be developed. The subject would be given information regarding his risk of disease and
his susceptibility to the effects of particular pollutants or occupational chemicals
on the basis of his genetic predisposition,
history of past disease, and exposure to
other environmental agents; alternative
options would then be suggested. A number of major issues, however, emerge regarding environmental counseling. (1)
Would counseling be mandatory or optional? (2) What would be the content of
such counseling? (3) Who would do such
counseling? (4) Who would sponsor (and
pay for) such counseling? (5) Who would
have access to the data regarding environmental screening and counseling? (6)
Would industrial employers be able to re
158
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

quire screening tests in selecting persons
to work with certain materials?

Other issues would also have to be addressed: Would such screening also be applied to residents in areas adjacent to
manufacturing plants and to the families
of workers who may bring the agents
home with them from the work setting? If
an employee insists that he is willing to
take a risk and continue working in a high
exposure situation despite the counseling,
would he be permitted to do so? Should
the data generated by such screening and
counseling be available to the health
officer of the industry; and, in general,
should the company have access to this individual information? An additional potential problem associated with such environmental screening and environmental
counseling is that industries may feel that
such programs relieve them of their responsibility for cleaning up the industrial
environment.

Naturally, in order to conduct such environmental screening and counseling,
sufficient knowledge will have to be available regarding potential hazards of specific
agents as well as the risk factors which may
characterize persons who are particularly
susceptible to such agents. Such information can be obtained using a variety of research approaches which help identify the
role of genetic and environmental factors
in causing disease. In addition to retrospective and prospective studies carried
out by epidemiologists, several other approaches are particularly appropriate for
discriminating between genetic and environmental components in the etiology of
disease.

These include a search for association
of a specific condition with known genetic
diseases and the search for genetic
markers. In addition, it is often helpful to
identify a familial aggregation of a given
disease. But such an aggregation need not
necessarily reflect genetic factors; it could

 

Invited Discussion 159

result from some common microenvironmental factors. The epidemiologic search
for time trends in the incidence of a disease is extremely helpful in discriminating
between environmental and genetic factors. If a significant change in incidence is
found over a period of several decades, for
example, it is unlikely that such a change
reflects any changes in the genetic composition of the population but rather suggests that this change reflects changes in
environmental exposures. Migrant studies
have also provided an invaluable tool for
examining international and regional
differences in disease incidence and have
often found that migrants tend to adopt
the disease risk characteristic of their
country of adoption, a finding strongly
suggesting a major role for environmental
factors but by no means excluding the importance of genetic determinants as well.

There is an urgent need to bridge the
gap that has all too often existed between
genetic and epidemiologic research.
Bridging this gap will require increased
collaborative activities both in research as
well as in programs designed to train anew
generation of genetically oriented epidemiologists and epidemiologically oriented
geneticists. There is a great need for biologically oriented geneticists interested in
epidemiology. There must be recognition
that the traditional model of biomedical
research which often focuses exclusively
on the bench laboratory may not be the
only one which can be productive in elucicating the etiology of disease. At the same
time, however, we require biologically
and medically oriented epidemiologists to
carry out collaborative studies with
geneticists.

There is an urgent need to introduce
genetics into the training of epidemiologists. This should be accomplished in
several ways: first, by emphasizing genetic
concepts in the epidemiology courses currently given; second, by adding genetics
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

160

courses to the curriculum provided by epidemiology departments; third, by adding
geneticists to epidemiology department
faculty as an integral part of the departmental program; fourth, by increasing the
utilization by epidemiology departments
of genetic resources available elsewhere in
the university outside the department itself; and fifth, by involving geneticists as
preceptors and readers for doctoral theses
in epidemiology.

At the same time, there is a need for introducing epidemiology into genetics programs. Geneticists must learn epidemiologic methods. There must be an
increased appreciation by geneticists of
the applicability of such methods to issues
of etiology both in terms of identifying the
agents involved as well as the mechanisms
which produce disease. There must be increased willingness on the part of geneticists to collaborate with epidemiologists in

Gordis

Social Biology

both teaching and research. Furthermore,
there must be recognition by geneticists
that disease mechanisms can be identified
not only by studies of a limited number of
individuals but rather by the populationbased methods which are already highly familiar to epidemiologists, but upon which
genetic approaches can be superimposed.

In order to facilitate the introduction of
genetics into epidemiology training as well
as of epidemiology into genetics training,
federal support is needed for truly integrated training programs in genetics and
epidemiology and for the development of
prototype programs which can serve as
models for the country. It would seem desirable for federal agencies to provide inducements to institutions which already
have distinct epidemiology and genetic
programis in order to stimulate them to develop collaborative endeavors on a
broader scale.
