Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Fertility effects of family planning programs: A
methodological review

Jacqueline Darroch Forrest & John A. Ross

To cite this article: Jacqueline Darroch Forrest & John A. Ross (1978) Fertility effects of
family planning programs: A methodological review, Social Biology, 25:2, 145-163, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1978.9988332

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988332

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
3:37 08 December 2015

higan] at 1

Mic

ity of

Downloaded by [Univers

 

Fertility Effects of Family Planning

Programs: A Methodological Review

 

Jacqueline Darroch Forrest and John A. Ross

Alan Guttmacher Institute, 515 Madison Avenue, New York, New York; and Center for Population and Family

Health, Columbia University, New York, New York

ABSTRACT: Extensive effort over the last ten to fifteen years has been applied to questions of what
family planning programs do to birth rates. Here we review this body of work, looking especially at
the different methods used. First, attention is called to the diversity of the field, in its questions, its
techniques, in the program types studied, and in assumptions as to modes of actions. Then
clarifications are suggested regarding which program features can produce fertility change and
which patterns in fertility trends can result from the net action of these factors. Each of the major
methods used is then presented, with its advantages and disadvantages and with recent illustrations
of its application. A matrix comparison of the methods is added to show their characteristics in
relation to each other, and suggestions are made as to the appropriate circumstances for using each.
Finally, recent work is described that promises partially to give more comparability of results across

different methods and program settings.

Since the early 1960’s some 52 investigations! have been undertaken into how family planning programs may have changed
the course of fertility, either that of acceptors or of the general population. In addition, there are perhaps 20 efforts of a less
empirical nature—official plans that calcuate the probable effect over the next five or
en years of a national program or comuter simulations that relate birth control
o fertility change. In the approaches taen, these are not always easily separable
from estimates of the past effects of actual
programs. We offer here acritical review of
this body of research, looking especially at
its methodological character.

tft _

a)

ais

DIVERSITY OF THE FIELD

The work so far done ranges over a considerable variety of questions, program
types, data sets, assumptions, and methods. These differences are partly acciden
1 A full bibliographic review has been separately
prepared, forthcoming (1978) in Population Index.

tal, reflecting research opportunities and
available data, but are also partly a reflection of disparate thinking; that is, the studies tend to differ in ways that reflect different thinking in the field:

First, in guestions asked. Strong interest
has always rested on what programs can do
to the population growth rate, or at least to
the crude birth rate. However, because
these measures respond to numerous influences other than the program, it has
often seemed fair to ask instead for effects
upon marital fertility, or even upon acceptors alone. Measures have included, besides overall rates, age-specific and parityspecific rates, and sometimes prolongation
of time to the next birth.

Second, in research methods used. At
least seven major methodological approaches, described below, have been
prominently employed. The approaches differ greatly in their logical structure, data
requirements, and strength of conclusions.
Some differ enough that they cannot be
applied to the same situation.

145

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

146 Forrest and Ross

Third, in program type investigated. It is
customary to think of all family planning
programs as a group, and the literature
reviewed implicitly assumes a commonality among all “programs.” Yet some are
small pilot projects lasting a year or two;
others are projects of individual clinics;
and still others are national efforts. Some
have silently added contraceptive services
to existing facilities, while others have
mounted determined mass media campaigns or assigned a corps of workers to
visit homes to urge birth control practice.
Some have established service points at a
high density throughout the countryside,
and others have done little outside provincial cities. Some have invoked commercial
distribution, and others have used incentives involving income tax rules, housing
eligibility, and other inducements. While it
can of course be argued that it is just these
differences that are under investigation,
they have nevertheless muddled the nature
of the interventions, just as discrepancies
in fertility measures have blurred the picture of outcomes.

Fourth, in mode of action assumed. Considerable disagreement attends the question of how programs can affect fertility.
The literature contains many shadings of
terminology, which often reflect fervent
controversy. A program is seen in any of
the following ways:

(a) “merely substitutes for other means
that would have been used anyway.”

(b) “is simply the means by which a reduction, dictated by social and economic
development, is achieved.”

(c) “is a facilitator of fertility reduction.”

(d) “determines the timing and rapidity
of the decline although the conditions for it
were present.”

(e) “is a social intervention that has an
additional effect on fertility beyond that
attributable to the on-going socio-economic
and demographic processes.”

Some argue that the program can be only a

Social Biology

vehicle for what people already wish to do,
while others believe it can also hasten

.changes in intention. Such differences in

concept as these are often taken to be
mutually exclusive, and shadings are ignored. Many commentators have been doctrinal, closed to the possibility that different programs at different times, even
within the same country, can conceivably
serve more than one function.

PROGRAM MECHANISMS

What then, in fact, can a-program do?
What are the mechanisms that can impinge
upon fertility rates? These fall into five
kinds, as follows:

1. The provision of means of fertility
control. A program can establish the supply and service of modern birth contro}
means or put them on a much more dispersed basis throughout the population.
The usual discussion of this area refers to
the provision of additional methods, better
technology, or closer distribution points. In
analyses focused on this topic, emphasis is
on the source supplying the means (commercial vs. government-supported), and
the crucial factors influencing fertility behavior are seen as mechanical features—
price, technology, variety of methods,
propinquity to users. An additional means
is neutral non-persuasive information
about particular methods of birth planning
and where to obtain them, presented
through channels that vary from personal
contact to mass communication.

2. Education. Attempts at persuading
people to change their fertility behavior can
be delivered through many channels.
These attempts can range from fairly mild
statements to strong propaganda programs
(“Stop at Two”). They generally focus on
the link between lower fertility and expected benefits for the person, family, or
country and try to convince people to
change their own fertility behavior and

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

norms as the result of logical, moral, economic, or political appeals.

3. Legitimation. As a program spreads,
its de facto presence in terms of services,
buildings, publicity, and clientele can foster a presumption of the acceptability of
birth planning and use of program services.
On another level, open endorsement of the
program and of new attitudes and behavior
by nationally visible and respected figures
as well as by local leaders helps make respectable what might otherwise might not
be. For instance, as Freedman et al. (1970,
pp. 12-13) comment:

In making easily and cheaply available on a
large scale first the IUD and then the pill
under legitimate and respected auspices, the
{Hong Kong Family Planning] Association as
a “supplier” helped to redefine the demand by
changing the “product.” This may be of particular importance for couples who feel the
need for birth control but are ambivalent
about what to do for a problem without traditiona) solutions.

4. Incentives/Disincentives. A program
can try to affect fertility behavior by offering inducements of some kind to acceptors.
In Ghana, for example, powdered milk
was given to mothers accepting family
planning. In Taiwan, discounts on the
costs of IUD’s have been offered through
field workers. The Indian governmental
program has provided monetary compensations for missed work time to vasectomy
acceptors. In some countries disincentives
or sanctions against continued large families have been applied. These have ranged
from anti-natalist taxes to housing and job
restrictions and other regulations whose effect is to encourage small families. While
these actions are usually taken outside the
service delivery network, programs have
been encouraged by and have benefited
from them. In some governmental family
planning programs, such as that in Singapore, these actions have come to be closely
identified with overall program activity.

Family Planning Programs

147

5. Combinations. Clearly, different programs give different degrees of emphasis to the mechanisms just listed. The
first mechanism chiefly concerns “supply”;
the others, “demand.” All, however, may
merge, flowing together in the society, with
supply and practice themselves changing
people’s perceptions of what others are
doing and thereby hasten normative
change. When this process is not recognized, there is confusion about what the
program may possibly have done and how
any fertility impact may have been produced. That is, the possibility of combinations can be stressed without insisting on
any particular combination. A frequent
error has been an insistence that “programs
in general” perform only certain function(s), which overlooks the large differences among and within countries in the
character and components of the program.

ALTERNATIVE FERTILITY PATHS

While it is clear that programs can operate through various modes of action and in
numerous combinations, examination of
effects on fertility seldom reaches down to
this layer of analysis. Rather, the sum of
program activities is usually treated as a
whole, and only the net balance of
influences from the various modes of action
is traced. Alternative concepts of program
effects at the societal level can be represented, as is done in Figure 1, which
portrays competing views (a, b, c, d, e) of
what the family planning program as a
whole may do to fertility. Figure 1a fits the
extreme causation view, that of the program entering astatic situation and by itself
producing an important decline. The
mechanisms for achieving such a decline
would necessarily combine supply, information, education, and legitimation. Figure 1b represents a more common construct, in which a decline had clearly begun
before a program was instituted and would
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

148 Forrest and Ross

birth
rate

time

Social Biology

 

 

 

Fertility with a
program

wenn nnn . Fertility without a
program

Initiation of program

Fig. 1.—Alternative fertility trends with and without family planning programs.

have continued, but the program accelerated and increased it. Again the mechanisms are partially obscure, but in this case
program influence supplements other influences already at work In the society.
Figure 1c depicts the view that the program
makes no additional normative change in a
situation where fertility is falling, but has

an implementing effect by providing
means, or better means, than would otherwise have been available. The final result
is unchanged but the downward path contains savings of births. Figure 1d illustrates
the view of complete substitution, that the
program was one vehicle for avoiding
pregnancy but that it had no net effect. It

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

only placed an alternate supply source or
different methods at the disposal of a population that already had access to other
sources. Figure le represents a final view,
that investment in the family planning program contributed to decreased fertility but
took the place of other program, actions, or
supply sources that would have produced
even greater decline. For example, had the
programs not been instituted, then commercial activity, different legal structures,
or liberalized abortion practices might
have begun to operate, conceivably with
superior effectiveness. Thus, the net fertility decline under the program was less than
would have occurred without the program.

Again, in any actual situation, it is usually only the net balance of all these forces
that can be traced. If several forces are
active, that fact may not be detectable.
The analytic methods currently available
(described below) differ considerably in
their character, but none of them can produce much refinement in telling how large
a role was played by each of the above
models. The actual course that fertility followed is subject to empirical measurement, but the hypothetical line of what it
would have been without the program is
not. This line is crucial to determination of
program effect, and several of the methods
below can in a sense be interpreted as
alternative means to its estimation. In
fact, the variety of methods available for
measuring program effect is not only due
to the need to address varying data types,
but in large part is the result of different
attacks on the problem of how to get some
estimate of what would have happened
without the program, in terms of aggregate or personal fertility behavior.

METHODS

From the body of studies examined, we
now present a classification of basic methodological approaches, with a comparison

Family Planning Programs

149

of their strengths, limitations, and applications. The methods so far used are of
greatly differing character, and range from
matching, use of control groups, and comparisons of pre- and post-acceptance (or
program) fertility behavior, to the statistical controls of multiple regression and
simulation of the nonprogram situation
within a stochastic model. Detailed technical considerations are omitted here; an excellent review has been prepared by the
U.N. Population Division (United Nations, 1977). Each method offers a reasonable means for making an estimate of a
particular kind, and each carries its own
peculiar advantages and limitations.

A. DECOMPOSITION OF CHANGE

By standardization, the change in the
crude birth rate (or general fertility rate) for
a given period is decomposed into the contributions of marital fertility, nuptiality,
age distribution, and interactions. If changing marital fertility is found to have
contributed significantly to the overall
change, attention usually turns to estimating the relative impact of program vs. private sources of contraception by comparing
the proportions of couples receiving supplies or service from each sector. Calculation periods are often picked to match the
establishment or strengthening of program
activity.

In some cases no further analysis is
made; but in others the detection of change
in marital fertility as a key factor in the
crude birth rate change prepares the
ground for further research using some of
the methods outlined below. Chandrasekaran and Hermalin (1975, p. 550) note that
decomposition of change “is an important
safeguard in any kind of trend analysis in
that it prevents falsely attributing to the
program that which is due to change in
demographic structure.”

This method allows separation of nuptiality and age distribution effects from ferDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

150

tility changes. The decomposition is fairly
clear even to those not familiar with program analysis and shows the relative contributions of changes in the three factors
examined in a reasonably simple way. Description of relative levels of program and
public supplies of contraception provides a
rough picture of the relative influence of the
two sectors on the change. However, data
on the demographic factors (by age groups)
and the source of supply are often unavailable. This method does not deal with motivation for change in fertility behavior but
only with the source of supplies, and no
direct connection is made between the program activity and fertility change.

Because the variations in the crude birth
rates and in the other factors considered are
usually small, even slight changes can produce large swings in the percentages of
change due to various factors over fairly
short time periods. Calculations for seven
countries with numerous time periods appear in Ross et al. (1972), with marital fertility change accounting for from zero to 89
per cent of the crude birth rate change, and
the percentage of married contraceptors
using public supply sources varying from
34 per cent to 88 per cent. More recent
work has identified changing marital fertility as an unimportant factor (without giving percentages) in crude birth rate change
in Trinidad and Tobago, 1961-67 (Thein,
1970), and in Fiji, 1959-68 (Fairbanks,
1970). On the other hand, Reynolds (1972)
estimated that marital fertility change accounted for more than 50 per cent of the
crude birth rate decline in Costa Rica,
1960-69.

B. CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN PROGRAM
ACTIVITY AND FERTILITY CHANGE IN
TIMING, GEOGRAPHIC AREAS,
POPULATION SUBGROUPS BY AGE,
PARITY, AND RACE/ETHNICITY

This approach identifies parallels between the establishment of a program (or

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

substantial changes in it) and fertility
trends over time or across areas or groups.
Close association is taken as evidence that
program activity was a causal factor in the
fertility change, while lack of association is
damaging to claims of program effect. The
association may be between a downward
turn in a time series of fertility measures
and the introduction (often lagged) of the
program stimulus. It may also be based on
evidence of lower fertility (or steeper decline) in areas with greater program input
or among groups on whom the program
was focused or which provided disproportionate numbers of acceptors. Brass (1976,
p. 1) expresses this approach: “. . . if the
relation between the fertility fall and the
program development is close in time and
detailed pattern, and if there is evidence
that the social and economic conditions
failed to establish a significant trend when
Operating alone, the balance of probabilities can be taken strongly to favor a
direct effect.”

This method stays close to the data,
avoiding complex techniques with heavy
statistical assumptions. Its information
demands are modest compared to several
of the other techniques. It usually can be
readily emnloyed, especially where adequate vital statistics exist. The geographic
approach can take advantage of informal
area comparisons where more formal approaches are nct feasible—where areas
cannot be matched, experimental and control areas are lacking, and the data and/or
analysis capabilities needed for area analysis using regression are unavailable.

There are limitations. Data on fertility
before and after program input may not be
available, especially when the program is
first established. Judgment is involved in
assessing the proper lag from program inputs, which have cumulative effects, to
subsequent fertility declines. Identification
of and controls for alternative explanations
are poor; private sector use, later marriage,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

and other factors can affect the patterns of
correspondence found. Variations in program activities may be accompanied by
variations in socioeconomic development
that also reduce fertility, making the program appear more important than it was.
Conversely, lack of fertility decline may be
interpreted as a sign of no program effect
when in fact it existed but was simply countered by other factors working toward fertility increase. Applications of this method
are available for Mauritius (Brass, 1976),
Taiwan (Freedman, 1965; Freedman and
Muller, 1965; Freedman et al., 1972),
Hong Kong (Freedman and Adlakha,
1968; Freedman, 1969, 1973; Wat and
Hodge, 1972; Chan, 1976; Freedman et al,
1970), and Georgia (Darney, 1975a,)), all
of which show sharp patterns of correspondence across time and subgroups that
persist when (limited) controls are introduced for nonprogram factors.

C. MATCHING STUDIES

Matching studies attempt to remove the
influence of nonprogram factors by matching subjects to controls (areas or individuals) on extraneous factors thought also to
affect fertility. For individuals, acceptors
are compared to nonacceptors possessing
similar characteristics, with nonacceptors
taking whatever birth contro] steps they
wish within the private sector. To the extent that the matching procedures truly
equalize subjects and controls, the fertility
data for the controls suggest what acceptors would have experienced without the
program. Then, residual fertility differences between program and nonprogram
groups are ascribed to program impact. If
the subjects used are a representative sample of all acceptors, results can be generalized to the entire program.

The matching method typically uses a
one-to-one comparison, but with secondary data this procedure almost always
wastes cases. Under any given set of match
Family Planning Programs 151

ing rules (i.e., the set of similarities used in
pairing), the mean value for two or more
subjects, or matches, on a variable is preferable to any of the individualized values.
In fact, all the cases available for the study
may be cast into a detailed cross-tabulation
containing each category for each variable
used in the matching. If one imagines two
of these tables, one for subjects and one for
matches, each case will fall into an appropriate cell. A mean value for the variable of
interest (e.g., fertility) can then be computed for all cases in each cell, and this
value will be more stable than if it were
based on any one individual. The comparisons are not one subject to one match, but
cell mean to cell mean; otherwise the calculations proceed unchanged. Sampling errors cannot easily be computed, but they
will be reduced from the one-to-one
method.

This adaptation of the matching approach has additional virtues: (1) One gains
the picture of the distribution of subjects
and matches across the control variables,
as in the Chow et al. (1969) Taiwan study.
(2) Extra cases are easily exploited by adding them to the cells where they fit. (3) The
format permits immediate application of
the usual standardization techniques regardless of cell sizes (providing the experimental cases and the matches follow
roughly similar distributions within the
two tables).

Two studies in particular illustrate the
potential of the method, one for Taiwan
(Chow et al., 1969) and one for Malaysia
(Johnson et al., 1973; Anonymous, 1976).
In Taiwan, all IUD acceptors in four townships were selected; in Malaysia, a sample
of acceptors was used to represent all national acceptors. Vital registration information permitted the identification of
nonacceptors with similar characteristics
and gave detailed birth records on all individuals. In the Taiwan study, fertility fell
80 per cent for acceptors vs. 48 per cent for
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

152

controls over two years, the decline for
both groups probably being related partly
to the alignment within the birth interval,
as many women had a recent birth. In
Malaysia, 1968 acceptors had 28 per cent
fewer births than did controls over the ensuing five years 1969~74. Acceptors with
more than five children had 37 per cent
fewer births.

Matching with areas as units is an attractive approach and has been applied to
Georgia counties (Rochat et al., 1972), pairing each of seven counties with programs to
a contiguous county without a program,
matched on geographic contiguity, population size, and racial distribution. Fertility
fell 13 per cent more in program counties,
with much larger differentials for subgroups with high acceptance rates.

It must be stressed that matching is ex
post facto, being done after acceptance or
program initiation has occurred. The
motivation of acceptors, and factors such
as leadership that affect program placement in specific areas, have not been
matched and are not controlled. Such factors may have been strong enough to have
brought about some fertility decline even if
the program had not existed, although this
speculation loses some of its force where
large differences are found. General diffusion of family planning information from
the program may also affect and contaminate the nonprogram subjects, blurring
measures of program impact and producing an underestimate of effect. Matching of
areas has not been used to assess a program
with national coverage since no clear control areas are available; it may, however,
be used in the early stages of program
growth before the program is widespread.
Even then, finding equivalent areas for
comparison is often a problem. The more
variables used in matching, the greater the
number of factors accounted for, but the
more impractical the actual research becomes. Matching individuals usually de
Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

pends on good vital statistics, registration
systems, or special identification numbers
(as in Malaysia and Venezuela) to identify
matches.

D. EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL AREAS

Where similar groups (areas or individuals) are initially identified and some then
recelve program input (experimental
groups) and others do not (controls), later
differences in fertility declines are ascribed
to the program. An important assumption
is that other factors are not only similar at
the start but that their effects upon the two
groups are similar throughout the experimental period. This assumption needs to be
verified by examination of nonprogram
factors wherever possible.

Control groups present a gauge of what
would have happened without program activity and therefore provide a standard for
measuring net program effect. However, it
is hard to find comparable groups, especially areas, and it is often practically and
politically difficult to assign them randomly to experimental or control status.
Usually only a few areas are used, and so
the cell sizes for areal variables in the analysis are very small. Contamination of program influence from experimental to control groups is acommon problem. In some
cases, actions necessary to achieve isolation
may be more elaborate than can be justified
by the program effort involved or by the
potential outcome. Prominent examples of
this method are experiments in KoyangKimpo, Korea (Bang, 1968), which founda
three times greater decline in the total fertility rate in the intensive program area; in
Singur, India (Rao and Mathen, 1970),
which obtained a steeper birth rate decline
in the experimental area during the intensive phase of the program; in Khanna, India
(Wyon and Gordon, 1971) where no difference was found; and a Taichung birthspacing experiment with as yet indecisive
results.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

E. MULTIPLE REGRESSION ACROSS AREAL
UNITS

This method requires measurements on
a number of variables for each of many
small administrative or statistical areas.
Conceptually, it works only with variables
that are genuinely areal or societal. Multiple regression and correlation techniques
are then applied within the structure of a
posited causal model. The areas serve in a
sense as small experiments across arange of
strength of both program and nonprogram
variables. With other factors held constant
statistically, it is possible to see, for instance, how variations in program strength
across the areas are related to fertility
trends and to determine whether or not the
family planning program had an independent fertility effect.

This method focuses on the level of social
units rather than on individuals. Therefore, program activity can be related to
effects on the whole population, and program impact through diffusion of nonservice effects to nonacceptors can be picked
up. Fertility trends can be related to program efforts directly without tracing all the
intermediate linkages (e.g. acceptance,
continuation, overlap of contraception use
with lactation, onset of sterility). The researcher can take advantage of socioeconomic data gathered on an areal basis and
can directly address questions about the
separate contribution of socioeconomic development.

However, extensive data and data manipulation requirements make this method
inapplicable in most countries. Among
weaknesses of the approach are the difficulty of generalization from _ crosssectional data to time trends, questions of
how best to measure program inputs, many
statistical complexities inherent in the correlational character of the method; its
strong parametric assumptions; the small
numbers of units (areas) upon which the
numerous statistical controls rest, espe
 

Family Planning Programs

 

153

cially when subgroupings are used; the
necessity of formulating an astute causal
model; the uncertainty as to the mechanisms by which the program had its effect;
and contamination of influence of the program and nonprogram factors across areal
borders. Nevertheless, this method is one
of the most powerful and valuable ones
available when the necessary data are at
hand. Freedman-Berelson (1976) and
Mauldin-Berelson (1977), applying it to
cross-national data, have demonstrated
strong independent effects of both socioeconomic variables and program inputs
upon fertility, as has Srikantan (1977).
Hermalin (1968), applying it to small areas
in Taiwan, has found independent program effects and, interestingly larger net
effects in rural areas where fewer alternatives exist than in urban areas (see also
Freedman et al., 1969). Cutright and Jaffe
(1976) used it on U.S. county data and
found very consistent independent relations between numbers of clients in federally financed programs and fertility decline.

F. NATIONAL EFFECTS OF BIRTHS
AVERTED AMONG ACCEPTORS

A group of techniques calculates births
averted among program acceptors and relates them to the total population to arrive
at the national effect. Some do so with corrections to yield the net program contribution.

One approach compares the actual fertility of an accepting group or of a program
area to a standard of what the fertility level
would have been without the program.
This standard is obtained through methods already described—extension of time
trends, or use of the fertility of comparison,
matched, or control groups (or areas).

A second approach is based on segments
of contraceptive use. The number of births
averted varies directly with the extent to
which use of program contraception pro
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

154. Forrest and Ross

longs the fecund portion of the birth intervals of acceptors. The average use time of
the contraceptive is reduced by such factors
as overlap with lactation amenorrhea, unknown sterility at acceptance, subsequent
sterility, and contraceptive failure. The
remaining use time is done on an agespecific basic.

It is sometimes problematic how to distribute the averted births by periods of
calendar time, and different techniques
handle this problem differently. However,
a core approach used in many variants is
the following. Annual cohorts of acceptors
are each moved forward under a decay
curve that shows surviving users through
time. Simple addition across these curves
gives total number of all users at each date.
This curve is then simply lowered by a
proportion that represents the corrections
mentioned above, for amenorrhea, etc.
Any direct effect on fertility must then
come from these users, displaced about
nine months. It is straightforward to translate the time curve of users into fertility
prevented by reference to an estimate of the
expected fertility of acceptors had they not
accepted. This estimate is taken from one
of the following:

(a) their own recent (3-5 years) agespecific fertility history (Potter, 1969; Wolfers, 1969, 1970; Sivin, 1974);

(6) a “natural fertility” level (fertility
level of fecund noncontraceptors in the society, as in the TABRAP (Nortman and
Bongaarts, 1975) estimation method);

(c) asimple rule, such as one birth prevented for every three or four person years
of use (country plans, discussed below);

(d) the marital age specific fertility rates
prevailing in the general population
(Laing, 1977; Astawa et al., 1975);

(ec) a matched group not using program
contraception/sterilization that suggests
expected fertility among acceptors (Malaysia) (Johnson et al., 1973; and
Johnson et al., 1976, unpublished);

Social Biology

(f) the recent fertility history of acceptors
who had prior contraceptive use (Potter,
1969, 1973).

Depending upon the approach used, the
expected fertility level may or may not be
corrected to allow for the net program contribution. As the above listing indicates,
the different procedures for choosing a potential fertility level may on one side recognize that acceptors typically show higher
fertility performance in the recent past than
do nonacceptors and may on the other side
recognize that some proportion of acceptors would have done something anyway to
avoid births, the proportion, however, depending partly upon how rich the environment is in alternative supply/sources.

In any case, the end result is acalculation
of numbers of births prevented among acceptors, usually scheduled over calendar
periods. Although certain applications of
this method stop at this point, it is quite
easy to take it to the final step, putting
births prevented against the total population to obtain the program-induced change
in the crude birth rate.

A logical extension of this method projects future births averted from past and
future acceptor cohorts to predict the future course of the crude birth rate. A number of country plans do this, to develop
targets for their national family planning
programs. Fourteen of these plans have
been compared (Ross, 1975). They agree
closely in targeting a decline of about one
point per year in the crude birth rate (e.g.,
from 35.0 to 34.0). They are, however, unconvincing that the program alone can
produce this decline, a doubt buttressed by
experience so far even in countries with
strong programs. Six plans intend to reach
this ambitious goal by recruiting 5-10 per
cent of married women of reproductive age
each year (MWRA); another five plan to
recruit from 5 to 16 acceptors per thousand
population per year (roughly 3-10 per cent
of MWRA, or about the same level). This

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

range agrees reasonably well with current
program performance (Freedman and Berelson, 1976; Nortman and Hofstatter,
1976).

Of eight plans that speak to the question,
six assume that acceptors have the same
potential fertility as other married women,
not higher. This assumption 1s surprising
since, as noted above, most data on the
question show acceptor fertility in the last
three to five years to have been well above
that of other married women of the same
age, even with a control on date of the last
birth. To assume that acceptors and nonacceptors are of equal fertility potential
is conservative, in that fewer births are
thereby considered to be prevented among
acceptors. Another conservative feature is
that most plans neglect the effects of later
marriage and private birth control in the
society.

Overall, however, it seems fair to say
that the plans tend to overestimate direct
program effects, through excessively high
continuation assumptions for each method,
and a failure to correct for superfluous use
time by discounting for overlap with lactation, for onset of sterility, marriage
breakup, contraceptive failure, etc., which
together can easily cancel up to a third of
calculated “use” time under life table projections.

Most plans are forced to major simplifications in their calculations. One simplification is to ignore the age of acceptors.
Age data on acceptors are incorporated in
only six of the plans, and only one (Turkey)
follows cumulative acceptance rates. (The
TABRAP/CONVERSE simulation program [Hortman and Bongaarts, 1975] also
keeps track of the cumulative acceptance
rate within any age cohort.) Most plans
calculate the number of person years of
contraceptive use produced by a given
schedule of acceptance and continuation
rates and then translate this figure to births
prevented by a simple rule of one birth

Family Planning Programs

155

prevented to either three or four person
years of use. No distinction is made between one person using contraception for a
full year vs. several people using it for
intervals that sum to a year. However,
multi-year use by individuals occurs more
frequently where there are more sterilizations or higher continuation rates, or a
smaller role of recent acceptors as the program ages.

No country recognizes the profound implications for the plan objectives of the
gradual disappearance of lactation, or the
heavy dependence of current birth intervals upon the _lactation/post-partum
amenorrhea component. Crude calculations (Waston, 1973, unpublished) suggest
that national reductions in the proportion
lactating and their mean duration of doing
so would cancel large portions of the calculated effect of the national programs.

Because the focus of this entire method is
on acceptor behavior, much of the data
needed are often available through program activities and records and through
client follow-up surveys. This method
points up the national implications of levels
of acceptance, choice of methods, and continuation rates. However, the choice of a
standard of expected fertility is difficult
and problematic, as are the numerous corrections and refinements called for to
achieve precision. Only direct effects
among acceptors are considered; indirect
effects of the program are omitted.

G. SIMULATION

This approach is based on formulation of
a mathematical model to represent demographic processes, usually for an entire population, with calculations set into a component projection. Relationships are specified
between contraceptive practice and assumed levels of expected fertility among
acceptors with allowances for sterility and
numerous other factors. A number of models have been proposed but are not yet
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

156 Forrest and Ross

prominently used in operating programs
(Bogue et al., 1973; Venkatacharya et al.,
1974).

One, however, has been used for several
Asian countries under ESCAP auspices,
with especially detailed results for Thailand (Nortman and Bongaarts, 1975). This
TABRAP/CONVERSE model was developed for a dual purpose: (1) to yield estimates of what birth control practice is required to achieve a given path of decline in
the crude birth rate (TABRAP), and (2) to
show what crude birth rate decline will
follow from a specific regimen of birth control practice (CONVERSE). The two programs embrace all calculations within a
component population projection, estimating the reductions which birth control
makes in baseline natural marital fertility
levels. No explicit feature is incorporated
to separate program from nonprogram
birth control, but certain improvisations
permit useful approximations (Nortman et
al., 1977).

The POPSIM model (Horvitz et al.,
1969; Lachenbruch et al., 1973) also offers
a number of attractive features and has
been used to approximate conditions for
India (Rao et al., 1973) and Korea (Treadway, 1975a,b, unpublished). However, besides making unrealistic demands for detailed data, POPSIM was not originally
designed to measure the effects of contraceptive usage or of national programs. It
is a full stochastic model, dealing with individuals who are subjected to monthly
probabilities of marriage, birth, death, and
other events, with life histories generated
during the forward projection. In practice,
it has proved both awkward and timeconsuming for measuring program effect
(Treadway, 1975c, unpublished).

Simulation models can be used for
exploratory purposes to show implications
of program contraception and other demographic factors and can also test the potential impact of some program changes

Social Biology

before they are instituted. Many assumptions are built into the models; and missing
input data, often required in great detail,
must be estimated in some way. There are
practical drawbacks in terms of demands
for computer time, money, and specialized
staff.

COMPARISON OF METHODS AND THEIR
APPLICATIONS

The matrix in Table 1 compares the vanious methods on a number of distinguishing
characteristics—subjects investigated, use
of controls for certain variables, provision
of separate estimates for the effect of nonprogram factors on fertility, types of data
required, design complexity, advantages,
limitations, and illustrative examples of
where each method has been used.

The matrix highlights the fact that the
methods are differently suited to the various questions about program effect. In
many cases, choice of a method for estimating a program’s fertility effect is, of course,
largely determined by investigator or administrator interests, and often the choice
is severely limited by what data are available. For instance, multiple regression
across areal units can be done only where
measures for a number of areas are available. Likewise, matching can usually be
done only when records exist for drawing
comparison cases.

Ideally, however, the choice of method is
based on its appropriateness to the question
being asked; and, while no single “best”
method has emerged, it is clear that for a
particular purpose one method may be
best. For example, while several methods
can be used to provide estimates of program effect on the total population of an
area, only three—matching individuals,
national effects of birth averted among acceptors, and simulation—focus specifically
on changes in acceptors’ fertility.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2

Similarly, for calculation of separate estimates for the role of nonprogram factors
on fertility change, most methods are inapplicable. Two are partially useful: decomposition of crude birth rate change and
simulation approaches offer some estimate
of the influence of other demographic factors. However, if one needs estimates of the
fertility influence exercised by socioeconomic factors, multiple regression across
areal units is the most appropriate approach.

A common first step is to ascertain
whether an important change in marital
fertility has occurred. If the data exist, researchers can look directly at marital fertility trends. Failing that, decomposition of
the change in the crude birth rate (or general fertility rate) can show the contribution
of lowered marital fertility in the context of
contributions from later marriage or age
distribution changes. If marital fertility
change Is established, the investigator can
look at the proportion of total contraceptive use that depends upon program
sources. He may also examine the correspondence between program activity and
fertility change. While all this yields helpful information, it is hard to rule out effects
of other influences on fertility.

One approach is to ask whether program
contraception was in fact a vehicle by
which a decline in acceptors’ fertility occurred without asking what they would
have done without it. For this question, the
analyses of segments of contraceptive use
employed by Potter (1969, 1972) for
Taiwan, Wolfers (1969, 1970) for Singapore, and Sivin (1974) for the International
Postpartum Program are well suited. They
move from acceptance through continuation to termination or pregnancy and birth
events, estimating the births averted due to
utilization of program contraception.
Laing’s method (Laing, 1977; Astawa et
al., 1975) is similar except that he moves
directly from acceptance to post-accept
Family Planning Programs

157

ance births without regard to duration of
contraceptive use.

One may then ask whether the program
had an additive effect for acceptors above
and beyond what they have done had no
program been present. By translating this
question into a comparison of what happened among acceptors and among similar
women not accepting program contraception, the matching method becomes a reasonable approach, comparing acceptors to
nonacceptors with similar characteristics
to see whether through time their fertility
differs. If the above method, or others,
produce an estimate of net program effect
on fertility among acceptors, a simple linkage to effects on fertility in the entire population can be made by adding averted
births to total actual births. If the latter is
unknown, averted births are simply divided by the population size to show the
crude birth rate reduction, without specifying its current level. These procedures ignore indirect contributions that the program may have made to depress both acceptor and nonacceptor fertility.

When the interest of the analysis focuses
strictly upon the societal level, areal methods become appropriate, even necessary.
These methods can catch effects, if any,
that occurred apart from the level of services and can pick up such indirect effects
as changed fertility among nonacceptors
due to diffusion of all types and changed
fertility among acceptors due to general
modernization.

Three areal methods have been employed. Use of experimental and control
areas is especially suited to pilot programs
and early stages of a program. Of all approaches, it is the one that provides for
direct and detailed examination of what
occurred in a control area, generally via
surveys and service statistics. Matching
areas on pertinent variables may be superior where enough areas and the
needed data are available, but it omits any

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

VARIABLES

Subjects
Acceptors.........

Total population...
Subgroup of

population ......

Use of controls.......

Separate estimates
for role of other
factors ....... beats

Data requirements ...

Complexity
of design............

Decomposition
of CBR Change

x

Possible where
data are available.

No

Yes—age distribution, nuptiality, program
vs. private contraceptive use.
Age dist. of
women of
child-bearing
age; % married
by age; MASFR;
contraceptive
use levels by
program/private
supply source.

B
Correspondence
Between Program
Activity & Fertility Change

No

Fertility & program data for
time periods,
geographical
areas, or population subgroups.

Simple

TABLE 1

COMPARISON OF CHARACTERISTICS OF METHODS FOR STUDYING THE EFFECT OF FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS ON BIRTH RATES

Matching
Studies

xX
(Matching
individuals)

x
(Matching
areas)

Post hoc matching is an attempt
to approximate
controls on
matching variables.

Measures for
matching variables; fertility
measures.

Intermediate

METHODS
D

Expenmental
and Control
Areas

Yes

Measures to establish initial
similarity; fertility and program
measures.

Simple

E
Multiple
Regression
Across
Areal Units

xX

Only _ statistical
controls.

Yes, both demographic and socioeconomic factors.

Extensive: program strength;
fertility measures; other
demog. and socioeconomic
measures by
area.

Complex

 

F G
National
Effects of

Births Averted
among Acceptors

Xx Xx

No

No Yes, demographic factors.

Need fertility Extensive
and/or pregnancy measures
for both acceptor
& comparison
experience; contraceptive
method accepted; reproductive process
measures.

Complex Complex

Simulation

 

8ST

ssoy pus jsoIIO

AZo[OIg: [BI0SG
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Advantages

Limitations

Illustrative
applications

 

eonvesr eer ®

rPeatrnanoe

epee he eee

Simple calculations. Good first
step. Isolates effect of marital
fertility change.

No direct link
between program activity
and fertility
change. Data by
age groups often
unavailable.
Program/private
division of contraceptive use
may not reflect
true relative contributions.
Ceylon, Hong
Kong, Korea,
Malaysia,
Singapore,
Taiwan,
Tunisia—Ross
et al., 1972.
Korea—-Cho,
1973; Cho&
Hahm, 1968.
Hong Kong—
Freedman &
Adlakha,
1968; Freedman, 1969,
1973; Freedman etal.,
1970; Wat &
Hodge, 1972;
Chan, 1976.
Matlaysia—
Chander,
1970.

Few statistical
assumptions.

Hard to rule out
competing explanations.

Taiwan—
Freedman,
1965; Freedman & Muller,
1967; Freedman et al.,
1972.

Hong Kong—
Freedman &
Adlakha,
1968; Freedman, 1969,
1973; Freedmanetal.,
1970; Wat &
Hodge, 1972;
Chan, 1976.

Mauritius—~
Brass, 1976.

Georgia—
Darney,
1975a,0.

Turkey—Fisek,
1974.

See Ross et al.,
1972.

Uses independent comparison
group, Controls
many confounding variables.

Unavailability of
data for matching. Contamination dangers.
Hard to contro}
for motivation/
leadership. Lack
of nonprogram
match areas in
national programs,

Area
Georgia—
Rochat et
al., 1972.
Individual
Malaysia—
Johnson et
al., 1973,
1976;

Anonymous,

1976.

Taiwan—
Chow etal.,
1969.

Independent
comparison
group. Areal
basis. Controls
many confounding variables.

Contamination
dangers. Small
numbers of
areas. Equivalence of areas
hard to achieve.
Political & practical problems in
execution.

Koyang—Bang,
1966, 1968.
Singur—Rao &

Mathen, 1970.

Washington, D.C.—

Okada, 1969.

Can provide
measure of program effect independent of socioeconomic factors. Covers
both direct & indirect effects.

Poor data availability. Complexity of data
manipulation &
interpretation.
Unclear temporal implications of crosssectional data.
Small numbers
of units.

Developing
countries—
Freedman &
Berelson,
1976; Mauldin
& Berelson,
1977. Srikantan, 1977.

Taiwan—
Hermalin,
1968. Schultz,
1971.

Availability of
“subjects through
program. Links
acceptance and
continuation to
fertility. Program effect on
whole country is
estimated.

Often omits indirect program effects. Uncertainty in estimation of “expected” accepter
fertility.

Taiwan—
Potter, 1969,
1972.

Singapore—
Wolfers, 1969;
1970. Gorosh
& Wolfers,
1977.

India—
Simmons,
1971.

Bali,

USA—Cutright Philippines—

& Jaffe, 1976.

Astawa

et al., 1975;

Laing, 1977.
Inter. Postpar
tum Pro
gram—Sivin,

1974.

Useful exploratory tool. Full
population component framework.

Extensive data
needs & data
manipulation
requirements.
Numerous assumptions for
unavailable
data.

Thailand—
Nortman &
Bongaarts,
1975; also
Nortman et
al., 1977.

Z ON ‘SZ "IPA

suBvisoig Sumueyg Apwueg

6ST
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

160 Forrest and Ross

random assignment of program stimuli to
different areas. It cannot be applied to a
fully national program for lack of territories from which to choose control areas.
Where feasible, multiple regression across
areal units can be much more fruitful. It
can be used in a national program where all
areas receive some input, and it has the
distinct advantage of supplying measures
of the effects of nonprogram factors.

CONCLUSION

At the outset we called attention to the
variety of questions, methods, data sets,
and modes of program action in this field.
There is nevertheless a common focus.
From approaches as different as examining
the effect of one IUD upon one acceptor to
calculating areal regressions for an entire
country, researchers examine whether program action did anything to alter the number of children born. Any effects at the
societal level can occur only through
changes in individual behavior; and so, in
that sense at least, all approaches must
come together.

Nevertheless, there remains the difficulty that much of the literature in this
field cannot be directly compared. To lessen the particularistic nature of much of the
research, the United Nations Population
Division has encouraged a series of projects
that apply different methods to a single
program setting (United Nations, 1977).
These projects have been completed for
Karnataka State, India (Srinivasan, 1977),
Tunisia (Jemai and Jemai, 1977), and Chile
(Taucher and Bocaz, 1977). There are limits to this process in the sense that certain
methods address data and measures of such

Social Biology

different character as to preclude comparisons; still, this is a most useful approach. A
further test of method differences, in the
simulation area, was made by Clague and
Ridley (1973), who applied alternative
methods to the same set of simulated data
and contrasted these results with results
from their own micro-simulation model
REPSIM-B. This isolated example suggests at once both the need for and value of
more method comparisons.

It is also to be hoped that this process
may be reversed—that the same method
may be applied to many different programs, so as to clarify program differences,
just as the above procedure clarifies
method differences. One cannot anticipate
that a method so demanding of exceptional
data as small-area regression work could
ever be done in many countries. However,
other approaches, based upon individual
survey data and program statistics, might
be used. Recently, three important projects
directed toward this objective have appeared: first, a new methodology by Potter
(1977) combining features from his and
Wolfers’ methods and relaxing rigor to
permit easier field application; second, a
manual by Gorosh and Wolfers (1977) offering a method based on a “standard
couple year of protection” with data requirements that can either be easily met or
can be replaced by fairly robust assumptions; third, the TABRAP/CONVERSE
simulation program (Nortman et al., 1977)
mentioned above which is being applied to
several Asian programs. Together with the
Bogue manual (Bogue et al., 1973) previously available, these three projects should
encourage the appearance of more extenSive cross-program calculations.

REF ERENCES
ANONYMOUS. 1976, Family planning enroleeshad 30 Bana, S. 1966. The Koyang Study: Results of two

per cent fewer births. Fam. Plan. Persp. 8(6):281282.

ASTAWA, I. B., S. WALOEYo, and J. E. Lana. 1975.
Family planning in Bali. Stud. Fam. Plan.
6(4):86-101.

 

action programs. Stud. Fam. Plan. 1(11):5-12.

. 1968. A comparative study of the effectiveness of a family planning program in rural Korea.
Ph.D dissertation. Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

BocuE, D. J., S. EDMoNps, and E. J. Bocue. 1973.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 2

An empirical model for demographic evaluation of
the impact of contraception and marital status on
birth rates With computerized applications to the
setting of targets and quotas for family planning
programs Family Planning Research and Evaluation Manual No 6, Community and Family Study
Center, University of Chicago, Chicago

Brass, W 1976 Impact of the family planning programme on fertility n Mauritius [PPF Med Bull
10(4) 1

CHAN, K C 1976 The role of the family planning
association in Hong Kong’s fertility decline Stud
Fam Plan 7(10) 284-289

CHANDER, R_ 1970 Family planning and fertility
trends in West Malaysia, p 230-255 Jn Proceedings of the Combined Conference on Evaluation of
Malaysia National Family Planning Programme
and East Asia Population Programmes, Kuala
Lumpur, March, 1970 National Family Planning
Board, Kuala Lumpur

CHANDRASEKARAN, C , and A I HERMALIN (eds )
1975 Measuring the effect of family planning programs on fertility Ordina Editions, Dolhain, Bel
glum

CLAGUE, A S$, andJ C Ripuey 1973 The assessment of three methods of estimating births averted,
p 329-382 In B DykeandJ W MacCluer (eds ),
Computer simulation in human population studies
Proceedings of aconference sponsored by the Social
Science Research Council and held at the Pennsylvania State University, June, 1972 Academic
Press, New York

Cuo, L J 1973 Current fertility estimates and
trends Korean Institute for Family Planning,
Seoul, Korea Reprinted in 1974 Jn Population and
family planning in the Republic of Korea, Vol H,
p 401-410 Korean Institute for Family Planning,
Seoul, Korea

Cuo,L J ,andM J HAHM 1968 Recent change in
fertility rates of the Korean population Demography 53(2) 690-698

CHuow, L P,M C CHANG, and T H Liv 1969
Taiwan Demographic impact of an IUD program
Stud Fam Plan 1(45) 1-6

CuTRIGHT, P,andF S$ Jarre 1976 Family planning program effects on the fertility of low income
US women Fam Plan Persp 8(3) 100~110

1977 Impact of family planning programs on
fertility The US expenence Praeger, New York

DARNEY, P D 1975a A statewide family planning
program’s effect on fertility, p 85-89 In J R Udry
andE E Huyck (eds ), The demographic evaluation of domestic family planning programs Ballinger Publ Co , Cambridge, Mass

19756 Fert:hty dechne and participation in
Georgia’s family planning program Temporal and
areal association Stud Fam Plan 6(6) 156-165

FAIRBANKS, I J 1970 Family plannimg im the Pacific
Islands The Fijian example J Pacific Hist
5 145-150

Fisek, N H 1974 An untegrated heath/family planning program in Etimesgut District, Turkey Stud
Fam Plan 5 210-220

FREEDMAN, R 1965 The accelerating fertility decline in Taiwan Pop Index 31(4) 430-435

1973 A comment on “Social and Economic
Factors in Hong Kong’s Fertility Decline” by
Sut Ying Wat and R W Hodge Pop Stud
27 589-595

FREEDMAN, R, and A L ADLAKHA 1968 Recent
fertility declines in Hong Kong The role of the

 

 

 

Family Planning Programs

161

changing age structure Pop Stud 22(2) 181-198

FREEDMAN, R, and B BERELSON 1976 The record of family planning programs Stud Fam
Plan 7(1) 1-40

FREEDMAN, R,L P CyHow, A HERMALIN, and J
Y TAKESHITA 1969 The family planning program for all of Tarwan, p 313-350 In R Freedman and J Y Takeshita, Family planning in
Taiwan An experiment in social change Princeton Univ Press, Princeton, N J

FREEDMAN, R, A HERMALIN, and T H SuN
1972 Fertility trends in Taiwan 1961-1970 Pop
Index 38 141-166

FREEDMAN, R, and J MULLER 1967 The continuing fertility decline in Taiwan 1965 Pop Index
33 3-17

FREEDMAN, R, D N NAmsBooruiri, A L ApLAKHA, and K C CHAN 1970 Hong Kong’s fertility decline, 1961-1968 Pop Index 36(1) 3~17

GorosH, M, and D WotLFerRs 1977 Standard
couple-years of protection A methodology for program assessment Paper prepared for presentation
to the International Union for the Saentific Study
of Population, General Conference on Technical
Advances in the Assessment of the Effect of Famiy Planning Programs, Mexico City, August,
1977 (Manual under the same title forthcoming)

HERMALIN, A J 1968 Taiwan An area analysis of
the effect of acceptances on fertihty Stud Fam
Plan 1(33) 7~11

Horvitz, D G,F G GirEsBRECHT, B V SHAH,
and P A LACHENBRUCH 1969 POPSIM—A
demographic microsimulation model, p 95-106
In Proceedings of the Internationa) Union for the
Scientific Study of Population, General Conference, London, September, 1969 International
Union for the Scientific Study of Population,
Liege, Belgium

Jemal, Y, and H Jemar 1977 Apphcation of
methods of measuring the impact of family planning programmes on fertuhty The case of Tunisia,
p 140-244 In Umited Nations, Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division,
Methods of measuring the impact of farmly planning programmes on fertility United Nations, in
collaboration with the Internationa] Union for the
Scientific Study of Population, Committee on
Demographic Aspects of Family Planmng Programmes, New York

JoHNSON, J T,T B ANN, and L Corsa 1973
Assessment of family planning programme effects
on births Preliminary results obtained through direct matching of birth and programme acceptor
records Pop Stud 27(1) 85-96

JOHNSON, J T,L Corsa, T B ANN, R CHANDER, D FERNANDEZ, and W H Bonp 1976
Impact of the Malaysia family planning program
on births A companson of matched acceptor and
non acceptor birth rates Ms

LACHENBRUCH, P A, M C SuHeEps, and A M
SoRANT 1973 Apphcations of POPREP, a modification of POPSIM, p 305-328 In B Dyke and
J] W MacCluer (eds ), Computer simulation in
human population studies Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the Social Science Research
Council and held at the Pennsylvama State University, June, 1972 Academic Press, New York

Lainc, J E 1977 Final report on the National
Acceptor Survey University of the Philrppines
System, Population Institute, Manila

MauLpDIN, W P,andB BERELSON 1977 Crosscultural review of the effectiveness of family planDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

162 Forrest and Ross

ning programs. In Proceedings of the International
Population Conference, Mexico, 1977. International Union for the Scientific Study of Population,
Liege, Belgium.

NoRTMAN, D., and J. BONGAARTS. 1975. Contraceptive practice required to meet a prescribed
crude birth rate target: A proposed macro-mode)
(TABRAP) and hypothetical illustrations. Demography 12(3):471-489.

NorTMAN, D., and E. HOFSTATTER. 1976. Population and family planning programs: A factbook,
Reps. Pop./Fam. Plan. 2:1-102.

NortTMan, D., R. G. PoTTER, J. BONGAARTS, and
S. KIRMEYER. 1977. Model relations between
birth rates and birth control practice. The Population Council, New York.

OKADA, L. 1969. Use of matched pairs in evaluation
of a birth control program. Publ. Hith. Reps.
BA(5):445-450.

PoTTER, G. G. 1969. Estimating births averted in a
family planning program, p. 414-434. In S. J.
Behrman et al. (eds.), Fertility and family planning: A world view. Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor.

. 1972. Contraceptive impact over several

generations. Jn T. N. E. Greville, Population dy
namics. Academic Press, New York.

. 1977. Reproductive process analysis. Paper
prepared at the request of the United Nations
Population Division and presented to the Seminar
on Patterns of Response to Family Planning Programmes, Palais de Congrés, Liege, April, 1977,
sponsored by the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, Liege, Belgium.

Rao, M. N., and K. K. MATHEN. 1970. Rural field
study of population control, Singur (1957~1969).
All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health,
Calcutta.

Rao, A. V., Q. W. LinpseEy, R. C. BHAvSAR, B. V.
SHaAn, D. G. Horvitz, and J. R. Batts. 1973.
The evaluation of four alternative family planning
programs for Popland, aless developed country, p.
261-304. In B. Dyke and J. W. MacCiuer {eds.),
Computer simulation in human population studies: Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the
Social Science Research Council and held at the
Pennsylvania State University, June, 1972. Academic Press, New York.

REYNOLDS, J. 1972. Evaluation of family planning
program performance: A critical review. Demography 9(1):69-86.

RocuHaT, R. W., C. W. TYLer, Jr., and A. K.
SCHOENBUCHER. 1972. The effect of family planning in Georgia on fertility in selected rural counties, p. 6-14. In A. J. Sobrero and R. M. Harvey
(eds.), Advances in planned parenthood: Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Meeting of the American Association of Planned Parenthood Physicians, Boston, April, 1970, VI. Excerpta Medica,
New York.

Ross, J. A. 1975. Acceptor targets, p. 55-91. In C.
Chandrasekaran and A. I. Hermalin (eds.),
Measuring the effect of family planning programs
on fertility. Ordina Editions, Dolhain, Belgium.

Ross, J. A., A. GERMAIN, J. E. ForRREsT, and J.
VAN GINNEKEN. 1972. Findings from family
planning research. Reps. Pop. Fam. Plan. 12:147

 

 

SHULTZ, JT. P. 1971. A framework for analysis and
its application to Taiwan family planning pro
Social Biology

gram. Paper presented to the International Sym
posium on Statistical Problems in Population Re
search, East-West Center, Honolulu, August,

1971.

. 1973. Explanation of birth rate changes over
space and time: A study of Taiwan. J. Polit. Econ.
81(2):238-274.

Simmons, G. B. 1971. The Indian investment in
family planning. The Population Council, New
York.

SIVIN, I. 1974. Contraception and fertility change in
the International Population Program. The Population Council, New York.

SRIKANTAN, K. S. 1977. The family planning program in the socio-economic context. The Population Council Books and Monographs Program,
New York.

SRINIVASAN, K. 1977. Application of methods of
measuring the impact of family planning programmes on fertility: The case of Karnataka State,
India, p. 86-139. In United Nations, Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, Methods of measuring the impact of family
planning programmes on fertility. United Nations,
in collaboration with the International Union for
the Scientific Study of Population, Committee on
Demographic Aspects of Family Planning Programmes, New York.

TAUCHER, E., and A. Bocaz. 1977. Application of
methods of measuring the impact of family planning programmes on fertility: The case of Chile, p.
245-310. In United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division,
Methods of measuring the impact of family planning programmes on fertility. United Nations, in
collaboration with the International Union for the
Scientific Study of Population, Committee on
Demographic Aspects of Family Planning Programmes, New York.

THEIN, T. M. 1970. Some variables of fertility decline in Trinidad and Tobago. International Institute for the Study of Human Reproduction, Columbia University, New York.

TREADWAY, R. C. 1975a. Evaluation of alternative
family planning programs in Korea by computer
simulation. Ms.

19755. Evaluation of alternative family

planning programs by a computer simulation ex
Pte Family planning simulation experiment.

 

 

 

. 1975c. Sources, procedures, and problems in
preparing basic demographic and family planning
data for the POPSIM family planning simulation
experiment: A supplement to “Evaluation of alternative family planning programs by a computer
simulation experiment” and “Experience in using
POPSIM in a simulation experiment.” Ms.

UniTED NATIONS, DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS, POPULATION DIVISION.
1977. Methods of measuring the impact of family
planning programmes on fertility: Problems and
issues, p. 4—85. In Methods of measuring the impact the family planning programmes on fertility.
United Nations, in collaboration with the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population,
Committee on Demographic Aspects of Family
Planning Programmes, New York.

VENKATACHARYA, K., T. K. Roy, A. SEBASTIAN,
and U. P. SINHA. 1974. A method of projecting
population at micro level with special reference to

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 2 Family Planning Programs 163

India. Sankhya: Indian J. Statist. 36(Ser. B., Pt.
1):70-92.

Wat, SuI-YING, and R. W. HopGE. 1972. Social
and economic factors in Hong Kong’s fertility decline. Pop. Stud. 26(3):455-464.

WATSON, W. B. 1973. Example of demographic significance of declining lactation. Ms.

WoLFERS, D. 1969. The demographic effects of a

contraception program. Pop. Stud. 23(1):111-140.

. 1970. The demographic effect of the programme, p. 158-188. In D. Wolfers (ed.), Postpartum intra-uterine contraception in Singapore.
Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam.

WYON, J. B., and J. E. Gorpon. 1971. The Khanna
Study: Population problems in the rural Punjab,
India. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge.

 
