Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Do women's breastfeeding experiences with their
first-borns affect whether they breastfeed their
subsequent children?

Julie DaVanzo , Ellen Starbird & Arleen Leibowitz

To cite this article: Julie DaVanzo , Ellen Starbird & Arleen Leibowitz (1990) Do women's
breastfeeding experiences with their first#borns affect whether they breastfeed their
subsequent children?, Social Biology, 37:3-4, 223-232, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988762

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988762

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB crs | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 8
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 13 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Do Women’s Breastfeeding Experiences
with Their First-borns Affect Whether
They Breastfeed Their Subsequent Children?

 

‘Julie DaVanzo, ’Ellen Starbird, and *Arleen Leibowitz

@Economics and Statistics Department, The RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California;
and * Agency for International Development, Washington, D.C.

ABSTRACT: Data on women with at least two children are used to examine how the
breastfeeding experience with the first child affects whether subsequent children are breastfed.
Our results indicate that women most often repeat with later children the feeding decision they
made with their first child. That is, those who breastfed their first child are very likely to
breastfeed a later child and those who did not breastfeed their firstborn are unlikely to
breastfeed a later-born. Among those who did not breastfeed their first child, education beyond
high school increases the likelihood that they will switch to breastfeeding with a later-born.
Those who breastfed their first child are less likely to breastfeed a later-born if the first
breastfeeding experience was of short duration or was perceived to be unsuccessful or
unsatisfactory or if the woman had not gone beyond high school or received anesthesia at the
later birth. Hence, educational differences are greater at higher parities than at first parity.

The American Academy of Pediatrics has consistently encouraged breastfeeding of infants as the “foundation of
good feeding practices” and has detailed
the benefits of breastfeeding for both
the mother and the child (AAP, 1982;
AAP Committee on Nutrition, 1980).
Breastfeeding is the natural form of infant nutrition, confers passive immunity, and is believed to promote motherchild bonding (AAP Committee on
Nutrition, 1976). Nonetheless, many
children are not breastfed.

It is a consistent finding that, at a
point in time, higher-order children are
less likely to be breastfed than first-born
children (Hirschman and Butler, 1981;
Martinez and Dodd, 1983; Gussler et
al., 1984). This differential has been
found during periods of both high and
low national breastfeeding rates. For example, in 1981 in the United States, 62.4
per cent of first-borns and 53.0 per cent
of later-borns in hospitals were
breastfed (Martinez and Dodd, 1983).

In 1971, 28 per cent of first-born children and 22 per cent of second-born
children were breastfed. In the early
1950’s, the rates were 52 per cent for
first-borns and 44 per cent for laterborns (Gussler et al., 1984).

Such cross-sectional studies, however, do not provide information on parity differences within families. None of
these studies actually looked at the persistence of individual women’s breastfeeding behavior; yet, to effectively target breastfeeding promotion effort, it is
important to understand how women
make decisions about feeding first-born
and later-born children. For example, if
women tend to repeat with later children the breastfeeding decision they
made with the first child, efforts to increase breastfeeding should focus on
primiparas and those who did not
breastfeed the first child.

We hypothesize that primiparas are
more likely to breastfeed the greater
their awareness of, or receptivity to, in
223
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

224 DaVanzo et al.

formation about the health benefits of
breastfeeding and the higher the average breastfeeding rate at the time or
among others of the same educational
attainment, race, or region, who serve
as role models (Raphael 1969; Starbird,
ms.). These same factors will lead a
woman to breastfeed a subsequent child
unless she receives information that
causes her to revise her view of breastfeeding. Since the medical profession
has been promoting breastfeeding and,
in fact, a higher proportion of new
mothers are breastfeeding, we hypothesize that personal rather than societal
factors are most likely to cause a woman
who breastfed her first child not to
breastfeed a second child. Such personal
factors may include obstacles to breastfeeding, such as administration of anesthesia during labor, or an unfavorable
impression of the first breastfeeding experience.

Women who did not breastfeed their
first child are also likely to repeat their
behavior, but they should be more likely
to switch to breastfeeding the more receptive they are to information about
the benefits of breastfeeding.

In this paper we study these issues using unique data on individual women
that report on the breastfeeding of each
woman’s first child and her most recent
child and that provide information on
several key factors that may affect
breastfeeding decisions. We address the
following questions:

To what extent do women feed their
later-born children in the same way they
fed their first child?

Which women are most likely to persist
with the way they fed their first child?
Which are most likely to change? What
are the effects of socioeconomic variables
such as educational attainment? What
are the effects of birth-specific events
such as anesthesia during delivery? What
is the influence of the woman’s perception of the first breastfeeding experience?

Social Biology

MATERIALS AND METHODS

DATA

The data used here come from the
RAND Health Insurance Experiment
(HIE) (Newhouse et al., 1982).! The
HIE, designed to determine the potential effects on health and health care utilization of alternative methods of financing health care, was fielded between
1974 and 1982 in six areas of the United
States (Seattle, Washington; Dayton,
Ohio; Georgetown County and
Charleston, South Carolina; and Franklin County and Fitchburg-Leominster,
Massachusetts) chosen to represent all
four census regions, a range of city sizes,
and both urban and rural areas. Our
goal is to make inferences about the
probability of breastfeeding and, given
that the sample is not highly selected in
some manner, the inferences should be
robust.

A total of 2,756 families were selected at random and assigned to one of
several different health insurance plans
for either a three- or a five-year period.
In 1980, as a part of the HIE, a Child
Development Questionnaire was
mailed to women aged 16 and over to
elicit information on the infant feeding
of: (1) their children under four years
old at the time; and (2) each respondent’s first child (if different from [1]).
Hence, the data provide information on
the infant feeding of several children
within a family. The overall response
rate to the Child Development Questionnaire was 91 per cent.

The HIE Child Development Questionnaire documents the reported reason why breastfeeding of the first child
was discontinued and such potential in
IFamilies with incomes in excess of $63,400 in
1987 dollars were excluded from the HIE. This was
3 per cent of all families contacted.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

fluences on breastfeeding as the use of
anesthesia during labor and delivery.
We also have information from other
RAND HIE data files concerning the
demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of these mothers and their
families.

METHODS

Sample for Analysis.—To address
the questions posed, we consider the
sample of 157 white women with
second- or higher-order children born
during the study period for whom we
also have information on whether their
first child was breastfed. The sample is
limited to white women because over 90
per cent of the 50 black women in the
sample lived in one geographic area and
their behavior cannot be claimed to be
representative of blacks across the
United States. Although some women
gave birth to more than one higherorder child during the study period, we
compare the breastfeeding decisions for
only one pair of children—the oldest
and the youngest—per mother, which
avoids the problem of clustering that
would occur if some women had more
children in the sample than others.
Forty-six per cent of the first births also
occurred during the study period, while
the remainder occurred earlier, some as
early as 1956. Fifty-six per cent of the
higher-order children are second-order
births and the rest are third or higher order.

The Breastfeeding Variables.—The
dependent variable in most of these
analyses is an indicator of whether the
mother breastfed her child for at least
one week, the cutoff often used in the
literature (Martinez and Dodd, 1983;
Gussler et al., 1984; Starbird, ms.; Martinez and Krieger, 1985). It is doubtful
that there are many health benefits asso
Breastfeeding Experiences 225

ciated with extremely short durations of
breastfeeding. Some women in this sample ‘‘tried” to breastfeed but continued
for less than one week. Of first-time
mothers who “tried” breastfeeding, 6
per cent continued for less than one
week; by contrast, all those who “‘tried”
with a later-born breastfed at least a
week. When no other variables are controlled, there is no significant difference
in breastfeeding rates with first-borns
and later-borns, either for women who
“tried” breastfeeding (61 per cent vs. 54
per cent) or among those who continued
for at least one week (57 per cent vs. 54
per cent).

Explanatory Variables Considered.—The HIE data document a number of potential influences on infant
feeding: mother’s age at the child’s
birth; mother’s education; the year of
the child’s birth; the type of provider of
prenatal care; whether the mother attended birth preparation classes; the infant’s gestational age; whether anesthesia (either complete or partial) was
administered during labor or delivery;
whether the child was sick, received
light treatment for jaundice, or was in an
incubator during the first week of life;
whether the mother first held or fed her
child within six hours after birth; and the
number of other children in the family.
Only mother’s education and anesthesia
were found to be significant independent predictors in this analysis.

Table 1 gives the definitions of the
variables we consider and presents their
means for the later-birth sample. For
education, the key distinction in explaining breastfeeding initiation was between women who had attended some
college and those who had only a highschool education or less. We are using
education as a proxy for receptivity and
access to new information (Schultz,
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

226 DaVanzo et al. Social Biology
TABLE 1
DEFINITIONS AND MEANS OF VARIABLES USED
(Sample = 157 later births)
Definition Proportion with
Variable Indicator = 1 if: Characteristic
Breastfed ...........-.-000 The child was breastfed one week or
more 0.54
Some college sccccs sacs veces Mother has education past the highschool level 0.39
Anesthesia ............00008. Anesthesia (some or complete) was
administered during labor or delivery 0.56

TABLE 2

LoGIsTIC REGRESSION SHOWING PREDICTORS OF BREASTFEEDING OF THE HIGHER-ORDER CHILD,
CONTINGENT UPON BREASTFEEDING OF THE First CHILD

WomeEN WHo
BREASTFED THEIR
First CuItp (N=90)

VARIABLE Coefficient t-stat.
Some college ............. 1.617
Anesthesia ............-- —1.oe —2.79
Intercept ...........500- 1.706
Log likelihood ........... ~—38.30
ga Oe ee a a ne Ae 13.48

1975). Thirty-nine per cent of the
women in our sample have more than a
high-school education.

Anesthesia during delivery can impair the mother’s ability to breastfeed
successfully and the child’s ability to
suckle (Brazelton, 1961; Winikoff and
Baer, 1980). The HIE distinguished between three categories of anesthesia:
complete, partial, and none. The important difference for the purposes of this
study was between those who received
anesthesia of any kind and those who
did not. We also investigated whether
anesthesia at the first birth influenced
later behavior, but found no significant
effect. Anesthesia was administered
during labor for 56 per cent of the later
births. (Sixteen per cent of those who received anesthesia with the later birth
had Caesarean sections; half of these
women breastfed, and half did not.)

 

2.06

3.47

Women WHo

t-TEST FOR
Dip Not BREASTFEED THEIR

First Cuitp (N= 67) DIFFERENCE
Coefficient t-stat. COEFFICIENTS
1.607 231 0.01
—0.758 —1.08 —1.05
~—1.560 —2.71 4.31
—28.48 .
6.02

Methods of Analysis.—We begin by
examining the bivariate relationship between breastfeeding initiation of the
first-born child and the later-born child.
We then perform a multivariate analysis, using logistic regression, to assess
each factor’s independent influence on
the later breastfeeding decision. We hypothesize that the influences of factors
that affect whether the later child is
breastfed differ depending on whether
the first child was breastfed. Therefore,
we examine the influences separately for
those women who did and did not
breastfeed their first child. These regressions are presented in Table 2.

The logistic regression results are
presented graphically in the form of adjusted predicted probabilities, which
control for the potentially confounding
influence of other factors (e.g., we control for anesthesia when we are examinDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

 

 

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Breastfeeding Experiences

227

TABLE 3
BREASTFEEDING OF LATER-BORN CHILD BY WHETHER First CHILD WAS BREASTFED?

LATER-BORN CHILD

Breastfed

FirsT-BORN CHILD (N=90)
Breastfed cus censays cx os 80.0
NOt bredstied «02 neue nas en . Le

a2 = 82.56.

ing predicted probabilities based on educational attainment). The means of
these adjusted predicted probabilities
lated for groups that differ in important
independent variables. For example,
when computing the adjusted predicted
probability for those with higher education, we set the dichotomous highereducation indicator equal to one for all
members of the sample, but allow the
anesthesia indicator to vary as in the actual sample. We then repeat this same
exercise setting the dichotomous education indicator equal to zero. We do this
separately for the sample of those who
did breastfeed their first child and those
who did not, since separate regressions
were estimated for those two groups.
We present t-tests for the significance of
these adjusted predicted probabilities
(the effect of particular independent
variables), as calculated from the logistic regression, and also f-statistics testing
whether the effect of the variable on the
adjusted probability of breastfeeding
the later child differs between those who
did and did not breastfeed their first
child (i.e., whether the coefficients of a
particular variable differ between those
who did and did not breastfeed their first
child). A 5-per-cent level of significance
(two-tailed test) is used.

We also examine how women’s decisions to breastfeed a later child vary by
their reported reasons for discontinuing

Not Breastfed TOTAL

(N=67) (N= 157)
20.0 100.0
82.1 100.0

breastfeeding of their first child and by
the duration of breastfeeding of the first
child.

RESULTS

PERSISTENCE OF BREASTFEEDING
BEHAVIOR BETWEEN FIRST AND LATER
Borns: BIVARIATE ANALYSIS

The cross-tabulation of breastfeeding
of the first-born child and the later-born
child, in Table 3, shows a strong persistence in breastfeeding behavior: Eighty
per cent of those who breastfed their
first child breastfed the later-born also;
82 per cent of those who did not breastfeed their firstborn did not breastfeed
the later-born either. The probability of
repeating the breastfeeding decision
made with the first child does not differ
significantly between those who
breastfed their first child and those who
did not.

ANALYSIS OF LATER BREASTFEEDING
BEHAVIOR CONTINGENT UPON First
DECISION: MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS.

The logistic regression in Table 2 confirms the results in Table 3. Other things
the same, women who breastfed their first
child are significantly more likely to
breastfeed a later child than women who
did not breastfeed their first child (i.e.,

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Adjusted predicted probability

228 DaVanzoe et al. Social Biology

A. Education

Adjusted predicted probability

Some college No college Some college No college
Breastfed First Child Did Not Breastfeed First Child
t = 2.56 t= 2.31
B. Anesthesia t for difference = 0.01

0
Some or complete No anesthesia Some or complete No anesthesia
anesthesia anesthesia
Breastfeod first child Did not breastfeed first child
t = -2,.79 t = -1.08
—~ t for difference = -1.05
Fic. 1.—Adjusted predicted probabilities of breastfeeding the later child, by whether the first child
was breastfed: Effects of education and anesthesia.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

the intercepts differ significantly between the two samples).

The adjusted probabilities of breastfeeding a later child are presented in
Fig. 1 for alternative values of the two
covariates—mother’s education and anesthesia at the child’s birth. We present
these probabilities separately for those
who did and those who did not breastfeed their first child.

Regardless of how women fed their
first child, higher education significantly
increases the probability that they will
breastfeed a higher-order child. Women
without breastfeeding experience who
have some college education have a 39per-cent adjusted probability of breastfeeding their later-born child, compared
with only 12 per cent for similar women
who have only a high-school education
or less. Women who breastfed their first
child and have college experience have a
90-per-cent adjusted probability of
breastfeeding their later-born child,
compared with 68 per cent for women
who breastfed their first child but have
not attended college.

For women who did not breastfeed
their first child, administration of anesthesia has no significant effect on subsequent breastfeeding. Their average
probability of breastfeeding their later
child is 20 per cent. Women who did
breastfeed their first child, however, are
significantly less likely to breastfeed a
later child if they received anesthesia at
the later birth. Their predicted probability of breastfeeding is 66 per cent, compared with 91 per cent for women who
did not receive anesthesia.

How BREASTFEEDING OF LATER-BORN
CHILDREN VARIES BY REPORTED
REASON FOR STOPPING BREASTFEEDING
OF First CHILD

To investigate further which women
abandon breastfeeding, we considered

Breastfeeding Experiences

229

the subsample of women who breastfed
their first child (at least one week) and
examined their reported reasons for discontinuing breastfeeding of that child.
For this subsample, Table 4 presents
breastfeeding rates for later-born children classified by the women’s reported
reasons for suspending breastfeeding of
the first child. These were responses to
the survey question: ‘“Why did you stop
breastfeeding this child?” The most frequently given reasons are that the child
no longer needed to breastfeed and that
the mother perceived that there were
problems with the quantity or quality of
her breastmilk.

Although sample sizes are small in
some cells, women’s subjective evaluation of the first breastfeeding experience
appears to be an important influence on
whether the feeding decision will be repeated. Women who perceived the initial experience to be successful were
more likely to breastfeed a later child
than were women who reacted less positively. If the reason for discontinuing
breastfeeding of the first child was a feeling of inability to produce enough or acceptable milk, only 61.5 per cent repeated the decision to breastfeed.
Women who gave “‘self-centered” reasons for stopping—inconvenience,
laziness—were even less likely to breastfeed again (50 per cent). By contrast,
nearly all women who stopped breastfeeding the first child for other
reasons—because the child seemed
ready to stop, because they returned to
work, because the mother was sick, or a
medical person advised stopping—
breastfed again.

“Women who breastfed their first child for less
than one week gave the following reasons for stopping: child was ill (2 = 1); perceived problems with
milk quality or quantity (7 = 2), medical person advised stopping (+2), and sore nipples (n=1).
Only the woman who stopped because of sore nipples breastfed again.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

230 DaVanzo et al. Social Biology

BREASTFEEDING RATES FOR LATER
BORNS BY THE DURATION OF
BREASTFEEDING OF THE FIRSTBORN

Table 5 shows that the likelihood of
breastfeeding a later-born child is positively related to the duration of breastfeeding of the first child: 91 per cent of
women who breastfed their first child for
at least six weeks breastfed again, compared with only 46 per cent of those who

breastfed 1-5 weeks the first time and 17
per cent of those who breastfed less than
one week. Eighteen per cent of women
who did not breastfeed their firstborn at
all breastfed a later child. Although cell
sizes are small, these results suggest that
breastfeeding for less than one week is
no better than not breastfeeding at all in
terms of its effect on the likelihood of
initiating breastfeeding with a later
child. :

TABLE 4
BREASTFEEDING OF LATER CHILD, BY REASON FOR DISCONTINUING BREASTFEEDING OF THE
First Cuiip??
Reported Reason for Per Cent Who Breastfed
Stopping Breastfeeding Most Recent Child at
of First Child Least One Week N

Child no longer needed to breastfeed ............. 92.8 28
Perceived problems with quantity or quality of
breastmilk, case sec pacann 05 cee de gk OE peed ne eeds 61.5 26
Inconvenient, lazy, tired, wanted freedom, shyness,
frustration 2.0... ccc cee cece cece tee eeeeeeeeues 50.0 6
Mother returned to work ..........0 sec eee cence 100.0 5
Medical person advised stopping ..........+...05 100.0 3
Whather wag! sscsg csassus ca eae 05 LOY he pew; 100.0 1
Other... cece cee cece cece teeter eeceee 100.0 3
Missing/no reason given ......... 0c reece eens 83.3 18

Total 22... ccc cece cece eee ete teeenecees 80.0 90

“Sample = those who breastfed the first child at least one week.

by2 = 20.5, P < 0.039.

‘Responses in this category include lack of information, rwins were too difficult to nurse, excessive weight loss, new preg
nancy.

TABLE 5
BREASTFEEDING OF LATER CHILD, BY DURATION OF BREASTFEEDING OF THE First CHILD?

Duration of Breastfeeding
of First Child
Did not breastfeed ......... cece ee ee eee
Less than one week ........ 0. ccc cee re eaces
T=S WEEKS. is ki pi op ood Oca Re phi gs HERE RTOS,
6 weeks OF MOTE ...... eee e eee eee eee eee

42 = 73.5, P < 0.000.

 

Per Cent Who Breastfed
Most Recent Child at
Least One Week N
18.0 61
16.7 6
45.5 22
91.2 68
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY
IMPLICATIONS

For individual women, the best predictor of later breastfeeding behavior is
the breastfeeding decision made with
the first child. Eighty per cent of women
in this sample who breastfed their first
child breastfed a later child, while 82 per
cent of those who did not breastfeed
their first child repeated that decision
with the later child.

It isnoteworthy that first-borns in this
sample were somewhat more likely to
be breastfed than later-borns (57 per
cent vs. 54 per cent) despite the fact that
the first births occurred during a period
(average birth year = 1972) when the
average national breastfeeding rate was
much lower (25.9 per cent) than in the
birth years covered by the later-birth
sample (average birth year, 1978; average national breastfeeding rate over period = 45.1 per cent) (Gussler et al.,
1984). Alternatively viewed, it is interesting that more women did not switch
to breastfeeding, given that the average
national rate was so much higher in the
years when the later-born children were
born. This evidence is consistent with a
conclusion that primiparas led the resurgence in breastfeeding in the United
States, and that, once they have given
birth, women are influenced much more
by their own previous experience than
by the national average prevalence of
breastfeeding at the time of their subsequent birth.

The positive relationship between
educational attainment and breastfeeding of first-borns is well documented
(Starbird, ms.; Hirschman and Butler,
1981; Hirschman and Hendershot,
1979). We find here that educational differentials are even greater at higher parities, since higher education increases

Breastfeeding Experiences 231

the likelihood of breastfeeding a laterborn both for the sample of those who
breastfed their first-born and those who
did not. On average, the odds of breastfeeding a later child are five times as
great for women with some college education compared with those without,college experience. (By comparison, for
women giving birth for the first time between 1970-79, the odds of breastfeeding for those with some college education are twice those for women who
completed only high school [Starbird,
ms.].) These differentials are consistent
with the notion that educated women
continue to be more receptive to outside
information (which over this period was
very positive toward breastfeeding).

Although the probability of repeating the decision to breastfeed is high, especially among more educated women,
those who breastfed their first child are
less likely to breastfeed a later child if
the first breastfeeding effort was perceived to be unsuccessful or unsatisfactory, if the duration of that breastfeeding was short, or if they received
anesthesia with the later birth. A positive benefit of a trend away from medication during labor and delivery should
be an increase in breastfeeding.

Of first-time mothers who “‘tried”
breastfeeding, 6 per cent continued for
less than one week, suggesting that they
were motivated to breastfeed but were
not successful at doing so. Very few
(only 17 per cent) of these women
breastfed a later child—an initiation
rate no different from that for women
who did not even try to breastfeed their
first child. Given their initial interest in
breastfeeding, special efforts should be
made to help such mothers establish successful lactation with their first child.
Similarly, women who perceived an unsuccessful experience with the first child

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

232 DaVanzo et al.

were less likely to breastfeed a second
child. Efforts to support primiparas who
breastfeed by providing reassurance and
advice can not only increase the likelihood that they will continue to breastfeed their first-born, but can also increase the breastfeeding rates of
later-borns.

The findings here imply that special
effort should be made to encourage
primiparas in general to breastfeed and
to help them succeed in doing so, since
women are likely to repeat a successful
breastfeeding experience. Lesseducated women are especially unlikely
to breastfeed and may merit special tar
Social Biology

geted programs. A number of studies
(summarized by Winikoff and Baer,
1980) have demonstrated that interventions can be very effective in increasing
the prevalence and duration of breastfeeding.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research reported herein was supported by grants R01-HD20538 and PS50HD12639 from the National Institutes of
Child Health and Human Development to
the Rand Corporation. The authors would
like to thank John Haaga, Jean-Pierre Habicht, and Linda Waite for their comments
and suggestions.

REFERENCES

AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS. 1982. The
promotion of breast-feeding. Pediatrics
69:654~661.

AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS COMMITTEE
ON NutriTIon. 1980. Encouraging breastfeeding. Pediatrics 65:657-658.

. 1976. Commentary on breast-feeding
and infant formulas, including proposed
standards for formulas. Pediatrics 57:278285.

BRAZELTON, T. B. 1961. Psychophysiologic reactions in the neonate: II. Effects of maternal medication on the neonate and his behavior. J. Pediat. 58:513-518.

GussLerR, J.D., M. A. Woo-Lun, and N. M.
SMITH (eds.). 1984. The international
breast-feeding compendium. Vol. 2. Third
ed. Ross Labs, Columbus, Ohio.

HirscHMAN, C., and M. BuTLer. 1981. Trends
and differentials in breast feeding: An update. Demography 18:39~54.

HirscHMAN, C., and G. E. HENDERSHOT. 1980.
Trends in breast feeding among American
mothers. Vital and Health Statistics 59.

 

 

MarRTINEZ, G. A.,and D. A. Dopp. 1983. 1981

Milk feeding patterns in the first twelve
months of life. Pediatrics 71:166~170.

MarTINEZ, G. A., and F. W. KRigEGER. 1985.
1984 Milk-feeding patterns in the United
States. Pediatrics 76:1004-1008.

NEWHOUSE, J. P., W. G. MANNING, and C.N.,
Morris, et al. 1982. Some interim results
from a controlled trial of cost sharing in
health insurance. R-2847~HHS. The
RAND Corporation, Santa Monica.

RaPHAEL, D. 1969. The lactation-sucking process within a matrix of supportive behavior.
Ph.D. dissertation. Columbia University,
New York.
SCHULTZ, T. W. 1975. The ability to deal with
disequilibria. J. Econ. Lit. 13:827-846.
STARBIRD, E. H. Comparison of influences on
breastfeeding of first-born children, 196069 vs, 1970-79. Ms.

WInIkorF, B., and E. C. Baer. 1980. The obstetrician’s opportunity: Translating “‘breast
is best”? from theory to practice. Amer. J.
Obst. Gynecol. 138:105-117.
