Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

New mating boundaries in education

Bruce K. Eckland

To cite this article: Bruce K. Eckland (1970) New mating boundaries in education, Social
Biology, 17:4, 269-277, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987884

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987884

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 8 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

New Mating Boundaries in Education

Bruce K. Eckland

Department of Sociology
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Mate selection has been governed at varlous times by geography, culture, and the
predispositions of different peoples. In tradition isolates, the intrabreeding modality
of the group was largely influenced by consanguinity, or the manner in which one individual was related to another. If marriage
partners tended to resemble each other in
some physical sense, it probably had more to
do with inbreeding and the unilineal kinship
systems of such societies than to any form
of selection for phenotypic traits.

In the absence of consanguineous marriages in most Western societies, sociologists, demographers, population geneticists,
anthropologists, and others have turned a
good part of their attention to assortative
mating for character-specific traits. It is
conceivable that assortative mating may be
a more important factor in affecting the genetic structure of future populations than
inbreeding was in the past, depending upon
just how high the rates of assortative mating eventually become for some highly heritable phenotypes, like intelligence.

Most sociocultural theories of mate selection tend to explain assortative mating from
the perspective of one of three models of
human behavior:

1. Rational-utilitarian model.

2. Normative model.
3. Opportunity model.

 

In the first model, man is viewed as a
reasoning animal who regularly weighs the
consequences of his actions and the actions
of others in a calculated manner. He is essentially motivated by a system of rewards
(incentives) and punishment (sanctions).
Whom he chooses to marry is largely determined by utility and reason.

The rational-utilitarian model is quite
compelling when applied to certain forms of
mate selection. It may be used, for example,
to explain specific instances of social hypergamy in inter-caste marriages in India and
inter-racial marriages in America. Rational
principles of supply and demand, or exchange and reciprocity, sometimes are the
dominant factors in who mates with whom.

In the normative model, on the other hand,
the primary emphasis is upon the commitment to moral values—what people are expected to do. Caste, racial, and, to some
extent, religious endogamy undoubtedly are
due largely to moral prescriptions or proscriptions. Like incest, the “‘taboos” are so
deeply internalized that the very thought
of violating them seldom comes to mind.

To a lesser degree, a similar commitment
to cultural values operates to explain class
endogamy, as well as the tentative commitment of some individuals to the simple folkways of each culture regarding such norms
as gentlemen prefer blondes, and women

269
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

270 Eckland

should marry someone taller and older than
themselves (but not too tall and not too
old).

The opportunity model says nothing directly about human motivation; rather it
suggests that some of the central determinants of human behavior are well outside
the control of specific individuals. They lie
instead in the opportunity structure, or
one’s access to the means for achieving certain ends.

This implies, in the case of mate selection,
an array of ecological and social factors that
place individuals into different positions in
relation to their opportunity to be considered as potential mates. For example, patterns of residential and school segregation
apparently contribute substantially to racial, class, and religious endogamy in the
United States, quite independent of the
motives of the people involved.

The remainder of this paper is devoted
to an application of the structural opportunity model to educational endogamy and assortative mating for intelligence. We contend
that positive assortative mating for tntelligence may be almost totally unrelated to personal preference or choice. Rather, it appears
that marriage partners tend to resemble
each other in intelligence mainly because they
have both been processed through the same
educational system—a system which places
individuals into different educational niches
based on intelligence and these niches, in turn,
lend to function as marriage markets.

In an open society that values individual
freedom of choice in marriage, education
probably is a better predictor of who mates
with whom than even social class or residential propinquity. I suspect that if our
schools and colleges did not function as marriage markets, we would be hard pressed to
explain the college-going rates of most women jn this country. The number of women attending colleges for the first time has been
steadily rising over the past generation. In
fact, there now appear to be nearly as many

Social Biology

females as males in the entering classes of
most state universities. Yet, and probably
some feminists would agree, it is not entirely
clear what value a college diploma is to most
women, other than attracting an eligible
male and unrestricted passage thru marriage
to middle-class respectability.

There are two important aspects to be
noted about the growth of mass education
over the past sixty years in America: (1) the
tendency to hold everyone in the academic
contest well into early adulthood, a time
when people are normally considering marriage; and (2) the tendency to sort and
screen students as they progress through the
educational system on the basis of ability,
providing numerous “check points” and as
many options or second chances as practical.

In 1910, only about 12% of all persons
age 14 to 17 were enrolled in high school
(Folger and Nam, 1967). Considering the
fact that the median age at first marriage
in 1910 was 25 for males and 22 for females
(Winch, 1963), it is highly improbable that
education was involved in any significant
way in mate selection then. However, by
1940 the proportion of persons age 14 to 17
enrolled in high school had risen to about
67% and presently is over 80%.

The more recent rise in enrollments in
higher education is almost as phenomenal
and seems to be following a similar growth
rate. Less than 15% of the 18 to 21 age
group were attending college in 1940. By
1970, this proportion is expected to have
risen to about 50%. At the same time, the
median age at first marriage has declined
to about 23 for males and 20 for females.
As a result, marriage today tends to closely
coincide with the cessation of schooling.

We are implying here that schools and
colleges function as marriage markets in
the direct sense that marriages frequently
are contracted among schoolmates, Education, however, is involved in mate selection
in other ways, too. For one thing, the
amount and kind of education people receive

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 4

tend to place them into relatively homogeneous social settings (at work, at home, at
play) which severely reduce the chances of
persons with very dissimilar educational
backgrounds coming into close contact.
For another, educational attainment seems
to presume, especially among college graduates, the acquisition of knowledge and an
appreciation of culture (call it “sophistication”) which probably tend to be desired
characteristics for some people in choosing
a wife or husband. Thus, even given the
opportunity to marry a college graduate,
a high-school dropout might find such a
situation faintly uncomfortable.

Let us turn now to our second point
regarding the increase in mass education.
Over the past twenty to thirty years, there
has been a silent revolution in our schools
and colleges in the development of testing
programs and other mechanisms designed
to choose those individuals who will be
permitted to enter a particular educational
institution or a particular program within an
institution. While its functions are many,
including the self-aggrandizement of some
of our most highly selective colleges and
private schools, educational selection has
developed partly in response to the growth
of higher education which, in turn, has required a fundamental change in the character of public secondary education. Instead
of preparing the vast majority of their students for terminal diplomas, as they once
did, our high schools now are primarily, it
seems, In business to prepare students for
college and secondarily in business to find
satisfactory alternatives for those who are
not college-bound.

Educational selection, however, occurs
at numerous points throughout the entire
system, beginning in the primary grades
and continuing through college and into
graduate school. To a large extent, the process involves the routine administration of
standardized tests. In the early years, IQ
tests are most common. Later, as it becomes

Mating and Education

271

more important to measure what a student
has learned rather than his potential for
learning, aptitude and achievement tests
are most widely used. The result is that, except for the lowest socioeconomic quarter
of the population, the far majority of the
students today of both sexes in the top quarter of ability enter college after high school
(Flanagan and Cooley, 1966). Even in the
lowest socioeconomic quarter, over half of
the men and a third of the women in the top
ability quarter go on to college.

In the remainder of the paper we will
trace the most critical points in the educational process when such decisions are made,
sometimes irrevocably. In doing so, we will
note any major sex differences involved in
the process, since the proposition that assortative mating for intelligence 1s primarily
a reflection of educational endogamy and
selection depends upon the degree to which
the system operates in basically the same
manner for both males and females.

PRESCHOOLS AND ELEMENTARY
EDUCATION

Over the past decade, preschool (compensatory education) programs have been developed in many American communities to
prepare culturally deprived children for the
rigors of formal education. IQ tests are routinely administered, sometimes ostensibly
for program evaluation, but perhaps more
frequently to assess each child’s learning
potential in order to provide individualized instruction or to decide his readiness to
enter a particular educational program.

Actual “grouping,” the assigning of students to different groups within the same
classroom or to different sections of the
same course according to ability, usually
begins early in the primary grades. Initial
assignments, such as to reading groups, generally are based on the results of the school’s
testing program. Children later may be
moved to “faster’’ or “slower” sections depending on their performance in the group
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

272 Eckland

or depending on changes in test scores. Although large jumps in scores in either direction between testing periods are rare, IQ
tests nevertheless tend to be somewhat unreliable or unstable before a child reaches
about age 8 or 9,

Thus, educational selection proceeds
very slowly in the primary grades. An attempt is made to bring all students up to
@ minimal level of performance. Of course,
some students will reach this level sooner
than others. Yet, rather than allowing these
students, that is the “fast”? ones, to move
more rapidly through the program and
promoting them into the next grade ahead
of their peers, in most cases they either are
simply given some extra homework or are
just ignored.

The new educational technology, however, may change all of this in the next
couple of generations. Teaching machines
mean individualized instruction and, at
least in theory, there is no upper limit on
individual performance that machines cannot be programmed to tolerate.

SECONDARY EDUCATION

The transition from the primary or elementary grades to secondary education is
not firmly fixed in the United States, although the dominant patterns involve
either an 8-4 or 6-3-3 system. Homogeneous
ability grouping almost invariably expands
as students move into junior and senior high,
perhaps only because a larger number of
students are enrolled together in the same
grade.

During this period, school-wide testing
programs also are used to enable teachers
to guide students in their decisions about
the school curriculum. Course options
(“electives”) usually are available by the
time a student reaches junior or senior high.
The choice of electives sometimes will decide
whether or not he eventually will enter a
college-preparatory program.

Going to high school, however, does not

Social Biology

generally involve a decision on the part of
parents and students because compulsory
education laws require children to stay in
school in most states until their fifteenth
birthday. If a student has progressed normally, he would already have reached the
10th grade at this age.

Similarly, a decision is seldom made regarding where to send a child to high school.
In most small towns and cities in the United
States, one senior high school serves the entire community. These generally are ‘‘comprehensive” high schools, meaning that they
try to accommodate the diverse interests of
a heterogeneous student body.

Although “busing” tends to break the
pattern, the “neighborhood” school is most
commonly found in our large urban centers
and suburbs. Here, intraschool differences
give way to interschool differences, which
are important to consider from the standpoint of social class and racial differentials
but which usually do not directly involve
educational decisions either by the school or
by the student and his parents.

There are two general exceptions where
standardized measures of ability are routinely used for permitting students to attend
a particular high school. One of these involves the special preparatory schools for
“sifted” students found in some of our large
urban public school systems, like Bronx
High and Hunter High in New York City.
Students who rank in the 99th percentile on
standardized tests are admitted from a population base which cuts across neighborhood school boundaries.

The second exception is the standardized
tests that have become an important part
of the admissions process of many private
secondary schools. Some of the most prestigious independent schools, like Exeter and
Andover in New England, apparently depend as much (perhaps more) on the past
performance and test scores of applicants
than on who their parents happen to be.
Some of these schools, in fact, actively

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 17, No. 4

recruit and sponsor bright students from
homes of low socioeconomic status. Thus,
where some students go to high school may
very well rest almost entirely upon their
academic credentials.

During the high-school years, a fairly
large majority of America’s youth are placed
into separate ‘‘tracks”’ or curricula. Among
the programs offered, the central distinction
tends to be between the college preparatory
program and all others—whether vocational,
general, commercial, or agricultural. Although it is possible for students in nonpreparatory programs to go to college, most
do not. Consequently, being in the “right”
track is an important matter. It also is related to ability.

In one recent study of high-school graduates, path coefficients of 0.36 for males
and 0.38 for females were found between
academic aptitude and curriculum, controlling for social class (Warren, unpublished).
In the same study, the path coefficients between social class and curriculum, with ability controlled, were 0.13 and 0.27 for males
and females, respectively.

One reason for the somewhat closer assoClation between ability and curriculum decisions than between social class and curriculum is that it is one of the primary duties
of the school’s guidance counselor to help
students to choose courses in light of their
own academic record and test performance.
A relatively new member of the professional
staff at most schools, the counseler’s influence is very great and frequently outweighs
that of the students’ parents (Circourel and
Kitsuse, 1963).

At least in terms of its irrevocability,
probably the most critical] decision during
the high school years involves leaving school
after it is permissible to do so and before
graduating. Students who drop out seldom
come back. Although the rates vary considerably from one state to another, about 10%
of all tenth grade students never receive a
high-school diploma. Moreover, the dropout

Mating and Education

273

rate is about three times higher among students in the lower than in the upper third of
ability (Stice and Ekstrom, 1964),

A most striking piece of evidence to demonstrate the strong correlation between
school attrition and intelligence was recently
reported by Folger and Nam in their analysis of some of the 1960 census data. They
estimated that about 98% of the children
with above-average IQs compared with 61%
of those with below-average IQs continue
in school to the senior year (Folger and Nam,
1967).

COLLEGE

Up to this point only minor differences
appear between the sexes in the educational
selection process. However, after high school
the situation changes—both in the proportion of males and females who continue on
and the part that ability plays in the process,

The general association between ability
and college enrollment is shown in Table 1.
It is interesting here to note that intelligence
apparently is as good if not a better predictor
of who goes to college than is class standing,
which is based on high-school grades.

Moreover, who goes to college depends
about as much upon intelligence as it does
upon socioeconomic status, although there
are some sex differences. For males, intelligence clearly outweighs family background; whereas for females, the reports are
conflicting (Sewell and Shah, 1967; Schoenfeldt, 1968).

TABLE 1

PERCENTAGE OF HIGH-SCHOOL GRADUATES ENROLLED IN COLLEGE, BY INTELLIGENCE
QUOTIENT AND SCHOLASTIC STANDING IN
HIGH SCHOOL

Intelligence Scholastic

Quartile Quotient Standing
Top. .cccceceeeee 67.2 66.6
Second........... 38.2 43 .6
Third............ 24.8 33.6
Bottom.......... 15.5 19.2

Source; Folger and Nam, 1967, p. 61.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

274 Eckland

For many students, the most important
decision of their educational career is not
whether to go to college, but where to go
to college. There are numerous qualitative
differences between institutions, and most
pronounced are the differences in selectivity
of the student bodies. In fact, Table 2 suggests that in some colleges the most inept
student may be a better academic risk than
the majority of students at another college.

Along with the introduction of educational testing in the college admissions process, the hierarchical structure of American
higher education has been significantly
transformed. Instead of being class-based,
it is based today primarily on meritocratic
principles. Although there are some exceptions, most college admissions officers presently are more concerned with “‘what you
are” than “who you are.” Unlike a generation ago, if you are an alumni son of Harvard, Princeton or Yale, you will largely
have to take your chances along with several thousand other applicants from across
the nation. The majority of undergraduates
at these three colleges no longer are prep
school boys, but public school boys.

Similar enrollment pressures have forced
virtually all major state universities to be
TABLE 2

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION BY SEX OF SATVERBAL SCORES OF FIRST-TIME ENROLLMENTS FOR THREE SELECTED VIRGINIA
COLLEGES

SAT-VERBAL ScoRES

Above Below
COLLEGES 499 350-499 350

William and Mary

Males (N=389)..... 84 16 0

Females (N=317)... 92 8 0
Old Dominion

Males (N=1,034)... 27 64 9

Females (N=588)... 32 60 8
Virginia State (Norfolk)

Males (N=303)..... 2 23 75

Females (N=366)... 1 21 78

ws State Council of Higher Education for Virginia,

 

Social Biology

come selective. Typically, about a decade
ago, roughly one-fourth of the entering
freshmen in these institutions ranked in the
bottom half of their high school classes.
Today, almost no one is admitted unless he
ranks in the upper half of his class, and most
rank in the top quarter. (Many of these universities are land grant colleges and, in
theory, are required to admit any person
with a high-school diploma who applies, although obviously they do not.) Where do
the others go? To the burgeoning teachers
and agricultural colleges which have recently gained university status, to the numerous
small private colleges across the country, to
the city colleges, and to the new junior and
community colleges. The diversity and selectivity in higher education in the United
States have reached the point where the interinstitutional differences in intelligence (or
scholastic aptitude) are about as great as,
and often greater than, the intrainstitutional differences.

In the search for talent, the selective
colleges rely very heavily upon a student’s
high-school performance and standardized
tests. The major testing programs are administered while the students are still in
high school. The first two hurdles—Educational Testing Service’s Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test (PSAT) and National
Merit Scholarship Corporation’s Qualifying
Test—usually come in the eleventh grade
and are being administered today in over
three-fourths of the nation’s high schools.

Results on the PSAT are not used by the
colleges but by the college aspirant, his
counselor, and parents. They are designed to
help the student decide where to apply to
college by giving him an early estimate of
the probabilities of being admitted. The National Merit examination is designed to
select among the uppermost two per cent of
the country’s college-bound students those
who will receive special recognition and
awards, The scholarships provided through
this program enable the most talented stu
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 4

dents to go to the college of their choice.
While relatively few winners come from
homes so impoverished that the student
cannot afford to go to college, many could
not otherwise afford to pay the high costs
at the better schools. Lists of high scorers
on the National Merit examination also are
sent to colleges across the country that may
wish to actively recruit some of these students on their own.

The most important hurdle in the admisslons process comes a year later—the college entrance tests themselves, which are
administered chiefly by Educational Testing
Service (for the College Entrance Examination Board) and by the American College
Testing Program. The results of these tests
go directly to the colleges and are used in
their admissions formula.

At colleges like Harvard, Princeton, and
Yale, once the student is there it is hard for
him to drop out. An elaborate set of devices
is used, including psychiatric counseling
and temporary “leaves of absence,” to keep
the student in school until graduation. Consequently, these schools have very low attrition rates. In the long run, the far majority
graduate.

However, the picture is quite different
at most other institutions. In the open-door
junior colleges, attrition is extremely high. In
fact, the chief role of the counselors in some
of these schools is “‘cooling out”’ the inept
students who can’t make it through the academic program (Clark, 1960). The students
are encouraged either to transfer over to a
business or vocational program or to drop
out. Relatively few students complete the
two years with grades that would qualify
them for transfer to a four-year institution.

Between the extremely selective and nonselective colleges are the state universities
and numerous private liberal arts colleges.
Dropout rates vary considerably among
these schools, ranging in most instances from
40 to60%. However, many dropouts return to
college after a few years, sometimes back to

Mating and Education

275

the same school they left and sometimes to a
different institution (Eckland, 1964a). Consequently, the true extent of the attrition
problem is difficult to assess.

Nevertheless, academic aptitude or intelligence has consistently been found to be a
major factor in dropout studies. The brightest students are apt to get through college,
regardless of their starting position in the
system. Inept students are not likely to get
to college in the first place, and relatively
few of those who do are likely to graduate
with a four-year degree.

The association between intelligence and
college attrition is closer for males than for
females. If they have a good chance of making it academically, men are more apt to
persist to graduation. Women, on the other
hand, are more likely to drop out, and they
are more likely to do so for nonacademic
reasons, particularly marriage.

But whether women persist or not to
graduation may not be particularly important in so far as our model is concerned. In
1965, the National Merit Scholarship Corporation conducted a follow-up study to determine the accomplishments of all female
Merit Scholars whohad received theirawards
between 1956 and 1960. These women were
among the brightest in the nation, and many
had not completed their degrees. However,
they were not destined to be spinsters or to
resort to hypogamy. By 1965, the far majority had married, and most of their husbands
had either completed or entered graduate
school (Watley, 1969).

GRADUATE AND PROFESSIONAL
EDUCATION

For an increasingly significant segment of
the American population (at least in numbers) formal education does not end with a
baccalaureate degree. Today, about half of
all male college graduates and a third of all
female graduates enroll in graduate or professional schools. Some observers believe, in
fact, that graduate education now differenDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

276 Eckland

tiates between the “haves” and the “have
nots” in much the same way that undergraduate education did a generation ago. We
therefore will attempt to answer briefly the
same questions here that were raised in the
previous section: Who goes, who goes where,
and who finishes?

Standardized tests are an important part
of the admissions process at most graduate
schools. Nationally administered tests include the Graduate Record Examination,
the Admission Test for Graduate Study in
Business, and the Law School Admissions
Tests. Scores on these examinations are particularly helpful in identifying the very able
graduates from mediocre colleges and from
colleges about which the university has little
knowledge (much in the same way that undergraduate college admissions officers use
entrance examinations for students coming
from hundreds of high schools of unknown
quality).

As should be expected, admission to graduate school depends in Jarge measure on undergraduate performance. However, even
though many universities will not even consider students without a “B average’”’ or better, nearly a third of the males in the lower
half of their graduating class are admitted
directly from college. On the other hand,
over two-thirds of those in the upper fifth of
their class enroll (Davis, 1963). Social class,
incidentally, plays only a minor role in both
college attrition (Eckland, 1964)) and in
graduate school admissions (Davis, 1963).
Almost all of the independent effects of class
background are played out in high-school
and in college admissions.

Where the seniors go to graduate school
also depends upon ability, although the direct effects of where they went to college as
undergraduates and college performance are
stronger. The path coefficients to graduate
school quality, as measured by national prestige rankings and controlling simultaneously
for socioeconomic status and for each other,
are 0.34 for undergraduate college quality,

Social Biology

0.26 for college grade-point average, and 0.07
for intellectual ability (Spaeth, 1968). This
does not mean that ability is really any less
important than either college grades or the
caliber of the undergraduate institution,
since both grades and where one goes to college are themselves largely dependent on
ability. By the time a cohort of students
completes college and is selected for graduate school, the variance in intelligence among
those who are left is severely restricted.

Attrition in graduate and professional
school is similarly affected. Only a small proportion of the variance in graduate school
performance and attrition can be accounted
for by either entrance examinations or undergraduate records, No doubt, this is largely because the small variability in intelligence among college graduates who remain
in direct competition with one another has
been further reduced by their selection into
small and relatively homogeneous graduate
departments. Most of the explanatory power of ability is lost.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Having followed the full cycle of educational selection from preschool to graduate
school, the reader may be left with the impression that all that counts in American
education is how well students perform on
standardized tests. This is far from the truth.
Motivation and other affective attributes of
individuals probably contribute as much, if
not more, to academic achievement in school
and college than test performance or ability.
No doubt this is why past performance (as
measured by grades) is usually a better predictor of future performance than are entrance examinations, and consequently why
grades are given more weight in both graduate and undergraduate admissions. Most
students earn the grades they receive, and in
the meritocracy effort plays as great a part
as ability.

We may also have left the erroneous impression that standardized tests are simply

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 4

a convenient device to position people in an
educational rat race. On the contrary, tests
are used just as often to identify the underachieving student and give him a second
chance as they are to weed out the inept.
Moreover, the so-called “rat race” is not so
deplete of human values as is often supposed. To be sure, the search for ability is
part of the rationality of a technological society; but it also is part of the ethos of any
egalitarian society which insists that all men
should be given the opportunity to fulfill
their potential.

In conclusion, the decline of traditional
kinship networks and the resulting freedom
which young people enjoy in marital choice
no doubt have tended to break up previous
social isolates and reduce both the level of
inbreeding and assortative mating for deleterious genes in Western societies. However,
owing to the rise of mass education and intense educational selection, social endogamy
does not disappear; the boundaries simply
are restructured.

As we have seen, educational institutions
openly recruit and sponsor students from exceedingly diverse backgrounds. Out of this

Mating and Education

277

diversity new patterns of mate selection
have emerged or, to put it another way, the
criteria for selection have changed. Socially
ascribed characteristics are replaced by
achieved characteristics. Ascription is based
largely on class, race, and ethnicity; achievement is based largely on educational attainment.

Since how much of what kind of education people get depends upon intelligence
and since marital choices generally occur between individuals with similar educational
backgrounds, all of the conditions necessary
are present for high assortative mating for
intelligence.

The question really is not whether likes
attract likes, as if people were really such excellent judges of one another’s intelligence.
Rather, assortative mating for intelligence
is a built-in feature of the educational selection system. Males and females of like ability tend to end up in similar educational
niches—as school dropouts, as college classmates, or as graduate students. It is primari
‘ly within these social boundaries that mate

selection occurs.

REFERENCES

Crcouret, AARON V., and Jonn I. Kirsusr. 1963.
The educational decision-makers. Bobbs-Merill,
New York.

Crark, Burton R. 1960. The open door college.
McGraw-Hill, New York.

Davis, James A. 1963. Great aspirations. National
Opinion Research Center, Chicago.

EckLanp, Bruce K, 19644. College dropouts who
came back. Harvard Educ. Rev. 34:402-420.

. 19645. Social class and college graduation:
Some misconceptions corrected. Amer. J. Sociol.
70: 36-50.

FLANAGAN, JOHN, and Wirriram Coorry. 1966.
Project Talent one-year follow-up studies. University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh.

Foucer, JouN K., and Cuartes B. Nam. 1967.
Education of the American population. U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

SCHOENFELDT, Lyle F. 1968. Education after high
school. Sociol. Educ. 41:350-369.

SEWELL, Wiri1aM H., and Vrwat P. Saaun. 1967.

 

Socioeconomic status, intelligence, and the attainment of higher education. Sociol. Educ.
40:1-23.

SpaEtH, Joe L. 1968. The allocation of college
graduates to graduate and professional schools.
Sociol. Educ. 41:342-349,

State CounciL oF HIGHER EDUCATION FOR VIRGIN1A. 1966. Student admissions: Virginia statecontrolled institutions of higher education.

SticE, GLEN, and Rura B. Exstrom. 1964. High
school attrition. Educational Testing Service,
Princeton.

Wattey, D. J. 1969. Career or marriage?: A lJongitudinal study of able young women. Research
Reports, No. 5. National Merit Scholarship
Corporation.

WarREN, JONATHAN. Determinants of college attendance. Ms.

Wincu, Rosert F. 1963. The modern family. Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, New York.
