Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Androstenedione, testosterone, and free
testosterone concentration in women of various
occupations

Frances E. Purifoy & Lambert H. Koopmans

To cite this article: Frances E. Purifoy & Lambert H. Koopmans (1979) Androstenedione,
testosterone, and free testosterone concentration in women of various occupations, Social
Biology, 26:3, 179-188, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988376

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988376

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil. Article views: 15

hd
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 61 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Androstenedione, Testosterone,
and Free Testosterone Concentration
in Women of Various Occupations

 

Frances E. Purifoy and Lambert H. Koopmans

Department of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico; and
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New
Mexico

ABSTRACT: Serum androstenedione (A), testosterone (T), testosterone-binding globulin (TBG),
and free testosterone concentration (FTC) were correlated with occupational status in fifty-five normal females. With some variation among age groups, A, T, and FTC were positively associated
with occupation, mean levels being higher in students and professional, managerial, and technical
workers compared to clerical workers and housewives. A and FTC also associated significantly with
the degree of job complexity in relation to people, whereas T significantly correlated with the degree
of job complexity in relation to things. These data most likely reflect biological and environmental
causes in a hormone-behavior feedback relationship. The genetic potential for increased androgen
secretion may affect certain personality characteristics related to career-orientation in females, i.e.,
those labeled ‘‘masculine”’ by this culture, such as assertiveness and independence. Moreover, the
positive or negative stress associated with an occupation could stimulate or inhibit androgen secre
tion.

In many cultures, males and females
differ statistically in a number of behavioral characteristics which show consistent
mean differences but overlapping ranges
of values (Archer, 1976). Maccoby and
Jacklin (1974) present a comprehensive
review of sex differences in behavior and
conclude that there probably exist constitutional differences between the sexes that
predispose them to learn certain behaviors. Boys have consistently been found to
be more aggressive and intrusive upon the
environment than girls; girls are more often compliant to the demands of an adult,
passive and dependent, accommodating
to environmental impositions, and
affiliative socially (Freedman, 1974; Kagan and Moss, 1962; Maccoby and Jacklin, 1974).

Hormone-behavior research often attributes ‘‘male behavior” to the effects of

testosterone (T) and ‘‘female behavior” to
estrogen effects. Both sexes, however,
produce androgens, estrogens, and progestogens, albeit in differing relative
amounts. Studies suggest that T contributes to aggressive behavior in animals, especially males (Kling, 1975; Leshner,
1978), and the female offspring of
monkeys given T during pregnancy exhibit male-like play behavior, i.e., increased play fights and threats and increased rough-and-tumble play (Phoenix,
1974). In human adrenogenital-syndrome
females, increased adrenal androgen secretion during prenatal development results in “tomboyish” behavior, i.e., increased motor activity and an interest in
athletics and in career over marriage
(Money and Ehrhardt, 1972). The offspring of mothers given estrogens during
pregnancy, which might inhibit androgen

179

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

180 Purifoy and Koopmans

secretion or compete for common receptor sites, exhibit group-dependent, conforming, passive behavior in contrast to
offspring of mothers given androgenic
progestins who are independent, assertive, and self-confident (Reinisch, 1977).
Moreover, androgenic hormones given to
those deficient result in positive effects on
mood, energy level, self-confidence, and
self-assertiveness (Herrmann and Beach,
1976; Marie, 1963). Thus, it appears that
relatively higher levels of T in males prenatally or in adulthood may be responsible
for some sex differences in learning
thresholds for certain behaviors.

Male-female differences are, however,
a Statistical finding, and individual variation within a sex is often as great or greater
than statistical differences between the
sexes (Archer, 1976). Though learning
thresholds may differ statistically between
the sexes, individual plasticity allows for
environmental influences on the learning
of sex-typed behaviors. Due to differing
socialization practices, the modal man
and woman of a society could conceivably
vary from extreme masculine and extreme
feminine to equal combinations of each
(Freedman, 1974). Such flexibility in behavior of human societies would contribute to cultural evolution and adaptation
(Wilson, 1975).

Personality characteristics labeled
“masculine” or “androgynous,” i.e., independence, assertiveness, athleticism,
ambition, analytical ability, dominance,
competitiveness, and individualism, have
been shown to be well within the spectrum
of normal behavior for a large percentage
of U.S. females (Bem, 1976). The large
differences in sex hormone levels which
contribute to many noncontinuous
morphological differences between males
and females often complicate the study of
hormone-influenced behavior differences
between the sexes. However, the study of
hormonal correlates of within-sex varia
 

Social Biology
tion in “masculine” or “‘feminine”’ behaviors might circumvent this problem.

Studies have found correlations of
serum T with dominance rank in nonhuman primates (Kling, 1975; Rose et al.,
1971). A similar measure of rank in humans for use in hormonal studies might be
occupational status, which confers privilege and material wealth on the individual
as well as providing a measure of selfworth and self-esteem. Since the women’s
liberation movement has encouraged females to leave the home and assert themselves in extra-domestic activities, some of
which are traditionally masculine, occupation may be an especially useful measure
of variation in female behavior which may
be hormone-related. Researchers have, in
fact, linked career orientation in females
with masculine or androgynous personality characteristics (Block et al., 1972;
Hennig and Jardim, 1978; Kagan and
Moss, 1962; Rand, 1968, the same qualities distinguishing adrenogenitalsyndrome females and the female
offspring of progestin-treated mothers
(Money and Ehrhardt, 1972; Reinisch,
1977). These studies suggest that those females with high masculine or androgynous
scores on personality tests are more likely
to pursue careers of higher occupational
status than typically “feminine” females.
Although environmental antecedents of
behavior are important, researchers often
ignore constitutional factors which an individual brings to the learning situation.
One possible source of biological factors
affecting one’s personality are hormones
present during critical periods of development and/or in adulthood. Because androgens have been studied primarily for their
effects on males, their role in normal female behavior is not well established. Interest in this relationship prompted the
present analysis of variation in androgen
levels in a group of normal females from
different occupations.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Subjects were 55 normal healthy females aged 20 to 87 from Albuquerque,
New Mexico. Each had intact ovaries,
uterus, and adrenals, and a history of normal menstrual cycles; none were on any
medications or hormonal therapy. The
majority were Caucasian of heterogeneous European background; five were
Spanish-American, one was black, and
one was American-Indian. If subjects
were premenopausal, time of cycle was
noted. Student’s f-test showed no
significant differences between follicular
and luteal phases, and the majority of premenopausal subjects fell into one of these
two categories.

A single blood sample was drawn on
each subject between 8 and 10 A.M.;
serum was separated and frozen within
one hour. Hormone assays were done by
Darrel M. Mayes of Endocrine Sciences
Laboratory, Tarzana, California as a research project to establish normal laboratory control values. Determinations included serum androstenedione (A),
serum T, testosterone-binding globulin
(TBG), and free testosterone concentration (FTC), which is the best available indicator of T’s biologic activity (Clark et
al., 1970). Per cent free testosterone was
determined by equilibrium dialysis; H*testosterone, obtained from New England
Nuclear, was purified by paper chromatography in a Bush A system, and TBG
was used to purify the label (D.M. Mayes,
personal communication). FTC was derived from the product of serum T and per
cent free steroid determined by dialysis.
TBG was determined by a saturation technique similar to that described by Rosner
(1972). Interassay coefficients of variation
for A,T, FTC, and TBG were 7.4, 9.0,
10.9, and 10.2 per cent respectively.

Since it was recently revised to eliminate sex-biased items, we chose the 1977

 

Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC 181

edition of the Dictionary of Occupational
Titles, published by the U.S. Employment
Service, as a guide for categorizing occupations, which fell into the following
groups: Professional, Managerial, and
Technical (Group 1, N=26); Clerical and
Sales (Group 2, N=13); and Service
(Group 3, N=2). In addition to the three
paid work groups, Housewives (V=11)
and Students (V=3) each formed a separate category. Those women who were retired were included in the appropriate category according to past occupation. Again
using the Dictionary of Occupational Titles, we assigned each paid occupation
(thereby excluding Students and Housewives) a three-number Worker Function
Rating (WFR), which is a measure of the
degree of complexity involved in the relationship of an employee to DATA, PEOPLE, and THINGS.

Other variables were given number ratings according to the subject’s response to
interview question. EXERCISE was a
self-rating of 0-2 in response to the question, “Approximately how much physical
exercise do you get in a week? (check one)
(1) sedentary job, no regular exercise
(rated 0); (2) regular exercise or physical
labor 2-3 times a week (rated 1); or (3) exercise or physical labor more than 3 times
a week (rated 2).””> ACTIVITY was a 0-2
rating assigned each subject based on her
recreational and volunteer activities, i.e.,
nonpaid, nondomestic activities: 0=little
or no activity; 1 = moderate activity level:
and 2=high activity level. RESPONSIBILITY was a 1-10 self-rating of the subject in response to the question, ‘““How
would you rate the amount of responsibility you are required to deal with on the
average? How much do you assert yourself, for example, in dealing with other
people, with situations and problems requiring decisions on your part? (1 =lowest
rating).”

Statistics included analysis of variance

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

182 Purifoy and Koopmans

Social Biology

TABLE 1

DUNCAN’S MULTIPLE RANGE TEST FOR THREE AGE GROUPS FOR SERUM ANDROSTENEDIONE (A),
TESTOSTERONE (T), AND FREE TESTOSTERONE CONCENTRATION (FTC)

HORMONE AGE <35

Mean* WN Ot

NL
SB w
”

Androstenedione .... A
A
BA 173 8 1
B
B C 437 1 H
C
C 120 7 zZ
Testosterone........ A 50 3
A
BA 38 8 ]
B
BC 23 } H
C
C 21 7 2
Free Testosterone
Concentration....... A 5.5 3 S
A
BA 3.7 7 1
‘ 21 7 2
C
C 1.8 1 H

mmMnmnw

AGE 35-50 AGE>50
Mean N Oo Mean N O
B A 161 9 1 D 88 8 1
B D
BC 145 3 D 80 6 H
Cc D
C 118 4 H D 79 Zz 3
D
D 60 3 z
BC 32 9 1 B A 36 8
BC BA
BC 30 3 2 CBA 35 2 3
BC CB
BC 27 4 H CB 29 3
Cc
Cc 15 6 H
CD 3.0 9 1 BA 4.9 2 3
CD BA
CD 29 4 H BA 44 3 2
cD BA
CD 2.6 3 BA 3.6 7 1
D117 6 H

*Means with the same letter are not significantly different; alpha level = 0.05.
+ O = Occupation: 1 = Professional, Managerial, and Technical; 2 = Clerical; 3 = Service; S = Students; H = Housewives.

for steroid levels versus age and the following variables: occupational categories,
WFR’s, EXERCISE, ACTIVITY, AND
RESPONSIBILITY. In addition, Duncan’s multiple range test examined steroid
levels by occupational category for the age
groups 20-34, 35-50, and 50. A p value of
0.05 was considered significant, but, due
to the fact that this was arbitrarily chosen,
exact p values will be given when available.

RESULTS

Analysis of variance revealed a
significant relationship of occupational
category to variation in A (p< 0.05), T
(p< 0.005), and FTC (p< 0.05), but no

significant relationship with TBG. This
occupational effect was seen regardless of
whether the woman was retired or still
working. Duncan’s multiple range test
showed that for those aged 20-34, Students and Group 1 had significantly higher
A and T than Group 2, with Housewives
intermediate (Table 1). Students and
Group 1 also exhibited significantly higher
FTC when compared to Group 2 and
Housewives, who did not differ significantly from each other.

For those aged 35-50, A was significantly higher for all paid workers when
compared to housewives, but T and FTC
did not differ significantly among categories. For women >50, those who had
worked in the past or were working outDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 3

side the home at the time of the study had
significantly higher T and FTC than those
who were Housewives. Although nonsignificant, A levels tended to be higher in
Group 1, with Group 2 exhibiting the lowest A in this age group.

Analysis of variance of WFR and steroid levels revealed differing relationships
of A, T, and FTC with DATA, PEOPLE,
and THINGS. For those assigned a WFR,
PEOPLE contributed significantly
(p = 0.02) to variation in A; those occupations with high PEOPLE ratings were
professions, 1.e., college professor, M.D.,
D.O., social worker, administrator, and
therapist. Occupations with low PEOPLE
ratings included clerical workers, nurses,
and medical technologists.

T correlated significantly (p = 0.005)
with THINGS, and, though nonsignificant, a trend toward an association of T
and DATA (p = 0.07) was also seen.
Those occupations with high THINGS
ratings include medical technologists,
therapists, M.D., D.O., tailor, cook, and
typists; those with high DATA ratings
were M.D., D.O., college professor,
therapist, administrator, social worker,
administrative assistant, and special services representative. Relationship of FTC
was significant with PEOPLE (p = 0.004),
and, though nonsignificant, a trend toward an association of FTC with THINGS
(p =0.08) was also observed.

Analysis of variance of steroid levels
versus other interview variables revealed
a significant negative association of TBG
with ACTIVITY, a trend toward a relationship of T and EXERCISE
(p=0.10), and a significant (p =0.005)
positive association of A with RESPONSIBILITY.

DISCUSSION

Although there was variation among
age groups, in general, A, T, and FTC

Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC

Be

183

were higher in students and professional,
technical, and managerial workers when
compared with clerical workers and
housewives. This observation is intriguing, but the cause-effect relationship
needs to be explored. Studies suggest that
a feedback relationship exists between the
endocrine system and behavior, wherein
hormones affect behavior, which, in turn,
may influence hormone levels (Leshner,
1978). Let us first examine possible biological causes of occupation-related behavior and then consider what effects occupation might have on steroid levels.
The occupational distribution of women in 1973 included 5 per cent female
workers in the category “Managers and
Administrators” and 15 per cent who were
professional or technical workers, many
of whom were employed as semiprofessionals, such as nurses and medical technologists. In contrast, the largest paid-job
category in this country today is clerical
work, homemakers being the largest unpaid female occupation (Seidman, 1978).
The professions require a protracted period of training (Theodore, 1971); and, although the semiprofessions require less
time-consuming preparation than the professions, they demand more training than
clerical work or homemaking. Since the
majority of working women in this country must combine career or job with the
tasks of homemaking and mothering, and
many fail to acquire job skills before pregnancy, females often are forced into jobs
which require a minimum amount of training or experience (Kipnis, 1976). Skills
such as those required for clerical or office
work are the most accessible to such women (Davies, 1975). Those who do obtain
the formal education or training required
by the professions may have certain personality characteristics which enable them
to succeed, 1t.e., greater drive, persistence, self-confidence, assertiveness, and
interest in career over marriage. The

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

184 Purifoy and Koopmans

higher A, T, and FTC levels observed in
Students and Group 1 might be related to
such qualities.

Relatively higher androgen secretion
might also influence a female’s disposition
to conform to cultural norms; those with
increased levels might choose nontraditional careers whereas those with relatively lower levels would be more likely to
accept the traditional female role. The latter may be more compliant to the demands of authority and thus more readily
conform to sex-role typing. Twenty-five
female executives interviewed by Hennig
and Jardim (1978) report that as children
they preferred boy’s activities, i.e., competition and sports, but did not reject all
aspects of femininity, just those they felt
were confining. They noted as little girls
the inconsistencies inherent in female role
definitions and questioned rather than accepted them. Likewise, adrenogenitalsyndrome females exhibited “‘tomboyish”’
behavior as children in contrast to a control population of girls who were more
typically feminine in interests (Money and
Ehrhardt, 1972).

Thus, increased relative A, T, and FTC
in early development and/or in adulthood
might lower one’s threshold for learning
masculine or androgynous behaviors and
promote those aspects of personality related to career- rather than homemakingorientation in females. Although the relationship of adult steroid levels to early
secretion is not known, they may reflect a
genetic potential commencing early in development. Of course, hormonallyinfluenced learning thresholds must interact with socialization practices to
produce sex-typed behaviors.

The age-cohort differences for A, T,
and FTC (Table 1) are interesting and deserve closer examination. Only for the
youngest age group did A, T, and FTC
differ significantly among occupational
categories, Students and Group 1 being

 

Social Biology

higher than Group 2, with Housewives intermediate. For those aged 35-50, only A
was significantly higher for all paid
workers compared with Housewives.
Many of the women in this group were
near menopause and had decreased T and
FTC compared to both younger and older
women (Purifoy et al., in press). Thus,
physiological processes associated with
menopause could have obscured any occupational effect on T or FTC. For the
oldest age group, all paid workers had
significantly higher T and FTC than
Housewives. Most of the women in the
last two groups grew up in a period when it
was less common than now for women to
work, much less pursue professional careers. Some of these same women growing
up today might choose to follow professional careers due to better opportunities
which are now available for women.

The overall age trends for FTC and T
are also of interest. We found that FTC
and T tend to rise after age 60 in females,
in contrast to declining estrogen and A
levels (Purifoy et al., ms.). Considering
the effects of T on dominance and aggressive behavior in animals (Kling, 1975;
Leshner, 1978), one should perhaps look
for behavioral correlates of a relative increase in T in older females. Increases in
aggression have been noted in elderly female langurs, who fight to defend the
troop from invaders and protect infants
from infanticidal males (Hrdy and Hrdy,
1976). Furthermore, ethnologists have reported an increase in assertiveness and political activity among older females in
some societies (Murphy and Murphy,
1974; Tiger and Shepher, 1975).

Researchers have traditionally considered A to be merely a precursor to T, but
A and T correlated independently with
WFR’s. Since it is commonly reported
that females exhibit greater interest in social affiliation than males, whereas males
are more interested in things and manipuDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 3

lation of the environment (Freedman,
1974; Tyler, 1974), it is intriguing that A,
secreted in greater amounts by females
(Horton and Tait, 1966), is most
significantly associated with PEOPLE,
whereas T, the major androgen secreted
by males, is most highly associated with
THINGS. Curiously, however, FTC,
which is the biologically active portion of
T, correlated significantly with PEOPLE
and nonsignificantly with THINGS.
Clearly, more research is needed to determine differential effects of these steroids
on sex-related interests and abilities.

Since TBG showed no significant relationship with A, T, or FTC, the observed
negative association of TBG with ACTIVITY is surprising and deserves reexamination. TBG reflects estrogen-androgen balance (Anderson, 1976) and could be an
indirect measure of estrogen as well as androgen production. Many of those with
high ACTIVITY ratings were older retired women who had more time available
for recreational and volunteer activities.
Some of these same women had decreased
TBG secondary to lowered estrogen production postmenopausally. The observed
correlation of TBG with ACTIVITY may
thus be spurious and due to the age effect
on both these variables. The trend toward
a relationship of T with EXERCISE also
needs reexamination using a more objective measure of physical activity.

The positive association of A with RESPONSIBILITY and with PEOPLE suggests that those women who are actively
engaged in a complex relationship with
the social environment, or at least perceive that they are, have higher average
A. Researchers (Leshner, 1978; Mason,
1975; Selye, 1976) have confirmed the importance of the adrenal corticosteroids in
an organism’s response to stress and as a
reflection of social interaction. While they

have emphasized the role of the catabolic.

adrenal steroids in providing energy sub
Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC

185

strates and in mediating fear-mediated
adaptive behavior in times of “fight or
flight,” researchers have neglected to investigate a possible role for the adrenal
anabolic steroids, such as A and dehydroepiandrosterone, in the adaptation response. The positive association of A with
PEOPLE and RESPONSIBILITY suggests a relationship between adrenal androgens and positive social stress. Whereas the corticosteroids are necessary for
short-term metabolic homeostasis, the
adrenal androgens may be involved in a
long-term feedback relationship promoting behavior beneficial for social adaptation, i.e. self-confidence, assertiveness,
and independence. Social interaction
may, in turn, affect adrenal androgen secretion. Prolonged negative stress, i.e.,
fear or anxiety, lowers androgen secretion
via ACTH potentiation of corticosteroid
relative to androgen output (Kolanowski
et al., 1975; Parker and Odell, 1977).
Thus, positive stimulation could theoretically raise androgen levels relative to corticosteroids. Those careers which offer a
greater degree of responsibility in dealing
with other people and thus a higher level
of positive social stimulation might stimulate adrenal androgen secretion.
Although women in the work force
might experience more competitive and
thus negatively stressful situations than
those not competing in the “‘man’s
world,” studies have found the opposite
(Feree, 1976; Gove, 1976; Shaver and
Freedman, 1976). Working married women complain of fewer symptoms usually
associated with stress, (i.e., headaches,
insomnia, depression, anxiety) than
housewives (Shaver and Freedman,
1976), and isolation from a meaningful social network is an important factor contributing to many housewives’ dissatisfaction with their roles (Feree, 1976).
However, among those women who work
outside the home, traditional women’s

 

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

186 Purifoy and Koopmans

jobs (i.e., clerical, sales, and service
work) are the most stressful for women in
terms of mental health and heart disease
(Ehrenreich, 1979).

Since relatively lower A, T, and FTC
were observed in clerical workers and
housewives, one might speculate that traditional female occupations which offer
low prestige and monotonous conditions
inhibit androgen secretion in some individuals. Such jobs are either low-paying or
nonpaid, perhaps fostering decreased selfesteem, and conditions are often conducive to repetition and boredom (Howe,
1977). The higher A, T, and FTC levels in
Students and Group 1 might reflect
greater job complexity, allowing for mental and physical stimulation. However,
this association was seen for retired women as well as for those who were still employed. Moreover, people differ in their
abilities to adapt to varying levels of stimulation and in the amount of stimulation
preferred. The steroid levels observed in
this study are within the range of normal
for females and do not suggest abnormal
environmental circumstances. In order to
assess the effects of stress on a person’s
steroid levels, intra- rather than interindividual studies should be done, as each
subject’s stress reactions may differ.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Data analysis revealed positive associations of A, T, and FTC with occupational
status in a group of normal females. Moreover, A was significantly associated with
the degree of job complexity in dealing
with people and with a responsibility rating, whereas T was associated significantly
with the degree of job complexity in dealing with things. Unfortunately, these
statistics tell nothing of cause-and-effect
relationships. Considering the available
evidence, however, one might conclude

 

 

Social Biology

that the observed correlations reflect
biological as well as environmental
causes. An individual may have a genetic
potential for androgen secretion which
manifests itself in early development and
continues into adulthood, affecting learning thresholds for behaviors related to occupational interests, abilities, and drives.
In particular, androgens may affect those
characteristics usually designated as
“masculine” or “‘androgynous”’ in this culture, 1.e., independence, assertiveness,
competitiveness, and individualism, the
same qualities associated with careerorientation in females. A and T may also
differentially affect individual interests
and abilities. A, secreted in greater
amounts by females, may be related to social interests, whereas T may stimulate interest in things and manipulation of the
physical environment.

The activities or occupation that an individual chooses may, in turn, stimulate or
inhibit androgen secretion. The observed
correlations may thus mirror both processes in interaction. Such correlational
data are, however, only suggestive, and
the interpretations offered here require
substantiation by future studies. Followup measurement of basal A, T, and FTC
before and during employment in individuals of various occupations would be useful, as would studies of the effects of positive and negative stress associated with
different jobs on female androgen secretion. Housewives starting paid employment for the first time, business women recelving promotions, or workers nearing
retirement would be likely candidates for
longitudinal studies. Age-related changes
in hormone secretion must, of course, be
considered in any long-term study. Hormonal profiles measuring the various androgens, estrogens, and perhaps progesterone and corticosteroids might be
correlated with. personality profiles, such
Vol. 26, No. 3

as the Bem Sex Role Inventory (Bem,
1976), or with occupational interest and
ability tests.

Although the exact nature of the association between androgens and female be
Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC

187

havior is not clear, the data described here
suggest that these steroids are not only important “male hormones” but may well
play a significant role in normal female behavior.

REFERENCES

ANDERSON, D. C. 1976. The role of sex hormone
binding globulin in health and disease. In V.
H. T. James, M. Serio, and G. Giusti (eds.),
The endocrine function of the human ovary.
Academic Press, San Francisco.

ARCHER, J. 1976. Biological explanations of psychological sex differences. Jn B. Lloyd and J.
Archer (eds.), Exploring sex differences. Academic Press, San Francisco.

Bem, S. L. 1976. Probing the promise of psychological androgyny. In A. G. Kaplan and J. P.
Bean (eds.), Beyond sex role stereotypes. Little, Brown and Co., Boston.

Biock, J., A. VON Der Lippe, and J. H. Biock.
1972. Sex-role and socialization patterns:
Some personality concomitants and environmental antecedents. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.
41:321-341.

Cvark, A. F.,S. Marcei_us, B. DE Lory, and C.
E. Birp. 1975. Plasma testosterone free index:
A better indicator of plasma androgen activity? Fert. Steril. 26:1001-1005.

Davies, R. 1975. Women and work. Hutchinson
and Co., London.

DicTIONARY OF OccuUPATIONAL TITLES. 1977. 4th
ed. U.S. Dept. of Labor, Employment and
Training Administration, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C..

EHRENREICH, B. 1979. Is success dangerous to
your health? Ms. Magazine, May, p. 51-101.

FEREE, M. M. 1976. The confused American
housewife. Psychol. Today 10:76-80.

FREEDMAN, D. G. 1974, Human infancy: An evolutionary perspective. John Wiley and Sons,
New York.

FuRUYAMA, S.,D.M. Mayes, and C. A. NUGENT.
1970. A radioimmunoassay for plasma testosterone. Steroids 16:415-428.

Gove, W. R. 1976. The relationship between sex
roles, marital status, and mental illness. Jn A.
G. Kaplan and J. P. Bean (eds.), Beyond sexrole stereotypes. Little, Brown and Co., Boston.

HEnNNIG, M., and A. Jarpim. 1978. The managerial woman. Pocket Books, New York.

HERRMANN, W. M., and R. C. Beacu. 1976. Psychotropic effects of androgens: A review of
clinical observations and new experimental
findings. Pharmakopsych. 9:205—219.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Horton, R., and J. F. Tait. 1966. Androstenedione production and interconversion rates
measured in peripheral blood and studies of
the possible site of its conversion to testosterone. J. Clin. Invest. 45:301-313.

Howe, L. K. 1977. Pink collar workers. G. P.
Putnam’s Sons, New York.

Hrepy, S. B., and D. B. Hrpy. 1976. Hierarchial
relations among female hanuman langurs (Primates: Colobinae, Presbytis entellus). Science
193:913-915.

Kaan, J., and H. A. Moss. 1962. Birth to maturity. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Kipnis, D. B. 1976. Intelligence, occupational
status, and achievement orientation. In B.
Lloyd and J. Archer (eds.), Exploring sex
differences. Academic Press, San Francisco.

Kina, A. 1975. Testosterone and aggressive behavior in man and nonhuman primates. Jn B.
E. Eleftheriou and R. L. Sprott (eds.), Hormonal correlates of behavior, Plenum Press,
New York.

KOLANOWSKI, J., M. A. PIZARRO, and J. CRABBE.
1975. Potentiation of adrencortical response
upon intermittent stimulation with corticotropin in normal subjects. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 41:453—-465.

LesHNER, A. I. 1978. An introduction to behavioral endocrinology. Oxford Univ. Press, New
York.

Maccosy, E. E., and C. N. JAck.iin. 1974. The
psychology of sex differences. Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif.

MariE, M. 1963. A new anabolic agent (stanozolol): Clinical evaluation in the aged. J. Amer.
Geriat. Soc. 11:440-456.

Mason, J. W. 1975. Emotion as reflected in patterns of endocrine integration. Jn L. Levi
(ed.}, Emotions: Their parameters and
measurement. Raven Press, New York.

Money, J., and A. A. EHRHARDT. 1972. Man and
woman, boy and girl. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Murpny, Y.,and R. F. Murpuy. 1974. Women of
the forest. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

PARKER, L. N., and W. D. ODELL. 1977. Control
of adrenal androgen secretion by a new pituitary factor: Cortical androgen stimulating
hormone (CASH). Clin. Res. 25: 299.

re

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

188 Purifoy and Koopmans

PHOENIX, C. H. 1974. Prenatal testosterone in the
nonhuman primate and its consequences for
behavior. Jn R. C. Friedman, R. M. Richart,
and R. L. Vande Wiele (eds.), Sex differences
in behavior. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Puriroy, F. E., L. H. Koopmans, and R. W. TaTUM. Steroid hormones and aging: Free testosterone, testosterone and androstenedione in
normal females aged 20-87 years. Human
Biology, in press.

Ranpb, L. 1968. Masculinity or feminity?
Differentiating career-oriented and homemaking-oriented college freshman women. J.
Counsel. Psychol. 15:444-450.

REINISCH, J. M. 1977. Prenatal exposure of human foetuses to synthetic progestin and oestrogen affects personality. Nature 266:561562.

Roses, R. M., J. W. Horapay, and I. S. BErnSTEIN. 1971. Plasma testosterone, dominance
rank, and aggressive behaviour in male rhesus
monkeys. Nature 231:366-368.

Social Biology

Rosner, W. A. 1972. A simplified method for the
quantitative determination of testosteroneestradiol-binding globulin activity in human
plasma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 34:983-988.

SEIDMAN, A. (ed.). 1978. Working women: A
study of women in paid jobs. Westview Press,
Boulder, Colorado.

SELYE, H. 1976. Stress in health and disease. Butterworth, Inc., Boston.

SHAVER, P., and J. FREEDMAN. 1976. Your pursuit
of happiness. Psychol. Today 10:26-75.

THEODORE, A. 1971. The professional woman.
Shenkman Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.

Ticer, L., and J. SHEPHER. 1975. Women in the
kibbutz. Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, New
York.

TYLER, L. E. 1974. Individual differences. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.

Witson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology. Belknap
Press, Cambridge, Mass.

 
