Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Natural selection and differential population
growth of human races

Frederick S. Hulse

To cite this article: Frederick S. Hulse (1972) Natural selection and differential population
growth of human races, Social Biology, 19:2, 171-179, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987981

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987981

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Natural Selection and Differential
Population Growth of Human Races

Frederick S. Hulse

Department of Anthropology
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona

It is most appropriate, I think, that this
symposium should honor the memory of
Charles Darwin on the hundredth anniversary of the publication of his remarkable
book The Descent of Man, and Selection in
Relation to Sex (1871). Quite commonly,
this work is referred to simply as The
Descent of Man; but, in fact, approximately two-thirds of its pages are devoted
to sexual selection. In Darwin’s view, the
connection between them was and still remains most intimate. It is most interesting
to note that during the era of Victorian
prudery he had the courage and the honesty
to advance the thesis that selection in relation to sex has been an effective mechanism
for evolutionary change. It is also interesting to note the degree to which this aspect
of Darwin’s thought has been neglected—
even avoided—by most of his successors.
Possibly the taboos of the past have not
yet been overcome. The idea of sexual selection still seems to shock many scientists.
Indeed, one of my colleagues wrote me that
Darwin was a notorious ladies’ man, as
though this allegation were enough to refute
his thesis.

Now, what is the relevance of Darwin’s
view concerning sexual selection to ““Natural Selection and the Differential Population

 

Growth of Human Races”? The answer is
simple. Having been unable to prove to his
own satisfaction that natural selection could
account for the differences between the
races of man, Darwin proposed that sexual
selection could account for at least some of
the observed variations. In his own words
(Darwin, 1871):

.. . the differences between the races of

man, as in color, hairiness, form of features,

etc., are of a kind which might have been

expected to come under the influence of

sexual selection.
He then devotes more than five hundred
pages to a review of the evidence concerning selection in relation to sex among other
species before returning to the study of the
secondary sexual characteristics of the human species,

Before proceeding further, it might be
well to state exactly what Darwin had in
mind in distinguishing sexual selection from
natural selection. In his view, both are unconscious processes which happen “independently of any wish or expectation on the
part of the members of the group concerned.”? However, he continues:

Sexual selection depends upon the success

of certain individuals over others of the

same sex, in relation to the propagation of
the species; whilst natural selection depends

171
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

172 Hulse

upon the success of both, at all ages, in relation to the conditions of life (Darwin,
1871).

In other words, sexual selection depends
upon the favor or preference of members of
the other sex within one’s population in
contrast to natural selection which depends
upon the favor of natural forces exterior to
one’s population. Sexual selection takes
place when some males have traits which
attract the females of the group to a greater
degree than do other males; or when some
females have traits which attract the males
of the group to a greater degree than do
other females. These may or may not be
traits which are useful in the struggle
against adverse conditions of life; but their
chances of preservation will be enhanced
if they promote propagation of offspring.
Sexual selection therefore can only operate
among bisexual species; and among them,
only in species of which the members are
capable of distinguishing by sensory receptors and of discriminating in action
between one another on an individual basis.
Inasmuch as patterned social cooperation
may frequently be useful in overcoming
adverse conditions, it may well be that
sexual and natural selection overlap in
many cases, or even merge into one another.

It seems to me, therefore, that one great
contribution of Darwin’s theory of selection in relation to sex is its implicit recognition of the vital importance of social life
to the survival of a species. On the other
hand, I am not able to see sexual selection
as something distinct from or contrary to
natural selection. After all, the members of
one’s society, including those of the opposite sex, are a vital part of anyone’s environment. The social structure of a population is an aspect of the natural environment
to which its members must accommodate,
and sexual selection is one of the functions
of social structure. If, in fact, sexual selec
Social Biology

tion has been an effective instrument in the
past evolution of our species, it must have
operated within the context of the social
groupings within which our ancestors lived.
And, contrary to Darwin’s view, it can not
have been the major factor in the subspecific differention of the stock. Other
aspects of culture, including the technological ones, have served to modify the
human environment in ways which seem
not to have occurred to him or to his contemporaries; and I suspect culture has
modified the human environment in ways
which have not been noticed even yet. Also,
in my opinion, Darwin did not pay enough
attention to climate and geography, operating either directly or at second hand
through diet and disease, as selective factors
during the course of human evolution.

He did note the reduction in the size of
jaws and the frequent noneruption of wisdom teeth among what he called the “Civilized Races.” He did remark upon the body
build typical of Andean populations. He
wrote of the influence of diet and of habitual occupation upon the size and proportions of different peoples. And he
stressed the fact that as much individual
variation is found among the members of a
tribe of savages as among the members of
a civilized nation (this must have surprised
most of his readers). He considered, but
rejected, the thesis of a causal connection
between skin color and climate. He emphasized the fact that esthetic standards vary
from tribe to tribe, and its corollary, that
most people consider their own tribe the
best looking.

His final conclusion, if I may rephrase it
in modern terms, is that genetic drift, and
perhaps especially the founder effect, led to
the initial differences in biological traits
between human populations which became
separated from one another; and that these
differences were accentuated by preferential

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2

mating as the generations went on. This
conclusion has not met with general acceptance among anthropologists and other
students of evolution, and the evidence
available to Darwin was all too meager.
Nonetheless, sexual selection, within the
framework of cultural predispositions and
social structure, is clearly going on all the
time, just as are selection by diet, by disease, by climate stress, by occupational
hazard, as well as by other environmental
conditions and by chance in very small
breeding populations.

As a matter of fact, several forms of
natural selection are more than likely to be
interacting under most circumstances. A
troop of baboons, for instance, if it is to
continue to exist for generations, must be
composed of individuals who are able to
subsist on grass roots for weeks at a time,
can run and climb fast, resist endo- and
ecto-parasites, infections, contagions, heat
and cold, and who are able to recognize and
get along with one another—and nowadays,
tolerate a visiting ethologist every so often.

Traits which are helpful in one respect
may be irrelevant or deleterious in another.
For defense, adult males should be large.
They will therefore need more food, so that
a given range cannot support too many of
them. They should be aggressive, but at the
same time have enough common sense to be
friendly with at least a few other adult
male baboons. This seems to require quite
a long growth period in which they can
learn their manners, which in turn necessitates a larger number of breeding age
females to keep the troop viable. The
females, busy with their babies, need not
be as large as the males, but they must be
able to attract male sexual interest at the
appropriate times. We are told that only a
few of the males become fathers (Devore
and Washburn, 1962). This is obviously
sexual selection, and I wonder whether it

Natural Selection and Population Growth

173

may not be responsible for the very late
eruption of the adult canine teeth. To have

‘such large fangs before one is strong enough

to use them may be socially hazardous.

Thus, we see that the various demands
imposed upon baboons as individuals, and
upon baboon populations as troops, must
be fitted together into a pattern if we are
to understand how selection has operated
during their evolution. To remove any one
of the stresses could lead to a considerable
rearrangement of the pattern. A lessening
of the hazard of predation, for instance,
would reduce the need for impressive-appearing males. A constantly adequate food
supply would reduce the need for a concentrated breeding season. In thinking
about the course of our own evolution from
a prehuman primate stock, we may find it
useful to consider such factors.

After all, one of the major distinguishing
features of human evolution, from the
earliest times, has been the increasing predominance of our species over other forms
of life. As Darwin wrote one hundred years
ago: “Man in the rudest state in which he
now exists is the most dominant animal
that has ever appeared on earth. He has
spread more widely than any other highly
organized form” (Darwin, 1871). The evidence of archeology now demonstrates that
this has been true for dozens if not hundreds of millenia. The hazards of predation
—except for our predation upon one another—long ago ceased to be important. A
constantly adequate food supply became
available as human technological skill increased. We no longer need to be arboreal
acrobats. At the same time, with increasing
population density, infections and contagions have become very important selective
stresses in the human species. As man has
spread more widely over the land surface of
the globe, we have had to adjust to or
Overcome a great variety of climatic stres
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

174 Hulse

ses. We no longer require large canines
either for combat or display—although the
impulse to snarl, when provoked, has not
yet vanished. The meager canines which
our snarls reveal erupt earlier in the sequence of permanent dentition than do
those of apes and monkeys in general.
There is, to be sure, some quite legitimate
questioning as to whether our prehuman
ancestors had really projecting canines
such as those of baboons and the Pongidae
in general (Kinzey, 1971); but there can
be little doubt that some reduction in size
has taken place.

Despite the constantly growing importance of culture as a selective mechanism
guiding the direction of human evolution,
our species continues to be subject to the
same sorts of forces which guide the evolution of other bisexual animals. One of
these may properly be designated as orthoselective or progressive; another, as radiative or divisive (Simpson, 1949). Orthoselection, leading to better adaptation to the
ecological niche of a species, seems to be
universal. When we approve of the results,
we call this “Progress”; when we worry
about the results, we call it “Overspecialization.”” Adaptive radiation takes place when
a species spreads so widely that differences
in habitat become great enough to be significant in the life of the species. One of the
interesting and important things about
human culture is that it tends, in many
ways, to reduce the importance of climatic
and other geographical differences. As
Dobzhansky and Ashley-Montagu (1947)
pointed out more than twenty years ago,
good judgment and intellectual acumen in
general are useful in all societies and cultures. One might reasonably expect that
natural selection—including sexual selection
—would have favored brains over brawn
among all the peoples of the world since
the time of Australopithecus at the very
latest. All pertinent data available support

 

Social Biology

this expectation. A helpless infancy, quadrupling of brain size after birth, early
acquisition of linguistic skills, prolonged
childhood, a relatively brief proportion of
the female life span devoted to reproduction, the survival of the elderly are characteristic of human populations native to all
different regions of the globe. So are quite
a few other items of a biocultural nature:
the prevalence of right-handedness; the
stigmata of sexual dimorphism; the degree
of nervous coordination and muscular skill;
the basic (mot the detailed) bodily proportions; the continual interest in sex, not
only throughout the year, but at all times
of the month by males and females alike
from pubescence onward; the appreciation
of esthetic and ethical standards, which
leads to value judgments. This is the sort
of world in which all human beings live.
Culture governs our behavior, including
our misbehavior, because our ideas are the
lenses through which we view the outside
world.

Nevertheless, despite the influence of
universal adaptation to culture which characterizes all the populations of the human
species, the fact that we have spread into
all sorts of climatic zones, and come to
occupy not only diverse habitats but many
quite remote and isolated regions, has had
effects upon our biology as well. The expectable result has been, of course, that
cultural and biological variety within the
species have been promoted. Barriers to
gene flow inevitably arise when any species
spreads so widely. Mating is bound to be
more frequent among individuals who are
readily accessible to one another. As human
beings with ideas and standards, we have
been able to erect new barriers to gene
flow. Social distance as well as geographical
distance separates us. Thus, in the Near
East, Moslems and Christians almost never
marry and are not even very likely to live
in sin with one another. In the United

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

States, blacks and whites marry very rarely
and reproduce without marriage less than
one might expect. In Europe, India, Japan,
and most other parts of the world we find
similar walls erected to separate people, although the excuses given differ from culture
to culture.

Rules derived from our cultural preconceptions have governed human mating for
thousands of generations at least, perhaps
beginning with the incest taboo which forbids the union of mother and son. Therefore, a purely random exchange of genetic
information within a breeding population
of our species can not be expected. Selection
in relation to sex is bound to go on all the
time. This selection need not be in reference
to any standards of beauty, to be sure.
It may be determined by rules of kinship,
social status, or by other factors. Yet the
fact that human breeding is selective rather
than random is bound to have both demographic and genetic consequences.

Let us take, for example, the contrasting
results of three sorts of polygyny. Due to
the relatively equal sex ratio which characterizes human populations, not only during
childhood but also during adulthood, any
form of polygyny tends to favor some males
at the expense of others. However, the
group of males who are favored depends
upon the rules of the society. When, for
instance, all men who live long enough are
able to accummulate several wives and
thereby succeed in excluding younger men,
any alleles favoring longevity are bound to
increase in frequency as the generations go
on, since most children will be fathered by
older men. Of course, any mating system
which includes the postponement of marriage and discourages premarital reproduction should also select for alleles favoring
longevity; but we have no evidence that
such a system existed until rather recent
times. Polygyny by older men, however, is
well attested among the native Australians

Natural Selection and Population Growth

 

175

and seems to be suitable to the conditions
of life faced by many hunting and gathering peoples.

In some other societies, authority is
exercised by a restricted hereditary class,
or by leaders called kings, chiefs, or some
such title. It has always been common for
men with hereditary authority to accumulate extra women, whether they be called
wives, concubines, or mistresses. King Solomon, of course, is the standard example.
It will be recalled that he had sevenhundred wives, but only three-hundred
concubines, which indicates the importance
of political considerations in this sort of
mating system. Gene flow between the
leaders of different societies is the expectable result of such practices as this. If it
lasts long enough, an international royal
or noble caste may evolve, perhaps possessing biological traits which differ from those
which characterize the subordinate classes
in each of the separate societies concerned.

At the same time, unless the hazards and
stresses encountered by members of the
ruling group are much greater than those
of their subjects, the frequency of any
genetic traits which distinguish the rulers
from the ruled should increase. Although
the scanty data available (all from Africa)
show that each wife in a group of wives
who share a single husband has fewer offspring than the sole wife of a monogamous
spouse, a polygynous human begets a
greater number of children than average
(Dorjahn, 1958). A further result of such
a mating system is an increase in the
amount and speed of gene flow from the
upper classes into the rest of the population, since not all of the offspring of polygynous males are accepted as members of the
upper classes.

In still other societies, wealth rather than
ancestral prestige is what really matters.
The importance of family alliances by the
exchange of women is then reduced, and a

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

176 Hulse

man who can afford to support several
wives or mistresses has more freedom of
choice to seek out those whom he finds most
charming in one way or another. Physical
attractions can assume a great deal of importance in this case, which is what Darwin
seems to have been thinking about when he
described the results of sexual selelction in
the human species. The different standards
of beauty found in different cultures will
then come to influence the course of evolution in each breeding population in such
a way as to accentuate population differences. If such standards are adhered to, for
the most part, and if they change little as
the centuries pass, later generations in each
population should approximate the ideal
more and more closely.

We have evidence which suggests that
this has indeed taken place in a number
of instances. The Charleston Negro population described by Pollitzer (1958) approximates the white more closely in morphology, which can be seen, than in blood-type
frequencies, which are invisible to the
eye of a suitor. In the countries of Central
Europe, the incidence of blood type B suggests a degree of Asian ancestry which
does not agree with the evidence of morphological features (Manuila, 1956). Seven
centuries after the reconquest of Andulsia
from the Moors, I found the more prosperous Classes there to be less brunette than
the peasantry (Hulse, 1960), just as the
more prosperous Japanese are more fairskinned than the poor (Hulse, 1967). The
degree to which polygyny is concerned
varies from place to place, but it is difficult
to avoid the conclusion that sexual selection has been taking place with respect to
traits which can be perceived by other
members of the population. And it does
seem to have led to evolution in the direction of the standard of the dominant group,
whether this group be gerontocrats, aristocrats, or plutocrats.

Social Biology

It is a matter of some interest that as
technology has improved, social structure
has altered. One need not adhere to the
evolutionary explanations give by Morgan
or Marx, White or Steward, to recognize
this. When no one has accumulated many
goods, the only possible form of polygyny
is the accumulation of extra wives by old
men. When food production developed,
some families or individuals could and
commonly did acquire a disproportionate
share of power, prestige, or produce. When
commerce developed, individual wealth
rather than ancestral prestige became emphasized. And the lives of the rich provide
stresses quite different from the lives of the
poor. New mating systems, including but
by no means restricted to the forms of
polygyny just mentioned, came into existence. With the invention of power machinery, the production of huge quantities
of goods became possible, leading to more
commerce and more plutocracy than ever.
This, in turn led to better nutrition and
health in the upper classes than in the
lower, which may come to differ from one
another a good deal.

As everyone knows, new inventions do
not occur simultaneously in all parts of the
world, although many items have undoubtedly been separately devised in more than
one place. Some technological advances
take place in one area, some in another.
They all lead to easier exploitation or
greater production, or both, which give an
advantage in the struggle for existence to
the group concerned. This in turn facilitates an increase in population because the
carrying capacity of the area inhabited increases. Sometimes, previously uninhabitable areas may come to support a considerable human population after an advance in
technology has been achieved. The continued occupation of Europe during the
Wiirm glaciation is an early example.
Clothing had been invented, and the kit

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

of stone tools much improved. The occupa- 
tion of Polynesia is a much later example.
Outrigger canoes, improved fishing techniques, and efficient government had been
devised. The extraordinary increase in
population in the Near East after the cultivation of crops began, and throughout the
world after the application of public health
methods, need to be mentioned in this connection. There is no evidence that Neolithic
peasants were biologically superior to Mesolithic hunters, or that modern man is an
improved version of his Paleolithic ancestor. Technological advance has made the
difference, as I pointed out quite a few
years ago in my paper on “Technological
Advance and Major Racial Stocks” (Hulse,
1955).

It is worth mentioning now, however,
that the selective stresses which operate
upon different populations are subject to
modification depending upon the prevalent
social structure as well as upon the economy and technology in current use, and
that these two factors are often associated.
Social structure influences the manner in
which genes are channeled and redistributed within a breeding population, as I
mentioned earlier in speaking of the effects
of different forms of polygyny. The economy of hunters and gatherers whose technology is meager precludes the accumulation of women by wealthy men, because
such men do not exist. Monogamy, or
polygyny by older men, are both found in
such groups. Quite commonly, the birth
rate is comparatively low, and infanticide
—especially of baby girls—has frequently
been reported. Almost all females who live
to be twenty years old or more have children, as do almost all males who live to be
thirty. Older people, if there are any, have
the socially useful roles of childcare and
the passing on of traditional lore. Genetically, selection in favor of longevity should
be brought about, although the hazards of

Natural Selection and Population Growth

 

177

existence may prevent its expression in
many cases. Preferential mating is exceedingly difficult, except for the avoidance of
incest as locally defined, because not many
potential mates are available.

During the past few millenia, and especially the last few centuries, very few
tribes have lived this sort of life. They are
found, as a rule, in remote and inhospitable
environments, and none of them are now
numerous. If genetic drift ever has the
chance to operate effectively, it should be
upon such small populations. But do they
really typify an earlier stage, through
which our ancestors all passed before the
development of food production? This has
often been assumed, rather rashly in my
opinion. A thousand generations ago, when
hunting and collecting were universal, many
bands lived in very hospitable environments and could easily have been in genetic
communication with neighbors leading the
same sort of life. Nevertheless, compared
to the populations of modern industrial nations, free choice of mates and polygyny
by a small class must have been restricted.

An economy based upon agriculture or
even horticulture does permit such selective mating patterns to a greater extent. It
also expands, geographically, as the archeological record shows. Migration and cultural diffusion have both taken place upon
innumerable occasions in the past. Migration can spread genetic characteristics very
rapidly, and to great distances. Modern
Australia and New Zealand have allele frequencies indistinguishable from those of
the British Isles, for instance. Cultural
diffusion works more slowly. Gene flow
trickles outward from the diffusion center
as the generations pass, but its effects may
be contradicted or at least delayed by natural selection in many instances. Europe,
for example, learned about food production and later about metallurgy from the
Near East without coming to resemble the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

178 Hulse

Near East in genetic characteristics. In
both cases, however, new mating patterns
were made possible by the accumulation of
wealth and power.

The demographic structure of an agricultural society depends upon the interaction of mating systems and environmental
stresses, both of which are different from
those of hunting and gathering bands. A
few men are likely to contribute much
more to the gene pool of the next generation than average, simply because of their
social position, mof because of their biological superiority or their sexual prowess.
The infant death rate is likely to be high,
because of the ease with which contagions
spread in crowded, unsanitary settlements.
The birth rate is likely to be high as well;
if it is not, the tribe becomes extinct. Can
we say that selection is relaxed under these
circumstances? I suggest that it is simply
redirected. New stresses require new adaptations. In some cases, new foods may have
had a strong selective effect, as McCracken
(1971) claims to be the case with respect
to milk. This may have been true of the
fava bean, and even of rice. New work
habits may also have a selective- effect.
Myopia, for example, may not interfere
with raising crops, but it may interfere
with successful hunting.

In a commercial society, still further
changes take place. Preferential mating is
encouraged. Gene flow is stimulated by the
traveling of traders. With the exchange of
knowledge as well as of material goods,
comfort and health are improved. The
death rate, and later the birth rate, are
likely to decline, so that the population
pyramid begins to resemble an obelisk.
Population density increases, as does distant migration.

Biological adaptation to such a natural
force as climate, therefore, will depend
upon the manner in which the culture attempts to deal with the climate. Farmers

Social Biology

on the dank and chilly altiplano of Peru,
for instance, send out their young sons to
herd the livestock. Growth is slow and
maturity delayed in this population. An
entire household huddles in a heap at night
to keep warm. This seems to work, but it
is also a splendid way to spread contagions
(Hanna, 1968). How it affects gene flow
I have not been told. In any case, one can
see that climatic effects are mediated by
cultural practices, not just by the technology available.

The warm and humid climates of the
Amazon and of the Congo basin have not
been dealt with in the same ways by the
cultural and especially the technological
practices of the native populations. Amazonian Indians, lacking metal tools, found
it more difficult to clear the jungle for their
crops. They produced less, and there were
far fewer of them. At the same time, they
did not create conditions favorable for
mosquitoes, and malaria does not seem to
have become endemic. Selection in favor of
the sickle cell was not promoted by their
way of life, whereas, as Livingstone (1958)
has so elegantly demonstrated, it was promoted by African agricultural techniques.
Even today, ten generations after Negro
slaves began to escape into the South
American rain forest, the sickle-cell trait is
almost if not totally absent among the
native Indians, and the density of the
population remains low in contrast to that
of Equatorial Africa.

A biologist who was blind to the cultural
factors in human adaptation might say—
in fact, one of them did say to me—that
this difference in numbers must be due to
inherited biological adaptations to the stresses peculiar to the humid tropics, perhaps
body build or skin color. But if we continue
our journey around the equator, we reach
Indonesia and Indochina. In these areas,
the native population is even denser than
in Africa, although in body build and pig
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

mentation the people approximate the
Amazonians rather than the Central Africans, The cultivation of rice, long established and skillfully conducted, can support
a far greater population than can the food
production methods of Africa or of the
Amazon valley. Clearly, it is technology
rather than biology that is responsible. The
materials utilized and the organization of
production, rather than tools alone, are involved in the obviously different densities
of these populations.

And, of course, population density is
among the environmental factors which
serve as selective stresses upon the peoples
concerned. When we observe that some
populations have increased in numbers
much more rapidly than have others, it is
easy, quite natural, and not illogical to
jump to the conclusion that natural selection has been relaxed. A reduction of the

Natural Selection and Population Growth

 

179

death rate is commonly thought of as the
typical cause of population increase. The
present population explosion which threatens us is largely the result of a drop in
infant mortality. Obviously, fewer deaths
must mean that some individuals survive
who would have died under other conditions, presumably including those who have
some genetic weakness.

However, an increased birth rate, with
no change in the death rate, also leads to a
speeding up of population growth. And, in
large populations the role of genetic drift
is bound to be reduced, whereas the selection of mates becomes easier when there
are many individuals of the opposite sex
available, rather than only a few. Thus,
natural selection, including selection in
relation to sex, seems to be the major force
leading to the continued evolution of the
human species in the world today.

REFERENCES

Darwin, CHARLES. 1871. The descent of man and
selection in relation to sex. John Murray, Lon
on.

Devore, I., and S. L. WasHBurn. 1962. Baboon
ecology. Film from University of California,
Berkeley.

DoszHANSKY, T., and M. F. AsHLEyY-Monracu.
1947, Natural selection and the mental capacities
of mankind. Science 105:587-590.

Doryann, V. R. 1958. Fertility, polygny and their
interrelationships in Temme society. Amer.
Anthrop. 60:838-860.

Hanna, J. M. 1968. Cold stress and microclimate
in the Quechua Indians of southern Peru. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Arizona, Tucson.

Hutse, Frepericx §. 1955. Technological advance
and major racial stocks. Hum. Biol. 27:184—192.

. 1960, Adaptation, selection and plasticity.

Hum. Biol. 32:63-79.

. 1967, Selection for skin color among the

 

 

Japanese. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop, 27:143155.

Krvzey, W. J. 1971. Evolution of the human
canine tooth. Amer. Anthrop. 73:680-694.
LivincsTone, Franx B. 1958. Anthropological
implications of sickle-cell gene distribution in

West Africa. Amer. Anthrop. 60:533-562.

McCracken, R. D. 1971. Lactase deficiency: An
example of dietary evolution. Curr. Anthrop.
12:479-517.

Manuva, A. 1956, Distribution of ABO genes in
Eastern Europe. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 14:
577-588.

Potiirzer, W. S. 1958. The Negroes of Charleston
(S.C.), a Study of Hemoglobin Types, Serology
and Morphology. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop.
16:241-263.

Smepson, G. G. 1949. The meaning of evolution.
Yale University Press, New Haven.
