Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Comment on “methodological options in
measuring illegitimacy and the difference they
make,” by Berkov and Sklar

Stephanie J. Ventura

To cite this article: Stephanie J. Ventura (1976) Comment on “methodological options in
measuring illegitimacy and the difference they make,” by Berkov and Sklar, Social Biology, 23:4,
349-353, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988249

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988249

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB crs | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Communications

Comment on “Methodological Options in
Measuring Illegitimacy and the Difference
They Make,” by Berkov and Sklar

Stephanie J. Ventura

Division of Vital Statistics
National Center for Health Statistics
Rockviile, Maryland

In the article “Methodological Options
in Measuring Ilegitimacy and the Difference They Make,” which appeared in the
Winter 1975 issue of Social Biology (Vol.
22, No. 4, pp. 356-371), Beth Berkov and
June Sklar raise two principal methodological issues: (1) the use of inferred
illegitimacy data in preparing national estimates of the incidence of illegitimacy,
and (2) the inclusion of separated women
in the denominator used for calculating
illegitimate birth rates.

The authors contend that the method
used in California to infer the legitimacy
status of births from a comparison of surnames on the birth record is valid and
therefore that “national estimates [of illegitimate births] incorporating inferential
data are preferable to estimates based solely on the experience of reporting states in
the same geographical area” (pp. 363,
365), which is the method used by the
National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS). The NCHS method assumes that
the nonreporting states in a given geographical division have the same proportion of illegitimate births as the reporting
states in that division.

With regard to the denominator used for
calculating illegitimate birth rates, Berkov

 

and Sklar believe that a strictly legal definition, whereby all children born to married women—regardless of whether or not
they are separated—are considered to be
legitimate, is not appropriate. They feel
tha separated women should be included
in the denominator used for calculating
illegitimacy rates since they are exposed
to the risk of de facto out-of-wedlock
childbearing.

In this communication, we will discuss
the problems involved in aggregating inferred illegitimacy data for some states
with the data that are actually reported for
other states. We will also comment on the
factual basis for the position taken by
Berkov and Sklar with respect to the appropriate population denominator for illegitimacy rates and explain why we find
the evidence thus far insufficient to support their position.

Berkov and Sklar base their reliance on
inferential legitimacy data on what they
believe to be reliable and complete data
for California, a state for which the only
available means of measuring the extent of
illegitimacy is the use of inferred data. The
criteria developed for inferring the legitimacy status of California births have evidently been carefully and completely eval
349
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

350

uated by the California Department of
Health and by the authors, and we have
no reason to question these evaluations.
However, this is not the case for the criteria used to infer legitimacy status in other
states.

In the Berkov-Sklar study, all inferred
data from the other 11 nonreporting states
have admittedly been aggregated and
utilized without questioning or evaluating
the criteria employed. We believe such an
evaluation should be a major component
of a study to infer illegitimacy in order to
produce national illegitimacy data. The
use of inferential data may result in better
national estimates, but this assumes that
the inferential data are themselves accurate. We also believe that a complete evaluation of inferential data would require
that the inferential criteria that are employed to produce illegitimacy data for the
nonreporting states yield data for the reporting states that are fairly compatible
with what are actually being reported. A
thorough evaluation of inferential data is
thus essential to help ensure that we are
combining comparable data when data
based on the legitimacy status item in the
ceporting states are aggregated with data
derived from inferring legitimacy status in
the nonreporting states.

Our concern about the comparability of
the illegitimacy data from the two sources
is based on two facts. First, the states
differ widely in their regulations concerning the entry of the father’s surname and
the appropriate surname for the child on
the birth certificate of a child born out of
wedlock. Since inferred legitimacy status
is usually based on a comparison of surnames of the father, mother (current and
maiden surnames), and child, obviously
the laws or regulations in effect in any
state with respect to entry of these names
can have considerable impact on the successful implementation of an inferential
procedure. For example, California is one

 

 

Communications

Social Biology

of only 4 states, among the 12 not now
requiring the reporting of legitimacy
status, that have virtually no restrictions
on the entry of the father’s name and the
child’s surname in the case of an illegitimate birth. In California, the mother of an
illegitimate child is permitted to enter the
father’s name without his permission, and
she is permitted to give any surname she
wishes to her child. Maryland, Ohio, and
Vermont have similar unrestrictive
policies. Most of the other nonreporting
states permit the father’s name only if
there is a paternity statement by the father
or court order; in some states, the father’s
name is prohibited in all cases where the
birth is illegitimate.

The second factor which gives us concern about the comparability of the illegitimacy data from the reporting system
with that based on inferential procedures
is that the nonreporting states which do
themselves infer legitimacy status utilize
widely varying criteria in inferring the
legitimacy status of infants born in their
states. The criterion most often used for
inferring that a birth is illegitimate by the
11 states other than California which do
not have a legitimacy item on the birth
record is the absence of the father’s name.
In fact, this criterion is the only one used
in two states. A paternity statement attached to the birth record is a second
common indicator that a child is illegitimate, Two other states use this criterion
together with absence of the father’s
name. In New York State, the single criterion used is absence of the father’s age
from the birth record. Thus, if one is to
conduct a national study of illegitimacy
using inferred data where legitimacy
status is not reported, one has two
choices—either to use the data as they are
inferred by each individual state or to devise a common set of guidelines that would
be applicable to all the states. It is not
clear that the criteria presently used by all

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 4

the nonreporting states are as complete as
they should be to yield an accurate count
of illegitimate births. For example, one
might question the single criterion employed in New York State.

A study now underway in the National
Center for Health Statistics is designed to
determine if it is feasible to devise a few
simple methods for inferring legitimacy
status in the nonreporting states that will
yield estimates superior to those obtained
by the present method. This study indicates that no single set of criteria could be
employed to adequately deal with the legal
situations encountered in the various
states. As the agency responsible for producing national data on illegitimacy, it
would be necessary for the NCHS to devise guidelines that would not vary so
much from state to state so as to be prohibitive from a data-processing standpoint.

We believe that the real options available to NCHS on the matter of using inferred legitimacy data to make national
estimates have not been fully presented in
the Berkov-Sklar paper. Indeed, the very
fact of the widely differing regulations in
the various states with respect to entering
the father’s name and options for the
child’s surname is only slightly alluded to
in their paper. The authors should really
focus prominently on this point for it may
have had a profound effect on their data.

We recognize that there are major problems in measuring illegitimacy and that
the data we now have need improvement.
We are trying to develop better procedures
for making national estimates. Meanwhile, we are hopeful that as a result of
the replacement of the legitimacy status
item on the current birth certificate by a
question on the mother’s marital status in
the 1978 revision of the U. S. Standard
Certificate of Live Birth, some additional
states may adopt the revised item, thus
providing NCHS with a more accurate

Communications

 

351

basis for making national estimates of illegitimacy.

The other major point of difference in
methodology between the Berkov-Sklar
paper and the procedures employed at the
NCHS is the inclusion in their study and
the exclusion by NCHS of separated
women from the denominators used in
calculating illegitimacy rates. The authors
make a good case that a strictly legal definition of legitimacy status may not be appropriate when trying to determine the
number of children born into single-parent
family circumstances. After all, the study
of illegitimacy usually focuses on the likely
social, economic, and health consequences
faced by illegitimate babies in comparison
to the more favorable situations for babies
born in relatively secure two-parent families.

The fact remains, however, that there is
a legal aspect to this problem. As the authors correctly observe, “separated women
are married, and their children are presumed to be legitimate” (p. 365). In fact,
for a large number of states, it is required
that the name of the husband be entered
on the birth record as the father unless or
until there is a court order determining
paternity to be otherwise. Furthermore,
most states have adopted the concept that
a child is legitimate if he or she was conceived or born during lawful wedlock, regardless of whether or not the woman’s
husband was the child’s biological father.
Thus, the child’s reported or inferred
legitimacy status in these states is based on
the mother’s marital status. NCHS is restricted to the information on the birth
record which is essentially a legal document, and we must follow the legal procedures observed by the states. It is possible,
as Berkov and Sklar suggest, that some
people completing birth certificates do not
follow state laws, but no one knows the
extent to which this may be done.

However, even if we forget about the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

352

legal aspects of reporting legitimacy
status, we believe that the evidence cited
in the Berkov-Sklar paper is not sufficient
or adequate to support inclusion of these
women in the denominator used for calculating illegitimate birth rates. The most
critical point is that the data in Table 7 (p.
367) refer only to illegitimate births to separated women. We feel that it is important
to secure data on legitimate births to separated women as well. That is, while a
certain proportion of separated women
may have babies by men other than their
husbands, it is essential to know what
proportion of separated women having
babies by men other than their husbands
choose specifically to list the legal husband
rather than the biological father as the
father on the birth certificate, thus virtually assuring that their babies are considered legitimate. Additionally, there are
probably separated women who have
babies fathered by their legal husbands. If
these latter proportions were found to be
relatively high, then it would not be correct to assume that separated women
should be included in the denominator
used for computing illegitimacy rates.

The real issue is the need to solve the
practical problem of securing comparable
data for the numerator and denominator
of the illegitimacy rate. The authors concede the desirability of knowing the
legitimacy status of births to separated
women. Simply because they feel that the
number of legitimate births to separated
women is small, based only on their experience with selected California data,
does not justify the conclusion that all separated women should be included in the
denominator used for calculating national
illegitimate birth rates.

With respect to the data specifically
cited in support of their position by Berkov and Sklar, we believe that the sample
selected tends to exaggerate the effects of
including separated women in the de
Communications

Social Biology

nominator. First of all, the data in Table 7
refer to only three hospitals in the San
Francisco Bay area and to a total of only
324 illegitimate births. The data are certainly not representative of illegitimate
births in San Francisco with respect to the
distribution by race. Even national data
on illegitimacy—either NCHS data or
data from the Berkov-Sklar estimates—do
not reflect such a preponderance of Black
births. Secondly, the data are not representative with respect to age composition. The data in their table show a much
larger proportion of women aged 20 and
over than do NCHS national data. It is
Black women and older women who are
more likely to be separated.

Finally, the data in Table 7 for separated women actually refer to very few
women—only 22 in total, 4 white and 18
Black (estimated from the per cents
shown). These figures seem to us to be
inadequate to sustain their argument that
“there seems little question that, at least in
California, separated women having children by men other than their husbands are
being included in the counts of illegitimate
births and therefore that separated women
cannot be excluded from the denominators
that are used to calculate illegitimate birth
rates” (p. 366). Perhaps this is true for
California, but we feel that the sample of
hospitals would have to be much larger
and more representative to be sure.

Furthermore, from our knowledge of
the practices in other states and from other
studies (Cutright, 1972, pp. 432-433) we
are not at all sure that this situation is
common for them and believe that it is
quite risky to assume this without more
adequate data. We practicularly wonder,
as does Cutright, how many separated
women would go to the trouble of listing a
man other than her husband as the father
of her child, thus ensuring that the child
will be registered or inferred as illegitimate. If a substantial proportion of sep
 

 
—|
=
©
N
Samed
5
&
oO
oO
oO
A
CO
CO
\O
oe)
oN
=
—
3
'S
CS
OQ
ao
oO
5
Cee
©
>>
—
N
~
oO
>
a
c
-,
Me)
2
cv
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

Vol. 23, No. 4

arated women do not take this step, then
we certainly could not justify the inclusion
of all separated women in the denominator.

We recognize that there are problems
with the conventional definition of the illegitimacy rate. In our future analytical
reports, we will be showing the effect of a
change in the denominator so as to include
(permanently) separated women. However, before we could consider making a
change in the way illegitimacy rates are
routinely defined and computed, we
would need to have more data—data
which at present are simply not available.
One essential piece of information, as we
have just suggested, is a classification of
all births to separated women by legitimacy status. If we were to find, for example, that most births to separated
women (fathered by men other than their
husbands) are actually reported as having
been fathered by the women’s husbands
(and thus considered legitimate), it would
be inappropriate to include separated
women in the denominator of the illegiti
Communications

 

353

macy rate, since their births are not in the
numerator. Clearly, more research is
needed on this aspect of the definition of
the illegitimacy rate before any changes
could be made.

As we have already stated, there are
many problems involved in the measurement of illegitimacy. We in the NCHS are
the first to recognize that the present
methods of counting illegitimate births for
national estimates and of measuring the
risk of illegitimacy may well need revision.
We are presently engaged in an extensive
research project which has the goal of developing better methods of making national estimates of illegitimacy. We are
also hoping to develop methods to ascertain more precisely the exact population at
risk of bearing illegitimate children. Not
only is better understanding and agreement of the practical and analytic uses of
the data needed, but also of the practical
problems associated with producing these
data. We welcome the advice of anyone
who would like to work with NCHS toward these goals.

REFERENCE

CUTRIGHT, P. 1972. Illegitimacy in the United States: 1920-1968. Jn C. F. Westoff and R. Parke (eds.),
Demographic and social aspects of population growth. Commission on Population Growth and the
American Future. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

 

 
