Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Transmission of information about the
environment in the human species: A cybernetic
view of genetic and cultural evolution

Carl Jay Bajema

To cite this article: Carl Jay Bajema (1972) Transmission of information about the environment
in the human species: A cybernetic view of genetic and cultural evolution, Social Biology, 19:3,
224-226, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987989

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987989

 

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

A)
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 4 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

in the Human Species: A Cybernetic View
of Genetic and Cultural Evolution

Carl Jay Bajema

Department of Biology
Grand Valley State College
Allendale, Michigan

What a man is and all that he knows is a
result of information passed on to him by
the DNA code of his genes and by the
sensory information he receives throughout
his lifetime?

Many species of animals possess two
systems for processing, interpreting, utilizing, and transmitting information about
their environments to other members of
the same species—a genetic system based
on genes (DNA) and a nongenetic or
cultural system based on the brain. The
brain is most highly evolved in the human
species. The genetic evolution of the biological capacity for nongenetic (cultural)
transmission of information concerning the
environment in the human species by the
symbolic processes of language has made
cultural adaptation the primary means by
which human populations adapt to their
environments.

The idea that cultural evolution has replaced genetic evolution, i.e., that cultural
evolution has put an end to genetic evolution is one of the most widely held misconceptions concerning human evolution. When
both genetic and cultural evolution are

1The source of this quotation is unknown to
the author of this paper.

 

viewed from the perspective of cybernetics
(see Figure 1), it becomes readily apparent
that cultural evolution has not replaced
genetic evolution (Bajema, 1971; Dobzhansky, 1964). Both genetic and cultural
adaptation to the environment are going
on simultaneously, and the two systems are
constantly interacting as human populations adapt to their environments.

It is via natural selection that information about the environment is transmitted
to the gene pool of a population. This is
accomplished by differential reproduction
of different genotypes changing the frequencies of genes in populations. Those
individuals carrying the genetic information
about the environment that best enables
them to survive and reproduce transmit the
most genes and thus the most genetic information about the environment to the
next generation(s). Cultural adaptation to
the environment takes place via the differential transmission of ideas which influence
how human beings perceive and interact
with the environment which affect survival
and reproductive patterns in and between
human populations.

The effect that cultural evolution has had
on genetic evolution in the human species

224,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3

Differential transmission

of ideas via

differential communication

Variation reduction

Environment in the Human Species

 

225

Natural selection
(differential reproduction)

Variation reduction

(output) Feedback Feedback (output)

. Information Individual Information

stored in human brains human being — environment stored in
and supplementary storage banks interaction DNA of genes in

—books, pictures, computers, etc.

JA

Ideas
{variation input)

Changing
environment
{variation input)

human beings

f

Gene
mutations
(variation input)

pre,

Cultural evolution

Genetic evolution

Fic, 1.—Transmission of information about the environment in the human species—a cybernetic

view of genetic and cultural evolution.

has been so great that the rates of evolution with respect to such human physical
characteristics as brain size (Campbell,
1963; Tobias, 1971) and dentition (Bilsborough, 1969; Kinzey, 1970) are among
the more rapid rates of mammalian evolution which have been calculated from fossil
evidence (Kurten, 1959). Thus, the data
indicate not only that human genetic evolution has not ceased, but that the rate of
genetic change for some human characteristics accelerated as the human species
evolved the capacity for transmitting information about the environment via the
symbolic processes of language.

Natural selection has not ceased operating to bring about genetic change in contemporary societies. The direction and/or
intensity of natural selection in relation to
human physical health and behavior patterns have been altered by cultural changes.
For example, the direction and intensity of
natural selection in relation to sickle-cell
hemoglobin (Allison, 1954, 1964) has been
altered by such cultural developments as
specific agricultural practices (Wiesenfeld,

1967), the development and use of pesticides to control the populations of mosquitoes which serve as vectors for malaria, and
still more recently by the development of
inexpensive specific medical therapy (urea
treatment) which alleviates the adverse
symptoms of sickle-cell anemia (Nalbandian et al., 1971a, 19710).

As Theodosius Dobzhansky (1964, p. 7)
has pointed out, “it is precisely because
we know that mankind changes so greatly
in cultural aspects that we can be reasonably confident that the human species is
changing to some extent genetically.”
There are two conditions necessary for
genetic change to take place—a changing
environment and the presence in human
populations of genetic variants, some of
which confer upon their carriers a higher
fitness in the newly emerging environments.
Cultural evolution has created selective
pressures which have brought about genetic
changes which increased man’s capacity for
the cultural transmission of information
about the environment. These genetic
changes in turn increased the fitness for
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

226

and the dependence of their carriers on
culture and stimulated further cultural
developments. These cultural developments
in turn initiated still further genetic
changes. Thus, a positive relationship has
existed between cultural and genetic evolution in the human species with respect to
what we call intelligent behavior.

The great changes that have and are
taking place in the social structure of
human societies affect the direction and/
or intensity of natural selection particularly
with respect to human behavior patterns
(Bajema, 1972). It is interesting to note
that the emerging urban-industrial welfarestate environments of the United States
appear to be cultural environments which
cause natural selection to operate to bring
about a very slight increase in the frequency of those genes in the population
which in interaction with the environment
lead to the development of above-average
intelligence (as measured by IQ). At least
this is the case in all three of the primarily
urban native-born white American popula
Bajema

Social Biology

tions where the operation of natural selection in relation to individual differences in
intelligence has been studied. The results
of these three studies are discussed in more
detail in another paper presented at this
symposium (Osborn and Bajema, “The
Eugenic Hypothesis’’).

The use of cybernetic models to describe
genetic and cultural evolution helps us to
more clearly understand how the genetic
and cultural systems for transmitting information about the environment complement each other. These two systems for
transmitting information about the environment are so interlocked that change in the
information content of one system frequently brings about a change in the information content of the other system.

The evidence indicates that the genetic
evolution of man’s capacity for culture
greatly expanded the cultural dimension of
human evolution which in turn has had
the effect of increasing the rate of genetic
evolution in the human species.

REFERENCES

Atuison, A. 1954. The distribution of the sicklecell trait in East Africa and elsewhere, and its
apparent relationship to the incidence of subtertian malaria. Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med.
Hyg. 48:312-318.

. 1964. Polymorphism and natural selection
in human populations. Cold Spring Harbor
Symposia on Quantitative Biology 29:137-149

Bayema, C. (ed.) 1971. Natural selection in human
populations: The measurement of ongoing
genetic evolution in contemporary societies.
Wiley, New York.

. 1972. Some thoughts concerning the direction and intensity of natural selection with
respect to human physical health and behavior
patterns in industrial welfare state democracies.
In I. Porter (ed.), Heredity and _ society.
Pergamon Press, New York.

BrrssoroucH, A. 1969. Rates of evolutionary
change in the hominid dentition. Nature 223:
146-149.

CamMpBeLL, B. 1963. Quantitative taxonomy and
human evolution, p. 50-74. In S. Washburn

 

 

(ed.), Classification and human _ evolution.
Aldine, Chicago.

DoszHansky, T. 1964. Evolution—organic and
superorganic. Bull. Atom. Sci, 20 (May): 4-8.

Kinzey, W. 1970. Rates of evolutionary change
in the hominid canine teeth. Nature 225:296.

Kurten, B. 1959. Rates of evolution in fossil
mammals. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology 24:205-215.

NALBANDIAN, R., G. ScHULTz, J. LusHER, J. ANDERSON, and R. Henry. 1971. Sickle cell crisis
terminated by intravenous urea in sugar solutions—-A preliminary report. Amer. J. Med. Sci.
261:309-324.

NALBANDIAN, R., S. ANDERSON, J. LuSHER, A.
Acustsson, and R. Henry. 1971. Oral urea and
the prophylactic treatment of sickle cell disease—
A preliminary report. Amer. J. Med. Sci. 261:
325-334,

Tostas, P. 1971. The brain in hominid evolution.
Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

WIESENFELD, S. 1967. Sickle-cell trait in human
biological and cultural evolution. Science 157;
1134-1140,
