Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Patterns of psycholinguistic development in the
severely mentally retarded: A hypothesis

David B. Burr & Art Rohr

To cite this article: David B. Burr & Art Rohr (1978) Patterns of psycholinguistic development
in the severely mentally retarded: A hypothesis, Social Biology, 25:1, 15-22, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1978.9988314

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988314

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 5 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Patterns of Psycholinguistic Development
in the Severely Mentally Retarded:

A Hypothesis

David B. Burr and Art Rohr

Department of Anthropology
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado

 

ABSTRACT: We hypothesize that the loss of psycholinguistic skills in some cases of severe mental
retardation caused by prenatal disruption closely approximates ontogenetic patterns of language
acquisition and phylogenetic patterns of cognitive development. This hypothesis was tested on 131
trainable mental retardates divided into four etiological classes. The results support the hypothesis and show that certain patterns of loss occur only in mental retardation resulting from prenatal
disruption and characterized by postnatal developmental delay and do not occur in postnatal

environmentally caused retardation.

Research into the  psycholinguistic
abilities of the trainable mentally retarded
(IQ 30-60) indicates that not all psycholinguistic abilities are affected by retardation
in a similar manner. Mueller and Weaver
(1964) and Hermelin and O’Connor (1961)
report great difficulty among trainable
mental retardates (TMR) in verbal expression when compared to other aspects
of language and note that the visual-motor
channel is developed to a greater degree
than the verbal-auditory channel.
Bilovsky and Share (1965) confirm this
finding for Down’s syndrome (DS) individuals.

This differential development of
psycholinguistic skills may be caused by
developmental differences which closely
approximate the phylogenetic development of the cognitive systems involved.
Visual-manual skills most likely developed
phylogenetically in response to the
hunting-toolmaking way of life prior to
skills in the verbal-auditory channel.
Therefore, psycholinguistic abilities in
visual-motor and verbal-auditory channels may develop at different rates.

There is some evidence to suggest that
these developmental patterns of psycholinguistic skills vary depending on
the medically defined cause of retardation
(e.g., genetic, biological brain damage,
environmentally induced damage). Lyle
(1960, 1961a,b) found that retardates with
DS had lower verbal ability than nonMongoloid retardates, a finding confirmed
by Mein (1961) and Blanchard (1964).
Furthermore, Spreen (1965) found auditory discrimination to be inferior in
brain-damaged retardates and motor expression and visual reception to be major
strengths among DS individuals. Smith
(1962) has reported similar conclusions for
educable mental retardates.

No hypothesis has been presented previously which can explain the consistent
nature of differential developmental patterns among psycholinguistic abilities in
different etiological classes of TMR. We
hypothesize that the loss of psycholinguistic skills in some cases of severe mental
retardation caused by prenatal disruption
closely approximates ontogenetic patterns
of language acquisition and phylogenetic

15
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

16 Burr and Rohr

patterns of cognitive development. Thus,
we anticipate that verbal-auditory skills
will be more greatly affected than skills in
the visual-motor channel.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

One hundred and thirty-one trainable
mentally retarded subjects were administered the Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic
Abilities (TPA). The ITPA interrelates
processes of psycholinguistic function
which operate during communication. It
tests two channels (verbal-auditory and
visual-motor), each of which defines sensory input and expressive output. Three
processes operate within each channel.
The receptive process (auditory and visual) concerns recognition and understanding of sensory input. The expressive
process (verbal and manual) deals with
skills necessary for communication output. The organizing process (auditory and
visual) relates to the ability to recognize
and use relationships among input stimuli.
The organizing process includes association (the ability to relate concepts), sequential memory (the ability to reproduce
sequences of stimuli from memory), and
closure (the ability to identify an object
from an incomplete visual or grammatic
presentation). Using these channels and
processes, language ability, as opposed to
speech ability, can be tested and the underlying cognitive structures analyzed
(Kirk and Kirk, 1971).

The subjects were divided into four categories according to the medically diagnosed cause of retardation: Down’s syndrome (37 persons), biological brain damage (34 persons), known environmental
cause (7 persons), and no diagnosed cause
(53 persons). The “known environmental
cause” group consisted of individuals
whose retardation stemmed from lead
paint poisoning, battered child syndrome,

Social Biology

postnatal head injuries, and injuries occurring at birth. Biologically braindamaged individuals all had etiologies
stemming from congenital conditions,
some of which disrupted prenatal development (premature birth) and some of
which did not (birth hypoxia). The 53 persons in the “etiology unknown” group had
never had the cause of their retardation
diagnosed.

Sex, race, and socioeconomic status
were used as control variables, and all 131
subjects were classified within each. A
three-way analysis of variance with ITPA
subtests, race, and socioeconomic level as
factors showed that the only significant
effect was ITPA subtests. Neither race nor
socioeconomic level, nor any of the interactions, were significant. A two-way
analysis of variance showed etiology and
subtests to be significant factors.

RESULTS

Figure 1, which presents the differences
among the ten ITPA subtests for the 131
subjects, demonstrates that the visual
channel is substantially more highly developed than the auditory channel. With
the exception of the association process,
each visual process (e.g., visual reception)
is distinctly higher than its auditory counterpart (e.g., auditory reception). If the
subjects are divided into a Down’s group
and a non-Down’s group, both groups retain the significant difference between the
auditory and visual channels, with the difference more marked for the Mongoloids.
In contrast to the findings of Mueller and
Weaver (1964) and Hermelin§ and
O’Connor (1961), the expressive process
(verbal and manual expression combined)
is stronger for both Down’s and nonDown’s than is either the associative or
receptive process.

The relationship of psycholinguistic
skills to one another can be demonstrated
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 1

AUDITORY

a &

o
oy

Age
Equivalent

s
$2

try
2 ols
26/22
=o [Fe

, Pe
Ww Oo

6
o>)

5-9
5-6

7
‘oO

=6
=3

le

©

a=?
3-6

Psycholinguistic Development

17

VISUAL

 

Fic. 1.—The relationship of the auditory to the visual channel. The means for all ten subtests are plotted,
with raw scores converted to age scores in years and months. All four etiologies are combined for a total

sample size of 131.

by converting raw scores into scale scores
based on the subject’s mental age. Figure
2 shows the relationships among the ten
abilities for each of the four etiologies.
Since the mental ages used to construct the
scale scores are different for each group,
the pattern of abilities for each etiology
must be considered independently. Each
of the four groups shows a similar pattern,

with verbal and manual expression the
strongest abilities in relation to the others
and auditory memory the weakest. This
pattern, which is accentuated among the
Mongoloids, agrees with the findings of
McCarthy (1965) and Bilovsky and Share
(1965). Table 1 presents the results of
paired t-tests used to contrast the relationship of each visual ability with its auditory
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

18 Burr and Rohr Social Biology
AUDITORY VISUAL
R
Y 6 g e
Bs ps s my g 7 0
@ @ oy jo AlN [eof 9 - ay ry w
38 /Sa/a8lae/] sf Fale (Ba / 28] Fe] 22
nn SPlSalE& ry Of & & | .% § 2S, Lo
SPOS [SEL af OOPS [SE PSAP eS SS

| | i} ttt tt
wh TE pT et a
: tty 4 ‘

©

4

Se
» =
P|

’ ANS NA
aN val
Fe Were

; See
a TV
ee =

Fic. 2.,—The relationship among the ten psycholinguistic abilities for each etiology. Since the scale
scores were constructed on the basis of mental age, the pattern of each etiology must be considered separately.
D, Down's syndrome; B, biological brain damage; E, environmental, U, unknown.

counterpart for each of the four etiologies.
The most striking result is that for DS
cases each visual ability is significantly
higher than its auditory counterpart,
whereas no such differences exist for the
known environmental etiology group. The
evironmental etiology group shows no
substantial differences among the subtest

scores, in contrast to the DS group with its
varying abilities.

Figure 3 and Table 1 demonstrate the
differences among the four etiologies for
each of the ten subtests. The groups were
contrasted using ten Newman-Keuls tests,
one for each ITPA subtest. The DS group
is significantly different from each of the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 1

 

Psycholinguistic Development 19

TABLE 1

RELATIONSHIP OF THE AUDITORY CHANNEL TO THE VISUAL CHANNEL
IN Four ETIOLOGICAL CLASSES OF MENTAL RETARDATION

BroL BRAIN ENVIRON CAUSE
Down’s DAMAGE DAMAGE UKNOWN F
BETWEEN
CATEGORIES MA* Signif MA Signif MA Signif MA Signif Groups
Reception
Auditory ...... 3~ 6 4-7 5~ 6 4-7 0.01
Visual ........ 4-19 0-005 5- 5 0Ge 5~10 No s. 7 (0-008 No
Association
Auditory ...... 3- 9 4-11 5~ 8 5- 1 0.01i+
Visual ........ a6 SOR gi BO gig Bo gig No No
Expression
Verbal ........ 4-11 5- 4 5~10 5-10 0.05
Manual] ....... 6- 9 0 025 6— 1 0.05 6~ 9 No 6- 1 No No
Memory
Auditory ...... 2-9 4-0 4~10 B= % 0.01
Visual ........ g-3 900 47 No 6.6 No 53 0.005 09s
Closure :
Grammatic . 3-10 4-10 5~10 -— 2 0.01
Visual ........ 4g 900 53 0025 674 No 6 4 09005 og o4

* Mental ages in years and months

+ Homogeneity of vanance violated as tested by Hartley’s F-max When the degrees of freedom are reduced by two-thirds, the analysis of

variance remains significant at 0 01

other three groups for all processes in the
auditory-verbal channel, while differences
among the other three groups are rare.
There are no differences among the groups
for three of the five visual abilities. The
environmental group is significantly different from the other groups in visual
memory, and the DS group differs from
the environmental and the unknown
groups in visual closure. A clear pattern
emerges in the auditory channel. The DS
group is significantly lower than the other
groups on all abilities. No distinct pattern
emerges in the visual channel, and the
Mongoloids do not show as great a weakness as they do in the auditory channel.

DISCUSSION

It is generally accepted that visualmanual skills most likely developed in response to the hunting-toolmaking way of
life prior to skills in the auditory-verbal
channel (see Hewes, 1961, for an excellent
discussion of this point). Skills in the latter
channel necessitate additional anatomical

 

changes both in the brain (e.g., crossmodal transfer of learning) and in the
vocal tract (e.g., development of a specious pharyngeal resonator) while skills in
the former channel do not. According to
Haeckel’s (1866) Theory of Recapitulation, this fact suggests that the anatomical
and cognitive basis for visual-manual
skills develops ontogenetically prior to
structures associated with verbal speech
and audition. If this is true, the results
presented in this paper suggest that the
first psycholinguistic abilities lost in genetically based mental deficiency and in some
congenitally based biological brain damage may have been the last psycholinguistic abilities gained phylogenetically.

In those individuals in whom retardation is known to have been caused genetically (DS), all abilities within the visualmotor field are more highly developed
than are auditory-verbal abilities (Table
1). Genetically based retardation affects
the total verbal-auditory channel, not just
a few aspects. In those individuals in
whom retardation is definitely not genet
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

pte
5 et EN

4=9 Ye f WV A

s wane

20 Burr and Rohr Social Biology
AUDITORY VISUAL
re)
5 § ;
@ SEAR 5 Yo 3 g
2 Bsles! Sle fz Fis] 2
2 /gelss/28/eh/ Fel 2% Pelgel aa FF
Sof{safnRl[ aus oF BO PS/ Faf eel #
TP [TY Sf €o/ Sg] 2 <3 ig B/ x § xg
6-9
os { | | | | | | TAK!
oof | tt tT tt WAL
59 A pb
4

   

KY

1 ERE ie

wo LLL WA

BCE
ty (| __t |
eg a

¥
Ww

’
=~

Fic. 3.—The differences among the four etiologies for each of the ten subtests. The means for all ten
subtests are plotted, with raw scores converted to age scores in years and months. D, Down’s syndrome; B,
biological brain damage; E, environmental; U, unknown.

ically based but rather of a known environmental etiology, retardation affects
both channels equally. Biologically
brain-damaged individuals demonstrate
no consistent pattern. This etiological
group is composed of two subgroups differentiated by the point of interference of
the developmental process. One group

consists of individuals whose development
was disrupted prenatally; the other group
is formed by individuals whose development was disrupted at the time of birth.
The inconsistent pattern within the group
as a whole is therefore compatible with the
hypothesis and is created by the nature of
differences in the prenatal developmental

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 1

process. The inconsistent pattern within
the unknown etiology group may be explained on similar grounds.

The conclusion is clear. Individuals
whose retardation is caused either genetically or by mid-term disruptions in fetal
development first lose those faculties of
language and cognition developed last
phylogenetically. Retardation not caused
by fetal disruption will affect visual-motor
and verbal-auditory channels equally.

Since the ontogenetic development of
the fetus follows in a gross manner the
phylogenetic development of the species,
disruptions of fetal development will most
greatly affect those structures and cognitive processes, and behaviors controlled
by them, which develop last ontogenetically. These are the systems least established in the species, and those without
which the individual can more easily survive. They are less vital to the viability of
the organism. Based on the time element
alone, fewer disruptions are to be expected
in systems developing early in gestation.
Any disruption of fetal development will
affect biological-behavioral systems which
are programmed genetically to develop
last ontogenetically.

It is likely that DS is a developmental
anomaly manifested by slowed or incomplete embryological and postnatal behavioral development (Benda, 1969; Lenneberg, 1967). Based on linguistic data
collected on DS cases by Lenneberg, et al.
(1964), Lenneberg (1967) suggests that
language acquisition among Mongoloids is
not random, but rather is patterned behavior which can be explained in terms of
language arrest at “primitive, but ‘normal’
stages of development” (1967, p. 320).
This arrest happens about puberty, after
which further development does not occur. The psycholinguistic data presented
in this paper support the idea of a genetic
schedule of language development which

Psycholinguistic Development

21

is retarded in cases of DS and which halts
at puberty. Both the linguistic data collected by Lenneberg and the psycholinguistic data presented here demonstrate
that this developmental schedule is grossly
patterned according to the phylogenetic
development of these skills.

Neuroanatomical considerations support this hypothesis. In cases of DS, the
frontal and temporal convolutions are
poorly developed, and the poor development of the middle cerebellar lobes is
functionally related to the reduced frontal
convolutions (Kirman, 1969). These are
the areas most highly developed in H. sapiens, those portions of the brain which
control the unique human functions of
auditory analysis and intersensory association, and those areas which develop in
the final stages of gestation.

CONCLUSIONS

These results suggest that differences in
the development of psycholinguistic skills
in certain groups of severely mentally retarded individuals can be explained by
prenatal disruptions in pregnancy which
lead to general retardation in the postnatal developmental process. This process
closely approximates ontogenetic patterns
of language acquisition and phylogenetic
patterns of cognitive development. Since
an individual’s cognitive language development is stopped about puberty, before
language acquisition has been completed
among some mentally retarded individuals, skills which develop last ontogenetically and _phylogenetically—primarily
skills in the verbal-auditory channel—are
lost. These specific patterns of loss occur
only in mental retardation characterized
by postnatal developmental delay as a result of prenatal disruption and do not
occur in environmentally caused retardation.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

22 Burr and Rohr

The results of this study provide insight
into the evolutionary development of language and cognitive behavior in H. sapiens. It is clear from this research that
retardation characterized by prenatal disruption and developmental delay does not
create random language behavior but patterned behavior which must be understood before effective methods can be developed to teach the retarded individual.
Furthermore, it is often not articulation
(speech) which is affected by retardation,
but language, primarily within the
verbal-auditory channel. The results also
lend credence to Lenneberg’s (1967) hypothesis of a critical period for language
learning. Regardless of the level of lan
Social Biology

guage ability reached, the onset of puberty
signals the decline in the ability to learn
language. This study demonstrates that
specific patterns of language acquisition
are followed in the severely mentally retarded, and these patterns not only approximate, at a delayed rate, patterns of
language acquisition in the normal child,
but also approximate ontogenetic and
phylogenetic cognitive development.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank Dr. Lorna Moore
for her helpful suggestions in the analysis phase
of this research and for her critical comments
on the many drafts of this manuscript.

REFERENCES

BenpaA, C. E. 1969. Down’s syndrome, Mongolism
and its management. Grune and Stratton, New
York.

BiLtovsky, D., and JAcK SHARE. 1965. The ITPA
and Down’s syndrome: An exploratory study.
Amer. J. Ment. Defic. 70:78-82.

BLANCHARD, I. 1964. Speech pattern and etiology
in mental retardation. Amer. J. Ment. Defic.
68:612-617.

HAECKEL, E. 1866 Generelle morphologie der organismen. Allgemeine Entwicklungsgeschichte der
Organismen, Vol. 2. Reimer, Berlin.

HERMELIN, B., and N. O’CoNnNoR. 1961. Shape
perception and reproduction in normal children
and Mongol and non-Mongol imbeciles. J. Ment.
Defic. Res. 5:67-71.

HEWEs, G. 1961. An explicit formulation of the relationship between tool-using, tool-making, and
the emergence of language. Visible Lang. 7:101—
127.

Kirk, S. A., and W. D. Kirk. 1971. Psycholinguistic
learning disabilities: Diagnoses and remediation.
Univ. of Illinois Press, Urbana.

KIRMAN, B. H. 1969. Down’s syndrome. Ment. Retard.: Ann, Rev. 1:57-75.

LENNEBERG, E. H. 1967. Biological foundations of
language. Wiley, New York.

LENNEBERG, E. H., I. A. NICHOLS, and E. F.
ROSENBERGER. 1964. Primitive stages of language
development in Mongolism, p. 119-137. In Disor
ders of communication, Vol. 42. Research Publications, A.R.N.M.D.

LYLE, J. G. 1960. The effect of an institution environment upon the verbal development of imbecile
children: II. Speech and language. J. Ment. Defic.
Res. 4:1-13.

. 1961a. Comparison of the language of nor
mal and imbecile children. J. Ment. Defic. Res.

5:40-51.

. 19616. A comparison of the verbal intelligence of normal and imbecile children. J. Genet.
Psychol. 99:227-234.

McCartny, J. M. 1965. Patterns of psycholinguistic
development of Mongoloid and non-Mongoloid
severely retarded children. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Illinois, Urbana.

MEIN, R. 1961. A study of the oral vocabularies of
severely subnormal patients. J. Ment. Defic. Res.
5:52—59.

MUELLER, M. W., and S. J. WEAVER. 1964.
Psycholinguistic abilities of institutionalized and
non-institutionalized trainable mental retardates.
Amer. J. Ment. Defic. 68:775-783.

SMITH, J. O. 1962. Group language development for
educable mental retardates. Except. Children
29:95-~101.

SPREEN, QO. 1965. Language functions in mental retardation: A review. I. Language development,
types of retardation and intelligence level. Amer.
J. Ment. Defic. 69:482-494.

 

 
