Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1990) Book notes, Social Biology, 37:3-4, 272-274, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1990.9988767

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988767

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Book Notes

THEORETICAL BroLoGy. EPIGENETIC AND
EVOLUTIONARY ORDER FROM ComPLEX SYSTEMS: Edited by B. Goodwin
and P. Saunders. Edinburgh. 228
pages. Hardbound.

In Mexico in 1987, an international
conference was held to develop the
work initiated by C. H. Waddington in
his 4 volumes of Towards a Theoretical
Biology (Edinburgh University Press).
This is a collection of some of the papers
from that meeting. Together, they provide a broad-based yet coherent enquiry
into biological processes, which is based
on the search for organizing principles
and rules in different areas of the subject.

Major topics are: self organization in
complex systems; order and adaptability
in genetic networks; and development
and evolution. The link with physics and
mathematics is highlighted in many of
the papers.

The distinguished team of contributors includes R. Thom, E. C. Zeeman,
F. Varela, S. Kauffman, B. Huberman,
M. Savageau, P.C. W. Davies and G.
Cocho. B. Goodwin is Professor of Biology at the Open University, Milton
Keynes. P. T. Saunders is Professor in
the Department of Mathematics at
King’s College, London.

EvOLUTION AND THE MyTH OF CREATIONISM. A Basic GUIDE TO THE FACTS
IN THE EVOLUTION DEBATE: By Tim
M. Berra. Stanford University Press,

272

 

Stanford, 1990. 198 pages. $29.50,
hardbound; $7.95, paper.

What should an informed person
know about the theory of evolution?
This clear, candid book is written for the
open-minded reader who does not understand the technical issues of evolution, but would like to. It tells how science proceeds, what evolution is, how
science knows that it has occurred and
continues to occur, and what biologists
can point to, in fossils and in the living
world, as hard evidence of evolution.

For its content and foundations, the
book draws on zoology, botany, genetics, embryology, geology, geophysics,
cosmology, astronomy, astrophysics,
history, religion, and _ science
education—in a manner that enables
the general reader without a science
background to understand the argument.

The book concludes with a discussion
of science education, a refutation of particular creationist claims, and a brief history of court challenges posed by creation ‘‘science.”” Some 50 helpful and
interesting illustrations supplement the
text.

The author is Professor of Zoology at
The Ohio State University at Mansfield
and is a vertebrate zoologist.

X-LINKED TRAITS: A CATALOG OF Loc!
IN NONHUMAN Mamma.s: By James
R. Miller. Cambridge University
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Press, Cambridge, 1990. 198 pages.
Hardcover.

Comparative studies among species
play a vital role in many biological disciplines, but they have not been a conspicuous feature of mammalian genetics until quite recently. The reason for this is
clear: There was little to compare with
ease and certainty until spectacular advances in molecular biology revealed
details of the genetic structure of many
mammalian species.

Now the volume of information in
comparative aspects of mammalian
genomes is such that it is difficult to keep
abreast of the flood. The information is
scattered in a variety of journals specializing in basic sciences—molecular biology, developmental biology, cell biology, biochemistry, genetics, and
cytogenetics—and clinical disciplines in
human and veterinary medicine.

There is no single place where information on apparently true homologies
or suspected homologies, often based
on similarity of phenotypes, is brought
together and compared. The present
volume is an attempt to remedy this situation and to treat mammalian X-linked
traits in such a comprehensive manner.

EVOLUTION AND ITS INFLUENCE: Edited
by Alan Graffen. Oxford University
Press, New York, 1989. 130 pages.
$35. Hardbound.

This book originated as a series of
Herbert Spencer Lectures, given at Oxford University, whose purpose was to
survey the influence on various disciplines of the Darwinian view of evolution by natural selection.

Six eminent scholars—A. J. Cain,
W.G. Runciman, R.J. Herrnstein,
Maurice Godelier, Bernard Williams,

Book Notes

 

273

and E.H. Gombrich—discuss a wide
range of topics under this heading: the
historical background to Darwin’s contribution; the concept of evolution in sociology, philosophy, and psychology;
reinforcement theory; kinship and incest prohibition; evolutionary epistemology and ethics; and the analogy that
can be drawn between changes in art
forms and biological evolution.

What emerges is a stimulating reminder of the enormous impact of
Charles Darwin’s great intellectual revolution of the nineteenth century on
subsequent thought.

SPECIATION AND Jrs CONSEQUENCES:
Edited by Daniel Otte and John A.
Endler. Sinauer Associates, Inc.,
Sunderland, MA, 1989. 679 pages.
$50, hardbound; $29.95, paper.

Speciation and its Consequences illustrates how different patterns of speciation and differentiation have occurred
among diverse taxa. Its 25 chapters by
prominent researchers elucidate the extreme diversity of concepts and viewpoints on the subject, considering the
ecological, paleontological, and classification consequences of speciation. Of
interest to students and professionals interested in ecology, evolutionary biology, biogeography, and classification,
this book will encourage discussion and
reassessment of both data and theory
and should ultimately contribute to a
new synthesis in this rapidly evolving
field.

The chapters are divided among six
headings: Concepts of Species, Genetic
Structure of Species Boundaries, Effects of Population Structure on Speciation, Biogeography and Ecology of Speciation: Background and Theory,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

274 Book Notes

Biogeography and Ecology of Speciation: Empirical Studies, and Evolutionary Consequences of Speciation. Part
Seven, Conclusion, is an essay by John
A. Endler on “Conceptual and Other
Problems in Speciation.”

The volume has extensive author and
subject indexes. Editor Daniel Otte is
with the Academy of Natural Sciences
of Philadelphia, and John Endler is with
the University of California, Santa Barbara.

THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES ON SEXUAL
DIFFERENCE; Edited by Deborah L.
Rhode. Yale University Press, New
Haven and London, 1990. 315 pages.
$25, hardbound.

This book offers a unique study of the
nature, origins, and consequences of
sexual difference. Leading scholars in
history, philosophy, law, literary theory, biology, sociology, psychology, political science, and anthropology explore the difference difference makes.
They focus not only on the differences

Social Biology

between men and women, but also on
the differences among women, and on
the ways in which those differences mediate gender relations and social
change.

Several traditions of feminist response to difference are reflected in this
volume. One approach has been to challenge the long-established tendency to
mischaracterize culturally influenced
gender differences as biological or psychological imperatives. A second strand
of feminist work has sought to challenge
not the significance of gender differences but the importance society has attached to them. A third strategy attempts to dislodge difference by
challenging its centrality and its organizing premises, thus recasting the debate
about gender relations. With its wide
range of distinguished scholarship, this
volume deepens our perceptions of both
the gendered nature of theory and theories about gender.

Deborah L. Rhode is professor of
law and director of the Institute for Research on Women and Gender at Stanford University.

 
