Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

Kenneth A. Bennett

To cite this article: Kenneth A. Bennett (1976) Book notes, Social Biology, 23:2, 179-181, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1976.9988228

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988228

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Book Notes

BIOSOCIAL INTERRELATIONS IN POPULATION ADAPTATION: Edited by Elizabeth
S. Watts, Francis E. Johnston, and
Gabriel W. Lasker. Mouton Publishers,
The Hague, and Aldine Publishing Co.,
Chicago, 1975. 412 pp. $24.50 (hardbound).

The twenty-three articles in this volume
center around human adaptation. However, the book is unique in stressing the
integrated effects of biology and culture
upon human populations. There are four
general subject areas in which these original reports appear: (a) Adaptation and
Adaptive Strategies, (6) Genetics, Society,
and Population Dynamics, (c) Nutrition,
Health, and Disease, and (d) Growth and
Development. Because the coverage emphasizes the relationships among genetics,
demography, nutrition and human development, and culture, this volume
would be an attractive textbook for
upper-level college courses in biocultural
anthropology.

ECOLOGICAL GENETICS: Fourth edition:
By E. B. Ford. John Wiley and Sons,
New York, 1975. 442 pp. $32.50 (hardbound).

Ford stresses that the outstanding aim
of ecological genetics is the study of evolution in natural populations, but that both
field and laboratory investigations are
vital for advances in our understanding of
evolutionary biology. Ecological Genetics
is basically an intermediate-level book

 

 

about evolutionary principles, and much
of it centers around aspects of genetic
polymorphism. Those familiar with the
first three editions will find the sections of
mimicry and melanism considerably revised and expanded. Ford’s writing style is
crisp and lucid, as always, and this edition
may be highly recommended to both students and professionals in biology and
botany.

Our FUTURE INHERITANCE: CHOICE OR
CHANCE?: By Alun Jones and Walter F.
Bodmer. Oxford University Press, London, 1974. 141 pp. $13.00 (hardbound);
$4.00 (paper).

Jones and Bodmer have directed this
small book toward those who are interested in recent developments in biology
and genetics. This group includes both
scientists and the general public, and the
latter should have little difficulty in understanding it. Discussed in this book are: the
pros and cons of biomedical advances; artificial insemination by donor and the
treatment of infertility; artificial fertilization; genetic screening and selective abortion; organ transplantation; genetic engineering and cloning; and social concerns
about recent biological advances.

ABORTION IN A CROWDED WORLD. THE
PROBLEM OF ABORTION WITH SPECIAL
REFERENCE TO INDIA: By S. Chandrasekhar. University of Washington
Press, Seattle, 1974. 184 pp. $6.95
(hardbound).

179
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

 

180 Book Notes

After a brief review of world attitudes
on abortion, Chandrasekhar describes in
detail the problems of population growth
in India. He then discusses the various
historical and religious factors that led to
liberalization of abortion in India and presents the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Bill of 1969. Appendices to the book
include a summary on the legal status of
abortion in several selected countries, a
list of diseases that indicate artificial interruption of pregnancy, the questionnaire of
the committee that studied legalization of
abortion in India, several Indian censuses,
Indian press editorials about abortion, and
U.S. Supreme Court decisions in Texas
and Georgia abortion cases.

POPULATION, ECOLOGY, AND SOCIAL
EVOLUTION: Edited by Steven Polgar.
Mouton Publishers, The Hague, and
Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago, 1975.
354 pp. $16.50 (hardbound).

Written by archeologists, social anthropologists, and physical anthropologists,
most of the thirteen papers in this volume
involve the role of population dynamics in
culture change. Oriented around historical
and ecological perspectives, the kinds of
topics include the respective effects of
biology and culture on population dynamics, how the culture historian views the
components of population dynamics, demographic changes during human evolution, and ecosystem analogies in cultural
ecology. Anthropologists, demographers,
and sociologists should find this book particularly interesting.

SEPARATING PARENTS AND ADOLESCENTS. A PERSPECTIVE ON RUNNING
AWAY, SCHIZOPHRENIA, AND WaAy
WARDNESS: By Helm Stierlin. Quadrangle/The New York Times Book
Co., New York, 1974. 204 pp. $8.95
(hardbound).

Social Biology

Stierlin formulates three transactional
modes that reflect the interplay and/or relative dominance of centripetal and centrifugal forces between parents. He discusses how such modes affect parent-child
interactions, and how they either trigger
or associate with a child’s impulse to escape from its family. In this context, separation dynamics in schizophrenia and
waywardness are examined.

THE ANATOMY OF RACISM: CANADIAN
DIMENSIONS: By David R. Hughes and
Evelyn Kallen. Harvest House, Montreal, 1974. 230 pp. $8.50 (hardbound);
$4.50 (paper).

This is a two-fold book, the first half
written by a physical anthropologist
(Hughes) and the latter half by a social
anthropologist (Kallen). Hughes begin
with a general discussion of human diversity and the evolution of human populations and follows with chapters on inheritance, environment and human adaptability, and race and intelligence. After a
chapter on the peopling of the New World.
and Canada, Kallen examines the origin,
development, persistence, and change of
systems of ethnic stratification, as well as
how ethnic integration occurs. The authors integrate social and biological phenomena in a useful and timely fashion to
plead for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Canada.

NEUROSCIENCES RESEARCH SYMPOSIUM
SUMMARIES (Vol. VII): Edited by Francis O. Schmitt, George Adelman, and
Frederic G. Worden. The M.IJ.T. Press,
Cambridge, Mass., 1973. 528 pp.
$15.00 (hardbound).

The seventh annual anthology of the
Neurosciences Research Program Work
Session reports, this volume continues the .
coverage of current research topics in the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

neurosciences. Included are core topics
from neurophysiology, cell biology, neurochemistry, and animal behavior. Each of
four critical summaries of research provides a “state-of-the-art” report and indicates current research directions for
neuroscientists. Newcomers to the field
will derive particular benefit from the extensive bibliographies at the end of each
summary.

AN ATLAS OF MAMMALIAN CHROMOSOMES (Vol. VIII): By T. C. Hsu and
Kurt Benirschke. Springer-Verlag, New
York, 1974, $19.80 (unbound).

Included in this volume are (a) a table of
contents for the first eight volumes and a
list of recent references for volumes one
through seven, (6) fifty-two unpaginated
folios representing volume eight, and (c) a
cumulative index for the entire series. The
karyotypes presented here represent certain species within the orders Marsupialia,
Insectivora, Chiroptera, Edeniata, Lago
Book Notes

181

morpha, Rodentia, Cetacea, Carnivora,
Pinnipedia, Artiodactyla, and Primates.

THE SOCIOLOGY OF HUMAN FERTILITY.
AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY: By
Ronald Freedman. Irvington Publishers, Inc., New York, 1975, 283 pp.
$14.95 (hardbound).

In this cumulative annotated bibliography on human fertility, Freedman classifies and covers a general collection of
papers. These papers represent topics such
as measurement techniques; descriptive
and historical studies; studies relating
stratification variables to fertility or fertility norms; studies of the effects of nonfamilial institutions with specific programs
to affect fertility; social-psychological variables; social and demographic factors relating to fertility; and many other topics.
Nearly all of the articles listed were published after 1961.

KENNETH A. BENNETT
