Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Women's roles and family formation in Venezuela:
New forms of consensual unions?

Emilio A. Parrado & Marta Tienda

To cite this article: Emilio A. Parrado & Marta Tienda (1997) Women's roles and family
formation in Venezuela: New forms of consensual unions?, Social Biology, 44:1-2, 1-24, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1997.9988931

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1997.9988931

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 61

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47

 
Women’s Roles and Family Formation in
Venezuela: New Forms of Consensual Unions?

PSR ORES
lagu tiara ass
srangst enronnspongers
Sanaa

Emilio A. Parrado and Marta Tienda

Population Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104; and
Department of Sociology and Woodrow Wilson School of Public Affairs, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544

ABSTRACT: This paper assesses the effects of changes in women’s education and labor force par“ticipation on nuptiality patterns and their implications for fertility decline in Venezuela. Results
_xshow that together with delays in union formation, changes in women’s education and labor
force participation produced a different, more “modern” type of consensual union, which coexQists with “traditional” consensual unions. “Traditional” consensual unions remain a substitute

oO « ° s e ° s
Cfor formal marriage among women from rural origins with low levels of education and higher
oolevels of work experience. “Modern” consensual unions appear to be an option for well-educated
t-women of urban origins. As in developed countries, these unions assume the form of a trial pe“riod before marriage or an alternative to singlehood. “Modern” consensual unions are more unom ee ita 33 2 : 2 eye

—stable than “traditional” consensual unions and they are associated with lower fertility.

—

= The rapid extension and widespread
Savailability of modem contraception has
“Sbeen recognized as the main factor behind
=the fertility decline in Latin America dur‘Ging the past three decades (Moreno and
Singh, 1992). Changes in nuptiality patotems, on the other hand, appear to have
‘splayed a trivial role in the fertility transi“tion for the region as a whole, despite sigShificant variation across countries (Rosero“=Bixby, 1996). Venezuela is one of the few
SLatin American countries where changes
‘gin nuptiality patterns figured prominently
Gin the process of fertility decline from 6.5
in the 1960’s to 3.4 in the 1990’s. During
the same period the singulate mean age at
marriage for Venezuelan women increased
more than three years, from 18.1 in 1960
to 21.2 in 1980. An assessment of the
changes and correlates of nuptiality patterns and their implications for fertility decline in Venezuela are the main objectives
of this paper.
Due to the extended prevalence of consensual unions in Latin America, a study

of nuptiality trends needs to consider both
changes in timing and prevalence of first
union and in type of union being formed.
A substantial social science literature has
shown that changes in female education
and labor force participation in the process
of modernization translate into new
roles and aspirations for women that often conflict with the traditional roles of
wife and mother, hence increasing the
age at marriage and the proportion of
women remaining single (Mason, 1993).
However, the effects of modernization on
the “choice” between a consensual or a legal union have been less clearly specified.
Because consensual unions in Latin America traditionally have been prevalent
among women from rural backgrounds,
with low levels of education, and higher
rates of labor force experience, we would
expect that improvements in the social status of women could lower the prevalence
of consensual unions. However, if modernization in developing countries 1s accompanied by greater female independence
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

2 Parrado and Tienda

and ideational changes from altruism to
individualism, as is the case in more developed societies (Van de Kaa, 1987), we
might expect an increase in the prevalence of consensual unions among the
most “modern” groups of the society.
These two effects are not incompatible. Improvements in women’s status
could lower the prevalence of consensual
unions among women with low education
and, at the same time, increase the prevalence of consensual unions among highly
educated women. We hypothesize that together with delays in union formation,
changes in women’s status triggered the
emergence of a different, more “modern”
type of consensual union in Venezuela,
which coexists along with “traditional”
consensual unions. “Traditional” consensual unions can be regarded as a substitute to formal marriage among women of
low socioeconomic origins. Partly stemming from their non-binding legal status,
“traditional” consensual unions are more
unstable than formal marriages and could
be harmful for women and children because male responsibilities toward the
family either do not exist or are difficult
to enforce.! “Modern” consensual unions,
on the other hand, assume the form of e1ther a trial period before marriage or an
alternative to singlehood (Rindfuss and
VandenHeuvel, 1990). These unions appear to be an option for well-educated
women of urban origins. These “modern”
consensual unions are associated with

ISeveral reforms to the Civil Code of Venezuela
were introduced in 1982 that modified the juridical status of married women imposing equality of rights and
duties and that eliminated the discrimination between
legitimate and illegitimate children (Esparsa, 1990-91).

 

Social Biology

lower fertility outcomes and are usually
less stable than “traditional” consensual
unions.

The following section locates Venezuela within the broader context of Latin
America and identifies its uniqueness and
importance as a case study. In the absence
of nationally representative demographic
data with retrospective marriage histories
differentiated by type of union, we focus
our empirical analysis on a recent fertility
survey conducted in the capital city of
Caracas and its surrounding metropolitan
area in 1991. A review of studies about
changes in.women’s roles and nuptiality
patterns identifies key correlates of union formation and union type. The empirical analysis addresses several questions.
First, how did the changes in women’s
roles, as measured by educational attainment and labor market experience, affect
the timing of first unions in Venezuela?
Second, how did these factors affect the
“choice” between a consensual or a legal
union? Third, what are the dissolution
and childbearing patterns associated with
both types of unions? The conclusion
considers what the coexistence of “modern” and “traditional” forms of consensual unions portends for fertility decline
in Venezuela.

BACKGROUND

TRENDS IN UNION FORMATION:
VENEZUELA IN THE
LATIN AMERICAN CONTEXT

Several recent studies have tried to assess the changes in patterns of marriage
and household behavior in Latin America
(ECLA, 1988, ECLA, 1993; Palloni et al.,
1994; De Vos et al., 1995; De Vos, 1987),
and their contribution to fertility decline.

 
Vol. 44, No. 1-2

For the region as a whole, Rosero-Bixby
(1996) concluded that changes in marriage
patterns have played a trivial role in the
fertility transition, although he admits exceptions to this regional generalization.
Venezuela is such an exception, along with
the Dominican Republic. In these two
countries changes in marriage patterns appear to have contributed substantially to
wn fertility decline. In other countries, like
© Ecuador and Guatemala, the contribution
3 of nuptiality to fertility decline was mod€ est, but nontrivial. Yet a third group of
o 3 countries, including Colombia and Costa
S Rica witnessed only modest nuptiality con& tributions to fertility decline. Other coun& tries, including Brazil, Peru, and Chile,
© showed oscillations in the effects of marmage on fertility. Finally, in El Salvador,
'S Panama, and Paraguay, marriage patterns
.-actually retarded fertility decline (Rosero.2 Bixby, 1996). Conceivably, the varied as— sociations between nupttality and fertility
5,changes may stem from differences in the
‘Z timing and nature of union type.
Delays in the timing of first marriage
‘= largely depend on the starting age at first
‘>,marriage for the period under considera= tion. Between 1950 and 1980, the singulate
3 mean age at marriage for Latin America ing creased slightly from 21 to 22 years of age
5 (United Nations, 1990). However, both the
4 starting SMAM’s and the changes in the
timing of marriage were considerably variable for the region. The largest changes in
the timing of first union occurred in those
countries with early initiation of first marriage in 1950. Venezuelan women increased their mean age at first marriage by
3 years, Guatemalan women by 2 years,
and Panamanian women by 3 years. Of the
remaining countries in the region, Colombia and Peru experienced an increase in
SMAM of 1 year or more, but the rest of

iversl

[U

Consensual Unions 3

the region did not show any important
changes. This finding provides a hint about
why changes in nuptiality are more closely
linked to fertility decline in Venezuela
compared to other countries.

The historical prevalence of consensual
unions in Latin America complicates the
analysis of marriage patterns and their consequences for family formation (Quilodran, 1985; Trindade Henriques, 1982). In
some countries, mostly in the Caribbean
basin (United Nations, 1990), consensual
unions are more prevalent than legal marriages. Countries characterized by an early
pattern of first marriage generally have the
highest prevalence of consensual unions.
The largest shares of consensual unions for
women aged 15-49 who are currently in
union occur in the Dominican Republic,
followed by Panama, Guatemala, and
Venezuela. In general, the share of consensual unions tends to decline at older ages.
However, Venezuela stands out as the Latin
American country where the prevalence of
consensual unions 1s most stable across the
age spectrum. The share of consensual
unions relative to legal marriages remains
above 30 per cent across all age groups.
This provides a second clue—and puzzle—about the significance of nuptiality
change for fertility decline.

Within the Latin American context,
Venezuela is an interesting case study because it 1s one of the few countries that experienced a substantial delay in the timing
of first marriages, and because changes in
marriage timing appears to be a significant
mechanism behind the fertility decline in
the country (Tienda et al., 1995). That consensual unions are prevalent among all age
groups invites a detailed analysis of the
mechanisms producing consensual vs. legal unions to further clarify how changes
in women’s roles affected the “choice” of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

4 Parrado and Tienda

union type, and how these changes undergird Venezuela’s fertility decline.

THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS

As one of the proximate determinants
of fertility, the timing of marriage is an important source of fertility regulation. Delays
in the timing of first union are relevant not
only because they reduce the amount of
time women are exposed to the risk of
conception, but also because they reflect
an environment conducive to alternative
social roles for women (Coale, 1992). As
the process of modernization unfolds,
changes in the material well-being and in
the value structure of a society motivate
delays in the timing of first marriages,
which in turn, are shaped by women’s
roles before and after marriage.

In a cross-country comparison, McDonald (1985) showed that lower ages at
marriage were associated with rural societies, low levels of education for both
men and women, and low rates of female
labor force participation before or after
marriage. The strongest and most consistent predictor of later ages at marriage are
women’s education and employment in
nonagricultural activities. Therefore, he
suggested that the completion of primary
education shifts the age at marriage above
age 16, and that further shifts can occur
only if a substantial proportion of women
obtain secondary schooling. Delays in
marriage above age 20 are related to the
employment patterns of single women,
which are largely determined by educational levels and economic opportunities.
More importantly, changes in female education and labor force activities in modern occupations signal the emergence of
new roles for single women.

Coale (1992) also emphasizes the centrality of women’s status for the under
Social Biology

standing of demographic behavior. Regions where first unions were delayed
also led the introduction of marital fertility control, implying that early and late
marriage patterns reflect different customs governing family formation. Societies with later patterns of union formation promote greater independence of
young women and greater female autonomy, suggesting an environment favorable to deliberate fertility control. Societies with early patterns of union
formation generally inhibit female autonomy and are less conducive to the introduction of fertility control.

In a review of the literature on
women’s autonomy and its effect on demographic behavior, K. O. Mason (1993)
argues forcefully that greater female autonomy and independence lead to a postponement of union formation. A study by
Safilios-Rothschild (reported in Mason,

1993) shows that the singulate mean age

at marriage for women is higher in countries where women have higher access to
resources, as measured by their economic
activity, their schooling, or their mortality
risks. For Latin America, studies also
have shown significant differentials in the
timing of first union for rural vs. urban
residents, for women with different levels
of education, and for those with different
work experiences (Durch, 1980; ECLA,
1988; Ecla, 1993; Florez et al., 1990; Freitez and Romero, 1991). There is a strong
consensus that rising educational levels
and participation in modern labor force
activities that compete with traditional
gender roles should lead to a postponement of marriage.

In Latin America, patterns of social organization and female autonomy not only
affect the timing of first union, but also
the “choice” between a consensual or a
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 44, No. 1~2

legal union. W. J. Goode (1960, 1961) proposed an explanation of cohabitation in
Caribbean societies that links the prevalence of consensual unions to the process
of modernization and the destruction of local cultures through colonization and slavery. He claims that high illegitimacy rates
resulted from the erosion of community
social integration, especially from the impossibility of the community to punish
“deviants” and to enforce the norm of Iegitimacy. Ignoring the teleological elements of his argument that specifies phases
of assimilation into a common cultural pattern, Goode’s account implies that consensual unions would be more prevalent
among women from rural compared to urban backgrounds. As such, social background characteristics of women should be
important predictors of their “choice” between consensual or legal unions.

A study by Charbit (reported in ECLA,
1993) shows that cultural and ethnic
background also are important for understanding the prevalence of consensual
unions in Latin American societies. However, Charbit maintains that the legacy
from slavery does not adequately explain
the prevalence of consensual unions in
contemporary Latin America. Rather, he
argues, the main factor behind informal
unions in Latin America is poverty. Consensual unions among low socioeconomic
status women are not a “choice,” but a
constraint imposed on them by their low
levels of education and independence, and
their low bargaining power relative to
men. Accordingly, women’s social status,
as measured by family background and
educational attainment, should be the key
factor driving the “choice” between a Iegal or consensual union.

Although there have been few studies
of Venezuelan nuptiality patterns, a re
Consensual Unions 5

cent study by Freitez and Romero (1991)
documented the wide differences in social background between women in consensual and legal unions. Consensual
unions are consistently more prevalent
among young women of rural origin, and
with low levels of education. Consensual
unions also tend to be more prevalent
among women with higher years of work
experience (Goldman, 1981). In the Latin
American context, labor force participation is not necessarily a sign of greater
female autonomy. Instead, it could well
be the result of harsh economic conditions that force women out of the school
system at young ages and into the labor
market to help their families or parents.
In fact, women of low socioeconomic origins exhibit high levels of labor force |
participation, particularly in low skill or
domestic occupations.

Consensual unions in Latin America,
particularly in the Caribbean and Central
America, are a historical characteristic of
the region. In that sense, these informal
unions differ from the cohabitation found
in more developed societies. Since the
1960’s, Western countries have experienced significant changes in union formation patterns. The general tendency has
been a movement toward later age at
marriage and higher proportions remaining single (Axinn and Thorton, 1992;
Westoff, 1986; Espenshade, 1985). At the
same time, cohabitation has become
more frequent among the young. This —
type of cohabitation has been associated
with changing societal values during the
“second demographic transition,’ from
altruistic values concerned with family
and offspring, to individualistic values
that stress the rights and self-fulfillment
of individuals (Van de Kaa, 1987). One
of the most pervasive explanations for the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

6 Parrado and Tienda

growth of informal unions in developed
countries is the growing independence of
women precipitated by increases in education, labor force participation, and female wages relative to men (Westoff,
1986). Different interpretations have been
given to the rise in cohabitation in developed countries: deviant behavior, trial
marriages, alternatives to marriage, or alternatives to being single (Rindfuss and
VandenHeuvel, 1990; Manting, 1994;
Thorton et al., 1995). Significantly, the rise
of informal unions in developed societies is associated with lower fertility and
higher instability than legal marriages and
is especially prevalent among students.

Compared to other developing regions,
and due to the character of the colonization
and later re-population, Latin America exhibits patterns of demographic behavior
that are both specific to the region and that
can be considered as “culturally Western”
(Goode, 1993). Thus, an increase in consensual unions in Venezuela, particularly at
later ages, might signal the emergence of a
different type of consensual union—one
more similar to the type of consensual
union characteristic of developed societies.
We maintain that in contemporary
Venezuela it is possible to distinguish between two types of cohabiting unions. One
is the “traditional” type of consensual
union which is associated with rural origins, low levels of education, low female
independence, low male responsibilities,
high fertility, and high instability. The second
type is a more “modern” variant of consensual unions prevalent among more educated
women from urban origins. This “modern”
type of consensual union is an alternative to
marriage among couples who enter into a
consensual union as a trial phase before legal
marriage, or those who choose cohabitation
as an altemative to being single.

 

Social Biology

The prior discussion identified three
conditions that signal the emergence of a
new type of consensual union in contemporary Venezuela. First, higher shares of educated women will form consensual unions
who in previous times presumably would
have chosen a legal marriage. Second, because the new type of consensual union often involves lower interpersonal commitment, informal unions will be more
unstable than either legal marriages or “traditional” consensual unions. Finally, because of their temporary character and instability, “moder” consensual unions will
be associated with lower fertility relative to
either “traditional” consensual unions or legal marriages. We examine these conditions
below.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

CHANGES IN THE TIMING AND TYPE OF
FIRST UNION: CARACAS, VENEZUELA

Apart from the World Fertility Survey
in 1977, there are no surveys that record
nuptiality by union type at the national
level.* Therefore, our analysis is based on
the 1991 Longitudinal Fertility Survey
conducted in Caracas and its surrounding
semi-urban areas. The survey was designed around two cohorts of women
who represent nuptiality behavior before
and after the significant fertility decline
that occurred between 1960 and 1990.
The mature cohort, born between 193746, corresponds to women aged 45 to 54
in 1991 and represents the experience of

2Unfortunately, the 1993 Social Survey, that also
collected data on first marriage, did not distinguish between consensual unions and legal marriages.

 
Vol. 44, No. 1-2

women who formed unions and bore children in the late 1950’s and 1960’s, when
Venezuelan fertility was at peak levels.
The young cohort, born between 196266, corresponds to women between ages
25 and 29 at the time of the survey and
represents the nuptiality and fertility behavior of women after the demographic
transition was well under way (Dyson
and Murphy, 1985).

NY

> Identical questionnaires were adminisN .
tered to the two cohorts of women strati
fied by income levels in the capital city

Sof Caracas and surrounding semi-urban

Aareas settled by recent rural migration to

the metropolis. The area under study cor
Gresponds to approximately one-quarter of

othe Venezuelan population in 1990. The

surveys collected retrospective informagtion on fertility behavior, nuptiality, edutation, residential mobility, and labor

-umarket participation, together with some

family background characteristics, such

Sas parents’ education and rural or urban

“rorigin (see Freitez, et al., 1992). An im
Sportant shortcoming in the data for the

‘analysis of union formation is that, as

Sin many other fertility surveys, women

obut not their partners were interviewed.

2Therefore, the influences of the husbands’ characteristics on the decision to

Sform a union are not considered.

& Even though the surveys collected
nuptiality histories, the information about
legalization of consensual unions is puzzling. According to the data, only 2 per
cent of consensual unions were later legalized—a very low proportion in the
Latin American context. Camisa (1978)
reports that around 30 per cent of legal
unions in Panama in 1967 were preceded
by consensual unions, compared to 15
per cent in Guatemala in 1957, A. Pebley
and N. Goldman (1986) report that in sur
Consensual Unions q

veys conducted between 1969 and 1970,
22 per cent of consensual unions were legalized within 10 years of union formation in Mexico, 19 per cent in Colombia,
18 per cent in Costa Rica, and 35 per cent
in Peru. Another study of Mexico using
data for 1976-77 showed that 37 per cent
of consensual unions were legalized after
10 years of cohabitation.

We could not find a study of union legalization in Venezuela to compare our
results. The low proportion of legalization in our sample could well be the result of response errors. It is highly conceivable that unions begun as consensual
unions and Jater legalized were reported
as legal unions at time of the survey. But
it is also possible that the rate of legalization of consensual unions in Venezuela is
lower than in other Latin American coun-.
tries. Generally in Latin America the
prevalence of consensual unions tends to
decrease for older women, owing in part
to legalization of consensual unions.
However, the percentage of consensual
unions in Venezuela is stable across all
ages (United Nations, 1990), which could

- signal a lower propensity to legalize con
sensual unions. For our purposes, and because the process of legalization of consensual unions is not one of our main
objectives, we treated all unions as consensual that were later legalized as legal
unions. This decision had no discernible
effects on our results.

The 1991 Longitudinal Fertility Survey
dates many life events by age, providing
life-histories for several major life domains.
The sample includes a total of 1,611
women, of which 684 belong to the mature
cohort. Table 1 presents the descriptive characteristics of the women in each cohort by
age 25. The family-background characteristics are more or less similar for both

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

8 Parrado and Tienda

TABLE 1

SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS AT AGE 25 BY COHORT

CHARACTERISTICS Mean
Family Background
Mother’s education
Denne nes anes neee KE 0.58
Pirmary? «..-..ossessssescsessssssnseeeeccesonssnsceseseceestene 0.37
SOCOMAALY? .......sessecseeessessssseneeesoneennenannnenteees 0.04
Higher ....0......cccceseseeceesseceteccaeeessetees 0.01
Number of siblings. ccccccssscssssesvsvensesanese 8.00
Mother’s age at first union ..............005 17.30
Mother's rural OF git... seesseeeeeesseee 0.49
Individual Characteristics
Wears Of Cd tc ation se cccccscccrsisscninassamaceascaney 4.83
Years of work experience...........-...00 3.09
In skilled OcCUPAtiONS?......eceeescseeeee 0.49
In unskilled occupations’ ...............6 2.60
Ever worked? nadeee scene nasvenaaswacrocsccnvearasonassconsccsson 0.49
In skilled Occupations... 0.10
In unskilled occupations ..............00 0.41
Ever use contraceptive methods”.......... 0.16
Always urban residence™......esscssssssssse: 0.34
Premarital child (at first union)........... 0.03
| fee ee ee ee

“Difference between cohorts statistically significant at p<0.05.

cohorts. Only mother’s educational level
differs across the two cohorts because a
larger share of the younger cohort had
mothers with completed primary or secondary education. Otherwise, the average
woman in both cohorts had 8 siblings and a
mother who formed a first union just over
age 17. Furthermore, almost half of the respondents’ mothers had rural origins. The
similar family background characteristics
indicate that Venezuela’s major demographic and social changes occurred between the two cohorts under study.

In fact, the individual characteristics of
the mature and young cohorts reveal several

 

Social Biology

Mature CoHort YounG COHORT
(1937-46) (1962-66)
s.d. Mean s.d
0.49 0.36 0.48
0.48 0.51 0.50
0.19 0.10 0.30
0.09 0.02 0.13
3.87 7.50 3.37
3,02 17.61 3.13
0.50 0.46 0.50
4.06 7.95 3.88
3.93 3.27 3.51
1.76 1.13 2.36
3.79 2.14 3.24
0.50 0.62 0.48
0.30 0.25 0.43
0.49 0.42 0.49
0.37 0.52 0.50
0.48 0.42 0.49
0.16 0.04 0.19
684 927

significant differences. The mature cohort
averaged approximately 5 years of formal
schooling compared to 8 years for the
young cohort, a statistically significant difference. Another significant difference is
the percentage of women who ever worked
by age 25: 49 per cent for the mature cohort
compared to 62 per cent for the younger cohort. However, there are no significant differences in the average number of years of
work experience acquired between the
two cohorts, which hovers around 3. The
apparent contradiction between the higher
proportion that ever worked among the
younger cohort and the absence of sig 

 

Vol. 44, No. 1-2

nificant differences in the average number
of years of work experience between the
cohorts is explained by the fact that the
younger cohort tends to participate in
the labor market at a higher rate, but at
later ages. The average age at first job for
young women who ever worked was 19
compared to 17.5 for mature women. Furthermore, there was an intercohort change
iin the occupational distribution of the fesmale workers. Specifically, women’s representation in skilled occupations, t.e., pro‘fessional and service jobs that require at
Yleast secondary education, rose signifiAcantly from 10 per cent among the older
cohort to 25 per cent among the younger
Ccohort. However, women’s representation
coin unskilled occupations, i.e., manual
sand household activities, remained stable
"gacross cohorts, around 40 per cent.
2 Furthermore, the use of modern contra.2ceptive methods significantly increased
between cohorts. Only 16 per cent of the
Smature cohort reported ever using efficient
‘Zcontraceptives while over half of the
Syoung cohort did so. Over 40 per cent of
Ethe young cohort reported continuous urban residence compared to about one-third
of mature women. Although similar proportions of mature and young women reSported a premarital birth at the time of first
Funion, we believe this figure is an underesAtimate of the prevalence of premarital
births because our measure includes only
those births that occurred in the year before marriage.

On balance, these comparisons reinforce our claim that the two cohorts were
exposed to quite different social influences. The impact of these influences is
clearly evident in the distinct patterns of
union formation reported in Figure 1. The
median age at first union (either consensual or legal) in Caracas increased more

Consensual Unions 9

that 1 year between cohorts, from less
than 18 for the mature cohort to 19 for
the younger cohort—a statistically significant difference (Tienda et al., 1995). The
curve depicted by the cumulative proportion of women entering a first union also
shows a tendency toward a lower prevalence of first union among the younger
cohort. By age 29, 94 per cent of the mature cohort had already entered a first
union, compared to 83 per cent for the
younger cohort. Even though censoring
of the young cohort conceals their marriage experience after age 30, the curve
suggests an increase in the proportion of
women remaining single. Results from
fitting the Coale and McNeil (1972) nuptiality model reveal that the predicted
proportion remaining single by age 45 for
the young cohort was 10 per cent, relative
to 3 per cent for the mature cohort
(Tienda et al., 1995).

Age patterns of first union by legal status reveal additional differences. Delays in
union formation between cohorts are evident for legal marriages, but not for consensual unions. By age 29, only 35 per cent of
the young cohort was ever legally married
compared to 50 per cent among mature
women. On the other hand, ‘the rate of entering consensual unions does not differ between cohorts, at least during the early
ages, when the curves almost perfectly
overlap. Up to age 20, the cumulative
proportion of women entering a consensual union is virtually identical for both
cohorts—around 35 per cent. After age
20, the prevalence of consensual unions is
higher for the younger relative to the mature cohort. The curves for both cohorts
cross, and by age 29, 47 per cent of women
in the younger cohort had entered a
consensual union, compared to 43 per cent
of mature women.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

10 Parrado and Tienda .

 

 

Social Biology

—¢@— Married - Mature
—— Cohabitation - Mature
—’&— Union - Mature

—>— Married - Young
—*— Cohabitation - Young
—®— Union - Young

Fic. 1.—-Cumulative proportion of women in first union by union type and cohort.

As an indicator of the prevalence of
each type of union within the same cohort,
we also computed the ratio of the proportion married relative to the proportion in
consensual unions (not reported). For the
mature cohort the ratio shows that under
age 20, the prevalence of consensual
unions is higher relative to legal unions;
by age 20 the share of women legally married and in consensual unions are the
same, and after age 20, the proportion of
legal unions exceeds the proportion of
consensual unions. For the younger cohort, the prevalence of consensual unions
is always higher relative to legal unions,
and there is no sign of convergence. More
over, it appears that after age 20, the ratio
of legal to consensual unions is more or
less steady—around 70 legal marriages per
100 consensual unions.

In short, the ratio of legal to consensual
unions reveals that for the mature cohort,
entering into a first union after age 20 implied that unions were most likely to be legal, which is not true for the younger cohort. Of the 23 per cent of mature women
who entered a first union between age 20
to 29, 34 per cent entered a consensual
union and 66 per cent entered a legal marriage. Among younger women, of the 22
per cent who formed a union during their
twenties, 52 per cent entered a consensual
Vol. 44, No. 1-2

union and 48 per cent entered a legal
marriage.

Our description of first union formation
has identified the major processes that will
be considered in the analysis of changes in
first unions by Venezuelan women. First,
we will identify the mechanisms behind
the overall delay in first union formation,
whether legal or consensual. Second, be
_, cause the formation of legal and consenS sual unions appear to represent two distinct; live processes, we will identify the factors
‘that influence the “choice” between one
type of union or the other. Third, we will
A try to explain the rise of consensual unions
for the younger cohort, particularly after
& age 20.
co To address these questions, we imple= ment a statistical analysis that allows us to
‘gidentify the mechanisms influencing the
%iming and probability of first union for.2 mation, on the one hand, and the mechanisms that undergird the “choice” between
a consensual or a legal first union, on the
Z other. Discrete-time logit methods for the
2 study of event histories are used to predict
= the risk of entering into a first union (Allison, 1982; Yamaguchi, 1991). However,
“we are also interested in understanding
4 what factors influence the type of union
& formed. Because consensual and legal
F unions are mutually exclusive, the risks of
Aentering one or the other compete. Together with discrete-time models to estimate the risk of first union formation, we
specify a competing-risk model that estimates the type-specific risks of entering a
legal or a consensual first union (Allison,
1984; Hachen, 1988; Liefbroer, 1991;

ey

y of Mich

Manting, 1994; Greene and Rao, 1995).
Competing-risk models generally require the estimation of two separate discrete-time logit models predicting the occurrence of a particular type of event,

 

Consensual Unions 11

treating the occurrence of the other event
as censored. An alternative is to estimate
a multinomial discrete-time logit model
with different outcomes. The two methods
yielded similar results. The multinomial
competing-risks approach allowed us to
estimate simultaneously the risks of entering either into a legal or consensual union
relative to the risk of remaining single and
to compare the risks of forming different
types of union (Steel et al., 1996).

WOMEN’S ROLES AND UNION FORMA- —
TION IN CARACAS, VENEZUELA

The empirical analysis concentrates
first on the process of union formation in
general, and subsequently on the “choice”
between a consensual or legal union. We
propose a model of union formation and
“choice” between consensual or legal
unions that includes indicators of modernization and female social roles, incorporating both family background and individual characteristics. Table 2 shows the
variables included in the analysis and
their predicted influence on the risk of
union formation in general, and on marriage versus cohabitation, in particular.
Because the “choice” between marriage
or consensual union may be differently
related to the independent variables, the
second column indicates whether the direction of the effect is expected to be the
same or not.

Being part of the young cohort measures secular changes between generations exposed to different influences,
life experiences, and opportunities (Ryder, 1965). Following the changes in
union formation and cohort differences
described above, for the younger cohort
we expect a lower risk of entering a marriage, but a higher risk of forming a consensual union. The previous theoretical

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

12 Parrado and Tienda Social Biology

TABLE 2

PREDICTED EFFECTS OF THE INDEPENDENT VARIABLES ON THE RISKS OF
First UNION FORMATION AND TYPE OF UNION

COMPETING RISKS

VARIABLES Type of Effect Union Marriage Consensual
Younger CONOST .......ceeesccscsssscensseeeeseeees Different - - +
Family background
Mother’s education ...........ccsceceeeeeees Different - + =
Mother’s age at marriage .............000 Different ~ + Mother’s fertility... cssseeeeoeees Same + +
Mother’s rural OTigin...........ceeceeeeeeee Different + Individual characteristics
Years of education (t.V.)7 oes eeeee Different - + —
Currently in school (t.V.)......ccseeeseees Different
In SCCONATY.......cecesssessecsscereeeeteees _ - In higher... eescsseeeecesseeeeeeseesees - = +
Work experience (t.v.)
In skilled OCCUP. .......ceescesseenenes Indeterminate ? ? 7
In unskilled GCC. ssasccccisscsscnnaxens Different + oe +
Currently working (1.V.) oo... eeceseeee Same = - =
In skilled Occup. .........cccsseeseeeseees Same - - _~
In unskilled OCCuUp. ........csceseceeseeee Same - — —
Always urban residence..........sescsee- Different _ + =
Premarital birth (t.v.) .......ccccecceeeeeees Same + + +
Interaction term
Young cohort by education............... Different = = +

“(t.v.) = Time-varying variable.

discussion predicts that mother’s rural origin and low levels of education will increase the risk of union formation, and that
the union will be informal. Likewise, these
circumstances will decrease the likelihood
of forming a legal union.? Mother’s fertil
3We do not know whether the mother’s union was
formal or consensual. Because entrance into a particular type of union is a highly structured process, these
family background characteristics can also be considered as proxies for the legal status of mothers’ union.

ity should exert a positive effect on all the
dependent variables because larger families may precipitate daughter’s early entry
into union as a way of gaining autonomy,
or because early entry into union constitutes a household mechanism to relieve
population pressure within the family
(Parish and Willis, 1993).

Several personal characteristics that
vary over time are measured up to the year
before entering a union, including all age
periods prior to first union and after age 11.
The schooling measures include both years
of education completed and enrollment staVol. 44, No. 1-2

tus, which exert different effects on nuptiality. Years of education will decrease the
risk of entering a union and forming a consensual union because early ages at union
formation and high prevalence of cohabitation is expected among women with
low educational levels. On the other hand,
higher levels of education will increase
the risk of forming a legal union. School
, enrollment, especially secondary school
= enrollment, should lower the risk of
‘union formation.
Work experience and current employ© ment status do not generate clear predicA tions based on theory and the Latin American
sc experience. Most studies in other developing
S regions show that higher female labor force
cs participation delays marriage, but the effect
= depends on the type of work performed. If
rseconomic independence is a constraint on
Sounion formation, greater work experience
5 may imply better economic conditions which
= accelerate union formation. Also, in Latin
S American societies, work experience tends to
£ be higher among women with low socioecoD nomic backgrounds, particularly in activities
"s that do not conflict with domestic roles.
To capture the possibly different effect
© of various kinds of occupations, we dis2 tinguish between work experience in
& skilled and unskilled occupations. The dig rection of the effect on union formation,
A marriage, and cohabitation of years of
work experience in skilled occupations
is indeterminate. Work experience in
skilled occupations can either conflict
with traditional familial roles and thus
delay union formation, or it can facilitate
entering a union by eliminating economic
constraints if women continue working
after entering a union. Based on the Latin
American experience of higher prevalence of consensual unions among
women with greater work experiences,

cembe

y [U

 

Consensual Unions 13

we predict that experience in unskilled
occupations will increase the risk of
union entry at any age, and a consensual
union in particular. Current work status,
either in skilled or unskilled occupations,
is associated more clearly with the presence of an immediate role conflict between work and family and hence could
lower the risk of being in union, whether
legal or consensual.

Prior studies indicate that relative to
rural dwellers, urban residents delay union formation and that consensual unions
will be less common. A pre-marital birth
should increase the risks of entering any
kind of union, legal or consensual. To the
extent that a premarital birth is the expression of union stability and commitment, it
could precipitate a decision that couples
would have taken anyhow.

An interaction term between young cohort membership and years of education
permits a test for the presence of the two
different types of consensual unions—the
“traditional” and the “modern’”—as described above.* The interaction term is expected to have a negative effect on the
likelihood of union formation and marriage because the risk of union formation
among the younger cohort will decrease
with higher educational levels. Furthermore,
if consensual unions among young, more
educated women represent a “modern”
union variant, the interaction effect should

4Due to the handful of women in the older cohort
with secondary schooling or beyond, we were unable to
treat education as a categorical variable. Specifically,
the competing-risks multinomial logit model could not
be estimated since no mature women with more than
secondary education ever entered a consensual union.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

14

increase the risk of forming a consensual
union because the effect of years of education on the likelihood of entering a consensual union should be different across
cohorts. A positive interaction effect would
signal that as years of education increase
women in the younger cohort are more
likely to form consensual unions than their
mature counterparts.

RESULTS

Table 3 presents the estimates from the
discrete-time logit model predicting the
risk of union formation and the competingrisks multinomial logit model predicting
the specific nsks of forming a legal or a
consensual union.

As expected, the main determinants of
delayed union formation are birth cohort,
mother’s educational background, and
school enrollment status. In particular,
being enrolled in school, either secondary or higher education, significantly
reduces the risk of entering a union at
every age. Controlling for other variables,
women who were enrolled in school were
half as likely (exp [—0.631] = 0.53, exp
[—0.559] = 0.57) to have entered a union
at any age than women who were not
attending school. The second largest
negative effect on the risk of union
formation corresponds to respondents’
mothers’ educational background. The
point estimates indicate that at every age,
women whose mothers completed at
least primary education were 0.84 (exp
[—0.168]) times as likely than women
whose mothers had no formal schooling
to form a union at every age. Daughters
whose mothers completed secondary
school were 0.68 (exp [—0.393]) times as
likely to enter a union at each age relative

Parrado and Tienda

 

Social Biology

to women whose mothers had no formal
education.® Finally, women in the younger
cohort were 0.74 (exp [—0.306]) times as
likely to enter a union relative to women
in the older cohort.

Several circumstances increase the
risk of entering a union at every age, including rural origins, number of siblings,
and premarital births. The strongest effect corresponds to non-marital childbearing. Women who bore a child out of
wedlock were 2.5 (exp. [0.918]) times as
likely to enter a union at every age compared to otherwise similar women who
were childless. The odds of first union
formation for women whose mother had a
rural background were 1.2 (exp. [0.168])
times those of women whose mothers had
an urban origin. Finally, the larger the
sibship size, the higher the risk of union
formation at every age, reflecting the predisposition toward marriage arising either
from socialization in a large family or the
household strategy of early marriage to
reduce population pressure within the
family.

The empirical results predicting the risk
of first union formation among VenezueJan women largely confirms expectations
based on the theoretical arguments, but
also highlights relationships that deserve a
closer scrutiny. On the one hand, the timing of first untons is strongly influenced by

>The effect of respondent’s education on the probability of first union is captured by the coefficients for mother’s education. A model including only personal
characteristics showed the effect of education to be negative and significant. The correlation between family
background and personal characteristics did not significantly affect the estimation of the multinomial discretetime models predicting the “choice” of union type.
However, to avoid collinearity problems, in testing for
the interaction between cohort and years of education
we include only personal characteristics.

 
Vol. 44, No. 1-2 Consensual Unions 15
TABLE 3
MODELS PREDICTING THE RISKS OF FIRST UNION FORMATION, MARRIAGE, AND COHABITATION
Locrr MODEL MULTINOMIAL LocIT
UNION FORMATION CoMPETING Risk MODELS/Vs. SINGLE
Marriage Cohabitation
VARIABLES Coef, S.e. Coef. 5.€. Coef. s.e

Comstant........ccccccsscsenscssscesssesseenees — 12.8654 (0.623) —13.8387 (0.854) —-13.498¢ (0.898)

ALE ..cscccssserccsecsecrceststscrsesteeeeetensees 1.1104 (0.064) 1.0667 (0.086) 1.1697 = (0.093)

Ae Squared... .ecccssccssceseseteeees —0.026° (0.002)  —0.0257 (0.002) —0.0287 (0.003)
‘Cohort .
S "YOUNG ssssacversseensisctiorecnesesrbiteneene —0.3064 (0.073) —0.799¢ (0.096) 0.2814 (0.108)
a
Family background
5 Mother’s education (vs. none)
DB —PLIMALY ....cesscsseeccsseeecsseeeeneees ~0.168¢ (0.080) 0.087 (0.112) 0.441% (0.111)

Secondary OF MOTE .........060 —0,3934 (0.146)  —0.075 (0.178) —0.969% (0.278)

< Mother’s age at union............... —0.008 (0.012) 0.004 (0.015)  —0.022 (0.018)
S. Mother’s rural origin sess 0.168% (0.079) 0.109 (0.111) 0.389% (0.111)
~ Number of siblings..................5 0.0262 (0.010) 0.0352 (0.014) 0.015 (0.015)
= Women’s characteristics
x
Of Years of education... 0.007 (0.013) 0.0667 (0.019)  —0.0522 (0.018)
aos
.2 Currently in school
= (vs. not in school)
5 In SCCONGALY css. cccscgssseenerseorne —0.6314 (0.121) —0O.5119 (0.147)  —0.8487 (0.210)
> In higher.....cccccessceccecesveerees —0.5592 (0.206)  —0.560? (0.224) 1.3674 (0.599)
Z Work characteristics
5 Years of work experience
> In skilled OCCUP. ........1eceeees 0.058 (0.041) 0.029 (0.047) 0.089 (0.074)
Be In unskilled occup. ...........004 0.039 (0.024) 0.026 (0.032) 0.0637 = (0.032)
Oo .
~gy Currently working
o In skilled occup. ...........c00e ~—-0.250 (0.196) —0.131 (0.224) ~0.524 (0.367)
s In unskilled occup. ..........0064 —0.102 (0.127) —0.102 (0.173) -~0.088 (0.174)
8 Always urban residence........... —0.137 (0.078) 0.167 (0.095) ~-0.5154 (0.115)
A Premarital birth .............. cesses 0.9184 (0.233) 0.603 (0.351) 1.089? (0.287)

Model chi-square ...:.....scscsssssseeres 882.57 1160.17

Of. oe eesscssetsestecesctsesessesneereeteensessees 17
"Coefficient significant at p<0.05.

family background characteristics, especially rural origin and mothers’ educational attainment, as well as by the roles
women occupy before and after entering
a union. However, these roles are not defined solely by women’s individual char
34

acteristics. Role definition derives both
from individual aspirations and opportunities, and from traditional patterns of
behavior transmitted through family
background and socialization experiences.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

16 Parrado and Tienda

Thus, social and economic changes
associated with modernization may not
immediately change behavior patterns because traditional roles and customs may
attenuate their effects. Yet, the individual
characteristics signal possible role conflict
between traditional maternal and spousal
roles on the one hand, and aspirations consistent with greater personal autonomy, on
the other. This is especially apparent for
women who are enrolled in school. The effect of education on first union delay is
very clear among enrolled women. However, female labor force participation does
not exert its predicted effect. This apparent
anomaly reflects the character of the female labor market in less developed societies. Higher work experience often reflects a response to an economic need at
very young ages of a woman’s life cycle
and is associated with low socioeconomic
status. Furthermore, the occupational and
professional opportunities for women in
less developed societies are not sufficient
to create a role conflict between family
formation and market activity.

Table 3 also shows the estimates from
the competing-risks multinomial logit model
predicting the likelihood of entering either
a formal or a consensual union versus remaining single. Consistent with predictions
based on the trends in union formation in
Venezuela (Figure 1), younger women have
a lower risk of forming a legal union, but a
higher risk of forming a consensual union
than mature women. Mothers’ educational
characteristics are strong predictors of their
daughter’s nuptiality behavior: higher levels of mother’s education significantly reduce the risk of forming a consensual
union. Mother’s rural origin also significantly increases the likelihood that
daughters will form a consensual union,
but does not influence the odds of legal

 

Social Biology

union formation, which appears to be
mostly the result of her individual char
- acteristics.

Family size increases the risk of forming a legal marriage, but has no effect on
the risk of forming a consensual union.
The meaning of the different effects depend on the characteristics associated
with a larger family. Being reared in a
larger family often involves stronger social contro! over female members and
these circumstances are conducive to the
enforcement of legal marriages. It is also
possible that the different effects of family size on union type reflect an unobserved association between larger families and stronger religious beliefs. If so,
the religious beliefs behind larger families could drive the choice of a legal instead of a consensual union.

Work experience in unskilled occupations significantly influences the risk of
forming a consensual union. As discussed
before, and consistent with the Latin
American evidence, each year of work
experience in unskilled occupations increases the risk of entering a consensual
union (exp [0.063] = 1.08). Current employment status is unrelated to the decision to enter a consensual or legal union,
but having resided permanently in Caracas lowers the risk of cohabitation. Specifically, women who always resided in
Caracas were 0.59 (exp [-0.515]) times
as likely to enter a consensual union as
migrant women. Finally, a premarital birth
increases the risk of entering a consensual
union, but has no effect on the risk of entering a legal union. This finding reflects
the fact that premarital childbearing is
more prevalent among the lower strata,
where cohabitation is typical.

Respondents educational characteristics show clearly opposing effects on the
 

Vol. 44, No. 1-2

risk of entering marriage and the risk of
entering a consensual union. After controlling for school enrollment, higher levels of education inhibit the formation of
consensual unions. On the other hand,
higher levels of education increase the
risk of entering a legal union at every age.
Being in school has comparable effects
on both union outcomes. Women enrolled
in school were less likely to enter any
=kind of union than their non-enrolled

“tounterparts. In sum, being part of the
a ounger cohort and being enrolled in sec
B ndary school reduce the risk of forming

- legal marriage, but higher levels of edu
o¢ation and urban residence increase that
isk.

ci The positive effect of young cohort

membership on the risk of forming a con
"sensual union deserves closer examina
Aion. A higher risk of forming consensual

"dinions among the young cohort runs

counter to the prediction that the prevaence of consensual unions will fall with

-jmprovements in women’s social status,
ainless there has been some changes in the

‘xomposition of consensual unions in

enezuela. We postulated that the in
“erease in consensual unions above age 20

ould involve members of the younger

Sohort who in the older cohort would

ave chosen a legal marriage.

A Table 4 presents the marital “choices”
of single women between ages 20 to 25
by cohort and educational level. To capture the different nuptiality behavior for
different educational Jevels within cohorts, we distinguished between women
whose educational attainment was onehalf standard deviation above or below
the cohort mean. In the mature and
younger cohort, respectively, this number
included women with less or more than
7 and 10 years of education. Among

Consensual Unions 17

women with lower education, the significant reduction in the proportion entering
a formal marriage is proportionately distributed between choices of remaining single or entering a consensual union.
On the other hand, for women with
higher educational levels, the proportion
remaining single increased from 25 per
cent in the mature cohort to 48 per cent in
the younger cohort. The proportions of
women who married fell from 63 per cent
to 31 per cent across cohorts. Finally,
consistent with our hypothesis, there is a
significant increase in the proportion of
highly educated women ages 20 to 25
who chose a consensual union as their
first type of union between ages 20 to 25.
Concretely, 21 per cent of women with
higher levels of education entered a consensual union, versus 12 per cent among
the mature cohort.

To ascertain whether these results held
up in a multivariate context, we estimated
the previous models of union formation
and choice of union type including only
personal characteristics as predictors and
adding an interaction term between cohort and years of education. Descriptive
tabulations reported in Table 4 imply a
negative influence of the interaction term
on the risks of forming a union and entering marriage and a positive effect on the
risk of entering a consensual union. Table
5, which presents the results from this
estimation, confirms that membership in
the younger cohort and higher educational levels reduces the risk of entering
any kind of union. The competing-risks
model shows that years of education increases the risk of entering a legal union
and that the effect of the interaction term
on the risk of marriage is, as expected,
negative, but only marginally significant
( p=0.099). On the other hand, the effect

 
18 Parrado and Tienda Social Biology

TABLE 4

PROPORTION OF SINGLE WOMEN BETWEEN AGES 20 AND 25 REMAINING SINGLE OR ENTERING
A LEGAL OR CONSENSUAL UNION BY COHORT AND EDUCATIONAL LEVEL

MATLRE COHORT YOUNGER COHORT
EDLCATIONAL LEVEL? EDUCATIONAL LEVEL?
Lower Higher Lower Higher
MARITAL STATUS (<7 years) (>=7 yrs ) (<10 yrs ) (>=10 yrs )

Reitialn SIn@le ss cesmsmssassas coreexenaens 0.282 0.247% 0.371 0.475
Enter marriage ....c.sscssssssssessseseeessessees 0.365" 0.634” 0.239 0.312
Enter cohabitation.......c.ccccsesssssessseseee 0.354 0.118? 0.390 0.213
NN voacessscnceenenceensanecseeseeescescensonseeneensetenee 181 93 205 202

“Educational level ts defined as years of education below or above the cohort specific mean plus one-half standard deviation

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

‘Difference of proportions between cohorts statistically significant at p<0 05

of the interaction term on the risk of entering a consensual union reveals that
even though the main effect of education
reduces the likelihood of entering into
consensual unions, among the younger
cohort the effect is less negative. Thus,
for young women, higher levels of education increase the likelihood of entering a
consensual union relative to their mature
counterparts. These results are consistent
with the proposition that, among the
younger cohort, consensual unions constitute an alternative choice for women
with higher levels of education.

Results presented thus far also have
shown that school enrollment is the main
factor behind the delay in the timing of
first unions for Venezuelan women. Higher
levels of education also delay the entrance
into union and increase the proportions remaining single, particularly among the
younger cohort. Labor force participation
did not affect the timing of union formation. The “choice” between a consensual
or legal first union appears to be a highly
structured decision that depends on family
background and women’s roles before
marriage. Decisions to enter a consensual
or legal union are two distinct, albeit re
lated, processes influenced by women’s
social position as measured by family
background, educational attainment, and
labor force participation. The persistence
of “traditional” forms of consensual
unions across cohorts results from the
modest improvements in the social position of women with low socioeconomic
origins. “Traditional” consensual unions
are still prevalent among women with
rural backgrounds, low educational levels,
and greater amounts of accumulated work
experience in unskilled occupations.
Increased cohabitation among the
younger cohort, particularly above age 20,
seems to be the result of more educated
women also choosing cohabitation as
their first type of unton. On balance, our
results suggest that in addition to “traditional” consensual untons, a “modern”
cohabitation has emerged in contemporary
Caracas. To the extent that consensual
unions involving highly educated women
represent a different type of union, they
should more closely resemble the pattern
of cohabitation common in more developed societies than the pattern of “traditional” consensual unions in Latin America. Thus, they should be associated with

 
 

Vol. 44, No. 1-2

Consensual! Unions 19

TABLE 5

MODELS TESTING THE INTERACTION BETWEEN COHORT AND EDUCATION

Locir MODEL
UNION FORMATION

VARIABLES Coef.
CONSTANE,......cevaiisincsnrearseciivingnnsvenes — 12.5774
AWS vnnsnscarcnranmanccinaenns 1.1174
ARC? ssarcaisnencmussnwniscesescansveonesa —0.0284

vLohort

Sey VOWNE snsnsnsemnnsvanvasnasnsucncenousnesnnne —0.003

N

‘SVomen’s characteristics

= Education

5 Years of education............- —0.019

A Currently in school

© (vs. not in school)

& Im SCCOMAALY .......ssccsecseeeeensees —0.6724

co En higher... eessstseeenes —0.473?

—

<= Work experience

— = Ear skilled OCCU. s.nccrenceascousves 0.065

q, In unskilled occup. .........eeee 0.0482

‘= Currently working

In skilled OCCUD. ..sseesesssessees —0,229

a In unskilled occup..........--+++- —0.072

o Always urban residence ........... —0.306°

"BZ Premarital Birth .cscsscsccseene 0.8687

2

‘Anteraction Term

>. Young by years of

= BOUCHEON sccasccasccnsrasnnsuany gapeasanens 0.0354

Model chi-square .....c.csccccsesseeeees 1068.67
AL, oesceccsssessenscssnscensesceneeesecseesnetens 13

MULTINOMIAL LOGIT
COMPETING RISK MODELS/VS. SINGLE
Marriage Cohabitation
S.e. Coef. 5.e. Coef. $.€.
(0.498) —13.8077 (0.733) —13.083 (0.680)
(0.056) 1.0872 (0.080) 1.1837 (0.078)
(0.002) —0.0257 (0.002) —0.029¢ (0.002)
(0.119)  —0.4794 (0.196) 0.083 (0.143)
(0.014) 0.0787 (0.018)  -0.155% (0.021)
(0.115)  —-0.5344 (0.141) -0.952% (0.195)
(0.196) —0.5897 (0.216) —1.331% (0.520)
(0.037) 0.036 (0.043) 0.081 (0.070)
(0.022) 0.035 (0.030) 0.0752 (0.029)
(0.186)  —0.146 (0.213) 0.569 (0.348)
(0.113)  —0.137 (0.161) 0.048 (0.148)
(0.064) 0.1977 = (0.085) —0.9012 ~—_ (0.101)
(0.187) 0.780% (0.265) 0.9344 (0.232)
(0.017) ~0.039 — (0.024) 0.057° (0.026)
1440.67
26

 

“Coefficient significant at p<0.05.

S
5
°
A

higher dissolution rates and lower levels of
childbearing relative to “traditional” cohabitation or formal marriages. The next section examines this possibility.

DISSOLUTION AND FERTILITY BY
UNION TYPE

A substantial body of research has
shown that consensual unions are more
unstable and have a higher probability of

dissolution than legal unions. Their fertility implications, however, are less uniform across Latin America. Consensual ,
unions have been associated with lower
fertility outcomes in the cities of Bogota,
Buenos Aires, and San Jose de Costa
Rica, but higher fertility levels in Caracas,
Panama, Rio de Janeiro, and Mexico City
(Henriques, 1982). Table 6 presents the
marital-duration specific probabilities of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

20

Parrado and Tienda

Social Biology

TABLE 6

UNION DURATION-SPECIFIC CUMULATIVE PROBABILITIES OF SEPARATION AND FERTILITY RATES BY
CouorT, UNION TYPE, AND EDUCATIONAL LEVEL?
(WOMEN UP TO 29 YEARS OF AGE AND [0 YEARS OF MARRIAGE DURATION)

CUMULATIVE PROBABILITY OF DIVORCE

CUMULATIVE FERTILITY RATES

Mature Cohort Young Cohort Mature Cohort Young Cohort
UNION DURATION Married Cohabit. Married Cohabit. Married Cohabit. Married — Cohabit.
Low educational level

1-2 0.032 0.142 0.050 0.106 0.574 0.573 0.593 0.632
3-4 0.046 0.254 0.097 0.204 1.352 1.203 1.208 1.359
5-6 0.074 0.330 860.119 0.245 2.044 1.912 1.685 1.964
7-8 0.090 0.398 0.155 0.284 2.626 2.500 2.023 2.383
9-10 0.095 0.420 0.170 0.300 = 3..013 3.091 2.287 2.706
Proportion ever

having a child — 0.93 0.85 0.86 0.91
N (t=1) 232 283 200 367 232 283 200 367

High educational level

1-2 0.008 0.043 0.024 0.130 0.544 0.696 0.467 0.555
3-4 0.042 0.087 0.113 0.199 = 1.138 1.650 0.808 0.978
5-6 0.070 0.037 0.176 0.302 1.524 2.126 1.053 1.158
7-8 0.070 0.087 0.220 0.353 =: 1.891 2.745 1.129 1.269
9-10 0.070 0.087 0.278 0.353 2.156 3.031 1.189 1.337
Proportion ever

having a child 0.92 0.97 0.91 0.67
N (t=1) 128 25 125 63 128 25 125 63

“Women up to 29 years of age and 10 years of marriage duration. Educational level is defined as years of education below or above the co
hort specific mean plus one-half standard deviation.

dissolution and fertility rates by cohorts
for legal and consensual unions in Caracas.
To capture the presence of different types of
unions, we also distinguish between women
whose educational attainment falls above or
below the cohort-specific mean by one-half
a standard deviation, i.e., years of education
over and under 7 or 10 years for the mature

‘and young cohort, respectively.

Considering changes in dissolution
rates among women with lower educational levels, Table 6 shows an increase in
the proportion of marriages dissolved
within 10 years in union by cohort. The
cumulative probability of dissolution of
first marriages rose from 9.5 per cent

among the older cohort to 17 per cent
among the younger cohort. However, the
probability of consensual union dissolution fell from 42 per cent for the older cohort to 30 per cent for the younger cohort.
Thus, to the extent that consensual unions
among women with lower educational
levels represent the “traditional” type of
consensual unions, Table 6 shows that
they have become somewhat more stable
among the younger cohort relative to the
mature cohort. Still, among women with
lower levels of education, the dissolution
rates for cohabiting unions are much
higher than the dissolution rates for legal
marriages.

 
Vol. 44, No. 1-2

Dissolution rates among women with
higher educational levels (Table 6) reveal a
pronounced increase in the probability of
dissolution after 10 years in union for both
legal marriages and consensual unions. As
we predicted, the probability of dissolution among legal marriages increased
from 7 per cent among the older cohort to
28 per cent among the younger cohort.

this change is more pronounced than the
Gise in dissolution rates for legal marwiages among women with lower educaional levels. The increased instability of
Segal unions has been postulated as an
Amportant causal mechanism behind the
ise of cohabitation in more developed
Csocieties (Westoff, 1986). A similar ten‘dency toward higher marital instability is
#@egistered in Caracas, particularly among
highly educated women, and could be
ne of the factors affecting the growth of
the new type of consensual unions among
ounger women. |
¢ Among women with higher educa‘Zional levels, the cumulative probability
®f consensual unions increased from 9
‘Her cent to 35 per cent across cohorts.
“the probability of dissolution of consen“sual unions in the younger cohort is
digher among women with higher levels
®f education compared to women with
Jower levels of education. To the extent
Ahat cohabitation among highly educated
women from the younger cohort represents a “modern” type of consensual
union, they show higher instability than
the “traditional” form of cohabitation in
the younger cohort.

The cumulative duration-specific fertility rates among women with lower levels of education show that after 10 years
in union, the fertility rate of consensual
unions is higher than the fertility rate for
legal marriages, particularly among the

Consensual Unions

younger cohort. Table 6 also shows that
after 10 years in union, the decline in fertility rates among women with lower educational levels has been relatively small,
from around 3 children per woman in the
older cohort to 2.5 children per woman in
the younger cohort. The decline in fertility rates has been more pronounced
among women with higher educational
levels. The fertility behavior of mature
women with higher levels of education
was very similar to that of their less educated cohort counterparts, but among the
young cohort, highly educated women
have much lower fertility than their less
educated counterparts. Highly educated
women in the younger cohort averaged
1.2 and 1.3 children per woman after 10
years in legal or informal unions respectively, much lower than the 2.3 and 2.7
children for women with lower levels of
education. Thus, to the extent that highly
educated women in consensual unions
represent the “modern” type of cohabitation, as we predicted, they bear fewer
children than cohabiting women with
lower levels of education.

Another aspect of fertility behavior that
distinguishes cohabitation among women
with higher educational levels from those
in legal or “traditional” consensual unions
is the probability of ever having a child.
Whereas in all the other types of union the
proportion ever having a child is almost
universal—around 90 per cent—one-third
of highly educated cohabiting women in
the younger cohort remained childless after 10 years in union.

Recognition of the presence of a new
type of consensual union among young
women in Caracas has important implications for fertility. This “modern” form of
cohabitation experiences higher dissolution rates and lower probability of having

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

22 Parrado and Tienda

a first child than “traditional” consensual
unions with a negative aggregate effect on
fertility. The emergence of this new type
of union should increase the influence
of changes in nuptiality on Venezuelan
fertility decline. This “modern” union implies that, unlike educated women from
the mature cohort who would have entered a legal union to begin their reproductive career, young, more educated
women initiate unions on a trial basis.
Because these unions assume the form of
a trial phase before marriage or an alternative to singlehood, they are highly unstable and do not translate into immediate
childbearing. These two factors—lower
exposure to the risk of childbearing due
to higher dissolution rates and later timing of first birth within “modern” cohabiting unions—are important proximate
mechanisms through which nouptiality
patterns affect fertility outcomes.

CONCLUSIONS

The analysis of changes in women’s
social status and its effect on the timing
and “choice” of first unions in Venezuela
has produced novel insights about the
mechanisms driving nuptiality change
and the links between marriage and fertility behavior. On the one hand, the extension of years of schooling among women
is the main factor delaying union formation in contemporary Caracas. In particular, school enrollment status seems to be
incompatible with the roles of mother and
wife. Once schooling is completed, higher
levels of education increase the probability of remaining single among younger
women. Paradoxically, years of work experience, specifically in unskilled occupations tends to increase the likelihood of
entering a union. This finding reflects the

 

 

Social Biology

character of female labor force participation in Latin America. There is a polarization between women who work because
of economic necessity early in their life,
and women who do not enter the labor market. This pattern appears to be changing
somewhat among younger cohorts, where
the rate of labor force participation in skilled
occupations has increased. Nevertheless,
changing patterns of female labor force
participation were not important enough to
affect union formation significantly.

On the other hand, by distinguishing
first union formation by union type, we
showed that the considerable delays in the
timing of first union are mostly explained
by changes in legal union formation. The
rate of entering a consensual union remained
the same up to age 20 for the cohort of
women born before and the cohort born after Venezuela’s fertility transition. However,
after age 20 the rate of entry into consensual
unions increased among women in the
younger cohort relative to the older cohort.

The “choice” between a formal or
consensual union appears to be a highly
structured decision that depends not only
on women’s individual characteristics,
but also on her family background, which
in turn reflects her socialization process.
Low levels of education in the family and
rural origins are very strong predictors of
consensual union formation. Educational
attainment, especially beyond secondary
schooling, may reverse that structural relationship because women with higher
educational levels tend to prefer legal
marriages over cohabitation. However,
improvements in the social status of
women from low socioeconomic background have been slow, nuptiality change
has not been very pronounced, and consensual unions remain their prevalent type of
first union.

 
 

Vol. 44, No. 1-2

Improvements in women’s social status,
accompanied by the rapid increase in divorce, appeared to have created a different
type of consensual union among highly
educated women. Added to the “traditional’ cohabitation prevalent among
women with rural origins, low levels of
education, and greater work experience in
unskilled occupations, our results indicate

in that the recent increase in cohabitation after
Sage 20 represents a new “modern” type of
consensual union among women with
‘ghigher levels of formal education. This
3“modern” type of consensual union follows
Amore closely the pattern of cohabitation in
Smore developed societies and assumes the
+ form of either a trial period before marriage
“or an alternative to singlehood. Since they

Michigan] at

‘S ALLISON, PAUL D. 1982. Discrete-time methods for

 

> _ the analysis of event histories, p. 61-98. In S.
‘%  Leinhardt (ed.), Sociological Methodology,
on *

© Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.

z . 1984. Event History Analysis. Sage, BevS .

5 ~ erly Hills, CA.

—AXINN, WILLIAM G., and ARLAND THORTON. 1992.

= The relationship between cohabitation and divorce: Selectivity or causal influence. Demography 29(3):357-374.

CAMISA, ZULMA. 1978. La nupcialidad de las mujeres
solteras. Notas de Poblacion VI(18):9-76.

ECLA. 1988. The decade for women in Latin America
and the Caribbean. ECLA-UN, Santiago de Chile.

. 1993. Cambios en el perfil de la familia: La
experiencia regional. ECLA-UN, Santiago de
Chile.

COALE, ANSELY J. 1992. Age of entry into marriage
and the date of the initiation of voluntary birth
control. Demography 29:(3):333-341.

COALE, ANSLEY J., and D. R. MCNEIL. 1972. The
distribution by age and the frequency of first
marriage in a female cohort. J. Amer. Statist.
Assoc. 67(340):743-749.

DeVos, SUSAN. 1987. Latin American households
in comparative perspective. Pop. Stud. 41:501-—
517.

DEVOS, SUSAN, ALBERTO PALLONI, ELISABETH ARIAS,
and HATALIMALALA RAFALIMANANA. 1995, Demographics and change, stability, and patterns

Downloaded b

 

Consensual Unions 23

involve lower personal commitment, “modem” consensual unions are more unstable
and have lower fertility outcomes than “‘traditional” consensual unions. This “modern”
cohabitation may have contributed to aggregate fertility decline.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by a grant
from the Andrew Mellon Foundation to the
Population Research Center of NORC and
the University of Chicago. The authors would
like to acknowledge John Craig, William L.
Parish, and Kazuo Yamaguchi and an anonymous reviewer for this journal for their helpful comments and suggestions on earlier
drafts.

REFERENCES

in Latin American households. Paper presented
at the 1995 Population Association of America
Annual Meeting, San Francisco.

Durch, JANE S. 1980. Nuptiality patterns in developing countries: Implications for fertility. Reports
on the World Fertility Survey. Population Reference Bureau, Washington.

DYSON, TIM, and MIKE MurpuHy. 1985. The onset
of fertility transition. Pop. Develop. Rev.
11:399-440.

EsPARZA, Jesus. 1990-91. Venezuela: A new approach to family law. J. Fam. Law 29:487-495.
ESPENSHADE, THOMAS J. (1985). Marriage trends
in America: Estimates, implications, and underlying causes. Pop. Develop. Rev. 11(2):

193~245. .

FARGUES, P. 1989. The decline of Arab fertility.
Population 44:147-175.

FLOREZ, CARMEN E., R. ECHEVERRI, and E, BONILLA.
1990. La Transicton Demografica en Colombia.
Ediciones Uniandes, Bogota.

FREITEZ, ANITZA, and DALIA ROMERO. 1991. Estudio
de los patrones de nupcialidad y fecundidad en
Venezuela a partir de Ja Encuesta Nacional de
Fecundidad, 1977. Documento de Trabajo 36,
ITES-UCAB, Caracas,

FREITEZ, ANITZA, DALIA ROMERO, and IRENE
CAcIQUE. 1992, Presentacion de los resultados
de la Encuesta de fecundidad region Capital
1991. Caracas,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

24 Parrado and Tienda

GOLDMAN, NOREEN. 1981. Dissolution of first
unions in Colombia, Panama, and Peru. Demography 18(4):659-679.

Goope, WILLIAM J. 1960. Illegitimacy .in the
Caribbean social structure. Amer. Sociol. Rev.
25(1):21-30.

. 1961. Illegitimacy, anomie, and cultural

penetration. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 26(6):910-925.

. 1993. World changes in divorce patterns.
Yale Univ. Press, New Haven and London.

GREENE, MARGARET, and VIJAYENDRA Rao. 1995.
The marriage squeeze and the rise of informal
marriage in Brazil. Soc. Biol. 42(1-—2):65-82.

HACHEN, Davip S., JR. 1988. The competing risk
model. A method for analyzing processes with
multiple types of events. Sociol. Meth. Res.
17(1):21-54.

LIEFBROER, AART C. 1991. The choice between a
married or unmarried first union by young
adults. A competing risk analysis. Europ. J. Pop.
7:273-298.

MANTING, DorEIN. 1994. Dynamics of marriage and
cohabitation. An inter-temporal, life-course
analysis of first union formation and dissolution.
Thesis Publishers, Amsterdam.

MASON, KAREN OPPENHEIM. 1993. The impact of
women’s position on demographic change during the course of development, p. 19-42. In N.
Federici, K. O. Mason, and S. Sogner (eds.),

 

 

Women’s position and demographic change.

Clarendon Press, Oxford.

McDONALD, PETER. 1985. Social organization and
nuptiality in developing societies, p. 87-114. In
J. Cleland and J. Hobcraft (eds.) Reproductive
change in developing countries. Oxford Univ.
Press, Oxford.

PALLONI, ALBERTO, SUSAN DE Vos, ELIZABETH ARIAS,
BETH FUSSELL, and HATALIMALALA RAFALIMANANA.
1994. Changes in families and household in
Latin America, 1970-1990. Working Paper,
University of Wisconsin, Madison.

PARISH, WILLIAM L., and RosBert WILLIS. 1993.
Daughters, education, and family budgets: Taiwan experiences. J. Hum. Res. 28(4):863-898.

PEBLEY, ANNE R., and NOREEN GOLDMAN. 1986.
Legalization of consensual unions in Mexico.
Soc. Biol. 33(3-4):199-213.

 

 

Social Biology

QUILODRAN, JULIETA. 1985. Modalité de la formation
et évolution des unions en Amérique Latine, p.
269-284. In International Population Conference, IUSSP, Liege.

RINDFUSS, RONALD R., and AUDREY VANDENHEUVEL.
1990. Cohabitation: A precursor to marriage or
an alternative to being single? Pop. Develop.
Rev. 16(4):703-726.

ROsSeERO-BixBy, Luis. 1996. Nuptiality trends and
fertility transition in Latin America. Jn Jose M.
Guzman et al. (eds.). The fertility transition in
Latin America. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

RYDER, NORMAN. 1965. The cohort as a concept in
the study of social change. Amer. Sociol. 30:
253-272.

STEELE, FIONA, IAN DIAMOND, and DUOLAO WANG.
1996. The determinants of the duration of
contraceptive use in China: A multilevel multinomial discrete-hazards modeling approach.
Demography 33(1):12-23.

THORTON, ARLAND, W. G. AXINN, and J. D. TEACHMAN. 1995. The influence of schooling on cohabitation and marriage. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 60(5): 762774.

TIENDA, MARTA, CARMEN ELISA FLOREZ, and EMILIO
A. PARRADO. 1995. Demography of unequal development: Fertility transition in Colombia and
Venezuela. Paper presented at the Population
Association of America Annual Meeting, San
Francisco. .

TRINDADE HENRIQUES, MARIA-HELENA F. 1982. Legal and consensual unions: Their fertility implications in Latin America, p. 271-287. In L. T.
Ruzicka (ed.), Nuptiality and fertility. Ordina
Editions, Liege.

Unirep Nations. 1990. Patterns of first marriage:
Timing and prevalence. United Nations, New York.

VAN DE KAA, Dirk J. 1987. Europe’s second demographic transition. Pop. Bull. 42(1).

WESTOFF, CHARLES. 1987. Perspective on nuptiality
and fertility, p. 155-210. In K. Davis et al.
(eds.). Below-replacement fertility in industrial
societies. Causes, consequences, and policies.
Pop. Develop. Rev. Supplement to Vol. 12.

YAMAGUCHI, Kazuo. 1991. Event history analysis.
Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
