Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Cultural evolution: The Darwinian model

Alexander Alland Jr.

To cite this article: Alexander Alland Jr. (1972) Cultural evolution: The Darwinian model, Social
Biology, 19:3, 227-239, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987990

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987990

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
alil Article views: 4
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 6 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model

Alexander Alland, Jr.

Department of Anthropology
Columbia University
New York, New York

The apparent contradictions between
Dr. Carneiro’s paper, in this symposium,
“The Devolution of Evolution,’ and mine
are due, in my opinion, to a difference in
emphasis rather than to a deep-seated theoretical conflict. My focus is upon process
and an attempted delineation of mechanisms, while Dr. Carneiro, following Herbert Spencer, has made great strides in the
analysis of evolutionary series and correlations between elements of culture as they
occur at particular stages of cultural evolution. Dr. Carneiro’s major emphasis, if he
will permit me to so label it, has been
paleontological and cumulative, while mine
has been genetic. These two points of view,
I believe, are necessary for an understanding of cultural evolution on both theoretical and empirical levels.

Dr. Carneiro quite rightly avoids simplistic analogies between organic processes
as described by Darwin and the operation
of cultural systems. Thus, he has never
fallen victim to false or premature reductionism which can lead only to social Darwinism. His debt to Herbert Spencer comes
from the latter’s focus on human behavior
in the context of social reality. This included Spencer’s attempts to unravel the
effects of such factors as population size

 

and the division of labor on culture and
emergent social forms.

As I have already stated, my emphasis
is genetic. My theoretical point of departure is Darwinian. The process of cultural
evolution is seen as a continuation of the
general process of adaptation. The process
is fundamentally biological, because the
survival of our species, as for all other
species, depends upon accommodation to
the environment. Furthermore, in my view,
Darwin’s delineation of evolution as a
dialectic between nature and species in
which the environment selects from a pool
of variation produced by individual organisms must be maintained in the analysis of
cultural change.

For the human species, accommodations
which take place may occur on the somatic
level and be preserved through genetic
transmission, or on the cultural level and
be preserved through the operation of tradition. Because this is a dual process,
points of interaction between genetic and
cultural accommodation are bound to
occur; but, in large part, man’s evolution
since his full emergence as Homo sapiens
has been extra-somatic. This is why Professor Carneiro’s injunctions are so imperative. As several authors have pointed out,

227
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

228 Alland

human physical evolution has resulted in
a species characterized by relatively open
coding in which a range of capacities
rather than specific precoded behaviors
have emerged. This has made culture possible. Its advantage as an adaptive device
need not be labored here. What we need to
remember, however, is the fact that because evolution is a process of accommodation to environment it continues to be a
biological process. In human cultural evolution, the equipment involved is new and
species specific.

It is my hope that these preliminary
remarks will serve to illuminate for nonanthropologists what might seem to be a
basic conflict in approach to the analysis
of human behavior. Dr. Carneiro and I
are members of the same school—one which
is committed to the theory of evolution as
the major explanatory device for the analysis of human society and culture. Dr.
Carneiro wishes to focus on complexity. I
wish to focus on adaptation as a process.

Let me turn now to an outline of cultural evolution as I see it. In this section
I shall attempt to describe what I believe
are the major mechanisms underlying the
evolutionary process.

I. Evolution operates with two sets of
mechanisms: those which maintain or preserve emergent adaptive gain and those
which allow further adaptive change to
occur in systems. In all evolution, the
major element in preservation has been the
maintenance of an invariant code system
(DNA in somatic systems and traditional
culture in human social systems). Change
in organic systems has resulted from mistakes (mutations of various sorts) in DNA
structure which then meet the test of environmental selection. Nongenetic behavioral variations should also be subject to
selection, but the maintenance of such
traits must involve mechanisms akin to

 

Social Biology

operant conditioning in which certain behaviors have higher reward values than
others. Thus, selective fertility does not
play a role in the initial phase of cultural
selection. However, as I shall attempt to
show below, fertility does play a key role
in the production of change and is part of
the selective process itself.

II. Man as a species has an inborn
genetic capacity for culture and language.
Both are code systems in which adaptively
valuable information is preserved and
transmitted through extrasomatic mechanisms.

HI. Adaptive behavior may be conscious or unconscious. Individuals do not
have to know why a certain act is adaptive
for it to be adaptive. They don’t even have
to know that they are performing certain
repetitive acts for those acts to alter the
survival capacity of a population. In cultural
systems, the process of change is not clearly
understood. It is clear that change may be
planned or unplanned, conscious or unconscious, and that unanticipated consequences of planned change may have
strong effects on the further operation of
a system, driving it off in a new direction,
damaging its adaptive accommodation, improving it, leading to new changes, and
so on.

IV. Populations are adapted to specific
environmental niches. Accommodation to a
niche is likely to improve temporally
through a maximization process in which
successful environmental exploitation becomes more efficient. Essentially, the species improves its ability to convert energy
from the environment into viable organisms.

V. Long-range adaptations involve balance with the resources of a particular
niche. At any given level of adaptation
there is a maximal optimal population
number based on the carrying capacity of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3

the environment. When population begins
to exceed this number, one of several alternatives may occur: (a) the population may
stabilize, establishing a state of balance
with the niche; (2) the population may
degrade the environment and therefore
lower carrying capacity; (c) the population may expand its niche or migrate to
new territory; or (d) individuals within
the population may be stimulated to innovate or borrow new traits which increase
carrying capacity through technological
and/or social innovation. Such change may
be directly related to extraction techniques, for example, improved tools, to
some form of labor intensification, or it
may involve a shift to some social form
which increases the productive efficiency
of the population.

VI. Adaptation has two facets. Behavioral systems develop internal coherence
and, as whole systems, accommodate to the

environmental field. The development of

internal cohesion and external adaptation
is part of the same process since the degree
of internal cohesion and efficiency will be
directly related to the degree of external
adaptation. Thus, the two facets of adaptation are theoretically the same, but may be
separated for heuristic purposes. I might
note in passing that much of modern anthropology has been concerned with the
analysis of internal organization and coherence.

VII. Dynamic systems maintain their
integrity through negative feedback in
which information operates to bring the
system into accommodation with shortrange variations in the environmental field.
Systematic change (increase in maximization) may result through the action of
positive feedback in which new elements
or new arrangements of elements are rewarded by the environment. By reward, I
mean an increase in carrying capacity lead
Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model

 

229

ing ultimately in egalitarian societies to
population increase or in nonegalitarian
societies to the partial diversion of energy
into such processes as capital formation.

VIII. Ideology, as opposed to technical
or social forms, plays an indirect role in
environmental accommodation. It may help
to maintain the internal coherence of a system by reducing interference with environmental accommodation even when commonly held beliefs may not be empirically
valid. Ideology may also mask cognitive
ambiguity. Such ambiguity may have adaptive value when it blunts what might
otherwise produce apparent contradictions
in the system (Harris, 1970).

IX. Language and culture provide the
basis for theory construction. Theories are
used to explain phenomena and/or predict
events including the results of behavior.
Good theories are powerful adaptive tools
since they increase the effectiveness of
positive feedback and act to reduce noise
in the system. Poor theories, on the other
hand, may retard adaptive change precisely
because they retard or blunt feedback.

X. Not all change occurs as the result
of empirical tests or operations based on
theory construction. Individual acts which
may be accidental may nonetheless have
adaptive value and be rewarded. In some
cases, behaviors which are unrelated to any
theory may rapidly become part of a system. Feedback in such cases will be direct
and will bypass faulty theoretical constructs. Similarly, such autonomous behaviors may be dropped rapidly when
environmental conditions change. Their
elimination will not threaten established
ethnotheories.

XI. The conditions which stimulate
innovation or borrowing may differ, but
the data show that people are slow to
adopt new forms of technology, particularly when labor intensification is involved.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

230 Alland

Change tends to occur with an increase in
population in the absence of geographic
expansion, for under these conditions it
becomes necessary to intensify production
(Boserup, 1965).

It is necessary to distinguish between
populations involved in initial innovation
and those which borrow. Contemporary
societies are usually imbedded in a context
where models of a potential adaptive
change exist. These may be chosen or not
depending upon stimulus conditions. For
example, the Hadza of Tanzania, unpressured by demographic density, refused to
give up their hunting life, in spite of
familiarity with agricultural techniques
practiced by neighboring peoples. Although
forced to settle on farms by the Tanzanian
government, the Hadza would not become
agriculturists and returned to hunting and
gathering, a means of subsistence which
they found adequate to their needs and
less arduous than horticulture. On the
other hand, population increase may lead to
the rapid adoption of new techniques, especially when the gain is obvious.

Some anthropologists interested in cultural evolution forget that cultural responses are conditioned by a wide range of
relationships among ethnic and national
groups. Within the time that anthropology
has existed as a viable discipline, populations representing different Ievels of adaptation have exerted pressure on less-adapted
populations, sometimes driving them into
refuge areas and forcing them to modify
their culture. Patterns of warfare among
so-called primitives can be understood in
most cases only by placing them in the
context of the colonial experience (Service,
1968).

The dynamics of the evolutionary process have also been clouded by those
anthropologists who tend to see primitives
frozen in time (Levi-Strauss, 1966) or slow
to change because of characteristic ideo
Social Biology

logical conservatism said to block pragmatic behavior. The poor health and/or
nutritional characteristics of peasant populations, for example, have been blamed
on their superstitious nature and ideological rigidity. Maladaptation may in fact be
the result of inability to control local resources. Natural limits may be more efficiently read by indigenous people than we
have assumed in the past. Conditions imposed by some exploiting power, extranational or a segment of a national
conglomeration, may be the cause of
adaptive breakdown. Recent studies suggest that population density and fertility
strategies may be the result of labor needs
and particular patterns of internal and
external exploitation. The pattern of single
crop agriculture so often found among
peasants is an imposed response to an economic system over which local populations
have little or no control. Gross and Underwood (1971) have shown how environmental degradation and caloric deficiency
among Brazilian jute workers may be
linked directly to an exploitive national
system.

Recently, several archeologists have applied an ecological approach to cultural
evolution and have analyzed rather long
sequences in terms of adaptation to the
environment. In this work they were
influenced, I think, by two papers by
Fredrik Barth in which he introduced to
anthropology the concept of the ecological
niche. In one, he notes (Barth, 1956,
p. 1079):

The importance of ecologic factors for

the form and distribution of cultures has

usually been analyzed by means of a culture
area concept. . . . The present paper attempts to apply a more specific ecological
approach to a case study of distribution by
utilizing some of the concepts of animal
ecology, particularly the concept of a niche
—the place of a group in the total environ
ment, its relations to resources and competitors.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3

Barth goes on to demonstrate how,
within a single broad geographical area,
three different ethnic groups have come to
occupy special segments (niches) of the
environment, those to which they have
adapted in terms of cultural behavior.

As far back as 1950 (p. 338), Barth had
noted the utility of the ecological niche:

. in archeology one has a continuous
record of cultural change. By regarding this
change as a process of adaptation to a
specific ecologic niche, the patterns of change
should make as much sense to the archeologist as do structural changes to the
paleontologist . . . . Thus, cultural change
may be described in terms of the ecologic
adaptation towards which it is moving since
this is a major controlling factor of the
change.

Note here that Barth, in contrast to
cultural evolutionists, sees the environment
as the controlling (rather than limiting)
factor in change. Adaptation is the result
of a dialectic between the culture (producing variation) and the environment
(which selects from this variation).

Coe and Flannery (1966) employ the
micro-environmental approach suggested
by Barth, and as archeologists attempt to
answer specific processual questions about
the development of sedentary village life as
a step toward civilization. Three questions
are asked (Coe and Flannery, 1966,
p. 348):

1. What factors favored the early development of food production in Mesoamerica
as compared with other regions of the
hemisphere?

2. What was the mode of life of the earlier
hunting and collecting peoples in Mesoamerica and in exactly what ways was it
changed by the addition of cultivated
plants?

3. When, where, and how did food production make it possible for the first truly

sedentary villages to be established in
Mesoamerica?

While Barth concentrated on three
niches exploited by three separate ethnic
groups, Coe and Flannery concentrated on
the multiple exploitation of a range of

Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model

 

231

niches by single populations or sets of ethnically identical populations. They then
proceeded to analyze a set of microenvironments in terms of available natural resources for the Tehuacan Valley and
Coastal Guatemala. The pattern of movement from micro-environment to microenvironment continued as an adaptation
until the development of irrigation which
allows for the beginning of full time agriculture and permanent settlement.

A similar analysis for Mesopotamia is
offered by Flannery (1965). In this case,
in addition to noting geographical zones of
exploitation, Flannery shows how different
ethnic groups settled in different niches all
contributed to a single food-producing
revolution (Flannery, 1965, p. 303-304):

The food-producing revolution in Southwestern Asia is here viewed not as the brilliant invention of one group or the product
of a single environmental zone, but as the result of a long process of changing ecological
relationships between groups of men (living
at varying altitudes and in different environmental settings) and the locally available
plants and animals which they had been exploiting on a shifting, seasonal basis. In the
course of making available to all groups the
natural resources of every environmental
zone, man had to remove from their natural
contexts a number of hard-grained grasses
and several species of ungulates. These
species, as well as obsidian and native copper, were transported far from the biotopes
or “niches” in which they had been at home.
Shielded from natural selection by man,
these small breeding populations underwent
genetic change in the environment to which
they had been transplanted... .

The three articles show three variations
on the same theme. Barth stresses ethnic
differentiation in relation to specific niches,
Coe and Flannery emphasize multi-niche
exploitation by a single ethnic group, and
finally Flannery attempts to show how different groups exploiting different niches
through time make a combined contribution to the development of a more complex
and highly evolved system of exploitation.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

232

Discussion does not end here, however.
In a recent book which attempts to find
parallels between the evolution of civilization in Mesoamerica and Mesopotamia,
Adams (1965) employs the multi-niche
multi-group model described above but
attempts as well to indicate how certain
features of social structure developing in
the context of ecological adjustment contributed the major share to the process of
change. For Adams (1965, p. 2), “The
independent emergence of stratified politically organized societies based upon a new
and more complex division of labor is
clearly one of those great transformations
which have punctuated the human career
rarely, at long intervals.” Adams sees the
preconditions for stratification in early
Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica existing in
conical clans (unilineal kin groups in which
certain members closer to the central line
due to primogeniture have greater status
and/or greater access to common property).
Such groups serve differentially and contribute to the development of a fully stratified society in the context of increasing
technological complexity and political control. While the two areas are distinct in
many respects, the evolutionary thrust of
both contributed to a similar processual
core.

Adams is highly critical of Wittfogel’s
(1957) irrigation theory as well as of hypotheses which relate social change to
population pressure. His awareness of the
role of multiple ecological zones in the slow
development of stratified society keeps him
within the camp of those evolutionists who
view the environment as active in selection,
but like so many other anthropologists his
desire to focus on function and change
within the behavioral system itself leads
him to minimize the overall interaction
process between culture and the environment.

Sanders and Price (1968) take an op
Alland

Social Biology

posing view. They believe that urban
civilization is based on demographic factors: “Technological change as the basic
causal factor is, we feel, significant only
where such change results in a substantial
increase in the numbers and densities of
human beings or in the markedly increased
efficiency of the individual human producer” (Sanders and Price, 1968, p. 9).

These authors see a definite relation between increased population and increased
political complexity. However, the factors
which limit density are first and foremost
ecological. Much of the variation among
agricultural populations, for example, in
South America, is due to protein availability.

The second factor which the authors
relate to political evolution is competition
between families and communities:

One factor that promotes competition is
the ratio between man-hours of work and
crop production. In this critical ratio swidden agriculture is actually more productive
than most labor intensive systems of
agriculture .... Only extreme population
pressure... will force farmers to shift from
swidden to more intensive patterns of land
use” (Sanders and Price 1968, p. 95).

Population pressure produces a series of
positive responses. These include: (1)
changes in technology related to productivity per unit of land or increases in the
percentage of land cultivated; (2) changes
in social and economic structure which contribute to greater economic efficiency; (3)
development of specialization both of individuals and communities for the production
of specific goods; (4) political controi of
surplus food by central authority rather
than local producing groups; (5) local
migrations and segmentations of communities; (6) warfare which acts to reduce or
stabilize population; (7) the development
of other checks on population.

Other authors have emphasized the role
of population pressure in the process of

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 3

adaptation employing it as the mechanism
which drives the evolutionary process.
Carneiro has long emphasized the relationship between complexity and population
density: “the thesis advanced here is not
that societies become more complex only by
growing larger, or that as they grow larger
they invariably become more complex.
Rather, the contention is that if a society
does increase significantly in size, and if at
the same time it remains unified and integrated, it must elaborate its organization”’
(Carneiro, 1967, p. 239).

For Carneiro, the elaboration of social
structure is a systemic response to stress
generated by the multiplication of units.

In a highly controversial book, Boserup
(1965) attacks the whole foundation of
Malthusian theory. Simply put, her suggestion is that agricultural techniques
respond adaptively to population pressure.
Increases in population are met more or
less automatically by shifts toward move
labor-intensive forms of production. The
driving force behind cultural evolution
therefore is population pressure.

The same approach has been taken recently by Harner (1970, p. 67):

Growth of population pressure is postulated
to be a major determinant of human social
evolution through the mechanism of competition for increasingly scarce subsistence
resources. In terms of a model for societies
practicing agriculture, inter- and_intragroup competition for such natural resources
is seen as leading to the evolution of more
competitively successful cooperative units
in descent (in classless societies) and in
political structure, and the evolution of class
stratification.

Harner has constructed a scale measuring population pressure based on an inverse
relation between the degree of dependence
on hunting and gathering and the degree of population pressure. Fishing dependence is also predicted to show a positive
correlation with an increase in the scarcity
of land resources. The scale is then tested in

Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model

 

233

relation to political complexity and social
differentiation showing very high correlations between the index of population
growth and social evolution.

Alland (1970) has related adaptation to
population increase. He notes that adaptation in the sense of stable system means an
accommodation between a system of economic exploitation and the carrying capacity of the environment. As long as the
technological system remains stable, population can increase only up to acceptable
limits without a degradation of the environment and eventual regression. Carrying capacity is related to both agricultural
potential in the context of a particular
technological system and to such population
reducing factors as disease and nutritional
limitations.

Dumond (1961, 1965) has examined
the relationship between civilization and
demographic density on the one hand and
population growth on the other. In the
earlier paper dealing specifically with Megger’s hypothesis relating Maya decline to
swidden agriculture, Dumond suggests that
centralization may predate intensive agriculture and that heavy population growth
stimulates expansion of subsistence activity and a tightening of social organization. He notes, however, that when expansion of subsistence activity is impossible
or difficult and when the welfare of the
population is threatened, a population has
two choices open to it. These are (1)
population control or (2) a decreased standard of living with increased threat of
famine. Thus, according to Dumond, population growth appears favorable to, but is
not a sufficient cause of, social centralization and the improvement of subsistence
and commerce. Both may in fact encourage
the growth of population. Population growth
(a natural outcome of human fertility)
stimulates a set of responses which produce an adaptation to increased numbers,

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

234.

but this adaptation is often capable of supporting a much expanded population and
so the increase may accelerate under
changed technical and social conditions.

Other authors, particularly Harris (personal communication), appear to favor the
idea that technological change precedes
population increase which is then followed
by changes in social structure in the direction of more complex political organization
such as the formation of centralized authority, eventually the state. Harris has
noted in an unpublished paper that the
number of man hours put into subsistence
activities is about the same in hunting and
gathering societies and in various types of
agricultural systems. Technological innovation leads to an increase in per-capita
output, particularly with the advent of
industrialization. An interesting point made
earlier by Sahlins (1968) is that, economically speaking, hunters and gatherers
are rarely marginal, locked in a daily struggle for food. Lee (1966) has demonstrated
quantitatively that King Bushmen have
ample time for leisure and that the population limiting factor in their environment
is water rather than food. Harris notes
that large increases in man-hour input
comes only with the rise of the state and
is highest in technologically advanced
Western society. Surplus output is then
exploited by those segments of the population in control of the politico-technological
system. Harris comes down very strongly
against the point made by Boserup (1965)
that natural increase of population in socalled backward areas may stimulate what
might be termed healthy technological
change. I find Harris’ criticism of Boserup
well taken, because Boserup apparently ignores the role of centralized authority in
the production and distribution of goods, as
well as in the stimulation of input without
benefit to the producers themselves. Far
from adapting to increased numbers, such

Alland

Social Biology

a population may become, to use Geertz’s
(1963) term, involuted; that is to say, the
population is directed into a kind of productive system dependent upon increased
labor, with little technological change. According to Geertz, this is the case in Java,
where the peasants have been consistently
exploited either by a colonial system or
by the urban centers. Labor intensification
occurred not as an adaptation to local
demographic and ecological conditions but
under the forced stimulation of an elite.

Population growth was also stimulated
during the industrial revolution in England
as well as other parts of Europe to meet
increasing labor needs. It is interesting to
note that it is only with the advent of automation that national planners have begun
to talk about population control.

The rather extensive discussion of the
role of population in adaptation by anthropologists and others is related to the interesting question concerning those forces
which drive the evolutionary machine as
far as human cultural evolution is concerned. These shall be discussed below.

A group of anthropologists, particularly
from Columbia University and the University of Michigan have concerned themselves with stable ecological systems and
the role of behavioral variables in maintaining a balance between population and
the natural environment as well as the
effect of disruption on these systems
(Vayda, 19695). Vayda (1969a2,6) and
Collins (1965) have come to be associated
with neofunctionalism which applies functional analysis to the operation of selfregulating systems in which variations in
environmental parameters are offset by
predictable changes in behavior. A case for
this kind of system has been made by
Piddock (1965) for the potlatch system of
the Northwest Coast following an idea first
presented by Suttles (1960) and Vayda
(1961). The most comprehensive ecological
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 3

study employing the notion of stable systems is Pigs for the Ancestors by Rappaport
(1968). In this detailed ethnographic
monograph, Rappaport attempts to demonstrate how the ritual cycle of pig slaughter
can be coupled to demographic changes
in both the human and pig populations.
Rappaport suggests that an element of
culture that some might assume to be removed from a direct role in ecological adjustment is central to the maintenance of
the system. Such a system is seen therefore,
as an adaptation equivalent to homeostatic
adjustment and is analogous to adaptation
in the physiological sense.

In his 1971 paper and in a more recent
set of as yet unpublished papers Rappaport
has extended his examination of ritual and
the concept of sanctity as they operate as
communication systems within and among
populations. Such a notion is exciting for
three reasons. (1) It suggests how ritual
performances may operate to spread ecologically adaptive information from group
to group within an interacting set of populations. (2) It offers an explanation for the
sacred nature of rituals in terms of their
truth value. That is to say, the truth of
secular information transmitted on ritual
occasions is validated by the acceptance
of participants that what transpires at such
(sacred) ceremonies is true. (3) Rappaport’s analysis provides a link between ecological studies and the work of structural
anthropologists and others concerned with
myth and ceremony such as Levi-Strauss,
Edmond Leach, and Victor Turner.

The ecological school has raised the
question of non-Malthusian population controls. Rappaport himself has drawn analogies between ritual and epidictic displays
in birds and other infrahuman animals.
Stott (1962) was among the first to suggest
that the adaptation of populations to a
limited environment may include biological
and cultural mechanisms which bring popu
Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model

235

lations into equilibrium before the intervention of disease or famine and within the
limitations of a particular carrying capacity. It seems to me that such conclusions
are highly suspect and call into play the
dubious concept of group selection.

Most anthropologists concerned with
culture change and acculturation have
tended to avoid encompassing theory. There
are few exceptions to this, and as a consequence there has been little dialogue between ecologists on the one hand and those
who study change on the other. However,
the exceptions are worth mentioning, Julian
Steward (1955) has been concerned not
only with a general theory of change but
has also examined specific instances of
social development within the context of
what he calls cultural ecology. While he
has noted environmental influences on cultural development, his focus has been on
the effect of exploitative activities, particularly work patterns, on the emergence
of what he calls levels of sociocultural
integration.

Sahlins and Service (1960), following
Leslie White, attempted to unite specific
studies of change with the overall process
of evolution by differentiating between
general and specific evolution.

Alland (1967, 1970, and in press) has
concerned himself with various aspects of
change within the context of Darwinian
theory. Using adaptation to disease as a
frame of reference, he suggested that the
rapidity with which adaptive strategies
develop depends upon such factors as: (a)
the degree of noise in the information system (feedbacks from the environment);
(6) the availability of medicinal materials
in the environment and the degree of access
to them which may be impeded by a restraining ideology, lack of information, or
by power relations in which access to
needed resources is blocked; (¢) pressure
from within a particular social system (deDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

236 Alland

gree of reward) for reward; and (d) the
relationship between what by itself might
be taken as a maladaptive behavior and its
place in overall maximization. Negative
practices—for example, those which affect
health adversely—may be maintained in a
system if they offer economic gain either
for the entire group (as in egalitarian societies) or for those who exert political and
economic power over primary producers.

Following Boserup (1965), I have suggested in this paper that population pressure
is in large measure the impetus for change.
Criticisms of this view have also been offered. These are most cogent, I think, when
they apply to the development of stratified
societies.

Population pressure alone will operate as
the stimulus for change only so long as
labor is performed exclusively (or almost
exclusively) to feed organisms and distribution is relatively equal. The development
of hierarchical social systems—class structure, ranked castes, colonial exploitation—
changes the rules of the game as the products of labor are drained off or unequally
distributed. When people begin to work for
others, those others may demand greater
and greater output. Depending on the circumstances, this increased output may be
achieved either through labor intensification or capital investment. In both cases,
people who work tend to work harder and
produce more. In cases where labor intensification is the exploitative strategy, population increase will tend to occur as a result
of the economic process, rather than as its
stimulus.

Evolution as a process tends toward
systemic parsimony; that is, one aspect of
adaptation is energy conservation in which
simpler solutions to adaptive problems are
selected out over less simple and more
energy-consuming solutions. Redundancy in
systems, when it occurs, acts as a hedging
device in which feedbacks are maintained

Social Biology

even if part of the system breaks down.
The degree of redundancy present in a
system should be a function of environmental and systemic uncertainty, with the
latter reducing itself through time.

The emergence of stratified societies was,
as Spencer suggested, an adaptation to
numbers in which simpler forms could no
longer function to maintain social order.
The growth of complexity in the division
of labor from simple differences based on
age and sex to an explosion of achieved
roles and full-time specialization may have
been driven in part by the development of
unequal distribution as a stimulus for some
to operate in achieved roles. There is no
doubt that such a system could no longer
be driven by demographic pressure alone.
In fact, in such types of organization
demography plays different roles in different situations and is itself affected differentially. In sum, among hunting and
gathering peoples and early agriculturists,
population pressure is probably the major
stimulus for change which, when successful, produces increased carrying capacity.
In stratified societies with unequal distribution, carrying capacity may be increased
for the benefit of small segments of the
society. Thus, the energy which might go
into the production of greater numbers
may be diverted into other uses. Jt might
also (particularly in the colonial situation)
be diverted to the production of greater
numbers of people outside of the local
system, i.e., the population of the colonial
power.

Those complex economic systems which
in the Jast hundred years have developed
within the context of expanding markets
appear to be driven in part by consumerism
which acts as a partial substitute for
colonial expansion. Modern economies
operate, at least in the short run, to increase
the energy-producing and consuming capacities of favored nations. Such consumption
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 3

patterns produce tremendous waste. Consumerism, whether in socialist or capitalist
societies, deflects an enormous percentage
of extracted energy into goods rather than
into organisms. Such a process depletes
resources and pollutes the environment. It
may also demand biologically maladaptive
fertility strategies in which economic wellbeing depends upon a constant increase in
population.

It must be noted, however, that consumerism is a tricky term. It seems to me
that Marx’s formula, “From each according
to his abilities; to each according to his
needs,” is an eminently Darwinian ideal for
it follows the law of parsimony as defined
here. In addition, it suggests a respect for
those human values which stress equality.
The problem, of course, lies in the definition of abilities and needs. We might be
able to define adequate health and nutritional standards, but where do we draw the
line between necessary supply, adequate
comfort which “raises the quality of human
life,’ and over-consumption? Such questions can only be answered on the basis of
a prevailing value system and in the strict
sense are not scientific. We can, however,
note as many ecologists have noted, that
the current pattern of world resource exploitation is maladaptive and that a great
deal of rethinking and reorganization must
occur in the near future if we are to avoid
disastrous consequences.

For species other than man, adaptation
can be measured only as it affects the
immediate generation’s offspring. The probability that a species may be heading for
eventual destruction through its own exploitative activities is irrelevant. Adaptation is measured only as fitness: the comparative contribution made to the next
generation by variant forms in the same
population. Unlike all other species, man
can think his way ahead several generations. Planning, crude as it may be, can be

Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model

237

used to increase long-range adaptive
chances. We need not behave like other
species. Alternate strategies can be produced and evaluated.

Natural selection acts only on what is
there; that is to say, it selects from a pool
of existing variation those variations which
are comparatively more efficient. Those
complex social systems which have evolved
in this way reflect a certain degree of efficiency, but they are not necessarily the
best of all possible systems among those
possible systems which, for example, could
be simulated on a computer.

It is my conviction that the mechanisms
which now drive complex social systems are
highly wasteful and dangerous in the context
of what has now become a total world niche.
In general, these mechanisms revolve
around created needs among the populations of the so-called developed nations at
the expense of the less-well-off populations
of the world. It is well known that such
over-consumption creates its own problems
of waste production, pollution, and disposal. Homo sapiens is a single species
coming to occupy a single niche, the entire
surface of the earth. We must therefore
consider the effects on ourselves and others
of a distribution and utilization system in
which the United States with 6% of the
world’s population consumes 40% of the
world’s resources. It has been pointed out
by others that if we adjust for consumption
and waste production the United States is
the most overpopulated country in the
world.

Planning programs which talk only about
saving lives and increasing the standard
of living according to existing patterns are
naive in the extreme, because in the long
run increased consumption which involves
unequal distribution will only increase
world problems. Population-control programs for the Third World which originate
in the West may, from the point of view
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

238 Alland

of the people involved, seem to be immature
and chauvinistic. There is at least a metaphorical truth in the charge that birth
control inspired by outsiders without consideration for distribution is modified genocide. Until we learn to control our own
consumption patterns and are willing to redistribute resources more adequately, birth
control for others has a hollow ring. This
is especially true today when exploitation
in most cases means resource extraction at
minimum cost and when the Third World
markets are of only marginal interest. In
most cases, modern extractive techniques
do not require vast labor resources and so
we do not require large populations in
developing nations. With few exceptions,
Third World people do little work for us
and are not consumers of goods which we
produce.

This is not to deny that demographic
problems exist. However, I would suggest
that many are the result of the colonial
situation, and here I do not mean the introduction of Western medicine and hygiene.
I think we have to reexamine the development of fertility strategies which produce
“over population” in the context of responses made by particular human groups
to labor needs. I am suggesting that birth
control programs will only work when and
where lowered fertility makes clear sense on
the local level and in terms of real experience.

The United States has become rich at

Social Biology

tremendous cost to present and future
generations elsewhere in the world and
future generations here. I think that the key
to a more efficient (adaptive) system which
fits the Darwinian model of evolution lies
in an economic system which equalizes
resource distribution not only in one
country but for the entire world. ‘Milton
Friedman’s capitalist anarchy might have
had adaptive value (although I doubt
it) in one stage of economic development
in which free economies stimulate innovation and technological progress. But
social control based on selfish motives
alone, in which private service industries
are created to warn the public of malpractice on the part of uncontrolled business,
seems to be a return to social Darwinism
in which progress is defined in terms of
survival of the fittest in a situation of free
trade and competition. The free market
may have stimulated technological change
in the nineteenth century, but it is certainly
not the mechanism which can provide
optimal use and conservation of resources
today.

The development of greater equality in
resource exploitation and distribution for
all mankind may lower our standard of
living; but this may be the necessary price
for a rational set of goals in which “necessity” can be more realistically defined. It
seems to me that such a system will not
only meet the requirements of evolutionary
maximization, but also the goals of humanism as I understand them.

REFERENCES

Apams, R. McC. 1965. The rise of urban society.
Aldine Press, Chicago.

Atiann, A. Jr. 1967. Evolution and human behavior. Natural History Press, New York.

. 1970. Adaptation in cultural evolution: An
approach to medical anthropology. Columbia
Univ. Press, New York.

Barta, F. 1950. Ecologic adaptation and cultural
change in archaeology. Amer. Antiq. 15:339-349.

. 1956. Ecologic relationships of ethnic groups

in Swat, North Pakistan. Amer. Anthropol.

58: 1079-1089.

 

 

BoseErup, E. 1965. The conditions of agricultural
growth. Aldine, Chicago.

CaRNEIRO, R. 1967. On the relationship between
size of population and complexity of social
organization. Southwest. J. Anthropol, 23:234243.

Cor, M., and K. V. FLannery. 1966. Micro environments and Mesoamerican prehistory, p.
348-357. In J. Caldwell (ed.), New roads to
yesterday. Basic Books, New York.

Cottins, P. W. The logic of functional analysis
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 3

in anthropology. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis,

Columbia University.

. 1965. Functional analysis in the Symposium Man, Culture, and Animals, p. 271282. In A, Leeds and A. P. Vayda (eds.), Man,
culture and animals: The role of animals in
human ecological adjustments. American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, D.C.

Dumond, D. E. 1961. Swidden agriculture and
the rise of Maya civilization. Southwest. J.
Anthropol. 17:301-316.

. 1965. Population growth and culture
change. Southwest. J. Anthropol. 21:304-324.
FLANNERY, K. V. 1969. The ecology of early food
production in Mesopotamia, p. 283-307. In A. P.
Vayda (ed.), Environment and cultural be
havior. Natural History Press, New York.

Geertz, C. 1963. Agricultural involution. Univ. of
California Press, Berkeley.

Gross, D. R., and B. A. UNnERWoop. 1971. Technical change and calorie costs: Sisal agriculture.
Amer. Anthropol. 73:725—740.

HarNeER, M. J. 1970. Population pressure and the
social evolution of agriculturists. Southwest. J.
Anthropol. 26:67-86.

Harris, M. 1970. Referential ambiguity in the
calculus of Brazilian racial identity. Southwest.
J. Anthropol. 26:1-14.

Lee, R. B. 1966. Kung Bushman subsistence: An
input-output analysis. Ecological essays: Proceedings of the Conference on Cultural Ecology.
National Museum of Canada, Ottawa.

Levi-Strauss, C. 1966. The savage mind, Univ.
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

 

 

Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model

239

Pmpock, S. 1965. The potlatch system of the
Southern Kwakiutl: A new perspective. Southwest. J. Anthropol. 21:244-264.

Rappaport, R. A. 1968. Pigs for the ancestors.
Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

. 1971. Ritual, sanctity and cybernetics.
Amer. Anthropol. 73:59-76.

SAHLINS, M. D. 1968. Notes on the original affluent society. In R. Lee and I. Devore (eds.),
Man, the Hunter. Aldine Press, Chicago.

Sautins, M. D., and E. R. Service. 1960. Evolution and culture. Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor.

SANDERS, W. T., and B. Price. 1968. Mesoamerica:
The evolution of a civilization. Random House,
New York.

Service, E. R. 1968. War and our contemporary
ancestors, p. 160-167. In M. Fried, M. Harris,
and R. Murphy (eds.), War, the Anthropology
of Armed Conflict and Aggression. Natural
History Press, New York.

STEWARD, J. 1955. Theory of culture change. Univ.
of Illinois Press, Urbana.

SuTTLes, W. 1960. Affinal ties, subsistence, and
prestige among the Coat Salish, Amer.
Anthropol. 62:296-305.

Vaypa, A. P. 1961. A re-examination of Northwest Coast economic systems. Trans. N.Y. Acad.
Sci. (Series II) 23:618-624.

19694. Environment and cultural be
havior. Natural History Press, New York.

. 1969b. An ecological approach in cultural
anthropology, Buckwell Rev. 17:112-119.

Wir1trFocer, K. A. 1957. Oriental despotism. Yale
Univ. Press, New Haven.

 

 

 
