Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Comment on “the probability of conception after
discontinuance of oral contraception,” by Wolfers

Charles F. Westoff , Larry Bumpass & Norman B. Ryder

To cite this article: Charles F. Westoff , Larry Bumpass & Norman B. Ryder (1970) Comment on
“the probability of conception after discontinuance of oral contraception,” by Wolfers, Social
Biology, 17:1, 60-61, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987844

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987844

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

60 Communications

Social Biology

Comment on “The Probability of Conception

after Discontinuance of Oral
Contraception,’’ by Wolfers

Charles F. Westoff, Larry Bumpass,
and *Norman B. Ryder

Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, and
*University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin

Wolfers takes our 1, column for the first
six months and calculates from it a 1p, column. Then he compares the variations of
ipz over x, for “Pill” and for “Other.” (His
values of 1/2 are slightly inaccurate arithmetically, but that is a trivial aside.) We had
done this also and chose to comment on the
difference between “Pill” and “Other” for
1Po (in addition to 1¢). Wolfers observes that
1Ps for “Other” is low and attributes that to
misreporting; but observes that 1/3 for
‘‘Pill” is low and erects a theory to explain
it.

We don’t think our data can stand the
burden of such detailed scrutiny. They were
collected from respondents by interviewers
who were untrained in the ordinary scientific
sense. Although the instruction was to record the response to the particular question
as a number of months, examination of the

interviews and of the coding instructions:

which were required shows that frequently
the response was non-quantitative (such as
“right away” or “not long after’) and that
frequently it took the form of a range. In
such a circumstance, we think it unwise to
place dependence on the month-by-month
fluctuations in probability of survival; accordingly, we chose to report two average
values for the first six months taken in toto
and avoided discussing the series in detail.

There were two specific reasons for being
wary of month-by-month changes. One was
our strong suspicion (supported by the evidence of a re-interview with some 400
women) that reports of the circumstances
of conception (accidental or planned) were
highly unreliable and almost certainly not
in a random way. Specifically, we think it
quite plausible that a considerable number
of reportedly planned conceptions which
took place immediately upon cessation were
in fact accidents. Wolfers cites a figure of
“52 more pregnancies” than would be expected under certain assumptions. This
would translate into some 20% of women who said they planned a conception
actually being in the accident category; the
statistic Js not out of line with other evidence of unreliability in this study.

The second specific reason is that there is
likely to be a difference, either real or an
artifact of reporting habits, consequent upon
the circumstance that the pill is not related
to the occurrence of coitus, whereas almost
all other methods are. There are many ways
of interpreting or misinterpreting how long
it takes to get pregnant, and the calendar
month is not a particularly good unit of
measurement. The beginning point of the
waiting interval may be considered as the
last act of protected coitus, or the first act
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 1

of unprotected coitus, or the last act of
protected coitus in the neighborhood of
ovulation time, or the first act of unprotected coitus in the neighborhood of ovulation time. On the other hand, it might be the
beginning of the first intermenstrual interval
in which coitus is unprotected. Pill-users
may well differ from others in the way they
think about their beginning point. They
may start with the last day they took the
pill, or, since they tend to be somewhat
more sophisticated than others, they may
start with the time of ovulation in that
month (58% of pill-users were correct, but
only 48% of others, on a narrow definition
of the correct response to a question about
ovulation time). Since it is obvious that
many women don’t know their time of
ovulation, they will have trouble figuring
out how many months to say in answer to
the question of how long it takes to get
pregnant. Moreover, many women do not
know in which month they get pregnant and
may very well report the time when they
first learned that they were pregnant, or
perhaps the time of their first missed period.

Given this array of considerations, we see
no difficulty in defending our decision to
stick to a gross level of detail. The one exception which would be interesting as an
addition to our knowledge of the effects of
the pill would be whether the low probability of conception in the first month for
pill-users as against others reflects a continuing effect of the pill; regrettably, the

Communications

 

61

problems of coding, and even, for many
women, of defining the responses for this
particular interval remove even this possibility from our grasp.

Wolfers chooses to interpret the nuances
of month-by-month changes as meaningful
and proceeds to create a model, involving a
dichotomization of women into those who do
and those who do not have some characteristic. The only measure of the characteristic
proposed is the observed behavior. What
Wolfers has done, in effect, is to fit a model,
based on three or four parameters, to a set
of six points—roughly equivalent to fitting a
second or third degree polynomial to a set of
six points. Accordingly, it is scarcely surprising that he gets a good fit.

Those of us who have had many painful
years of experience with rough-and-ready
survey data, burning our fingers repeatedly
from over-interpretation of putative findings, are finally learning to approach the
output of such crude data-collection instruments with the due amount of skepticism.
It is easy to understand how a person from a
tradition of careful measurements made by
people who were highly trained for the task
(rather than by respondent, interviewer, and
coder, as in our case) would tend to give our
data more credit than they are really due.
The error was probably ours. We should not
even have published the 1, values month by
month, and we should have included a
longer statement on the pitfalls of our data.

Symposium on Genetic Counseling in

Mental Retardation

A symposium on Genetic Counseling in
Mental Retardation will be held during the
annual meetings of the American Association on Mental Deficiency which will be

held this year in conjunction with the annual
meetings of the American Academy on Mental Retardation at the Sheraton-Park Hotel
in Washington, D.C. The symposium will
