Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

On genetics and criminal behavior

J. P. Scott

To cite this article: J. P, Scott (1987) On genetics and criminal behavior, Social Biology, 34:3-4,
256-265, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1987.9988682

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1987.9988682

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 4

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Review Essay:

On Genetics and Criminal Behavior

J.P. Scott

Department of Psychology
Bowling Green State University
Bowling Green, Ohio

CRIME AND HUMAN Nature: By J. Q.
Wilson and R. J. Herrnstein. Simon
and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1985.

Anyone who studies the history of
science soon comes to the conclusion
that it is largely a history of mistakes. At
first glance, it seems illogical that the
search for truth should involve such an
amazing amount of error, but this paradox is easily resolved by the realization
that scientific truth is never absolute.
Consequently, succeeding generations
of scientists establish closer and closer
approximations and in so doing demonstrate the errors of their predecessors.
An obvious example is Newtonian physics, which served for the truth for three
centuries, only to be replaced by the
concepts of modern physics.

The second reason for the prevalence
of error is that every so often a scientist
comes up with a totally erroneous concept which provides a simple and attractive explanation of a set of phenomena.
If the scientist is a persuasive writer, the
idea may obtain wide credence, until it is
demonstrated to be false. Such was the
Lamarckian theory of evolution, which
still captures the imagination of an occasional unwary or unprincipled scientist,
as it did in the notorious case of Lysenko. The histories of this and numerous other examples lead to the conclu
256

 

 

sion that nothing dies harder than a bad
idea.

Thus, the concept of Human Nature
seems to be an attractive and reasonable
one that could be the basis of scientific
inquiry. Expressed as the question
‘“‘What are human beings like?”, it can
lead to an exploration of the likenesses
and differences between humans and
other animals. These explorations lead
to the realization that the measurement
of human behavior involves an enormous number of major and minor dimensions that are not reducible to one
simple formula. And the fact that other
organisms also vary in multiple dimensions does not make the task any simpler.

The enormous complexity of the
results of comparative science leads one
to question the simplistic concept of
“Nature,” and I propose that, however
obvious and attractive it may be, the
concept is an erroneous one. In short
“Nature” is one of those bad ideas that
seem immortal.

What is the matter with the concept?
First, it is a singular and collective noun,
implying the existence of a single entity
or quality. Second, as the term is commonly used, it is assumed that this entity
or quality is fixed and invariant. Third, it
is assumed that ‘‘Nature”’ is inherent;
1.e., determined by heredity. All three
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 34, No. 3~4

of these assumptions are erroneous.
Nature in the broad sense refers to all
phenomena, both living and nonliving,
and cannot be a single entity. Genetics is
the science of variation, and one of the
most general findings of this science is
that every quality of living organisms is
subject to greater or lesser degrees of
genetic variation. Therefore, there can
be no fixed and invariant quality. Finally, genetic processes involve only one
sort of the many systems and conditions
that interact to produce the various phenomena exhibited by organisms. Genetics is a determinant only in the sense that
it determines that there shall be variation.

“Nature” and the related concept of
the “Natural” have a long history dating
back at least to the Romans, as Lucretius’ poem “De Rerum Natura” bears
witness. It is also involved in a long list
of errors such as Rousseau’s concept of
the “Natural Man,” unspoiled by civilization. Even the followers of Darwin
have been misled by his use of the term
“Natural Selection,” assuming that this
is a monolithic directive force instead of
a miscellaneous collection of variable
factors and conditions that modify the
phenomenon of differential survival. In
short, ““Nature”’ is a bad idea.

PRINCIPLES OF BEHAVIOR
GENETICS

The modern approach to the problem of what people are like is Behavior
Genetics, which asks the general question of what effects genetic variation has
upon what people and other animals
(and a few plants) do. Anyone dealing
with this field must know genetics, not
the genetics of the past which was as full
of errors and misconceptions as any

 

Review Essay

257

other science, but genetics as we know it
today.

Genes do not function as individual
entities but always operate as parts of
genetic systems. Within such systems
they function cooperatively and interactively to produce organization on higher
levels. Each gene affects many aspects
of such organization (i.e., is pleiotropic). Therefore, each characteristic is
affected by many genes. The interactions between such genes are almost universally nonadditive, i.e., each combination produces a unique effect not
numerically related to those of other
combinations. Consequently, in the vast
majority of cases, gene combinations
rather than single gene replacements are
the principal basis of variation.

Further, genes never act ina vacuum,
but always interact with other living and
nonliving systems to produce variation
in organization. For example, the combination of genes present in a fertilized
human egg must interact first with the
cytoplasm of the egg and the accompanying cytoplasmic genes contributed by
the mother, next with the physiological
systems of the mother’s body which are
relatively well controlled by homeostasis but still subject to variation produced
by her behavior and by environmental
accidents, and then with the actions of a
whole host of other variable living and
nonliving systems that the resulting infant may encounter after birth, and especially the cultural systems into which
itis born (Scott, 1968). This is not a matter of simply calculating how much variation can be attributed to heredity and
how much to environment. Such heritability figures (another of those persistent
bad ideas) are only meaningful with respect to a particular genetic population
living in a particular environment. Since
both genetics and environment are sub 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

258 Review Essay

ject to change, a heritability figure is further limited to a particular time period.

Finally, in the case of any characteristic involving behavior, an enormous
amount of variation is added by the
process of behavioral adaptation. The
amount of variation is of course specific
to a particular genetic population, a particular set of living conditions and a particular kind of behavior. In a genetic experiment with the behavior of dogs
(Scott and Fuller, 1965), in which we deliberately attempted to reduce variation
in living conditions and to maximize genetic variation by using contrasting
breeds, we still found that variation attributable to behavioral adaptation averaged at least 60 per cent of the total.
Because these figures apply only to a
particular situation, the most important
results were those that related to the relative amounts of variation in different
kinds of characteristics. Briefly put, the
most important variation occurred in
motivational and emotional characteristics.

BEHAVIOR GENETICS OF
CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR

General Principles.—On the ground
of the general finding that genetic variation may affect every characteristic of
an organism, one can predict that there
should be some effect of such variation
upon behavior defined as criminal. It is
a researchable hypothesis, albeit one
fraught with extreme difficulty.

Because it is behavior, we should expect that it would be the outcome of genetic variation interacting with a great
variety of other variable intrinsic and extrinsic processes including behavioral
adaptation. And because it is human we
must deal with the important effects of

 

Social Biology

cultural variation, both within and
among human societies.

We must use good conceptual tools.
No scientific inquiry is better than the
concepts it employs. Therefore, we
must abandon the concepts of “human
nature”’ and its corollaries, ‘‘criminal
nature” and “criminality,” and substitute the concepts of modern genetics
and behavior genetics, the most important of which I have outlined above. To
these I might add the finding that the
results of genetic variation are not deterministic but probabilistic. The researchable question in respect to criminal behavior is then: Why is one individual
more likely to commit a crime than another? And if we are to present a convincing case that genetic variation has an
effect on criminal behavior we must
show how it operates, i.e., how gene
combinations interact with other systems to produce a final result. Furthermore, if we know the pathways through
which hereditary variation operates,
this should give us clues as to how these
pathways may be diverted or modified
in the course of development. Is it based
on some irreversible change in the nervous system, or is it a matter of variation
in emotional responses that are readily
modified by training? From what we
know of the physiological basis of genetic variation in behavior we would anticipate that there might be several pathways affected by genetic variation.

Finally, from the viewpoint of practical applications, there is the question:
How important are the effects of genetic
variation on criminal behavior? As
noted above, this is a question for which
there is no general answer. Our heritability figures for the behavioral differences in dogs ranged from zero to 66 per
cent, depending on what was measured.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

We would expect a similar but lower
range of variation in human populations.

Since experimentation is virtually impossible with human subjects except in
relatively superficial and harmless aspects of behavior, we are limited to certain techniques: description, including
both qualitative and quantitative aspects, correlations or the study of associations, and the technique I consider
most valid and direct, the study of how
criminal behavior develops. This last involves longitudinal studies over extensive time periods, but it should give valid
answers as to why one person commits a
crime and another does not in a particular cultural milieu.

ON INTERDISCIPLINARY
RESEARCH INVOLVING
BEHAVIOR GENETICS

The most exciting and important
fields of scientific research today either
cut across the conventional disciplinary
boundaries or lie within unclaimed fields
between them. Research in criminal behavior is no exception. Ideally it should
involve researchers from cultural anthropology, law, political science, sociology, social psychology and, at least to
some extent, economics. If the hereditary aspect of criminal behavior is to be
investigated, a behavioral geneticist
should be added to the group.

Obviously, such a research team
would be difficult to assemble, expensive to fund, and especially difficult to
integrate. The alternative is for one or a
limited number of researchers to attempt cross-disciplinary research. If
they do so, they must become thoroughly familiar with and sophisticated in
the other disciplines involved. Other
Review Essay

259

wise, they are likely to commit naive errors of judgment that denigrate whatever authentic ideas and data they may
contribute.

Crime and Human Nature.—Wilson
and Herrnstein’s (1985) book bearing
this title is a serious attempt at interdisciplinary research in the literature relating to criminal behavior. Wilson is a
political scientist and Herrnstein a social psychologist. Both are professors
at Harvard, and they appear to be reasonably sophisticated in fields of social
science other than their own.

Such is not the case with respect to
genetics. For example, these authors
were greatly impressed with William
Sheldon’s concept of the somatotype,
an idea that has little or nothing to do
with genetics. It is based on the idea of
measuring populations in terms of comparing them to ideal types, as did the
early naturalists. As soon as biologists
began to numerically measure variation, they found it was continuous, not
falling into discrete types. Sheldon’s research was centered around the hypothesis, a common one among the
older medical anatomists, that variation in structure determines variation
in behavior.

Statistical tests of the Sheldonian typology turned out to be negative. Howells (1952) did a factor analysis of human physical measurements. If
Sheldon’s concept had held up, there
should have appeared three factors corresponding to his three somatotypes.
Howells indeed found three factors: (1)
presence or absence of fat, (2) bottomheaviness vs. top-heaviness, and (3)
heavy trunk and face with light limbs vs.
narrow trunk and face and heavy limbs.
None of these corresponded to
Sheldon’s somatotypes.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

260 Review Essay

Further, if one examines Sheldon’s
alleged evidence for a connection between physique and behavior, one finds
that it was based on impressionistic studies and case histories. We made an experimental test of this association in a
breeding experiment with dogs, which
showed large amounts of variation in
both physique and behavior. When we
did a factorial analysis, we came out
with one factor related to physical size,
with nothing associated with behavior
(Scott and Fuller, 1965). In short, physique has no relationships to behavior
other than the obvious ones, such as the
fact that the short-legged dachshund
cannot run as fast as the long-legged
greyhound, and so on.

Sheldon’s work is relative to criminal
behavior in that he and coworkers made
a somatotype study of delinquent youths
who were being treated in the Hayden
Goodwill School in Boston. The principal finding was that these boys tended to
be high in mesomorphy (having a
stocky, muscular build). In a thirty-year
follow-up study of these same youths,
Sheldon’s coworkers remarked that all
groups of males, including college students, tend to rate high on mesomorphy (Hartl et al., 1982). In short, there
was no control population. Sheldon developed an intriguing and logically consistent scheme of description but based
on a defective concept. Physique may
have something to do with crime (in
Dicken’s day, thieves apparently used
small children to enter houses through
narrow windows), but one suspects that
its effects depend on a great variety of
individual circumstances.

Among humans, the easiest genetic
factor that can be worked with is that of
sex. This is an exception to the rule, that
typology is involved. Humans in the vast
majority of cases fall into two easily rec
Social Biology

ognizable types, male and female, albeit
with an enormous amount of variation
within the sexes and considerable overlap in most measurable characteristics.
Wilson and Herrnstein cite the well
known facts, that the frequency of comparable crimes in males in our culture is
on the order of five to seven times as
great as that in females. But the authors
conclude that the differences are likely
to be largely cultural, disregarding the
evidence of sex differences in aggression in animals where culture should be
a minor factor (Scott, 1975).

In the few mammalian species that
have been studied experimentally, it is
now becoming clear that both sexes
fight, but under different motivational
conditions, and often with different behavioral patterns. Further, there is now
good evidence in mice that the Ychromosome, found only in males, has
some effect on variation in fighting propensities in males (Maxson et al.,
1979).

This brings us to the case of the XYY
condition, a rare chromosomal anomaly
in humans which has been alleged to be
more frequent in criminals than in normal populations. Some of the best data
came from Scotland, where the observed frequency of the condition is
about 1 in 700 in newborn males, or 0.14
per cent (Jacobs et al., 1971). They obtained karyotypes from 2,538 males in
penal institutions and ‘‘approved
schools,” which are institutions for children having various sorts of disciplinary
problems. They found one XYY male
among 909 prisoners unselected for
height and 2 out of 510 among prisoners
over 178 cm. tall. Since one of the effects
of the XYY condition is increased
height, this was a biased sample.
Among 1,119 boys in the approved
schools, they found 4 of the XYY karyoDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

types, as opposed to 1.57 that would be
expected.

These figures obviously fall within
the range of normal variability, and the
authors concluded that none of their
criminal populations were significantly
different from the general population.
But even if one takes these figures as
they stand (7 out of the whole institutionalized population instead of the expected 3.5) and assumes that the institutionalized rate of XYY males is roughly
twice as great as the normal, Kessler
(1975) has calculated that there were

still 99.73 per cent of the XYY males in

Scotland that were not institutionalized.
If it has an effect on criminal behavior, it
affects less than 1 per cent of the persons
carrying it. This is not a strong effect of
genetics; if there is any, it might work in
other ways than a tendency toward violence.

XYY males are both unusually tall
and somewhat subnormal in intelligence; that is, they are easily recognizable and not very smart, both of which
characteristics should lead to a greater
probability of getting caught if they
commit misdeeds. Which is not often.

What then is a criminal? It is a person
who gets caught (in our culture, convicted) of an act defined as wrong by the
culture. In my personal experience of
our culture, I have never known a boy
who did not at some point commit some
unlawful acts—destruction of property,
theft, malicious mischief, traffic violations, etc. Many of them are never
caught, and if caught, are treated differentially. Ifa boy is apprehended by a police officer, he is likely to be let off with a
warning if he belongs to a ‘‘good family”
(i.e., an affluent and influential one) and
treated more severely if he comes froma
poor family. Consequently, any available figures on the incidence of crime are

Review Essay

261

likely to be biased. Moreover, unlike
the case in Denmark, records are likely
to be kept in a very sloppy fashion, differing from place to place.

In our culture a person apprehended
and convicted of a serious crime is statistically likely to be: (1) a male, (2) between the ages of 16 and 25, (3) froma
disorganized family background, (4)
poor, and finally, (S) unemployed. In
any individual case, the person may
show none, one, or several of these
characteristics. It is obvious that none of
these directly involves heredity except
that of sex. Age involves biological and
developmental changes as well as cultural influences, but the other three are
products of the culture. Further, it is often demonstrated that there are subcultural differences in our society with respect to the frequency of deviant
behavior. Childrearing practices and parental control, probably the more important deterrents to crime, vary with
socioeconomic status.

THE SYSTEMS CONCEPT

The easiest way to integrate these
general findings is through the concept
of polysystemic organization. Living
phenomena are organized in a set of
nested systems and subsystems. Entities
within each system interact with twoway causation. Also, systems as wholes
may act as entities composing systems
on higher levels of organization. These
also interact reciprocally. Furthermore,
there may be two-way interaction between levels of organization. Thus, in
using the systems concept, one must assume that every living phenomenon is
related to every other, and the task is to
discover which of these relationships are
important. One cannot assume one-way
causation, or that phenomena are unrelated (Scott, 1975).

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

262 Review Essay

    
 

Social Biology

   
 

Physiological Organismic Social
Systems Systems Systems
Genetic
Systems defined by culture
Physiological
Organization Social Organization:
Genetic tomical : imi ZZ Poverty, \
oo on omice’ «+ Behavior :Crimina — Culture
Variation —_—_ Behavior Unemployment,
\ physiological Family Organization
Function

moy limit reproduction

 

Fic. 1.—Criminal behavior is affected by all levels of polysystemic organization, even by ecosystems
(not shown on the diagram). Note that effects proceed in both directions, often reciprocally.

From this viewpoint, crime is a phenomenon that occurs within human social systems that in turn are parts of particular cultures. It is behavior, which
means that it can only be committed by
organisms, or groups of organisms, in
this case belonging to the species Homo
sapiens. Figure 1 is a rough diagram illustrating how the variables associated
with criminal behavior may be related to
each other.

This diagram emphasizes the important effects of culture, first in defining
what criminal behavior is and then affecting social organization within it to
produce poverty, unemployment, and
family disorganization. Reciprocally,
criminal behavior may determine the
nature of social groups and modify the
culture as a whole.

Genetic systems are illustrated as if
they show one-way causation, but even
here there may be long-range feedback
from the higher levels of culture and social organization, as the culture encourages or discourages reproduction in
those individuals who show criminal behavior.

Also, the diagram is a static one. Behavior is not inborn; it develops through
higher levels of organization than the
genetic one, and as it does so it is modified (again interactively) by systems
on higher levels.

Wilson and Herrnstein have not written a bad book; they have produced
what might have been a good one were it
not held in bondage by a bad idea. The
authors have reviewed a large amount
of scientific literature and have attempted to be critical and objective, but
their bad idea causes them to omit most
of the relevant literature on genetics and
behavior genetics, and to use uncritically a subset of bad ideas related to the
concept of ‘‘Nature.”

For example, they seem not to have
heard of the genetic concept of populations, defined as a group of interbreeding individuals, which has replaced the
useless concept of race. Wilson and Herrnstein correctly point out that it is absurd to classify individuals as belonging
to a group on the basis of skin color, but
then go on to review the literature based
on just that erroneous concept, a conDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

cept whose only validity lies in the cultural effects that it produces. To their
credit, they do come up with a constructive suggestion (p. 484) for useful research:

What is wanted ts a prospective, longitudinal study of black and white children
growing up in a big city, a study that attends closely to constitutional factors;
early family and school experiences; the
ways in which young people come into
contact with peers, the labor market, and
the criminal justice system; and the development of a set of values and an orientation towards the larger society. No such
research has ever been done.

Their preoccupation with ‘‘Nature”’
leads them down other conceptual blind
alleys as well. Among these is the concept of “constitution,” being the way in
which an individual is constituted, or put
together. From the viewpoint of scientific analysis, this is no more than saying
that there is a group of unknown factors.
Into this class, Wilson and Herrnstein
throw a group of traits that have little in
common except that there is some evidence of genetic variation—physique,
intelligence, and temperament (the last
of which should join the long list of bad
ideas). Originating with the Greek philosophers who imagined four types of
temperaments and later adopted by
Pavlov, who tried to fit his dogs into this
scheme, it turns out to be useless when
one attempts to measure genetic variation in emotional and motivational
traits.

But the worst effect of the pursuit ofa
bad idea is that it leads the authors to
overlook the obvious. If they had
started with the concept of populations,
they would have realized that the human species today forms one vast interbreeding population having certain universal traits, the most important of
which are language and the related tendency, without which language would

Review Essay

263

be useless, to live in social groups and to
organize these on the basis both of unspoken behavior and of language. That
is, all humans have the tendency, unique
in the animal world, to produce cultural
organization based on language.

From this viewpoint, crime is the creation of culture, being defined by it. The
same behavior may be considered a
crime in one human society and greatly
admired in another. As recently as the
nineteenth century, a cowboy in the
western part of the United States could
be hanged for horse stealing, while the
same activity directed toward the livestock of another tribe was considered
highly meritorious among the Plains Indians. Consequently, the major variables in defining the frequency of crime
should be cultural. Wilson and Herrnstein’s preoccupation with the concept
of Nature led them to neglect the obvious, i.e., the homicide rate in the United
States is the highest among the developed countries of the world. Instead
they tried to find communalities among
cultures. It is obvious that humans of
whatever culture have the capacity to injure or steal, but it does not take a book
of some 600 pages to establish this.

Wilson and Herrnstein assume,
somewhat cavalierly, that there is no difference in crime in socialistic and capitalistic countries, implying that economic systems have no effect. In so
doing, they discard basic psychological
theory related to the production of prosocial behavior. Teachers in nursery
schools long ago discovered that the best
way to control the undesirable behavior
that they observed in infants was not to
punish it, but rather to stimulate
friendly and constructive behavior. This
they called the ‘‘positive method.”
From the viewpoint of psychological
theory, they were getting the children to
form habits of constructive and peaceful
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

264 Review Essay

behavior. A fact not always appreciated
by psychologists, and originally discovered by Pavlov, is that one can form a
habit of not doing something simply by
not doing it.

Extending this idea to the adult economic world, any economic system that
provides full employment in reasonably
well-paid, constructive, and socially respected occupations should have lower
crime rates (Scott, 1977). And so it is, in
either the semisocialistic country of
Denmark or the capitalistic one of Japan, the latter of whose low crime rates
the authors find mysterious. Incidentally, the result of reducing environmentally produced variation should be to
augment and increase the relative
amount produced by genetic variation.

On‘the positive side, the book includes extensive reviews of the literature relating to crime and social
organization—families, schools, economics, and unemployment. Surprisingly there is little reference to the effects of political organization and, as I
pointed out above, very little attention
to the enormous effects of culture. Here
again “Nature” as an integrating concept has the effect of putting the authors
into blinders and so causing them to neglect other more useful concepts. In
their last chapter, the authors seem to
abandon “Nature” and conclude that
the most important factor affecting rates
of criminality is variation in family organization.

In spite of this conclusion and the
weakness of much of the evidence, no
one should conclude that genetic variation has nothing to do with behavior
defined as criminal. The biggest sort of
variation is that between species; only
humans have language to define crime.
Other species may show behavior that
we may label killing or stealing, but

Social Biology

none of them label it. Then there are the
sex differences, compounded and usually augmented by cultural norms, but
nevertheless huge. As we are beginning
to understand from studies in other species, sex differences may be based not
only on differences in size and physique,
but on the neural organization of behavior. Finally, there should be variations
within the sexes that will modify the
probability of behavior occurring within
a particular cultural milieu. As I pointed
out, and as the authors appreciate, such
differences are not innate (i.e., they are
not “Nature’”’); they develop throughout lifetimes in interaction with a great
number of other variables, including the
cultural ones.

CONCLUSION

In answer to the three basic questions
raised at the beginning of this paper,
Wilson and Herrnstein come up with the
following answers:

1. Is there variation in criminal behavior attributable to genetic variation?
Their best evidence is that:

A. There are large differences in crime

rates between males and females.

B. There is a correlation between early

onset of delinquency and high rate of
offending.

Genetically induced sex differences
correlated with cultural norms is valid
evidence for the likelihood of genetic
variation; early onset is not. Nowhere is
there specific evidence relating genetic
variation to specific kinds of crime in a
particular cultural milieu.

2. What are the pathways through
which genetic differences produce their
effects? In the case of sex differences,
the presence or absence of the male hormone with its effects on stature, physical
strength, kinds of aggressiveness, etcetera, is an obvious pathway. But this still
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

begs the question of why some boys become criminals and some do not. The
answer may lie in variable responses to
the hormone and independent variation
in other characteristics. Wilson and
Herrnstein suggest variation in “‘constitution,” meaning especially the differences in physique, the evidence for
whose effects is particularly weak, and
in intelligence tests, the argument being
that because high heritability figures can
be obtained from IQ scores the proportion of variance due to heredity should
affect criminal behavior. The argument
is a weak one, particularly since the differences are not very great (six points or
so on the IQ scale on the average), and
there are so many alternative explanations. The physiological links between
genetic variation and variation in criminal behavior are still to be established.
3. How important is genetic variation?
Taking the sex (gender) differences in
certain classes of crime, particularly
those involving violence, there is every
reason to believe that genetic variation
in this sense is important. Genetic evidence for within-sex variation is there,

Review Essay

 

265

as the Danish data show (Mednick et
al., 1984), confirming what we would
expect on theoretical grounds; but its
importance is still in doubt. Since Denmark is a particularly orderly country
and since some of the social factors associated with crime are relatively well controlled, one would expect that the relative amount of genetic variation would
be larger than in some other cultures.

What effect will the book have? Beguiled by the Nature-Nurture dichotomy (another bad idea), social scientists
in our culture tend to swing in alternate
generations from an underemphasis to
an overemphasis of the importance of
genetic variation as it affects social behavior. As this book attests, there is a
reviving interest in the effects of biological processes upon behavior. Hopefully,
some young behavioral geneticist will
take advantage of the trend and do some
soundly based investigations of criminal
behavior. Hopefully, also, they will not
follow the will-of-the-wisp of “Nature,”
but instead make use of the tools of
modern genetics and the systems concept.

REFERENCES

Harti, E.M., E. P. MonneLLy, and R.D.
ELpERKIN. 1982. Physique and delinquent
behavior: A thirty-year follow-up of William H. Sheldon’s Varieties of delinquent
youth. Academic Press, New York.

Howe Lis, W. W. 1952. A factorial study of
constitutional type. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 10:91~118.

Jacoss, P. A., W. H. Price, S. RICHMOND, and
R. A. W. RaTcLiFF. 1971. Chromosome
surveys of penal institutions and approved
schools. J. Med. Genet. 8:49-58.

KESSLER, S. 1975. Extra chromosomes and
criminality, p. 65-73. In R.R. Fieve, D.
Rosenthal, and H. Brill (eds.), Genetic research in psychiatry. Johns Hopkins Univ.
Press, Baltimore.

Maxson, S. C., B. E. Ginspura, and A. TRaTTNER. 1979. Interaction of Y-chromosomal
and autosomal gene(s) in the development

 

of intermale aggression in mice. Behav.
Genet. 9:219-—226.

MEDNICK, S.A., W.F. GABRIELLI, and B.
Hutcuincs. 1984. Genetic influences in
criminal convictions: Evidence from an
adoption cohort. Science 224:891-—894.

ScoTT, J. P. 1968. Early experience and the organization of behavior. Brooks-Cole, Belmont, CA.

. 1975. Aggression. 2nd ed. Univ. of

Chicago Press, Chicago.

. 1977. Agonistic behavior: Function
and dysfunction in social conflict. J. Soc. Iss.
33:9~21.

Scott, J. P., and J. L. Futter. 1965. Genetics
and the social behavior of the dog. Univ. of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

WILSON, J.Q., and R. J. HERRNSTEIN. 1985.
Crime and human nature. Simon and Schuster, New York.

 
