Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Kissing cousins: Frequencies of cousin types in
“Nebraska” Amish marriages

James P. Hurd

To cite this article: James P. Hurd (1985) Kissing cousins: Frequencies of
cousin types in “Nebraska” Amish marriages, Social Biology, 32:1-2, 82-89, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1985.9988594

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988594

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Kissing Cousins: Frequencies of Cousin Types in
*‘Nebraska”’ Amish Marriages

 

James P. Hurd

Department of Anthropology
Bethel College
St. Paul, Minnesota 55112

ABSTRACT: One hundred and ninety current ‘‘Nebraska’”’ Amish marriages are analyzed to determine if statistical frequencies of types of cousin marriage conform to cultural rules for marriage. The Nebraska Amish (so named because a bishop from Nebraska organized the group)
are located in Central Pennsylvania. They are prohibited by church and state from marrying
first cousins or closer relatives. No other mating proscriptions based on kinship exist. This analysis is based on pedigrees four generations deep for each currently-married individual. These
pedigrees were constructed from private and published genealogies and from individual interviews conducted during four months of residence in the community in 1979-1980. Findings are
that 47.4 per cent of all marriages are between second cousins. No significant basis exists toward marrying matrilatera! or patrilateral cousins. This finding concords with the absence of
prescriptive marriage rules and also reflects the demographic constraints on mate choice.

The aim of this paper isto determine marriage with a first cousin (Levithrough demographic and statistical Strauss, 1969). Marriage rules also often
analysis the types and frequencies of specify alateral preference, for instance,
cousin marriage among the “Nebraska” _a preference for marrying a matrilateral
Amish of Central Pennsylvania. Ofspe- relative. The Nebraska Amish have a
cial interest is to determine if rules for complex marriage system in the above
types of cousin marriage agree with ac- sense, and no stated lateral preference.
tual marriage behavior. Here I under- Quite apart from marriage rules,
stand marriage rules to mean stated Hammel argues that certain demopreferences or stated practices. Mar- graphic facts would lead one to expect a
riage behavior I take to mean statistical _ lateral bias in cousin marriage. This bias
frequencies of marriage types. would exist when males marry at an age

Levi-Strauss makes a distinction be- several years older than females between elementary and complex mar- cause, in general, women on mother’s
riage systems. Elementary systemshave side would tend to be younger than
a prescriptive marriage rule, such as a women on father’s side and thus be
prescription that a man must marry a more appropriate mates for a male ego
woman of the category cross-cousinand (Hammel, 1978). Another possible bias
no other woman. Complex systemshave might occur because of the custom of
only negative rules that specify prohib- _ virilocal residence. If young men live
ited relatives based on kinship relation- _ closer to and relate more to father’s peoship between potential married part- ple rather than mother’s, we might exners, such as a prohibition against pect them to choose a mate from their

82

 

 
ichigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

father’s people. In the next section I will
discuss the existence of these demographic factors in the Nebraska Amish.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The Nebraska Amish population ts
located in Central Pennsylvania in Mifflin, Centre, Snyder, and Union Counties. The group is called “Nebraska”
Amish because its organizing bishop
came from Nebraska. They use horses
for farming, and horse and buggy for
transportation. Car ownership, electricity, and telephones are prohibited by
church rules.

Data on the Nebraska Amish population were collected in 1979 and 1980
from published and unpublished genealogies, and from selected respondents.
The sample used in this paper consists of
380 currently married individuals (190
marriages).

Kissing Cousins 83

Before 1933, the Nebraska or ‘“‘White
Buggy”? population was one Amish
church affiliation, with its roots going
back to the first Amish settlers in Mifflin
County in 1791 (Hostetler, 1980). In
1933 and 1978, acrimonious fissions divided the church, resulting in three separate Nebraska churches or affiliations
existing today.

The SYA and CZA affiliations are
each composed of three church districts
and the RYA affiliation is composed of
two church districts. Note in Figure 1
that church districts from the three affiliations overlap significantly.

Each affiliation has an average of
300.7 adults and children. The church
district is the smallest unit of organization with an average size of 112.8 adults
and children. Of married adults 84.9 per
cent of spouses married someone from
the same church affiliation, and 58.7 per
cent married within their own church
district.

 
 
 
 

Countles a an

Churches: —
centre

CZA —-~-<-- J

  
  
 
 
 
  

—_—<—

RYA +—+—+—+ i ‘ ;
7
SYA Qe /
“pm PR,”
oO 5 10km J
a

      
   
    

f unton \

"

\
my
f

enyder

PENNSYLVANIA

 

Fic. 1.—The Nebraska Amish in Central Pennsylvania: CZA Church (3 districts), SYA Church (3

districts), and RYA Church (2 districts).

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Age at first marriage for Nebraska
Amish males is 23.2 years and 22.0 years
for females. Church membership is required for marriage. Each Nebraska
Amish church affiliation is endogamous,
the extent of the endogamous unit being
determined not by geography, but
rather by affiliation membership. For a
general discussion of U.S. Amish demography, especially with respect to
marriage and fertility, see Ericksen et
al., 1979. For a fuller discussion of Nebraska Amish marriage, see Hurd, 1981
and 1983.

With the aid of the computer, genealogies or pedigrees four generations deep
were constructed for each spouse, and
common ancestors identified. Pedigrees
for these individuals are 91.1 per cent
complete extending back four generations. To determine the quantity or
amount of relatedness, Wright’s Coefficient of Inbreeding, F, was calculated
based on the formula,

nb+n2+1

(1 + Fi) (1)

Fo=

S | (0.5)

where 7; equals the number of generational steps from Spouse 1 back to the
common ancestor, 2 equals the number
of steps back to the same ancestor from
Spouse 2, and F, equals the Coefficient
of Inbreeding (F) of the common ancestor. The value inside brackets is
summed over all pathways to all common ancestors, giving Wright’s Coefficient of Inbreeding (F). With this value
in hand, Wright’s Coefficient of Relationship (R) can be calculated:

2F 2
Ry = ——— (2)

Vii+h) +4)

Hurd

Social Biology

where F; equals F for Spouse 1, F,
equals F for Spouse 2, and Fj equals F
for the (real or hypothetical) offspring
of 1 and2. (See Wright, 1922, for a fuller
explanation of calculating relatedness.)
The value of R represents the probable
proportion of genes the spouses share by
reason of descent from common ancestors. For our purposes, R is an index of
how closely the pair is related.

The quality of relatedness between
spouses was determined by a computer
search for all common ancestors, and
the specification of the specific genealogical links connecting both spouses to
each of these ancestors. First, the marriage types were classified by degree of
cousin married (e.g., second or third
cousin). (In some cases, this classification produced two cousin classifications
for one marriage, for instance, in cases
where the spouses were related as second cousins and also as third cousins.)
Second, each marriage was classified by
the closest connection between spouses,
rendering just one cousin degree classification for each of the 190 marriages.
All the marriages where “‘closest cousin
type” was second cousin were further
analyzed as to type of second cousin.
Sixteen possible types of second cousin
exist. Analysis of these types rendered
frequencies of each type of second
cousin classification.

RESULTS
MARRIAGE RULES

The Nebraska Amish (like all other
Amish groups) have no stated preference for marrying on father’s side of the
family or on mother’s side of the family.
Thus, based only on stated marriage
rules, we would not expect a patrilateral
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

or matrilateral bias in cousin marriage
patterns. Because of the limited number
of nonrelated potential spouses in the
church, we would expect a significant
number of second cousin marriages.

No Nebraska Amish marriages are
closer than second cousin. One respondent states, ‘‘Relatives and ministers
don’t let these people court each other,
because they don’t think these marriages are healthy physically. Up the valley, a man married in between first and
second cousin [his first cousin was her
parents]. They call this second cousin,
and what we call second cousin they call
third cousin.”’

Another respondent, when asked
why the people usually marry second
cousins said, ‘““That’s all there is around.
Most of the people in the church are relatives.”” Why do most people marry
within the church? ‘‘That’s just the way
we do. The young people go to the
singin’s together, and that’s who they
marry.” She knows of many second
cousin marriages including her own, but
no marriages closer than second cousin.

A third respondent stated that “In
Lawrence County (Pennsylvania), widows may marry their dead husband’s
brother [the levirate, in anthropological
parlance]. They also are allowed to
marry their schwartz cousin [“black”
cousin; a child of their first cousin]. But
we don’t allow it here; we feel related to
them.” She believed the word schwartz
cousin came from a woman named Schwartz marrying a man of this relationship.

EXAMPLES FROM THE DATA

Scanning the data collected on 190
extant Nebraska Amish marriages, we

Kissing Cousins 85

find it appears that most “mixed marriages”’ (i.e., marriages between church
affiliations) were contracted by people
who moved to Ohio and married there.
Almost allof these people later returned
to Pennsylvania. Four men moved to
Ohio, married women from the Swartzentruber Amish Church, stayed
awhile, then came back to Pennsylvania. Two Ohio Amish men married
women from the Nebraskan Church,
then moved to Pennsylvania.

The following example illustrates a
typical marriage pattern in one family.
In one sibship, four men and three
women all married second cousins. Of
these seven sibs, one is no longer in the
Nebraskan Church. The respondent
stated that he thought individuals visited
the families of their second cousins
rather infrequently. He himself didn’t
get to know his wife well until they began attending German school together.

The R value for the Nebraskan married pair most closely related is 0.106, almost the first-cousin level. This pair
shares nine ancestors in common: six
GGP and 3 GGGP (see pedigree in Figure 2).

Three of the husband’s four grandparents had siblings who were the wife’s
grandparents.

One hundred eighty one (95.3 per
cent) of the marriages are between individuals with traceable common ancestors. Mean Coefficient of Relationship
(R) for all married pairs is 0.041. This
figure falls between first cousin (0.125)
and second cousin (0.031). As previously stated, the highest value of R fora
married pair is 0.106. As will be made
clear in the following section, these values of R reflect not only the immediate
genealogical connection between the
spouses, but also multiple pathways of

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

 

 

86 Hurd

[pr ¢/) 1861

[pr s28 e 1547

QD Ly

/\* (Husband)

= Common Ancestor

 

Social Biology

f 1485

4 1079 [pyre Yi} 6e4

 

= 632 (Wife)

Fic. 2,—Pedigree showing common ancestors and genealogical connections for the Nebraskan couple

with the highest level of relatedness (R = 0.106).

relatedness to more distant ancestors.
The level of relatedness between
spouses must be set against the backdrop of the general level of relatedness.
The 380 currently married individuals
could be paired up in 72,010 possible
ways. The mean value of RK for these
possible pairs is 0.062, compared to the
mean value of R for spouse pairs of
0.041.

Figure 3 demonstrates the frequency
of different closest cousin types. For 90
marriages (47.4 per cent), the closest genealogical connection with spouse is second cousin. For 74 of the marriages
(38.9 per cent), closest genealogical
connection is third cousin. In seventeen

of the cases (8.9 per cent), the marriages
are cross-generational, i.e., one spouse
is at a preater genealogical distance from
the closest common ancestor than is the
other spouse. In nine cases (4.7 per
cent), the spouses have no common ancestors back four generations. Thus,
86.3 per cent of all marriages are between second or third cousins. In summary, the calculation of Wright’s Coefficient of Relationship is an attempt to
understand the quantity of relatedness
that exists. A classification of cousin
types such as is demonstrated in Figure 3
is an attempt to understand the nature
or quality of cousin relationships in Nebraska Amish marriage.

 
Vol. 32, No. 1-2 Kissing Cousins 87

74

Fic. 3.—Types of cousin marriage for 190 Nebraska Amish marriages.

SUISNO) puodasS
SsuTSNOD) PITUL
UO] D1aUaB-SSO04)
pa1p[auun

TYPES OF SECOND COUSIN MARRIAGE each case, at least one grandparent of
each spouse is sibling to one grandpar
There are 16 possible waysamalecan ent of the other spouse (See Figure 1).
be related to a female second cousin. In Eight of the cousin types are linked to

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December

88 Hurd

ego through his father (patrilateral) and
eight through his mother (matrilateral).

If a bias in laterality existed in Nebraska Amish cousin marriage, we
would expect to discover it by an analysis of types of second cousin marriage,
since the types are based on the sex
of the linking relatives.

In Table 1, 119 total second cousin relationships exist in 90 marriages.
Clearly, in some of the marriages the
spouses are double second cousins. This
means that in the grandparental generation two sibships intermarried. Double
second cousins have double the Coefficient of Relationship compared to simple second cousins.

TABLE 1

TYPES OF SECOND COUSIN RELATIONSHIPS FOR
ALL CURRENTLY MARRIED NEBRASKA AMISH

INDIVIDUALS
Relationships Frequency
Patrilineal

FFBSD 2.65 ..se cc eseeeees 11
FFBDD ................. 7
FFZSD ..............-0.. 5
FFZDD ...............-. 9
FMBSD ...........-...-5 3
FMBDD ................ 7
FMZSD ......-...2-0ceees 8
FMZDD ............-.4. 5

OPA! «sos na &% Oa PE aes Bee 55

Matrilineal

MMBSD ................ 10
MMBDD ................ 6
MMZSD ..........--200- 9
MMZDD .............-... 7
MFBSD ............---5- 0
MFBDD ............-26. 13
MFZSD ..........-.0+05- 11
DEP AD) ces cwn os on pe awn 8

Total .......... cee eee 64

Total relationships ...... 119

Social Biology

No respondent indicated any preference for marrying on the matrilateral or
patrilateral side. Fifty-five males married a woman on their father’s side and
64 married a woman on their mother’s
side. A chi-square test revealed no statistically significant bias towards matrilaterality. I] also wished to know if the
overall distribution of marriage types
among the 16 categories revealed any
Statistically significant bias in marriage
type toward any one category. A chisquare test failed to confirm any overall
bias. Thus, there is no evidence that any
bias in type of second cousin marriage
exists among the Nebraska Amish.

DISCUSSION
HISTORY OF COUSIN MARRIAGE

It is clear that most individuals (86.3
per cent) married either a second or a
third cousin. No marriages closer than
second cousin were observed. The high
levels of spouse relatedness (0.041) average; a bit closer than second cousin)
were generated from a succession of individuals marrying second cousins
rather than from recent marriages of
first cousins.

The emic (or ‘‘insider’s’’) view of
marriage expressed by respondents is
congruent with the observed frequencies of marriage. It is clear that respondents recognize possible harm from high
levels of inbreeding. It 1s not clear that
they recognize the cumulative effects of
a long history of endogamous marriage,
or the heightened levels of inbreeding
produced by marrying double second
cousins. The model type of cousin marriage (second cousin) compares with respondents’ statements that people customarily marry second cousins. There is
‘40 US December 20

Tey Oo. Micmigan| a

OdUCd DY

PIO W

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

no stated preference for patrilateral or
matrilateral cousins, and no statistically
significant lateral bias is indicated in the
data.

Way No Bias?

On the face of it, the lack of lateral
bias in marriage patterns is what would
be expected from respondents’ statements. However, two demographic
facts would suggest a bias in laterality.
First, men marry at an older age than do
women, as noted above. If this is the
case, a male should find on the average
that women on his mother’s side would
be a bit younger than those on his father’s side, and thus he would tend to
marry in the maternal direction. The
male-female disparity in age at marriage
is small, however, and would have a
minimal effect. Second, the fact of predominant virilocal residence might indicate that men would tend to find wives
on father’s side. This is because, in cases
where ego’s parents are not both from
the same affiliation, mother ts more frequently the parent who has come in
from another affiliation. This means
that offspring of mother’s cousins would
probably be in another affiliation from
ego, while offspring of ego’s father’s

Kissing Cousins 89

cousins would probably be in ego’s affiliation and hence more accessible as
marriage partners. However, few
women marry in from outside the affiltation. Also, although marriage is predominantly virilocal, it is almost always
endogamous with respect to affiliation.
Thus, for an interested male, the pool of
young people who socialize probably
would include almost as many from
mother’s side of the family as from father’s. These two systematic biases are
both small, and since they would work
in opposite directions, they would tend
to cancel each other out. Therefore, the
marriage patterns that we observe both
fulfill demographic expectations, and
also conform to the stated preferences
of respondents.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS _

The computer program for calculating relatedness was developed by Tom Malancon
and Napoleon A. Chagnon at Pennsylvania
State University. The research for this paper
was supported by a grant from the Hill Foundation for Anthropology (Pennsylvania
State University) and from the National Endowment for the Humanities, John A. Hostetler, Principal Investigator. _

REFERENCES

ERICKSEN, JULIA A., EUGENE P. ERICKSON,
JouNn A. HOSTETLER, and GERTRUDE E. HUN
TINGTON. 1979, Fertility patterns and trends
among the Old Order Amish. Pop. Stud.
33:255-276.

HamMMEL, GENE. 1978. Matrilateral implications of structural cross-cousin marriage. In
Ezra Zubrow (ed.), Demographic anthropology. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

HOosteETLER, JOHN A. 1980. Amish society. The
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Hurp, James. 1981. Mate choice among the

 

Nebraska Amish of Central Pennsylvania.

Ph.D. dissertation, Anthropology depart
ment, Pennsylvania State University. Uni
versity Park, Pennsylvania.

. 1983. Church fissioning and kin relatedness among the “‘Nebraska” Amish of
Pennsylvania. Soc. Biol. 30(1).

Levi-STRAUSS, CLAUDE. 1969. The elementary
structures of kinship. Rev. ed. Eyre and
Spottiswoode, London.

WRIGHT, SEWALL. 1922. Coefficients of inbreeding and relationship. Amer. Natural.
§6:330-338.

 
