Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Contributions of P. K. Whelpton to demography

Clyde V. Kiser

To cite this article: Clyde V. Kiser (1973) Contributions of P. K. Whelpton to demography, Social
Biology, 20:4, 438-447, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988074

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988074

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Contributions of P. K. Whelpton
to Demography

Clyde V. Kiser

Office of Population Research
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey

Since Pascal K. Whelpton spent most of
his professional life with the Scripps Foundation for Research in Population Problems, I would like to say a word at the
outset about that organization and its first
Director, Warren S. Thompson. Born in
Weeping Water, Nebraska, April 29, 1887,
Thompson took the Ph.D. at Columbia
University in 1915. His dissertation, written under the general direction of Franklin
H. Giddings and later published, was entitled Population—A Study in Malthusianism (Thompson, 1915).

According to Notestein (1971), Edward
W. Scripps, owner of the newspaper chain,
became interested in population problems
in Asia and during the early twenties ran

_ across a reference to Thompson’s book in

the Columbia University Library. After
reading the book, he contacted Thompson
and invited him to accompany him on a
year-long trip to the Orient on Scripps’
yacht. While on this trip, they planned the
organization of the Scripps Foundation
for Research in Population Problems,
which was founded in 1922. It was the
first foundation in the United States to
become concerned with demographic study.
The Milbank Memorial Fund, founded in
1905, is an older foundation but did not
begin work in population until 1928. Hav
 

ing been with this latter organization, I
am proud to claim that only the Scripps
Foundation antedates the Milbank Memorial Fund with respect to the initiation
of work in population.

Whelpton joined Thompson as Assistant
Director of the Scripps Foundation in
1924. Born February 22, 1893 in Buffalo,
New York, Whelpton had received the
B.S. degree in Agricultural Economics at
Cornell University in 1915. During the
nine years from his graduation until he
joined the Scripps Foundation he was
engaged in teaching, graduate study, and
extension work in agriculture, farm management, and agricultural economics.

In 1924, when Thompson and Whelpton
teamed up, there was relativély little interest in demography in this country. The
question on number of children ever born
had been asked in the censuses of 1890,
1900, and 1910 but very little use had been
made of the data and the question was
omitted in the 1920 census. At Johns
Hopkins University, Raymond Pearl was
editing Human Biology, and he and Lowell
J. Reed had published in 1920 an article
“On the Rate of Growth of the Population
of the United States since 1790 and Its
Mathematical Representation” (Pearl and
Reed, 1920).

438

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 4 P. K. Whelpton

Pearl and Reed were to learn later that
the principles of the logistic curve had been
expounded nearly a century earlier (1838)
by a Belgian mathematician, P. F. Verhulst.
However, because of their independent,
though belated, discovery and because of
certain features of their formulation not
present in that of Verhulst, the names of
Pearl and Reed as well as that of Verhulst
are generally associated with the logistic.

Alfred J. Lotka was also at Johns Hopkins University during 1922-24 working
on Elements of Physical Biology which was
published by Williams and Wilkins in 1925.
In 1924 Lotka went to the Statistical Department of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company where Louis I. Dublin was
beginning to attract attention to his work
on aging of the population. With Dublin,
Lotka published the famous article “On
the True Rate of Natural Increase” in the
September, 1925, issue of the Journal of
the American Statistical Association.

The original intention of Scripps probably was to have the Scripps Foundation
devote its chief attention to world population problems. The reason for having a
nuclear staff of two professional people
was that of rotating between the two the
duties in the office and travel abroad. Both
Thompson and Whelpton, especially the
former, did travel considerably in the Orient. Thompson’s several editions of Population Problems were oriented to world as
well as national population problems. Besides, his Danger Spots in World Population, Plenty of People, and Population and
Peace in the Pacific, marked Thompson as
a prolific writer on world population problems.

For several reasons, however, the Scripps
Foundation for Research in Population
Problems quickly became oriented to our
own national population problems. In the
first place, the headquarters was established
in the United States. Furthermore, instead

and Demography

439

of being placed with a large university or
in a large city in the East, it was placed
with Miami University located in Scripps’
native Butler County within the American
heartland of Ohio. In the very first year
of the Scripps Foundation, Thompson presented a paper at the meeting of American
Statistical Association held in Chicago in
December, 1922, on “Population Facts for
the United States and Their Interpretation,” published in the March 1923 issue
of Journal of the American Statistical
Association. In the second place, Whelpton’s previous training in agricultural economics and rural problems were mainly
national interests. In the third place, at
the time Whelpton joined the Scripps
Foundation, there were several signs of
awakening interest in national population
problems. The work at Johns Hopkins
University and the Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company has been mentioned.
In addition, the growing birth and death
registration areas were serving to increase
the potentialities of national vital statistics.
For the first time, a series of monographs
based upon the 1920 census was planned.
One of these related to children under 5,
and it was being prepared by Warren S.
Thompson. In the fourth place, 1924 was
the year in which the national quota legislation regarding immigration went into
effect. The great floods of immigration during the early years of this century had been
terminated by World War I. With the ending of the war, there was much interest in
and concern about the problem of immigration. This question not only provided a
burning issue for the legislators, it also
served as a catalyst to direct attention of
the few demographers to national population problems. The latter effect persisted
after the immigration question was settled
and the few demographers increasingly
turned their attention to the basic components of population change and to the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

440 Kiser

general question of population dynamics
in the United States.

The Thompson-Whelpton team was a
strong one precisely because of the complementary characteristics of these two
men. Thompson had become steeped in
Malthus and the early population theorists
as a graduate student. He had spent considerable time in the Orient. He was the
philosopher of the team. Whelpton probably
had read little or nothing of Malthus or
other population theorists before coming
to the Scripps Foundation. In fact, it seems
doubtful that he had previously known or
cared much about demographic questions
at all. However, he was a hard-headed and
dedicated man with a bent for statistics
and the inductive approach. Furthermore,
once he became interested in demography,
he was “in” for keeps.

Whelpton never really terminated his
affiliation with the Scripps Foundation.
He took several leaves of absence to do
work which he and Thompson agreed
should be done. Thus, during 1938-40 he
worked with the Central Statistical Board
of the Bureau of the Budget. During 1949
he went to Japan to work with the Department of the Army in its effort to conduct
a census. During 1950-53 he served as
Director of the Population Division of
the United Nations. He returned to the
Scripps Foundation to succeed Thompson
as Director in 1953. Although he nominally
retired as Director in 1963, he continued
to work on the second Growth of American
Families project until a few weeks before
his death April 6, 1964. His name appears
posthumously as senior author of the book
with Campbell and Patterson, Fertility and
Family Planning in the United States, published by Princeton University Press in
1966.

The first article published by Whelpton
after coming to the Scripps Foundation illustrates at once his quantitative approach,

Social Biology

his interest in national problems, his courage in tackling a huge job, and his dogged
persistence in carrying it out. This was
“Occupational Groups in the United States,
1820-1920,” published in the Journal of
the American Statistical Association in
September, 1926 (Whelpton, 1926). It provided a point of departure for his second
article “Industrial Development and Population Growth,” published in the March
and June 1928 issues of Social Forces
(Whelpton, 1928a).

Whelpton’s third article “Population of
the United States, 1925-1975” published
in the September 1928 issue of the American Journal of Sociology was the one that
gave him his first national reputation
(Whelpton, 19285). This article was the
first appearance of what was to become
known as the Thompson-Whelpton component method of population projection.
It was so named because it involves future
estimates of the three components of population change—fertility, mortality, and
immigration.

As already indicated, Pearl and Reed
had previously presented estimates of the
future population of this country under
assumptions that the growth pattern would
conform to a “logistic curve” fitted to past
growth. Both were established biometricians. Pearl’s orientation was in biology
and Reed’s in mathematics. However, despite his relative youth and newness to the
field of population, Whelpton had no hesitancy in stating at the outset why he believed the component method was preferable to the logistic (Whelpton, 19285,
p. 255):

From a scientific standpoint the claim of

Pearl and Reed that they have established

a “law of population growth” by their

logistic curves is questioned on several sides.

Certain critics assert that it is no law of

population growth, but simply a curve which

may or may not fit the past and future

better than other curves that have been
calculated.

 

 
—|
=
©
N
Samed
5
&
oO
oO
oO
A
CO
CO
=z
oe
oN
=
—
3
'S
CS
OQ
=
ao
oO
=
Cee
©
>>
—
=
N
~
oO
>
—
c
-,
Me)
2
cv
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

Vol. 20, No. 4 P. K. Whelpton

In view of the interest in population
growth and the practical value that accurate estimates would have, the Scripps
Foundation is presenting another exhibit of
what the future may have in store. These
predictions have one point of difference
which may distinguish them. Other population estimates are based almost entirely on
the size of the population in the past ....
In the forecasts of the Scripps Foundation,
however, the total population is used as a
point from which to start. Future trends
are estimated separately for such factors as
birth rates, death rates and immigration.
The total population at future dates is
therefore the calculated result of several
predicted factors, rather than an original
prediction in itself,

With reference to the last sentence, it
should be emphasized that the logistic and
the component methods involve subjective
estimates for the terminal years considered.
In the case of the logistic method, the
“Wpper asymptote” to be reached by a
given year is estimated. The logistic curve
fitted to past growth and the assumed
time and size of the “upper asymptote”
yields population sizes for the intervening
years. In the case of the component
method, judgment is used in fixing terminal age-specific rates of birth, death,
and net gains or losses from migration.
Judgment is also required in deciding upon
the temporal pattern of change between
existing and terminal rates.

My first encounter with Whelpton’s
article came while I was a graduate student at Columbia University. The article
was on a list of assigned readings in Professor Robert E. Chaddock’s courses on
population and vital statistics which I took
during the year 1929-30. Chaddock was
quite interested in Whelpton’s statement
(19285, p. 267):

Another point of interest is the similarity
in trend and absolute size between these
population estimates and those of Pearl and
Reed (up to 1940), in spite of the entirely
different methods by which they were obtained .... There are very minor fluctuations in comparative position up to 1940,

and Demography

441

but from then to 1970 the Scripps estimate

remains higher .... No claim is made that

the Scripps Foundation estimates represent

a law of population growth. They are simply

the result of empirical process.

The component method reached {full
bloom in the book by Thompson and
Whelpton, Population Trends in the United
States, published in 1933 for President
Hoover’s Research Committee on Recent
Social Trends. This was a succinct and
clearly written presentation of the historical trends in size, distribution, and composition of the population by a variety of
characteristics. It culminated in a series of
“high,” “medium,” and “low” projections
of population under given assumptions regarding trends of age-specific fertility and
mortality and net gain from immigration.
The book pointed up the declines in fertility, the slowing of population growth,
and the urbanization and aging of the
population (Thompson and Whelpton,
1933a, 19330).

Thompson and Whelpton continued to
be the outstanding population forecasters
for this country until the Bureau of the
Census took over this responsibility in
the forties. They provided estimates of the
future population 1940-1980 for the reports on population statistics published by
the National Resources Committee in 1937
and 1938 (Thompson and Whelpton, 1937).

Thompson and Whelpton took leading
roles in the organization of the Population Association of America in 1931. Both
were charter members and each eventually
became president. They also cooperated in
the development of the International Union
for the Scientific Investigation of Population Problems which was organized in
1928. Both were members of the original
American National Committee.

Shortly after the Population Association
of America was organized, Whelpton and
others began considering possibilities for
developing a systematic program for re
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

442 Kiser

search in the field. A result of this was
Whelpton’s agreement to prepare a report
Needed Population Research which was
published in 1938 under the aegis of the
Population Association of America with
financial help from the Milbank Memorial
Fund (Whelpton, 1938).

According to the report, one of the outstanding “needs” for research was that of
learning more about the social and psychological factors affecting fertility. Frederick
Osborn, another charter member of the
Population Association of America, took
an active role in promoting such a study.
In 1938 he talked with Frederick P. Keppel, Executive Director of the Carnegie
Corporation of New York, and received encouragement from him to proceed with the
development of plans for a study in this
field. Six people frequently met during
1938-39 to discuss the possible aims and
methods of such a study. These were three
pairs that had worked as teams: Thompson and Whelpton, Frank Lorimer and
Frederick Osborn, and Frank Notestein and
Clyde Kiser. Lorimer and Osborn had coauthored Dynamics of Population (1934)
and Notestein and Kiser had worked together at the Milbank Memorial Fund
before Notestein went to Princeton in 1936.
These six informally organized themselves
as a “Committee on the Study of Social
and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility.”

In December, 1939, the Committee was
enlarged to include Lowell J. Reed (who
later became President of Johns Hopkins)
to serve as Chairman and three psychologists to serve as additional members:
Daniel Katz of Princeton University, S. A.
Switzer of Miami University, and E. Lowell
Kelly of Purdue University. A plan was
developed whereby the Carnegie Corporation of New York would make a grant to
the Milbank Memorial Fund to enable it
to sponsor the preparation of plans for

Social Biology

a study. The plans included the development of the scope or content, the development of the instruments, i.e., the interview
forms, and the subjection of the plans to
field test.

As a first step toward development of
content, Warren S. Thompson prepared a
list of hypotheses concerning factors believed to be related to family planning and
size of planned family. There were eventually twenty-three hypotheses. As for research instruments, there was virtually
unanimous agreement from the outset to’
collect detailed pregnancy and contraceptive histories, socioeconomic histories since
marriage, and other needed demographic
and descriptive data. Following the advice
of the psychologists on the Committee, the
decision was made to utilize the multiplechoice questionnaire technique for measurements of attitudes and for the general delineation of the “psychological factors.”

Preliminary field work was carried out
from two centers—the Scripps Foundation
at Oxford and the Office of Population Research at Princeton. In each place, the
wording, acceptability, and meaningfulness of specific questions were tried out in
home visits of skilled interviewers. In the
summer of 1940, something approaching
dress rehearsals of the study were carried
out in Hamilton, Ohio, under the direction of P. K. Whelpton and in Trenton,
New Jersey, under the direction of F. W.
Notestein. On the basis of this experience
the plans were laid for the final study.

The final study was conducted in Indianapolis in 1941. Whelpton served as director of the field work. The field work included: (1) an initial Household Survey of
virtually all white families in Indianapolis,
and (2) an intensive study of a sample of
native-white Protestant couples found to
be eligible for further study from the
limited information collected in the Household Survey. The first stage was carried

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 4

out early in 1941 with some 43 college students serving as interviewers. The second
stage was carried out with the help of
eleven carefully selected and carefully
trained women interviewers. As field director, Whelpton not only had to keep alert
on problems of sampling and quality control; he occasionally had to be a virtual
Solomon in settling minor disputes among
the interviewers.

If Whelpton’s first major effort in demography was that of helping develop a component method of population projections,
his second was his critical role in a pioneering effort at studying social and psychological factors affecting fertility. In a sense,
the fates were against him in both these
efforts. Because of the unexpected persistence of the postwar increases in fertility,
it soon became evident that the population
growth of the United States for the last
half of the twentieth century would be
larger than even the “high” estimates made
by Thompson and Whelpton. As for the
Indianapolis Study, although it yielded
a great deal of solid and valuable information and provided a stepping stone for
future studies, it did not yield as much new
knowledge about psychological factors affecting fertility as the planners had hoped
it would (Whelpton and Kiser, 1946, 1950,
1952, 1954, 1958).

Among Whelpton’s most noticeable characteristics were his sense of realism, his
sense of balance, and his persistence. He
was not one to throw up his hands in
despair if his population projections went
awry or if the Indianapolis Study did not
pan out as well as it should. To him, demographic research was a never-ending challenge to increase the base of our knowledge and to improve the accuracy of our
statistics about demographic matters. Even
during the heyday of population projections
he was constantly revising the projections
for the future on the basis of the most-up
P. K. Whelpton and Demography

 

443

to-date trends in fertility, mortality, and
immigration available. This is not to say
that Whelpton was hypercritical of his own
work. On the contrary, he had a good
healthy streak of self-confidence. Nevertheless, setbacks in research served as challenges for him to study the problem at hand
more closely, to take it apart, and to try to
devise a more adequate approach.

Whelpton’s high degree of self confidence
perhaps led him to persist in the belief
that the postwar increase in the birth rate
was transitory long after others accepted
its reality. His inquisitiveness led him to
deeper studies of fertility and to what may
be his third and perhaps most enduring
contribution to demography—the development of cohort measures of fertility.

Since the wartime increases in the birth
rate were due largely to increases in first
births, Whelpton was naturally dubious
about the permanence of the increase. In
a paper “Effect of Increased Birth Rate
on Future Population,” presented at the
1944 meetings of the American Public
Health Association in New York City,
Whelpton attracted the attention of demographers throughout the world with his
demonstration of the vulnerability of the
net reproduction rate to abnormal conditions (Whelpton, 1945). He demonstrated
that under conditions of age-specific rates
of first-births in the United States existing
in 1943, approximately 108% of the women
would have first births. This, of course,
was an impossibility since a woman could
have only one first birth. The anomalous
result arose because of the concentration
of first births in 1943. This pointed up not
only the inadequacy of the net reproduction rate as a predictive device, but also
the inadequacy of existing measures of
period or annual fertility and the need for
new measures of cohort or lifetime fertility.

Whelpton did not originate the cohort

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

444. Kiser

method. The basic idea is implicit in data
arranged according to age or year of birth
(for birth cohorts) or according to year of
marriage (for marriage cohorts). More
specifically, a fertility rate for a group of
women of specific age in a given year is a
datum that might appear in either cohort
or period series. The data can be laid out
in a manner to focus on the experience of
a cohort passing through life or on the experience of a cross-section of cohorts at a
given period.

Dr. Wade Hampton Frost, who was in
the School of Hygiene and Public Health
at Johns Hopkins University during 191938 frequently used the cohort method in
studies of tuberculosis. Probably partly
because Dr. Frost’s association with the
Milbank Memorial Fund, Edgar Sydenstricker and Frank W. Notestein applied
elementary techniques of cohort analysis
in their early studies of fertility. However,
Whelpton systematized the procedure in
detail in his book Cohort Fertility: Native
White Women in the United States (1954).
He contributed the section on cohort fertility in the 1950 census monograph on fertility (Grabill, Kiser, and Whelpton, 1958).
With A. A. Campbell, he computed cohort
fertility tables for white women in cohorts
of 1876 to 1943 in the United States
(Whelpton and Campbell, 1960). Whelpton’s work has stimulated others, notably
Norman B. Ryder, to further elaboration
of cohort fertility theory.

Another tack that Whelpton took in
his quest for a better understanding of fertility and the improvement of population
forecasts was the inauguration of the
Growth of American Families Studies in
1955. This was in part a followup of the
Indianapolis Study.

When the plans for a successor to the
Indianapolis Study were being discussed,
there gradually crystallized plans for two
studies. This occurred even though a com
Social Biology

mon “Steering Committee” served both.
On the one hand, Charles Westoff, Elliot
Mishler, Philip Sagi, and Robert B. Potter
of Princeton were anxious to try their
hands at another attempt to study social
and psychological factors affecting fertility.
On the other hand, Whelpton, perhaps
remembering that the Indianapolis Study
had yielded good results regarding the relation of socioeconomic factors to fertility
and poorer results regarding psychological
factors, developed plans for the GAF
(Growth of American Families) studies.
The original design was to interview a
representative sample of white married
women in 1955 and another sample drawn
in the same manner in 1960. From each
survey, women were to collect fertility and
contraceptive histories, socioeconomic data,
and some fairly simple data on attitudes regarding family size and expectations regarding births or more births during the
next five years. The original chief purpose
of the second or 1960 study was that of
testing the validity of data on expectations.
This test was desired in order to ascertain
the potential usefulness of the expectation
data for the improvement of population
estimates. As described later by Ryder and
Westoff, “The method was daring in its
simplicity! Ask each woman to make her
own forecast of her future fertility” (Ryder and Westoff, 1971, p. 37).

As for the validity of the data, the expectations voiced in 1955 appeared to be
fulfilled in 1960 insofar as gross averages
were concerned but not with respect to
distributions by number of births. Perhaps
one could hardly expect a close validation
on distributions since the 1955 and 1960
surveys were simply based on samples
drawn in the same manner; they did not
represent a real longitudinal study of the
same couples.

Whelpton and his colleagues utilized the
expectation data in the population forecasts
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

. Vol. 20, No. 4

P. K. Whelpton

presented in the first GAF report (Freedman, Whelpton and Campbell, 1959). Ryder and Westoff subsequently challenged
the validity of expectation data for predictive purposes. However, their respect
for the principles of GAF and even of the
usefulness of expectation data, is attested
to by their taking over the national fertility studies of 1965 and 1970. Both were
patterned largely after the GAF studies.
They included questions on intended and
expected numbers of children but did not
try to use them as bases for population
forecasts.

As for Whelpton’s contribution at the
United Nations, John Durand, Whelpton’s
colleague and successor has written as follows (1964, p. 324):

What Whelpton did to advance demography on the worldwide front and particularly in the less developed countries, during
the two and one-half years of his service as
Director of the United Nations Population
Division is not documented by published
works bearing his signature. It is remembered with the highest appreciation by his
former co-workers at the United Nations
and will surely not be forgotten by the
members of the Population Commission, the
Preparatory Committee for the 1954 World
Population Conference, the participants in
the United Nations Seminar on Population
Problems in Asia and the Far East (Bandung, 1955), the collaborators in The
Mysore Population Study, and The Determinants and Consequences of Population
Trends, and the workers on demographic
studies in many countries throughout the
world, who had the benefit of his advice,
cooperation, and support.

The high regard in which Whelpton’s
demographic work is held is indicated by
the extent to which his methods have been
followed by government agencies, research
organizations, and by able demographers.
The Bureau of the Census took over an
adaptation of the Thompson-Whelpton
method of population projections in the
forties. The National Office of Vital Statistics adopted his method of correction of
births for under-registration and used it

 

 

and Demography

445

for the years 1909~59 after which registration was deemed to be reasonably complete. The National Center for Health Statistics followed his recommendation for
tabulations of births by age and parity.
Both the National Center and The Bureau
of the Census cooperated with him in the
preparation of cohort fertility tables. The
two GAF studies were continued in 1965
and 1970 by Ryder and Westoff under
government auspices. In the cohort fertility method, Whelpton has ardent and
able disciples not only in this country but
throughout the world. It is true that in
some cases the successors have tried to
improve upon the methods. However, the
basic structure and principles laid down
by Whelpton still exist.

The National Center for Health Statistics is now planning a program of regular surveys of the GAF type. Commenting
on this, the recent Report of the Commission on Population Growth and the American Future (1972, p. 131) stated:

The feasibility of such work has been dem
onstrated in a series of surveys undertaken
since 1955 by private organizations.

The Commission recommends program
support and continued adequate financial
support for the Family Growth Survey as
almost the first condition for evaluating the
effectiveness of national population policies
and programs.

Finally, a word may be said about the
warmth and gentleness of Whelpton. He
was democratic to the core. He often said
that in his frequent visits to government
agencies he liked to slip away from “the
brass” and have talks with the underlings
who were also his friends, They liked him,
trusted him, and confided in him. They
told him office gossip that he could not get
from the “big shots.”” Whelpton was not
only a demographer’s demographer. He was
a warm friend of workers of all grades in
the trade.

I would like to take this opportunity to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

446 Kiser

pay tribute to Whelpton’s wife and children. Their supportive roles were important to him. His wife was the delightful
hostess to a steady stream of study groups
and individuals that descended upon him.
He liked to attend conferences in various
parts of the world, especially if his wife
could accompany him. If traveling alone,
he looked forward to the return to his
family.

A “Bibliography of P. K. Whelpton”
compiled by the writer and believed to be
fairly complete contains a total of about
111 items. It includes 6 books of which
Whelpton was author or coauthor, 5 volumes of reports on the Indianapolis Study
of which he and I were co-editors, and
about 100 articles and reports published in
scientific journals, proceedings, symposia,
and government or quasi-governmental
publications. Lack of space precludes inclu
Social Biology

sion of the full bibliography with the present article. However, the Selected Additional Publications includes some of the
more important items except those already
listed as references and except individual
articles from the Indianapolis Study.
Whelpton’s publications provide a lasting
monument to the wide range of his interests, to his industry and scholarship, to his
tireless devotion to the science of demography, and to his deep concern over the national and world population problems of his
time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was presented in substantially
the present form at Miami University, Oxford,
Ohio, April 20, 1972, as a P. K. Whelpton
Memorial Lecture sponsored by the Scripps
Foundation for Research in Population Problems, Miami University. The author thanks
the Scripps Foundation for permission to publish the article.

REFERENCES

CoMMISSION ON POPULATION GROWTH AND THE
AMERICAN Future. 1972. Population and the
American future. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C.

Duranp, JoHn D. 1964. Pascal Kidder Whelpton,
1893-1964. Pop. Index. 30:323-324.

FREEDMAN, RONALD, P. K. WHELPTON, and ARTHUR
A. CAMPBELL. 1959. Family planning, sterility,
and population growth. McGraw-Hill, New
York.

GRABILL, Witson H., Cirypr V. Kiser and P. K.
WHELPTON. 1958. The fertility of American
Women, John Wiley and Sons, New York.

NoTESTEIN, FRANK W. 1971. Reminiscences, Milbank Mem, Fund Quart, 49:Part IT, p.68.

PEARL, RAYMOND, and LOWELL J. Reep. 1920. On
the rate of growth of the population of the
United States since 1790 and its mathematical
representation. Proceedings Nat. Acad. Sci. 6:
275-288.

Ryper, NorMAN, and CHarrrs F. WESTOFF. 1971.
Reproduction in the United States, 1965. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

THOMPSON, WARREN S. 1915. Population—a study
in Malthusianism. Longmans, Green & Co., New
York.

THOMPSON, WARREN S., and P. K. WHELPTON.
1933a. Population trends in the United States.
McGraw-Hill, New York.

. 19336. The population of the Nation, p.

1-58. In Recent social trends, Report of the

President’s Research Committee on Social

Trends, Vol. 1. McGraw-Hill, New York.

 

 

 

. 1937. Section A. Estimates of the future
population of the United States, 1940-1980.
Section C. Ratios of children to women by

size of community by divisions and states, 1910,

1920, 1930. Section D. Ratios of children to

women by counties, 1930. In U.S, National

Resources Committee 1937. Population Statis
tics: National data. Government Printing Office,

Washington, D.C.

. 1938, Population estimates in U.S. National] Resources Committee, The problems of a
changing population (especially p. 22~27). Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

WHELptTon, P. K. 1926. Occupational groups in
the United States, 1820-1920. J. Amer. Statist.
Assoc. 21:335-343.

. 19284. Industrial development and popu
Aton growth. Soc. Forces 6:458-467 and 629
38.

 

 

. 1928b. Population of the United States,
1925-1975. Amer. J. Sociol. 34:253-270.

. 1938. Needed population research. Prepared for the Population Association of America with the cooperation of the Milbank Memorial Fund. The Science Press, Lancaster, Pa.

. 1945. Effect of increased birth rate on
future population. Amer. J. Publ. Health 35:
326-333,

1954. Cohort fertility: Native white
women in the United States. Princeton Univ.
Press, Princeton, N.J.

WHELPTON, P. K., and ARTHUR A. CAMPBELL.

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 4

1960. Fertility tables for birth cohorts of American women, Part I. Annual and cumulative
birth rates, by age, by order of birth for all
women in cohorts of 1876 to 1943. Vital Statistics Special Reports 51(1) :1~29.

WHetptTon, P, K., ArtHUR A. CAMPBELL, and
Joun E. Patterson. 1966. Fertility and fertility planning in the United States. Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

WuHetrtTon, P. K., and CLypE V. Kiser (eds.}.
1946-1958. Social and psychological factors af
P. K. Whelpton and Demography

447

fecting fertility. Vol. 1, 1946. The household
survey in Indianapolis, 138 pp., Vol. 2, 1950.
The intensive study: Purpose, scope, methods
and partial results, pp. 139-466, Vol. 3, 1952.
Further reports on hypotheses in the Indianapolis study, pp. 467-800, Vol. 4, 1954, Further
reports on hypotheses and other data from the
Indianapolis study, p. 801-1086, Vol. 5, 1958.
Concluding reports and summary of chief findings from the Indianapolis study, p. 10871372. Milbank Memorial Fund, New York.

SELECTED ADDITIONAL PUBLICATIONS OF P. K. WHELPTON

CAMPBELL, ArtHuR A., P. K. WaHeELPToN, and
RONALD FREEDMAN, 1958. The growth of American families: Results of a national survey, p.
128~132. In Proceedings of Social Statistics
Section, 1958 meetings of American Statistical
Association, Washington, D.C,

CaMPseLL, ArTHuR A., P. K, WxHeLpton, and
R. F. Tomasson. 1963. The reliability of birth
expectations of U.S. wives, p. 49-58. In Proceeding of the International Population Conference, New York, 1961. John Wright and Sons,
London.

FREEDMAN, RonALp, P. K. WHELPTon, and
ARTHUR A, CAMPBELL. 1959, Family planning
in the United States. Sci. Amer. 200:50-55.

THOMPSON, WARREN §., and P. K. WHELPTON,
1936, Population policies of European countries.
Ann. Amer, Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 188:297-306.

. 1938. Levels of living and population pres
sure. Ann. Amer. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 198:93
100.

 

 

. 1941. Estimated future population by age

and sex: 1945-1980. 4 pp. U.S. Bureau of the

Census, Sixteenth Census: 1940. Population

Series P3 No. 15. Government Printing Office,

Washington, D.C.

. 1943, Estimates of the future population
of the United States, 1940-2000. 137 pp. Prepared for National Resources Board. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

WHELPTON, P. K. 1929. Differentials in true natural increase. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 24:233249,

 

 

. 1932. The future growth of population in
the United States, p. 77-86. In G. H. L. F. PittRivers (ed.), Problems of population. George
Allen and Unwin, London.

. 1934. The completeness of birth registration in the United States. J. Amer. Statist.
Assoc, 29:125-136.

. 1935, Causes of the decline in birth rates.
Milbank Mem, Fund. Quart. 13:237-251.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. 1935. Why the large rise in the German

birth rate? Amer. J. Sociol. 41:299-313.

. 1936. An empirical method of calculating

future population. J. Amer. Statist, Assoc. 31:

457-473.

. 1936. Geographic and economic differ
entials in fertility. Ann. Amer. Acad. Pol, Soc.

Sci. 188:37-55.

. 1937. Corrected birth tables by states,

1918-1921, 1929-1931. Section A in National

Resources Committee, Population statistics:

State data. Government Printing Office, Wash
ington, D.C.

. 1946. Reproduction rates adjusted for age,

parity, fecundity and marriage. J. Amer. Statist.

Assoc, 41:501-516.

. 1950. The outlook for control of fertility

in Japan. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 15:34—42.

. 1950. Births and birth rates in the entire

United States: 1909~1948. Vital Statistics-Spe
cial Reports 33(8):133-162.

. 1955. A study of “expected” completed

fertility of a national sample of white women,

p. 106-112. Zn Current research in human

fertility. Milbank Memorial Fund, New York.

. 1963. Why did the United States’ crude

birth rate decline during 1957-1962? Pop, In
dex 29:120-125.

. 1964. Trends and differentials in the
spacing of births. Demography 1(1):83-93.
Wuetrton, P, K., and NELte E. Jackson. 1940.
Prolificacy distribution of white wives according to fertility tables for the registration area.

Hum. Biol. 12:35-58.

WuHetrton, P, K., and Crype V. Kiser. 1945.
Trends, determinants, and control in human
fertility. Ann. Amer. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 237:
112-122.

WHELPTON, P. K. (Assisted by Hore T. Etprmcr
and Jacos S, Srecer). 1947. Forecasts of the
population of the United States: 1945-1975.

 

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

 
