Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The genetics of affective disorder and genetic
counseling

Remi J. Cadoret

To cite this article: Remi J. Cadoret (1976) The genetics of affective disorder and genetic
counseling, Social Biology, 23:2, 116-122, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988217

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988217

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
The Genetics of Affective Disorder
and Genetic Counseling

 

Remi J. Cadoret

Department of Psychiatry
University of Iowa
Iowa City, lowa

ABSTRACT: Affective disorders—depression and mania—occurring with no preexisting psychiatric condition, severe physical illness, or recent personal loss can be divided into unipolar
(depression only) and bipolar (both manic and depressive episodes) disorders. Bipolar illness is
transmitted in some families as an X-linked dominant factor. In other families, X-linked transmission does not occur. Hence, bipolar illness may be similar to retinitis pigmentosa. This makes
some types of genetic counseling difficult to apply to bipolar families. There is no evidence that
unipolar depressive illness is transmitted by an X-linked factor. Family studies indicate that there
might be more than one type of unipolar illness. Limited prediction of risk of depression and other
psychiatric conditions in other family members can be based on family studies which show that
alcoholism and personality disorder occur frequently in families of early onset depressives but

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

much less frequently in families of late onset depressives (age 40 or older).

Affective disorder is one of the commonest psychiatric conditions and is best
understood as mainly a disorder of mood
with other symptoms arising primarily
from the mood change. By far the commonest mood alteration is depression;
mania, or a euphoric expansive mood, is
much rarer. Some individuals and members of their families seem to have episodes
of mania as part or all of their affective
disorder, whereas other individuals and
their family members have depressions
only. In some persons, psychosocial events
seem to precipitate affective episodes; in
others, no such precipitants can be found.
In some affective conditions, little evidence is available to support a genetic hypothesis; in others, there is direct evidence
of genetic transmission. All of this suggests
that affective disorder is a heterogeneous
group of conditions. A clinically useful
classification of affective disorder, which
takes into account familial transmission
and precipitating events, distinguishes

three general classes of depression (Winokur, 1973):

1. Bereavement or grief reaction—a
depression occurring within a short time of
an emotionally important loss, such as
death of a spouse (Clayton et al., 1968).
There is no evidence at present of a genetic
factor in this condition.

2. Secondary depression—a depression
occurring during a preexisting psychiatric
illness, such as alcoholism, anxiety neurosis, obsessional neuroses, antisocial personality disorder, or schizophrenia (Feighner et al., 1968). The main hereditary
component in this group seems to be associated with the primary illness, e.g., alcoholics show an increased family incidence of alcoholism.

3. Primary affective disorder—an affective illness occurring with o preexisting psychiatric condition, severe physical
illness, or recent personal loss (Robins and
Guze, 1972). There is considerable evidence that genetic factors are important in

116

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

primary affective disorder. On the basis of
clinical picture and family constellation of
psychiatric illness, primary affective disorder has been extensively further subdivided into two kinds of illness—unipolar, in which only depression occurs,
and bipolar, in which both manic and depressive episodes occur.

Some of the clinical features that differentiate unipolar from bipolar illness are
shown in Table 1. Of more interest in a
discussion of genetic transmission are the
familial variables which are also shown in
Table 1. More members of bipolar families

Affective Disorder and Genetic Counseling

117

shown in several studies strongly suggests
that transmission of bipolar affective disorder or manic depressive disease occurs
as an X-linked dominant (Reich et al.,
1969; Cadoret et al., 1970). Further support for the X-linked hypothesis has come
from studies in which the linkage of either
red-green color blindness or the X¢g? antigen was studied and was found to show a
significant association with a diathesis for
manic depressive illness.

The first study in this series was that of
Reich et al. (1969) who extensively studied
two families in which red-green color

TABLE 1

CLINICAL AND FAMILIAL VARIABLES SHOWING DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN BIPOLAR AND UNIPOLAR AFFECTIVE DISORDER

VARIABLES

Clinical variables
1. Premorbid temperament ..............2..0.085
2. Age of onset

ete veeoavnereee tone eee ree ere Heo vee eaes

3. Frequency of episodes .............0e ee ceueees

4. Length of episodes .............. ce eee cece eens
5. IUness during post-partum period ..............

6. Response to treatment............ cc eevee cence

Familial variables
1. Two-generation history of affective illness
(proband-parent; proband-child)
2. Bipolar illness in siblings
3. Son vs. daughter risk for affective disorder
when mother affectively ill.................0..

so ue ete eaoseanae

eee em eoeer evra mr Bee eevr aves

are affected with illness, and bipolar patients definitely have an increased family
incidence of other members with manic
episodes. Studies of the pattern of inheritance of illness also have shown clear differences between bipolar and unipolar affective disorder.

GENETICS OF BIPOLAR AFFECTIVE
DISORDER

One such finding is shown in the last
line of Table 1. The pattern of inheritance

BIPOLAR UNIPOLAR
more more
hypomanic depressive
younger older

(median = 36 yrs.)
less frequent
(18% have = 6

(median = 28 yrs.)
more frequent
(57% have = 6

episodes) episodes)
shorter longer
greater risk for no measured risk
psychosis for illness
good response to not as good a
lithium response or ?
response to lithium
54% 34%
10% 0.3%
23% vs. 24% 9% vs. 23%

blindness was present. In each of the
families, a highly significant association
between the carrier state for color blindness and for illness was found. More recently, Fieve and his co-workers (1973)
have studied nine families and have reported a close linkage for proton and
deuton color blindness and manic depressive illness. Winokur and Tana (1969) in
one study and Mendlewicz et al. (1973) in
another have between them studied ten
families in which the Xg* antigen and
manic depressive illness were found to be
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

118 Cadoret

significantly associated. Thus, there is direct evidence of genetic linkage of the
manic depressive diathesis and the X
chromosome.

However, there is some evidence that
this mechanism may not operate in all
families. There are at least four studies
which have shown results incompatible
with X-linked transmission. In sixteen
male bipolar patients, Von-Grieff et al.
(1973) found that four had affectively disturbed fathers and that there was no evidence of an affective disturbance on the
mothers’ sides of the family trees. Green et
al. (1973) reported on thirty-five bipolar
families with at least four cases of a
father-to-son transmission, again with no
evidence of affective illness on the maternal side in these four families. Two other
studies, those of Perris (1968) and of Dunner et al. (1972), have reported a number
of apparent cases of father-to-son transmission of bipolar illness, although in
these latter two series it is possible that
illness could have entered from the maternal side.

Thus, we have evidence for two kinds
of transmission in bipolar illness, one an
X-linked and the other a possible autosomal. This situation is analogous to
that found in other human illnesses such
as retinitis pigmentosa, where partial sex
linkage accounts for transmission in some
families and an autosomal gene in others.

GENETIC COUNSELING IN BIPOLAR
FAMILIES

The fact that there may be two kinds of
genetic transmission makes it difficult to
predict in any given situation what the
results will be for offspring of patients, or
to make other predictions which might be
of importance in genetic counseling. In
families where father-to-son transmission
clearly occurred, it would mot be reason
Social Biology

able to try to apply the X-linked dominant
model. In families where no father-to-son
transmission was present, one could apply
an X-linked dominant model with the
proviso that the probabilities obtained
would be true only if this model were applicable.

Unfortunately, at present there is no
clinical way to determine whether the
family in question has a disease transmitted by an X-link or not, aside from knowing whether there is father-to-son transmission. Families with a useful marker
gene such as color blindness or Xg* are so
rare that this association is not of practical
value in counseling. Thus, any information that might be given to bipolar families
seeking genetic counseling might be so tentative as to be almost valueless.

One alternative solution would be to use
risk figures obtained from general surveys
such as Stenstedt’s (1952) in which one can
compute the risk chance for illness in children, given a sick parent. However, the
difficulty with such survey material is that
in most of these series individual family
members were not interviewed, so that
considerable illness could well have been
overlooked. Thus, at the present time,
there is no universally satisfactory way of
assessing probabilities for risk as there
would be in illnesses where only one type
of genetic transmission is indicated, such
as Huntington’s chorea.

Although one cannot cite exact probabilities of illness in other family members
of bipolars, it is useful to apply some of the
genetic information from these studies to
clinical situations. For example, given a
patient with bipolar illness, it is much
more likely that a relative will suffer from
a bipolar psychosis. Should one be in a
position to give advice about the sick relative, it would certainly be indicated to
suggest that this individual’s chance of
suffering from bipolar illness would be

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

high enough to warrant treatment for
same.

For example, the author once had as a
patient a young girl in her late teens who
had suffered from a clear-cut manic episode and was currently being seen for a
mild depression. During the course of her
treatment, she mentioned that her father,
a man in his mid-fifties, had been having
increasing difficulty in the past year with
his memory, had been forced to give up his
business, and had been diagnosed as having a chronic brain syndrome by the practitioner in their small town. I urged the
family to seek further diagnostic help for
the father and to obtain another medical
opinion. This was done, and it was found
that the father was suffering from depression, not from an organic brain syndrome.
He responded well to antidepressant
treatment. Thus, in this situation, the application of a genetic principle led to more
effective treatment for a sick family
member. This is especially important in
this period when we have available treatment means such as lithium carbonate
which are specific for bipolar illness.

A part of management of psychiatric
patients with bipolar illness often involves
some kind of genetic counseling. Such
counseling may develop from questions by
the patient regarding the heritability of the
illness. It is my own personal custom to
inform such inquiring individuals that, although there is considerable evidence of a
genetic component in manic depressive
illness, it is only in special circumstances
that we are able to predict what the approximate risk would be for children. We
try to stress the positive aspect of the
heritability, that at most the risk is 50 per
cent (assuming X-linked dominant transmission) and that we are at least dealing
with an illness that can be treated quite
successfully and does not lead to severe
chronic handicaps.

Affective Disorder and Genetic Counseling

119

GENETIC STUDIES OF DEPRESSIVE
DISEASE

As can be seen from Table 1, depressive
disease is distinguished from bipolar illness on a number of clinical points. The
~attern of inheritance has been shown to
be different from a number of series
(Cadoret et al., 1970). A simple X-linked
type of inheritance is clearly not operative
in unipolar illness, as is shown by the finding of a large number of father-to-son
pairs of apparent illness transmission as
well as by the findings in children of ill
mothers. The latter can be seen in the last
line of Table 1 which shows a much higher
risk for illness among daughters than
among sons of ill unipolar mothers, a difference that is not compatible with an
X-linked hypothesis.

Furthermore, there have been a number
of studies which have shown that depressive illness is probably a heterogenous entity. These studies have divided patients
with depressive illness into those whose
onset was before 40 years of age and those
whose onset was after 40 years. The findings from six studies are summarized in
Table 2, and in general there is good
agreement between the studies.

There are some major findings that
have supported the idea of two possible
kinds of unipolar affective disorder. First,
early onset probands have a higher incidence of affective disorder in other family
members. Second, early onset depressives
show more alcoholism among male relatives. This evidence has suggested two
kinds of illness, one occurring early and
the other later in life. As prototypes, Winokur et al. (1971) and Winokur (1973d)
have regarded early onset females as representative of early onset depression and
late onset males as prototypic of the late
onset type of disease.

Looking at the data from the six series
in terms of affective disorder in relatives of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

120

TABLE 2
FAMILIAL PSYCHIATRIC ILLNESS IN DEPRESSIVE PATIENTS SEPARATED ACCORDING TO AGE OF ONSET AND SEX:

CONSISTENCY ACROSS SIX STUDIES (1,255 PROBANDS)

AFFECTIVE DISORDER IN RELATIVES OF

EARLY ONSET FEMALES:

LATE ONSET MALES:

MorE FAMILIAL ALCOHOLISM

More FAMILIAL AFFECTIVE

MALE RELATIVES 2 FEMALE RELATIVES >

IN EARLY ONSET THAN LATE

DISORDER IN EARLY ONSET
THAN LATE ONSET PROBANDS

No. or
PROBANDS

MALE RELATIVES

FEMALE RELATIVES

ONSET PROBANDS

STUDY

1. Winokur, Cadoret,

yes

yes

100 yes yes

Dorzab, and Baker (1971) ....

2. Winokur, Cadoret

yes yes yes yes

345

Dorzab, and Baker (1971) ....

3. Woodruff, Guze, and

Clayton (1971) .....
4. Winokur (19738)* ...........

5. Marten, Cadoret,

yes
yes

yes

no

yes
yes

yes
yes

139
242

204 yes yes yes yes

Winokur, and Ora (1972).....

6. Winokur, Morrison,

no

yes

yes

yes

225

Clancy, and Crowe (1973) ....

Cadoret

* In this study, early onset is before 40 and late onset is after 50; in all other studies, early onset is before 40 and late onset is after 40.

Social Biology

the two prototypic groups (late onset males
and early onset females), one finds consistent differences. Male relatives of late
onset males appear to have an equal or
slightly increased risk for affective disorders than do the female relatives. In contrast, female relatives of early onset
females have a much higher incidence of
affective disorder than do male relatives.

In relatives of the early onset group, the
other illnesses that seem to occur instead
of depression are alcoholism and, in some
series, sociopathy (Winokur et al., 1971).
This variation has led to the use of the
term “depression spectrum disease” to describe early onset affective disorder. At the
present time, there is no clinical way to
differentiate between the early and late
onset types of illness other than the obvious difference in age of onset.

The exact mode of transmission of unipolar depressive illness, whether it is the
early or the late onset type, is not at all
clear from present studies. It is possible to
eliminate a sex-linked inheritance and to
state that the transmission is different
from that found in some bipolar illness. At
the present writing, there is no available
linkage data to prove a genetic factor directly or to indicate a specific type of genetic transmission.

GENETIC COUNSELING IN UNIPOLAR
DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

Because no specific genetic transmission
has been shown, it is currently impossible
to apply refined methods of probability to
assess risk in relatives. As with bipolar
illness, published risks of illness in chil.
dren of probands and among other family
members are open to the methodologic
criticism that under-determination or
under-reporting of illness is undoubtedly
present in many of the studies and must be
taken into account if such published risks
are to be used as crude guidelines.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

In counseling, it is useful to make the
distinction between a patient with unipolar illness of early onset versus one with
late onset since it is possible to predict a
higher incidence not only of affective disorder but also of other conditions such as
alcoholism and possibly sociopathy in relatives of early onset probands. This prediction of other kinds of illness in family
members may be of considerable clinical
usefulness and can lead to help in understanding the patient and his environment,
which may be considerably disturbed by
the presence of other ill relatives.

In counseling, it is also possible to state
that the risk for relatives developing an
affective disorder is lower in unipolar
families than in bipolar families. Thus, it
is of some importance in predicting outcome for families to determine whether
one is dealing with a unipolar or bipolar
family. In the individual with clear-cut

Affective Disorder and Genetic Counseling

121

clinical mania, there is no diagnostic problem. Those individuals with depressions
prove to be difficult. If there is no family
history of mania, we usually call the individual unipolar; if a family member has
been manic, then the family is designated
bipolar. This distinction is not 100 per
cent certain because of possible overlooked manic episodes. Accordingly, in
“unipolar” families there is a finite possibility that a mania is present, although our
experience has indicated that this is very
infrequent.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by
U.S. Public Health Undergraduate Grant’
5-T02MH-05911-23. This paper was presented
at a conference on Genetic Counseling in
Psychiatric Disorders: State of the Science and
the Art, May 17, 1973, at the University of
Indiana, Indianapolis.

REFERENCES

CaDORET, R. J., G. WINOKUR, and P. CLAYTON.
1970. Family history studies VII: Manic depressive
disease vs. depressive disease. Brit. J. Psychiat.
116:625-635.

CLAYTON, P. J., L. DESMAREST, and G. WINOKUR.
1968. A study of normal bereavement. Amer. J.
Psychiat. 125:168-178.

DuNNER, D., E. GERSHON, and F. K. GooDwIn.
1972. Heritable factors in the severity of affective
illness. Paper read at the 123rd annual meeting of
the American Psychological Association, San
Francisco, Calif.

FEIGHNER, J. P., E. RoBins, S. R. Geize, R. A.
Wooprurr, Jr., G. WINOKUR, and R. Munoz.
1972. Diagnostic criteria for use in psychiatric research. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 26:57~—63.

FiEvE, R. R., J. MENDLEWIcz, J. D. RAINER, and
J. FLetss. 1973. A dominant X-linked factor in
manic depressive illness: Studies with color blindness. Paper presented at the 63rd annual meeting,
American Psychopathological Association, New
York, March 1-2.

GREEN, R., V. GoEeTzE, P. WHyBRow, and R.
JACKSON. 1973. X-linked transmission of manicdepressive illness. In Letters to the editor,
J.A.M.A. 223: 1289.

MARTEN, S., R. J. CADORET, G. WINOKUR, and E.
ORA. 1972. Unipolar depression: A family history
study. Biol. Psychiat. 4:205-213.

MENDLEWICZ, J., J. FLEISS, and R. R. FIEVE. 1973.
X-linked dominant transmission in manicdepressive illness (linkage studies with the Xg?

blood group). Paper presented at the 63rd annual
meeting of the American Psychopathological Association, New York, March 1-2.

PERRIS, C. 1968. Genetic transmission of depressive
psychoses. Acta Psychiat. Scand. (Supp).)
203:45-52.

REICH, T., P. CLAYTON, and G. WINOKuUR. 1969.
Family history studies: V. The genetics of mania.
Amer. J. Psychiat. 125:1358-1369.

ROBINS, E., and S. B. GuzeE. 1972. Classification of
affective disorders: The primary-secondary, the
endogenous-reactive, and the neurotic-psychotic
concepts. Jn T. A. Williams, M. M. Katz, and J.
Shield, Jr. (eds.), Recent advances in the
psychobiology of the depressive illnesses: Proceedings of a workshop sponsored by NIMH. Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C.

STENSTEDT, A. 1952. A study in manic-depressive
psychosis. Acta Psychiat. Scand. (Suppl.) 79.

Von GreiFF, H., P. R. McHuGu, and P. STOKEs.
1973. The familial history in sixteen males with
bipolar manic depressive disorder. Paper presented at the 63rd annual meeting of the American
Psychopathological Association, New York,
March 1-2.

WINOKUR, G. W. 1973a. Diagnostic and genetic aspects of affective illness. Psychiatric Annuals, Feb.

. 1973B. The types of affective disorder. J.
Nerv. Ment. Dis. 156: 82-96.

WINoKurR, G., R. J. CADORET, J. Dorzas, and M.
BAKER. 1971. Depressive disease: A genetic study.
Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 24:135-144.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

122 Cadoret Social Biology

WIinokur, G., J. MORRISON, J. CLANCY, and R. role of X-linked dominant factor in manic depresCrowe. 1973. The Iowa 500: Familial and clinical sive disease. Dis. Nerv. Sept. 30:89-93.
findings favor two kinds of depressive illness. WooprurFF, R., S. GuzE, and P. CLAYTON. 1971.
Comp. Psychiat. 14:99-107. Unipolar and bipolar primary affective disorder.

WINoKuR, G., and V. L. TANNA. 1969. Possible Brit. J. Psychiat. 119:33-38.
