Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Theodosius dobzhansky

Francisco J. Ayala & Timothy Prout

To cite this article: Francisco J. Ayala & Timothy Prout (1999) Theodosius dobzhansky, Social
Biology, 46:3-4, 184-189, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1999.9988998

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9988998

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
Theodosius Dobzhansky'

Theodosius Dobzhansky died near
the end of his seventy-sixth year on December 18, 1975, in Davis, California.
Dobzhansky was one of the most influential scientists of the twentieth century;
he also was one of the most prolific. His

= first scientific publication appeared in
“1918 when Dobzhansky was eighteen
6 years old, a short paper describing a
5 hew species of beetle. At the time of
® his death, he had published nearly six
oo hundred works, including more than a
SS dozen books, and there were several man= uscripts in press or at various stages of
= preparation.

Genetics and the Origin of Species,
1937

Dobzhansky’s most significant contribution to science doubtlessly was the
5 modern synthesis of evolutionary theory
‘= accomplished in Genetics and the Origin
— of Species, first published in 1937—a book
& that may be considered the twentieth3 century counterpoint of Darwin’s The
= Origin of Species (1859). The title of
‘<= Dobzhansky’s book suggests its theme:
8 the role of genetics in explaining the origin of species, a synthesis of genetic
knowledge and Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection.

By the early 1930s, the work of R. A.
Fisher, Sewall Wnight, J. B. S. Haldane,
and S. S. Chetverikov (virtually unknown
outside the USSR) had provided a theoretical framework accounting for the
process of evolution, particularly natural

ty of Michigan]

vers

‘Reprinted from Social Biology, 1976, Vol. 23, No.
2, pp. 101-107.

 

selection, in genetic terms. This work had
a limited impact on the biology of the
time for various reasons: it was formulated for the most part in difficult mathematical language; it was almost exclusively theoretical without empirical
corroboration, i.e., it showed how evolution could occur but not that it had
occurred according to the theory; and
it was limited in scope. Dobzhansky
completed the integration of Darwinism
and Mendelism in two ways. First, he
gathered the empirical evidence that
corroborated the mathematic-theoretical
framework. Second, he extended the integration of genetics with Darwinism much
beyond the range of issues treated by the
mathematicians into critical evolutionary
issues—such as the process of speciation
—not subject to mathematical treatment.
Moreover, Dobzhansky’s book was written in prose understandable to all biologists.

Thus, the modern theory of evolution
was born in 1937 with the publication of
Genetics and the Origin of Species. Other
authors would in the 1940s and later contribute major advances to the modern theory of evolution, for example, by propounding the implications of the theory
in systematics, in paleontology, or in
plant evolution. Dobzhansky updated his
synthesis of the theory of evolution in the
second (1941) and third (1951) editions
of Genetics and the Origin of Species and
in Genetics of the Evolutionary Process
(1970), a book that he considered the
fourth edition of the earlier book, but that
had changed too much to serve under the
same title. Much of the empirical work
that made possible the synthesis ad
184
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

vanced in these works was done by
Dobzhansky himself.

Darwin, near the end of The Origin of
Species, wrote, “Much light will be
thrown [by his theory] on the origin of
man”; in The Descent of Man (1871) Darwin showed mankind as the outcome of
biological evolution and thus kin to all
life. Likewise, Dobzhansky extended the

synthesis of Mendelism and Darwinism

to the understanding of human nature in
Mankind Evolving (1962), a book that
some think as important as Genetics and
the Origin of Species.

Mankind Evolving, 1962

Mankind Evolving remains an unsurpassed synthesis of genetics, evolutionary
theory, anthropology, and sociology. Dobzhansky expounded that human nature
has two dimensions, the biological which
mankind shares with the rest of life and
the cultural which is exclusive to man.
These two dimensions result from two interconnected processes, biological evolution and cultural evolution:

The thesis to be set forth in the present
book is that man has both a nature and a
“history.” Human evolution has two components, the biological or organic, and the
cultural or superorganic. These components are neither mutually exclusive nor
independent, but interrelated and interdependent. Human evolution cannot be understood as a purely biological process,
nor can it be adequately described as a history of culture. It is the interaction of biology and culture. There exists a feedback
between biological and cultural processes
(Mankind Evolving, p. 18).

Two principal topics of Mankind
Evolving are the interrelated concepts of
human diversity and race. Dobzhansky’s
first major publication dealing with these
topics was Heredity, Race, and Society
(1946), written in collaboration with

Theodosius Dobzhansky

 

185

L. C. Dunn, which was translated into
many languages and sold more than one
million copies. These two topics are also
the main subject of Dobzhansky’s last
published book, Genetic Diversity and
Human Equality (1973).

Genetic Diversity and Human Equality,
1973

Dobzhansky set forth that the individual is not the embodiment of some ideal
type, but rather a unique and unrepeatable
realization in the field of quasi-infinite
possible genetic combinations.

He was one of the first clearly to see
and to force the general recognition that
racial boundaries are arbitrary and, furthermore, that the immense variation
within races, however they are designated, naturally leads to the precept that
individuals should be judged by what
they are rather than by the race to which
they belong.

Dobzhansky considered human diversity a fact belonging to the realm of observable natural phenomena: “People are
innately, genetically, and therefore irremediably diverse and unlike” (Genetic
Diversity and Human Equality, p. 4). Biological distinctiveness is not, however, a
basis for inequality. Equality—as in equality in law and equality of opportunity—
“pertains to the rights and the sacredness
of life of every human being” (loc. cit.).
Dobzhansky pointed out that equality in
law and equality of opportunity is the
best strategy to maximize the benefits of
human biological diversity:

Denial of equality of opportunity stultifies
the genetic diversity with which mankind
became equipped in the course of its evolutionary development. Inequality conceals
and stifles some people’s abilities and
dissembles the lack of abilities in others.
Conversely, equality permits an optimal

 

 
3:48 08 December 2015

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 1

186

utilization of the wealth of the gene pool
of the human species (Mankind Evolving,
p. 285).

Dobzhansky had little patience with
racial prejudice or social injustice and
castigated those who pretended to base
them on what he called the “bogus ‘science’ of race prejudice.”

Dobzhansky’s lasting interest in the
relevance of biology, and particularly
evolutionary theory, to human affairs is
evident in the scores of articles that he
wrote on the subject and in the titles of
some of his books: Heredity, Race, and
Society (1946), Evolution, Genetics, and
Man (1955), The Biological Basis of
Human Freedom (1956), Radiation,
Genes, and Man (1959, with B. Wallace),
Mankind Evolving (1962), Heredity and
the Nature of Man (1964), The Biology of
Ultimate Concern (1967), and Genetic
Diversity and Human Equality (1973).

Contributions to Experimental
Genetics

Dobzhansky was not only a great synthesizer, and perhaps the greatest theorist
of evolution in the twentieth century, he
was also an eminent and extremely productive experimentalist. He may be considered the founder of experimental population genetics. During half a century
of intensive research and publication,
he made fundamental empirical contributions to virtually every major problem of
population genetics.

Although they were overshadowed by
his contributions to population genetics,
Dobzhansky made many contributions to
other areas of genetics and to other fields,
such as systematics. For example, using
translocations, he demonstrated in 1929
that the linear arrangement of genes based
on linkage relationships corresponds to a

Theodosius Dobzhansky

 

Social Biology

linear arrangement of genes in chromosomes; and he constructed the first sophisticated cytological map of gene location in the II and III chromosome. He
did some of the pioneer work showing
that crossover activity was not evenly
distributed along the chromosome. He
was among the first to show that sexdetermining genes are distributed over
the entire Drosophila genome. He conducted the first systematic study of
pleiotropy and made many contributions
to developmental genetics.

Dobzhansky’s success as an experimentalist depended on a wise combination of field and laboratory research, his
keenness in working always at the utmost
level of genetic resolution possible at
any given time, his ability to exploit the
possibilities of any new apparatus or experimental design, and his incisive choice
of appropriate organisms (for example,
Coccinellidae in the 1920s, Drosophila
pseudoobscura and its relatives since the
1930s, and the D. willistoni group of
species since the 1940s).

Evolutionary biology is a field with
implications reaching far into other
realms of knowledge. Particularly during
the last two decades of his life, Dobzhansky systematically investigated many
philosophical problems relevant to, or
emerging from, evolutionary theory.

Biographical Information

Theodosius Dobzhansky was born on
January 25, 1900, in Nemirov in the
Ukraine, the only son of Sophia Voinarsky and Grigory Dobzhansky. In 1910 the
family moved to the outskirts of Kiev,
where Dobzhansky lived through the tumultuous years of the Bolshevik revolution and World War I. He graduated in
biology from the University of Kiev in

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

1921, and from 1921 to 1924 taught zoology at the Polytechnic Institute. From
1924 to 1927, he was a lecturer in genetics at the University of Leningrad.

In 1927, Dobzhansky obtained a fellowship from the International Education
Board (Rockefeller Foundation) and arrived in New York on December 27 to
work with Thomas Hunt Morgan at
Columbia University. In the summer of
1928, Dobzhansky followed Morgan to
the California Institute of Technology
where he was appointed Assistant Professor of Genetics in 1929 and Professor of
Genetics in 1936. Dobzhansky returned
to New York in 1940 as Professor of Zoology at Columbia University, where he
remained until 1962 when he became
Professor at the Rockefeller Institute (renamed Rockefeller University in 1965),
also in New York City. On July 1, 1970,
Dobzhansky became emeritus at Rockefeller University, and in September, 1971,
he moved to the Department of Genetics
at the University of California, Davis,
where he was Adjunct Professor until his
death.

On August 8, 1924, Dobzhansky married Natalia (Natasha) Sivertzev, a geneticist in her own right, who at the time was
working with the famous Russian biologist I. I. Schmalhausen in Kiev. Natasha
was Dobzhansky’s faithful companion
and occasional scientific collaborator
until her death on February 22, 1969. The
Dobzhanskys had only one child, Sophie,
who is married to Michael D. Coe, Professor of Anthropology at Yale University.

In a routine medical check-up on June
1, 1968, it was discovered that Dobzhansky suffered from chronic lymphatic
leukemia, the least malignant form of
leukemia. He was given the prognosis
of “a few months to a few years” to live.
The progress of the leukemia over the

Theodosius Dobzhansky

187

following seven years was unexpectedly
slow, and even more surprising to his
physicians, it had little if any noticeable
effect on Dobzhansky’s energy and work
habits. However, the disease took a noticeable turn for the worse in the summer
of 1975. In mid-November he began
chemotherapy, but was not hospitalized
and continued work as usual. He was
convinced that the end of his life was
near and dreaded that he might become
unable to work and to care for himself.
Mercifully, this never came to pass. He
died of heart failure on the morning of
December 18, 1975. The previous day,
Dobzhansky had been working in the
laboratory.

Dobzhansky was a world traveler and
an accomplished linguist able to speak
six languages fluently and to read several
more. His interests covered a broad spectrum of human activities, including the
plastic arts, music, history, Russian literature, cultural anthropology, philosophy,
religion, and, of course, science. He was
a good naturalist and never lacked time
for a hike whether in the California Sierras, in the New England forests, or in the
Amazonian jungles. He loved horseback
riding, but practiced no other sports.
Throughout his academic career, Dobzhansky avoided administrative posts and
participated minimally in committee activities. He alleged, perhaps correctly,
that he had neither temperament nor ability for management. Most certainly, he
preferred to dedicate his working time to
research and writing rather than to administration.

Dobzhansky’s most obvious personality traits perhaps were magnanimity and
expansiveness. He recognized and generously praised the achievements of other
scientists; he admired the intellect of his
colleagues, even when admiration was
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

188

alloyed with disagreement. He made
many long-lasting friendships, usually
started by professional interactions.
Many of Dobzhansky’s friends were scientists younger than himself, who either
had worked in his laboratory as students,
postdoctoral researchers, or visitors, or
who had met him on his trips. Throughout his academic career, Dobzhansky had
about thirty graduate students and an
even greater number of postdoctoral students. He liked to be called “Doby” by
his friends, including young scientists or
students. To young biologists, he freely
gave his time and encouragement. He had
many friends abroad and was largely responsible for the establishment or development of genetics and evolutionary biology in various countries, notably Brazil,
Chile, and Egypt. He was conspicuously
affectionate and loyal toward his friends;
he expected affection and loyalty in return. Dobzhansky’s exuberant personality
was manifest not only in his friendships
but also in his antipathies, which he was
neither able, nor often willing, to hide.

Dobzhansky was a religious man, although he apparently rejected fundamental beliefs of traditional religion, such as
the existence of a personal God and of
life beyond physical death. His religiosity
was grounded on the belief that there is
meaning in the universe. He saw that
meaning in the fact that evolution has
produced the stupendous diversity of the
living world and has in fact progressed
from primitive forms of life to mankind.
Dobzhansky held that in man biological
evolution has transcended itself into the
realm of self-awareness and culture. He
believed that somehow mankind would
eventually evolve into higher levels of
harmony and creativity. He was a metaphysical optimist.

Theodosius Dobzhansky

Social Biology

Honors and Awards

Dobzhansky received many honors
and awards. He was president of several
professional organizations, including the
Genetics Society of America (1941), the
American Society of Naturalists (1950),
the Society for the Study of Evolution
(1951), the American Society of Zoologists (1963), the American Teilhard de
Chardin Association (1969) and the Behavior Genetics Association (1973). He
was Chairman of the Board of Directors
of the Society for the Study of Social Biology from 1969 until his death. He was
an elected member of the National Academy of Sciences, the Academy of Arts
and Sciences, the American Philosophical
Society, and of many foreign academies,
such as the Royal Society of London,
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences,
the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences,
the Brazilian Academy of Sciences, the
Academia Leopoldina, and the Academia
Nazionale dei Lincei.

More than twenty honorary degrees
were bestowed upon Dobzhansky by
many institutions: abroad, the universities
of Sao Paulo in Brazil (1943), Miinster in
Germany (1958), Montreal in Canada
(1958), Sydney in Australia (1960), Oxford in England (1964), Louvain in Belgium (1965), Padua in Italy; and in the
United States, Chicago (1959), Columbia
(1964), Michigan (1966), Syracuse
(1967), Berkeley (1968), and Northwester (1968).

He received the Daniel Giraud Elliot
Medal (1946) and the Kimber Genetics
Award (1958) from the National Academy of Sciences, the Darwin Medal from
the Academia Leopoldina (1959), the
Anisfield-Wolf Award (1963), the Pierre
Lecomte du Nouy Award (1963), the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

Addison Emery Verrill Medal from
Yale University (1966), the Gold Medal
Award for Distinguished Achievement
in Science from the American Museum
of Natural History (1969), and the Benjamin Franklin Medal from the Franklin
Institute (1973). One award that understandably he much prized was the National Medal of Science which he received from President Lyndon Johnson in

Theodosius Dobzhansky

189

January, 1964, although—as Doby was
quick to point out—it was President John
F. Kennedy who had chosen him for the
award.

FRANCISCO J. AYALA
TIMOTHY PROUT

Department of Genetics
University of California
Davis, California

 

 
