Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Elaboration of the definition of genetic counseling
into a model for counselee decision-making

Robert G. Bringle & Ray M. Antley

To cite this article: Robert G. Bringle & Ray M. Antley (1980) Elaboration of the definition of
genetic counseling into a model for counselee decision#making, Social Biology, 27:4, 304-318,
DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988433

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988433

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 7 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Elaboration of the Definition of Genetic Counseling
into a Model for Counseiee Decision-Making

 

Robert G. Bringle and Ray M. Antley

Department of Psychology, Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis, Indianapolis,
Indiana; and Indiana School of Medicine Division of Medical Genetics, Methodist Hospital of
Indiana, Indianapolis, Indiana

ABSTRACT: Genetic counseling has evolved from a eugenic orientation to an orientation concerned
with the physical and mental well-being of counselees. This change in genetic counseling, which has
received formal recognition in a new definition of genetic counseling, requires collateral development of the processes and evaluation of the outcomes of counseling. This paper offers a theory of
genetic counseling which interrelates genetic information, psychological responses, learning theory, and decision-making. The theory presented for genetic counseling is based on the more general
theories of learning, decision-making, and adaptation to psychological stress. This theory is extended into a practical model that provides a comprehensive explanation of the relationships between the activities of genetic counseling and informed decision-making, which is assumed to be a
major element of healthy counselee adjustment. Implications of this theory for the genetic counselor, the counselee, and the assessment of clinical and program success are discussed.

Genetic counseling is moving away _ selorsneed to have a basis for determining
from persuading counselees to adopt eu- when genetic counselees have completed
genic practices and toward advocating the process of making an informed decithat counselees make personal and in- _ sion. This is difficult since not everyone
formed decisions (Epstein, 1977; Fraser, who learns the genetic facts makes an in1973, 1976; Headings, 1973; MacIntyre, formed decision (Leonard et al., 1972;
1977). This shift in emphasis causes a _ Lippman-Hand and Fraser, 1979 a, b). Finumber of problems for the genetic coun- _ nally, to the extent that geneticists take reselor. First, most geneticists are trainedto sponsibility for counselees achieving the
understand genetics and generally lack goals of genetic counseling, the profesformal training in psychology and inhelp- _ sionals are making themselves responsible
ing counselees achieve an informed deci- for a result that is ideal and therefore
sion. It is also difficult for counselors to difficult to obtain (Antley, 1976; Sorenson
maintain motivation while working to fa- _ et al., 1980). This has the potential for becilitate informed decisions among coun- __ ing frustrating to genetic counselors.
selees when the success rate is low or when What is needed is a theory which exthe outcome is unknown. The interval in _ plains the steps between the presentation
time between the counseling andthe deci- of genetic information and counselees
sion process is long enough that it be- making a healthy adjustment to their gecomes difficult for counselors to know netic liabilities. Further, a theory needs to
whether they have succeeded. Geneticists provide an overall counseling strategy and
need a means for determining when they _ to be generative of practical models for
have carried out their responsibility even counselors planning their counseling tacthough there may be incomplete follow- __ tics. This guide for planning would allow
ups. Perhaps more important, the coun- _ counselors to set realistic counseling ob
304

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

jectives which can provide short-term
evaluative feedback. A theory which can
relate the achievement of these short-term
objectives to longer-term goals would goa
long way toward encouraging genetic
counselors to accept a rather idealistic
goal for their counseling efforts while at
the same time encouraging them to take
responsibility for accomplishing only
those intermediate objectives which are
realistic and feasible given a specific clinical situation. If these needs can be
satisfied, then geneticists have the opportunity to accept and foster goals for genetic counseling which go beyond their expertise without being entrapped in chronic
frustration and the need for an infinite
source of internal motivation. Their motivation can be encouraged by their measured success because the model would
encourage delineation of the task and simultaneously relate the intermediate
steps to the end goal (i.e., informed decision making and a healthy adjustment.)

It is the purpose of this paper to provide
a theory for genetic counseling which will
extend the goals into a specific practical
model for providing and evaluating genetic counseling.

DEFINITION OF GENETIC
COUNSELING

The definition developed during the
1972 workshop on genetic counseling and
published by Fraser (1974) states:

Genetic counseling is the communication
process which has as its goals the alleviation
of human suffering associated with the occurrence or the risk of occurrence of a genetic disorder in a family. The counseling
tries to achieve this goal by helping the
counselee:

1. Comprehend the medical facts, including a diagnosis, probable course of the
disorder, and the available management
resources.

Genetic Counseling Model

305

2. Appreciate the way heredity contributes
to the disorder and the risk of recurrence
in specified relatives.

3. Understand the alternatives for dealing
with the risk of occurrence.

4. Choose the alternative which seems appropriate to them in view of their risk
and their values and act in accordance
with that decision.

5. Make a healthy adjustment to the disorder in an affected family member and/or
to the risk of recurrence of that disorder.

Although this definition may be unacceptable to some, it does provide a comprehensive structure for genetic counseling (Sorenson and Culbert, 1979). The
effect of this definition on genetic counseling has been to formally delineate goals of
genetic counseling which are distinct from
the eugenic orientation. The definition
has had a general acceptance among geneticists (Ad Hoc Committee, 1975). The
effect has been to encourage counseling to
be not only for teaching about genetics but
also for helping the counselees make selfevaluated decisions, that is, decisions in
keeping with their values. This latter goal,
which includes making a healthy adjustment, although difficult to define for the
purpose of conceptualizing, is a clear injunction that the counselor should be concerned with psychosocial issues (Antley,
1979a; Fraser, 1976).

Another perspective on genetic counseling could focus upon counselees attaining an integration between their cognitive
decision and behavior, that is, that they attain ‘a healthy adjustment.’ We think
that a model which focuses on the task of
counselees acquiring the genetic information, when employed in a sensitive and
reasoned manner, will achieve this end.
Thus, it is an additional assumption that
irrespective of the initial focus, the various
manifestations of a healthy adjustment
are interrelated such that comprehensive
attempts at genetic counseling from either
a genetic-information approach or a

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

306 Bringle and Antley

psychosocial-adjustment approach will
yield similar results. The effects will be
similar in that the counselees’ adaptations
to their genetic concerns and to their risk
will have similarities such that as the counselees’ coping patterns are strained there
will be a correspondingly higher probability of poor adjustment. That is, at the
point their previously purposeful learning
begins to show signs of being ineffective,
their behavior and feelings will begin to
show signs of stress in a parallel pattern.
Genetic counselees come with multiple
needs and, for some, their need for genetic information may be a small or minor
part of their overall need to cope with
their life situation. However, some counselees need only genetic information and
not a psychological counselor. Thus, the
starting point for the professional providing genetic counseling is to make a series
of judgments about how the counselees
might be guided toward making an informed, personal decision (Antley, 1976,
19795).

OVERVIEW OF THE THEORY

The definition of genetic counseling
posits that counselees should acquire general knowledge and specific information
about the disorder which has resulted in
their consultation. The first part of the
model to be presented is based upon theories of learning which hold that the process
of learning can be divided into stages
(Cermak and Craik, 1978). Each stage of
processing bears upon the usefulness of
the information in decision-making and
each is, therefore, hierarchically related
to the others. From this structuring of the
counselees’ Jearning, it 1s possible to set
prerequisites for informed decisions.
Thus, the proposed model allows for extending genetic counseling beyond the
goal of counselees’ learning facts. The
model will show how counselees who

Social Biology

demonstrate that they have processed the
information from genetic counseling
through the hierarchy have the genetic information in a mode which will be useful
for informed decision making. In addition, counselees who show evidence of
failing to process the information through
the hierarchial pattern are in evidence of
being unable to attain an informed decision. Finally, whether or not they attain an
informed decision is dependent upon their
prior coping, planning, values, and social
milieu.

LEARNING THEORY

Information which people learn varies
in its usefulness for decision-making for a
number of reasons. One set of reasons
why information is not useful for problem
solving is that it is insufficiently processed
by the learners, and they fail to see the relationship between their problem and
their knowledge (Bransford, 1979). Other
reasons why information which is presented fails to influence behavioral decisions include how genetic counseling sessions are structured (sessions are too short
or too few) and inadequacies of the counselors (insensitivity to grief, lack of psychological skills). The first stage of learning new facts ts a form of memorization or
rote learning. The elements of the system
are memorized. However, until the relationships between the elements are understood, the application of the information
to problem solving is minimal and its
meaning will be of low value (Piaget,
1970). In the model this stage of learning is
referred to as the acquisition of facts.

The second state of the learning portion of the theory is the process of developing interrelationships between the elements which lead to generalizations,
concept formation, induction, and deduction. From this level of conceptualization
the learners can interpolate and extrapolate to solve problems which they have not

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 4

confronted. In the theory, this level of
learning 1s referred to as understanding.
In genetic counseling some of the information which the counselor gives is contrary to what counselees would like to
hear. The disagreeable personal meaning
of the information changes the processing
of the information by the counselee. In
contrast, a student may learn descriptive
information which is personally remote
and would process it in a matter-of-fact
way. However, in genetic counseling, the
personal relevance of the information is
such that it is important to determine
whether information processing ts carried
to a level of personalization. The model
calls for the generalizations and conceptualizations of understanding to be extended so that they apply to the counselees’ own life situation. In the model this
is referred to as personalization. The three
levels of information (facts, understanding, and personalization) are hierarchically related; that is, facts are necessary
prior to concept formation and understanding. In a similar manner, general un
 

Genetic Counseling Model 307

derstanding precedes specific applications
in personalization. The model further
posits that all information is not equally
valuable for informed decision making.
The more specific the understanding (personalization) relative to the particular situation (counselee decision-making), the
more likely it is to be used and the more
useful it will be in decision making.

APPLICATION OF THE LEARNING MODEL TO
THE CONTENT OF GENETIC COUNSELING

The model posits that the counselee
processes the genetic information to make
an informed, self-evaluated set of decisions which take a number of issues into
account (i.e., multidimensional). This
process includes the three progressive
learning stages of attaining the facts, understanding, and personalization. Furthermore, the content areas are designated by the definition of genetic
counseling. Table 1 shows the relationship
between the learning process and the major content areas in genetic counseling: di
TABLE I

INTEGRATING GENETIC CONTENT WITH THE LEARNING MODEL

Diagnosis Prognosis
Facts Down Syndrome 30% ofchildren
has an extra with DS have
chromosome. Congenital
Heart Disease
(CHD).
Understanding Trisomyleadsto Children with
cascading effect DS may die early
of MCA and in life.
MR.
Personalization My child with DS My child with DS
may have MR. may have CHD
and may die in
early life.

Risk

The recurrence
risk is 1~2%.

One or two
couples out of
every 100 with
one CWDS will
have another in
their next pregnancy.

In our next
pregnancy the
chances ofa

recurrence is 1-2
in a 100.

Options

The options are as
follows:

a. take risk,

b. prenatal diagnosis,

c. adoption, etc.
Couples can choose
to exercise options
in the following
way....

We have the following choices to make
in our own life... .
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

308 Bringle and Antley

agnosis, prognosis, risk, and options. This
paradigm specifies twelve objectives.
Those under ‘‘Facts” are the most easily
attained and the most removed from
decision-making. In general, facts can be
understood as the counselees being able to
recall from memory what they have been
told about diagnosis, prognosis, risk, and
options. To reach an understanding of the
content areas requires that counselees
possess proficiency in conceptualizing the
information to make generalizations. For
example, in the Down syndrome, the
counselees would be able to understand a
general relationship between an extra
chromosome and sets of physical anomalies or mental retardation. As another example, personalization of diagnosis calls
for the demonstration of an understanding
that their child has the diagnosis and that
their understanding leads them to be open
to the possibility that their own child may
have problems implicit from the generalization. In analogous manner the other
nine objectives are defined.

RELATING LEARNING TO BEHAVIOR

As one moves from facts and understanding to personalization, the model
specifies an increased integration of information provided by the counselor with the
value system of the counselee (Beatty and
Clark, 1968). The ideal outcome of genetic counseling is that counselees would
learn all relevant information provided by
the counselor and this information would
be integrated into their value system in
such a way that it can be applied to subsequent decisions. As previously detailed,
one assumption of the model is that the
steps in the learning process are hierarchically related, such that each earlier step is
a necessary but not sufficient one for subsequent learning. Thus, no personalization will occur without some nominal rote
learning. There are extrinsic contextual
factors which are barriers to learning. In

Social Biology

addition, intrinsic reasons for a counselee
not attaining the facts would include
deficiencies in cognitive functioning, lack
of interest or motivation, (Antley, 1979a;
Antley and Seidenfeld, 1978; Antley and
Hartlage, 1976), lack of background in genetics, and the presence of high levels of
stress, grief, and emotional upset (Emery
et al., 1973; Kessler, 1979a, c; Seidenfeld
et al., 1980; Smith and Antley, 1978). A
counselee can memorize and comprehend
the information without adequately personalizing the information. Emotional upset and stress can result in counselees intellectualizing the newly comprehended
information or affectively isolating it from
subsequent decisions and behavior (Agle
1964; Lippman-Hand and Frasier, 1979 a,
b, c; Sibinga and Friedman, 1971). For example, counselees can attain the ability to
understand the implications of recurrence
risk for a genetic disorder in a normative
sense (as it applies to the general population) but fail to apply it to their life and
family-planning decisions. According to
this theory, facts and understanding are
primarily a function of cognitive ability
and temporary stress states, whereas personalization is a function of the counselees’ maturity and flexibility. The
influence of each of these factors can be
modified by characteristics of the counselor and contextual elements inherent in
the counseling procedures. Furthermore,
the degree to which one personalizes relevant information sets an upper limit on the
degree to which subsequent decisions are
considered “informed.”

Counselees may fall short of personalization of knowledge and therefore may
fail to make an informed, multidimensional, cognitive decision which results in
congruent behavior. However, in spite of
this deficiency, they will continue to make
decisions. For example, some will make
passive decisions (no explicit decision),
others will make impulsive decisions

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 4

which are not well thought out and therefore not informed, and still others will
make informed cognitive decisions which
fail to influence their behavior. The following discussion presents a model for the
decision-making process which is based on
work by Fishbein and Ajzen (1975; Ajzen
and Fishbein, 1980) and details how personalized information from genetic counseling may or may not play a role in those
decisions and subsequent behavior.
Counselees have access to numerous
sources of information in addition to the
genetic counselor. While genetic counseling may be the primary source of genetic
information, it is not always the most important determinant of behavior. First of
all, counselees enter counseling with numerous preconceptions, misconceptions,
and predispositions toward issues discussed during counseling (e.g., family
planning, abortion, contraception). At
best, because of the individualistic nature
of the counselee’s circumstances, only
some of the information presented during
counseling will be relevant to each counselee. Material presented during genetic
counseling will be selectively integrated
with prior views held by the individual.
When factual material is involved, new information provided by the counselor is
likely to replace old incorrect information. However, when feelings, values, and
morals are implicated, inconsistencies or
differences may be more problematic because synthesis is harder to attain. Thus,
one could postulate that when discrepant
information is encountered by the individual, the affective intensity which the material holds for the individual would be inversely related to the ease with which the
person could integrate and personalize the
materia). Thus, information which is understood and personalized from genetic
counseling will be integrated, as possible,
with other important domains in the person’s life. Genetic counseling can also mo
Genetic Counseling Model 309

tivate the individual to seek additional
congruent or incongruent information
outside of counseling. The integration of
the person’s feelings (or values) with those
personalized beliefs which are salient to
the decision-making process can be summarized as an attitude toward behavioral
options (i.e., decisions). According to
Fishbein and Ajzen (1975) the attitude
(Att) toward a behavior is defined algebraically as the sum of salient, personalized beliefs toward the act (b,) and the person’s evaluation of each of those beliefs
(e,) and is summarized as follows:

Att = Lbe..

In addition to the formation of attitudes, which is an intrapersonal process
resulting from integrating information
from genetic counseling with other personalized beliefs and values, counselees
consider interpersonal and social! factors
when assessing behavioral options. Beliefs, feelings, and expectations of spouse,
family, relatives, neighbors, the physician, the genetic counselor, and others are
all capable of influencing an individual’s
decision (e.g., friends and family may disapprove of abortion). However, the expectations of significant others, reference
groups, and society at large are influential
only to the extent that an individual is motivated to comply with these expectations.
In addition, these external influences on
counselees will differ in their salience. Indeed, the spouse represents a critical
influence when the issue is family planning; and influence, compliance, and compromise are more likely to influence the
counselee’s decision-making in this case.
Finally, different persons may have different expectancies. For example, Davidson
and Jaccard (1975) found that parents of
childless women favored their daughters
having a child while their husbands were
against their having a child. Knowledge of

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

310 Bringle and Antley

normative expectancies (E,) and motivation to comply (M,) are jointly related, as
illustrated below, such that lack of motivation or no knowledge of expections results
in low normative social influence:

Normative Social Influence = » E. M..

The combined influence of an attitude
toward the behavior and the normative social influences (NSI) is assumed to determine how a person evaluates behavioral
options and decides on a course of action.
This behavioral intention (BI) is posited to
result in the observed behavior. This portion of the model is summarized as follows:

Behavior = BI = (ATT) y + (NSD) y .
i

The degree to which behavior ts
influenced by external pressure varies
from situation to situation and from individual to individual. In some instances the
expectations of others are a major determinant, while 1n others the individual’s attitude is weighted more heavily. This issue
is reflected in the differential weighting
(w,, w,) of the two terms in the above expression. Also, because the posited relationship between the two components is
additive, their influences can be congruent
with one another, or incongruent.

The utility of the theory presented ts
that it details the role of genetic counseling in the counselees’ decision making. In
addition, it provides a theoretical framework within which to examine the antecedents of the counselees’ decisions and
subsequent behavior. According to the
theory, there is no necessary relationship
between the information provided in genetic counseling and the counselees’ behavior. That is, counseling may noi
influence the individual’s appraisal of
available options. As previously mentioned, counselees may fail to relate the
counseling session to their life (failure to

Social Biology

personalize). If this occurs, then it means
the individual has failed to develop an attitude toward the relevant behavioral options available. Also, the theory suggests
the possibility that counselees’ behavior
need not be directly related to their attitudes and values. Specifically, the attitudinal component could be of secondary importance in determining behavioral
intentions if the normative social
influences were weighted more strongly.
This would be reflected in the weights of
the model’s components as follows:

WwW, <W,Finally, there are numerous reasons why
the behavior might not reflect behavioral
intentions. This would be the case when

BI + Behavior.

For example, if a person’s behavioral intention (e.g., ‘I don’t want any more children’’) is not consistent with the person’s
behavior (e.g., the couple doesn’t use
birth control), then this represents important clinical information that the values of
the person are in conflict and appropriate
intervention strategies should be employed.

On the other hand, if a counselee has
made an informed decision, then certain
relationships in the theory are posited to
be necessary. First, counselees should
demonstrate personalization of all information available in genetic counseling
which is relevant to their decision and integration of this information with other aspects of their life (i.e., values, moral principles). When this has occurred, then an
attitude based on personalized information has formed. In addition, the counselees’ personal attitude toward behavioral options (rather than social pressure
from others) should be the major determinant of their intentions. This would be evi
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

denced by diiferential weighting of the
model’s components in the following manner:

W, > W,
Finally, counselees should demonstrate
congruity between how they want to behave and how they do behave. When there
is consistency between values, attitudes,
and behavior, it is assumed that a
healthier adjustment to the initial genetic
problem and subsequent decisions regarding family planning will be realized.

The theory presented is not necessarily
a description of how most people behave,
either in genetic counseling or in general.
In fact, people in some situations probably
do not mirror the pattern detailed in this
theory. Numerous other models and theories can be generated to account for actual
behaviors. For example, in contrast to this
theory, many individuals could confirm
the reverse sequence of events in that their
behavioral choice precedes and determines their cognitions (Bem, 1972; Festinger, 1957). The theory for learning and
the relationship between learning and behavior should be considered an ideal
against which one can compare a counselee’s behavior. Similarly, it is presented
as a description of the process most likely
to yield an informed decision.

RELATIONSHIP OF THE THEORY TO
COUNSELEE ADAPTATION TO STRESS

Counselees seeking genetic counseling,
in addition to obtaining genetic information, are attempting to deal with psychological issues. Manifestations of counselees’ psychological responses have been
pointed out by describing symptoms
specifically (e.g., denial, anxiety, hostility, depression; see Antley and Hartlage,
1976; Fraser, 1974; Kallmann and Rainer,
1963; Kessler, 1979a, b; Leonard et al.,

Genetic Counseling Model 311

1972). These symptoms and behaviors
have been described conceptually as defensive reactions (Cohen and Rudnick,
1979; Targun, 1981), as coping mechanisms (Falek and Britton, 1974, Falek,
1977), and as grief responses (Antley,
1976; McCollum and Silverberg 1979).
Others who have noted these psychological manifestations have described them in
the context of their preferred therapy
model, such as crisis intervention (Bocian
and Kaback, 1978; Kinney and Antley,
1976; Smith and Antley, 1978) and psychotherapy (Kallmann and Rainer, 1963;
Kessler, 1979b). All of these “‘perspectives of the psychological issues” in genetic counseling emphasize both the importance of these emotional responses
and the variability of counselee’s reactions
on which professionals have focused.

We conclude froin these observations
that most genetic counselees are emotionally upset at the time of genetic counseling. If this is true, then it follows that their
emotional upset is related to the reason
they seek genetic counseling, to what they
are expecting to learn during genetic
counseling, or both. In reality both of
these are within the conceptual framework of what we have called genetic facts
and its process derivatives. For purposes
of discussion, the physical aspects of their
problem cannot exist outside of the metaphors which we use to describe them.
Given this definition, it is the genetic information and the process of its incorporation which causes the psychological reaction seen in genetic counselees.
Therefore, the genetic information must
be treated as correlated with, if not identical to, the cause of the counselees’ emotional stress. The model deals with how
counselees obtain and process the genetic
information toward decision-making and
incorporate its meaning to themselves. It
then follows that for this model to be consistent with genetic counseling, it must fit

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

312 Bringle and Antley

with what we understand about how individual families cope (i.e., handle stress).

The response to stress follows a pattern
similar to that described in the coping
process, the grief process, and the response to crisis. Each has an initial phase
of relative inactivity, followed by an attempt to maintain a functional balance between committing attention to regular activities and attention to managing the
Stress (acute stress adaptation phase).
This activity involves a combination of attempts at resisting the stress, efforts at removing the cause of the stress, and accommodations to adapt to the stress. The
latter occurs in situations when the cause
of the stress situations cannot be controlled. The final stage is one in which either by removing the cause of the stress,
by adapting to it, or by a combination, the
issue is Managed 1n a routine way and does
not require special attention (equilibrium
phase). In general, the more the stress requires special attention and alters the life
style, the greater are the physical and
emotional responses.

New information, especially that which
has implication for change in expectations
and/or life style, constitutes a stress. Such
information is processed in the pattern described in relationship to the general response to stress. We think that the facts
and understanding in the genetic counseling situation are analogous to the period
of initial inactivity when the person is attempting to understand the nature of the
problem prior to acting (Antley, 1976a,
b). The stages of personalization through
decision describe the cognitive aspects of
this adaptation which focus upon developing a conscious plan for removing the
stress or for accepting the change. Achieving a cognitive decision and congruent behavior mark the acceptance of the situation. Thus, there is an inherent
relationship between the theory and adaptation to stress.

Social Biology

DISCUSSION

There is a tendency for people to see
problems in terms of remedies. In an effort to cope, we define goals which tend to
concentrate our behavior. A corrollary to
this goal-oriented behavior is that problems without apparent solutions go unad
' dressed. This is true for those persons with

disciplinary training when a problem appears to fall outside of their field of training or expertise. The counselees’ problem
extends beyond the genetics affecting or
potentially affecting their health and includes their relationships with spouse,
family, and community and their moral
sense of right and wrong. The definition of
genetic counseling elaborated in the proposed theory is important because it
defines the activity in terms of the counselees’ needs rather than restricting it to
confines of the discipline (i.e., genetic expertise). The old view of genetic counseling was comforting to the genetic counselor because it was aligned with the
professional genetic expertise (Epstein,
1977). While the new definition (Fraser,
1974) changes the goal, the task performed by geneticists during genetic counseling is changing more slowly (Sorenson,
1973; Sorenson and Colbert, 1979). However, the complexities in the process of
counselees achieving an informed decision bring into question the practice of
providing information alone as being effective. On the other hand, change in genetic counseling starts with conceptualizing a different outcome according to the
new definition.

This definition calls for a practice which
is neither eugenic in orientation nor narrowed to offering only information on genetic principles. However, the definition
stands alone with neither an observable
body of scientific facts nor an apparent
theoretical basis which will encourage its
adoption. It emerges out of ethical values

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 4

in our society and creates a need for a new
theory of genetic counseling (Antley,
1979b). The theory should provide guidelines for practice which will either lead to
it being effective or to evaluations which
demonstrate genetic counseling as defined
cannot be effective. The evaluation and
opportunities for feedback are essential to
any serious theory of genetic counseling
(Hsia, 1979). For the person who would
evaluate genetic counseling according to
how well it leads counselees to make informed decisions, the new definition suggests that the geneticist is responsible for a
comprehensive activity which in the
present medical and social setting is often
unrealistic to conduct. A goal of this paper
is to advocate a theory of genetic counse]ing which has the potential for taking into
account most of the variables which bear
on the success and failure of genetic counseling. The openness of the theory to nongenetic issues should not be construed to
set the genetic counselor’s responsibility
at unrealistic levels. There are limits on
the expectations for genetic counseling
and the genetic counselor which include
the geneticist’s training in psychological
counseling, the host of psychological, social, and economic problems which the
counselees may have, and the resources of
the field of genetics to staff counseling sessions and to the exogeneous variables
which influence the counselees’ behavior
subsequent to counseling. Although the
theory is designed to be open to a breadth
of issues influencing the outcome of genetic counseling, it is not designed to advocate greater responsibility for the geneticist. The theory 1s intended to facilitate
delineation of the steps of genetic counseling so that both realistic goals can be set
for each session and so that the professional’s opportunity to reach these goals
can be improved. The problem then becomes one of organizing genetic counseling services so that the input from the ge
Genetic Counseling Model 313

neticist is ensured, while, at the same
time, the process addresses the broader
spectrum of the counselees’ needs by
other professionals (Silverberg and Godmilow, 1979).

Under this new set of conditions called
for by the definition, the geneticist needs a
theory of genetic counseling which (1) can
be relevant to counselees’ overall needs;
(2) be specific for evaluation purposes; (3)
be realistic enough that the counselors and
their associates can experience success in
meeting tactical, intermediate objectives;
and (4) be useful in generating new ideas
which guide our thinking in more general
ways about the relationships between
learning, stress, and decision-making in
genetic counseling. We have offered a
preliminary description of a process which
is consistent with the definition and which
has the potential of fulfilling these criteria.
Three important elements of the theory
presented are (a) that it is holistic and
comprehensive, (6) that it defines key
concepts and posits relationships among
them, and (c) that it provides criteria on
the basis of which counseling can be evaluated. The theory has value in organizing
observations and conceptualizing the
process of genetic counseling in such a way
as to allow the practice of genetic counseling to be related to program evaluation
and to the development of the field.

IMPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL FOR GENETIC
COUNSELORS

The practical value of this theory
emerges from its extension to a practical
model of genetic counseling. The model
specifies the counseling activities: teaching and counseling the patient. The counselees’ processes are learning, decisionmaking, and the adaptation to stress or the
grief response. In a sense, these reactions
in counselees parallel or are synonymous
with the behaviors ranging from learning
to decision-making.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

314 Bringle and Antley

To varying degrees, genetic counseling
is psychological counseling (Kessler,
1979a,b). One of the problems in evaluating psychological counseling is that the
end point is so variably defined by concrete behaviors. To the extent that genetic
counseling is similar to psychological
counseling it would be difficult to evaluate. An important difference between genetic counseling and psychological counseling is the genetic information which is
essential for informed decision-making.
This provides a concrete, objective,
definable set of facts which can be followed as the counselee progresses through
the counseling process. This information
is analogous to a radioactive probe and
provides a distinct advantage in the evaluation of genetic counseling over psychological counseling.

Secondly, learning theory provides a
reasonable basis for delineating the learning process: facts, understanding, and personalization. Furthermore, the geneticcontent information can be defined in
terms of diagnosis, recurrence risk, prognosis, options, etc. When the content is related to the process, then the specificity 1s
refined to the level of suggesting sequential counseling tasks.

To extend this model to clinical application, the counseling team needs to incorporate four reiterative steps which are
related to the overall structure and are
guided by the specific content. These steps
are (1) assessment, (2) setting objectives,
(3) counseling, and (4) evaluation
(Antley, 1979b; Headings, 1973; Hsia,
1977; Kessler 1979c; Silverberg and Godmilow, 1979).

In the assessment, the professionals responsible for the counseling determine
where the case lies in the sequential model
presented from such information as (a)
the counselees’ stated purposes in coming,
(b) their evaluation of counselees’ history
of past responses to stress, and (c) their

 

Social Biology

progress in prior counseling sessions. The
specificity of the model helps with the assessment by guiding the counselor to review the content areas and to conceptualize the counselees’ progress in the process
toward making an informed decision.

Because the model provides a sequence, the setting of objectives follows
from the assessment. The assessment diagnosis is where the case stands, and the
sequence suggests the next step. An understanding of the model also points out
the relative importance of genetic information, education, and counseling. If, for
example, counselees have learned the
facts and have an understanding of the genetic concepts, then the objectives for the
next counseling session are specified as
personalization of the genetic content
areas which seem necessary for future
decision-making. A further implication of
the model is that when the objectives are
related primarily to education, then
audio-visual presentations, problemsolving exercises, and written material are
often important and inexpensive resources. :

The third step, counseling, is to carry
out the objectives. A value of the model is
that as the process moves from facts toward a decision, the relative importance
of counseling increases and that of genetic
education decreases (Kessler, 1979a,c).
This implies that the breadth of subjects
which the counselors are going to need to
deal with is broadening and that the psychological issues (counselees’ stress response and grief) are the domains in which
the process is best defined rather than genetics and conventional education
(Antley, 1979c; Kessler 19795).

The final reiterative step is evaluation.
This calls for a determination of how well
the objectives have been attained. It is important that genetic counselors obtain
feedback on both successes and failures. If
the objectives are met, then the counselor
NM
—
©
N
mi
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
nN
og)
oN
—
—
3
"
3
oN
a
O
=
Cd
©
>
—
N
~
oO
>
=.
c
-,
ve)
Oo
cv
oO
ca
3
©
—
c
S
©
a

Vol. 27, No. 4

should derive a sense of success and accomplishment because progress has been
made toward the overall goal. This is important because the overall goal is and
needs to be an ideal that the wise, prudent, and mature person would seek to attain. Simultaneously, given the variable
levels of counselees’ maturity, it is unrealistic to expect this outcome to be realized
after one, two, or three hours of genetic
counseling (Emery et al., 1973, 1979). On
the other hand, if the goals are not attained, then the counselor has a realistic
basis for determining whether goals were
too difficult, the counseling was flawed,
the counselees needed more time, or the
problem of decision-making was too disagreeable for the counselee. As this type
of rigorous planning and execution of genetic counseling is done, it is likely to
emerge that counselees progress more
slowly than present assumptions imply
(Antley, 1981). Genetic counselors may
decide that remedies such as planning
multiple visits over a specified time are
necessary. No matter how the case is managed few counselors have evidence that
the counselees achieved an informed decision (Sorenson and Culbert, 1979; Sorenson et al., 1980). This evaluation is important for counselors who approach a
difficult job day after day. It is also important for the field if we are going to make
progress toward greater numbers of counselees achieving informed decisions.

EVALUATION OF GENETIC COUNSELING
PROGRAMS

The discussion of evaluation to this
point has focused on the clinical assessment of the client’s progress toward an informed decision and healthy adjustment.
This idiographic or individual-oriented
approach is useful to the counselor because it allows initial assessment of the
counselees’ needs, an assessment at an in
Genetic Counseling Model

315

termediate point in the counseling process
so that progress can be monitored and adjustments instituted, and final evaluation
of the counselees’ status at the contracted
close of counseling. Prior to counseling,
the counselor is also in a better position to
predict how counselees will react in counseling and how they will process information presented during the counseling because of past evaluations on other clients.
The model also allows the counselor to
more accurately represent the goals and
potential benefits to a counselee so that a
more informed decision to participate in
counseling is possible. Finally, the ability
to evaluate individual counselees means
that the counselor can provide to the
counselee a valid appraisal of progress
during counseling. Thus, one of the theory’s assets is that it structures case-bycase evaluations.

At the same time, counselors are faced
with an additional set of questions which
need answers. Included in these concerns
are how to obtain information which can
assist in decisions concerning continuation, expansion, and/or modification of
genetic counseling programs and how to
obtain information which can lead to an
evaluation of proposed theoretical models
which detail the basic psychological and
social processes which are assumed to operate in genetic counseling. These questions, and related ones, require a different
approach to evaluation than that previously discussed. Evaluation of a genetic
counseling program requires a more general approach which has the ability to aggregate information across counselees
(i.e., the nomothetic approach) in addition to evaluating on a case-by-case basis.
The present status of program evaluation
in genetic counseling is confined to numerous informal conceptualizations or to
models which are so general that they do
not adequately attend to specific content
issues in genetic counseling. This is inade
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

316 Bringle and Antiey

quate because useful evaluations can only
be obtained when there are delineated
goals, valid measures of the outcomes
which are consistent with the conceptualization of the goals, and designs which are
appropriate for question. For example, it
is possible to develop objective standardized measures of the acquisition of facts,
understanding, and personalization. The
fact that these concepts can be measured
opens up the possibility of systematic evaluation. Thus, the theory proposed in the
present paper has the added asset that it
can not only adapt to clinical evaluation
but it can also provide the basis for immediate, intermediate, and long-term evaluation of genetic counseling programs.

In the same sense that it is not possible
to ‘“‘prove’’ a hypothesis true, as the
present theory has been detailed, it is not
possible to prove that any given decision is
an informed one which leads to a healthy
adjustment. However, it is possible to
specify characteristics of decisions which
have less quality (Antley, 19792). The
ability of the proposed model to allow
evaluation of specific decisions and programmatic evaluations means that it is
possible to systematically increase the
quality of care provided in genetic counseling.

Thus, the present model can be useful
to genetic counselors because evaluations
based on it can provide a check on clinical
judgment, give feedback on overall effectiveness across counselors and counseling
centers, and facilitate organization and
coordination of genetic counseling. Geneticists with research interests can use
the theory as the basis for conceptualizing
questions concerning the underlying processes in counseling. Further development
of rigorous measures for the key concepts
in the theory will allow empirical validation. Some of the work of operationalizing
concepts is completed and some is in progress. (Braitman and Antley, 1972).

Social Biology

In addition, evaluations provide information which is useful to program staff in
representing their program externally.
Whatever the purpose of an evaluation of
genetic counseling, it is imperative to acknowledge that it is embedded in a social,
political, economic, and professional context which has implications for the nature,
scope and utilization of the evaluation. To
be able to demonstrate success and to plan
systematic improvements means that directors of genetic counseling programs
can defend their work to upper-level administrators, public health officials, and
funding sources. 
CONCLUSION

The field of genetic counseling has been
troubled throughout its history by
eugenics-based values. It is important in
any consideration of evaluation of genetic
counseling that these eugenic values not
reemerge aS a measure of accountability
for counselors. Implicit in the proposed
theory of genetic counseling is the concept
that accountability for the success of genetic counseling could ideally be measured by the quality of the counselee’s decision as defined in the model. We
advocate that the geneticists can be held
accountable for providing accurate diagnoses and information on recurrence risk.
Further, should associated psychological
counseling be shown to improve the quality of counselees’ decision-making, then
the administrator in charge of genetics
clinics would have the responsibility of
finding ways of meeting the counselees’
psychological needs. Explicitly, we believe that this is not necessarily the task of
the geneticist, that geneticists are usually
untrained in psychological counseling,
and that the task of providing psychological counseling during genetic counseling is
not easy. Furthermore, we think that
psychological counseling accompanying
genetic counseling is difficult and requires
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

 

 

Vol. 27, No. 4

well-trained psychological counselors
with supervised experience in crisis intervention techniques of therapy. The purpose of the theory is to open up our thinking about what the counselees’ needs are
without regard for professional boundaries. If this thesis were used to press geneticists into doing psychological counseling

Genetic Counseling Model

317

and/or to hold them accountable for the
success of that counseling, then the intent
of this theory would have been subverted
to the detriment of the genetic counselors
and counselees. We hope that this theory
allows geneticists to focus on genetics and
to obtain assistance from psychologists to
share the other counseling tasks.

REFERENCES

AD Hoc COMMITTEE ON GENETIC COUNSELING:
1975. Report to the American Society of Human Genetics. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
27:240-242.

AGLE, D. P. 1964. Psychiatric studies of patients
with hemophilia and related states. Arch. Intern. Med. 114:76-82.

ANTLEY, R. M. 1976. Variables in outcome of genetic counseling. Soc. Biol. 32:108~115.

. 1976b. A counselor decision model for

genetic counseling. Excerpta Medical ICS

397:59.,

. 1979a. Genetic counseling for parents of

a baby with Down’s syndrome, p. 115~134. In

S. Kessler (ed.), Genetic counseling: Psycho
logical dimensions. Academic Press, New

York.

. 1979b. Genetic counseling: Problems of

sociological research in evaluating the quality

of counselee decision making. Amer. J. Med.

Genet. 4:1+4.

. 1979c. The genetic counselor as facilita
tor of the counselee’s decision process. Birth

Defects Orig. Artic. Ser. 15(2):137-168.

. 1981. Letter to the Editor. Amer. J.
Med. Genet. (in press).

ANTLEY, R. M., and L. C. HarTLacE. 1976. Psychological responses to genetic counseling for
Down syndrome. Clin. Genet. 9:257-265.

ANTLEY, R. M., and M. J. SEIDENFELD. 1978. A
detailed description of mothers’ knowledge
before genetic counseling for Down syndrome. Part I. Amer. J. Med. Genet.
2:357-364.

Beatty, W. H., and R. CLark. 1968. A self concept theory of learning. Monograph. San
Francisco State College, 1962. Reprinted in
H. C. Lindgren (ed.), Educational psychology. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Bem, D. 1972. Self-perception theory. In L.
Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology. Vol. 6. Academic Press,
New York.

Bocian, M. E., and M. M. Kasack. 1978. Crisis
counseling: The newborn infant with a chromosoma! anomaly. Pediatr. Clin. North
Amer. 25:643-650.

BRAITMAN, A., and R. M. ANTLEY. 1977. Devel
 

 

opment of instruments to measure counselees’
knowledge of Down syndrome. Clin. Genet.
13:25-36.

BRANSFORD, J. D. 1979. Human cognition: Learning, understanding and remembering.
Wadsworth, Belmont, California.

CERMAK, L. S., and F. I. M. Craik. 1978. Levels
of processing and human memory. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey.

Cohen, J. R., and M. B. Rupnick. 1979. Who
should have genetic counseling: Case finding.
In Y. E. Hsia, K. Hirschhorn, R. L. Silverberg, and L. Godmilow (eds.), Counseling in
genetics. Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York.

Emery, A. E. H., M. S. Watt, and E. Crack.
1973. Social effects of genetic counseling.
Brit. Med. J. 3:724-726.

Emery, A. E.H., J. A. RAEBURN, R. SKINNER, S.
Ho.ioway, and P. Lewis. 1979. Prospective
study of genetic counseling. Brit. Med. J.
1:1253~1256.

Epstein, C. J. 1977. A position paper on the organization of genetic counseling, p. 333-348.
In H. A. Lubs and F. de la Cruz (eds.), Genetic counseling. Raven Press, New York.

Facex, A. 1979. Use of the coping process to
achieve psychological homeostasis in genetic
counseling, p. 179-188. In H. A. Lubs and F.
de la Crux (eds.), Genetic counseling. Raven
Press, New York.

FaLeEK, A., and S. Britton. 1974. Phases in coping: The hypothesis and its implications. Soc.
Biol. 21:1-7.

FISHBEIN, M., and I. AJZEN. 1975. Belief, attitude, intention and behavior: An introduction
to theory and research. Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.

FrasER, F. C. 1973. Survey of counseling practices, p. 7-12. In B. Hilton, D. Callahan, M.
Harris, P. Condliffe, and B. Berkley (eds.),
Ethical issues in human genetics: Genetic
counseling and the use of genetic knowledge.
Plenum Press, New York.

. 1974. Genetic counseling. Amer. J.

Hum. Genet. 26:636-659.

. 1976, Current concepts in genetics: Ge
netics as a health care service. New. Engl. J.

Med. 9:486—488.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

318 Bringle and Antley

 

. 1979. Introduction. The development of
genetic counseling. Birth Defects Orig. Artic.
Ser. 15(2):5-15.

GrirFin, M. L., L. M. Kavanacu, and J. R.
SORENSON. 1976-77. Genetic knowledge, client perspective, and genetic counseling. Social Work in Health Care. 2:171-180.

Heapincs, V. E. 1973. Alternative models for genetic counseling. Soc. Biol. 22:297-303.

Hsia, Y. E. 1973. Choosing my children’s genes:
Genetic counseling. Jn M. Lipkin and P. T.
Rowley, Genetic responsibility. Plenum
Press, New York.

. 1977. Approaches to the appraisal of genetic counseling. In H. A. Lubs and F. de la
Cruz (eds.), Genetic counseling. Raven Press,
New York.

Hsia, Y. E., R. BERMAN, and H. S. Uemura.
1979. Fetal diagnosis of infantile microcystic
kidneys. Ped. Res. 13:420.

KALLMAN, F, J., and J. D. Rainer. 1963. Psychotherapeutically oriented counseling techniques in a medical genetics department. in B.
Stokvis, S. Karger (eds.), Topical problems in
psychotherapy. Basell.

KEss“cer, S. 1979a. The psychological foundations of genetic counseling, p. 17-34. In S.
Kessler (ed.), Genetic counseling: Psychological dimensions. Academic Press, New York.

. 1979b. The genetic counselor as psycho
therapist. Birth Defects Orig. Artic. Ser.

15(2):187-200.

. 1979c. The processes of communication,
decision making and coping in genetic counseling, p. 35-52. In S. Kessler (ed.}, Genetic
counseling: psychological dimensions. Academic Press, New York.

KINNEY, K., and R. M. ANTLEyY. 1976. Balancing
information giving and anxiety control. Excerpta Med. Intl. Congr. Ser. 397:84.

LEONARD, C. O., G. A. Cuase, and B. CHILps.
1972. Genetic counseling: A consumer’s view.
New Engl. J. Med. 287:433-439.

LipPMAN-HAND, A., and F. C. Fraser. 1979. Genetic counseling: Provision and reception of
information. Amer. J. Med. Genet.
3:113-127.

. 1979. Genetic counseling—the postcoun
 

 

 

 

 

Social Biology

seling period. I. Parents’ perceptions of uncertainty. Amer. J. Med. Genet. 4:51-71.

McCo.uu, A. T., and R. L. SILVERBERG. 1979.
Psychosocial advocacy in counseling, p.
239-260. In Y. E. Hsia, K. Hirschhorn, R. L.
Silverberg, and L. Godmilow (eds.), Counseling in genetics. Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York.

Macintyre, M. N. 1977. Need for supportive
therapy for members of a family with a defective child, p. 567-572. In H. A. Lubs and F. de
la Cruz (eds.), Genetic counseling. Raven
Press, New York.

PiaGET, J. 1970. Science of education and the psychology of the child. Grossman, New York.
REED, K. E., and R. M. ANTLEY. 1976. Crisis theory: Implication for genetic counseling. Ex
cerpta Med. ICS 397:95.

SEIDENFELD, M. J., A. BRAITMAN, and R. M.
ANTLEY. 1980. The determinants of mothers’
knowledge of the Down syndrome prior to genetic counseling. Part II Amer. J. Med.
Genet. 69-23.

S1B1nGA, M. S., and C. J. FriepMan. 1971. Complexities of parental understanding of phenyIketonuria. Pediatrics 48:216-224.

SILVERBERG, R. L., and L. GopMILow. 1979. The
process of genetic counseling, p. 281-293. In
Y. E. Hsia, K. Hirschhorn, R. L. Silverberg
and L. Godmilow (eds.), Counseling in genetics. Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York.

SmitH, R. W., and R. M. ANTLEY. 1978. Anger:
A significant obstacle to informed decision
making in genetic counseling. Birth Defects
Orig. Artic. Ser. 15(SC):257-260.

SorRENSON, J. R., and A. J. CULBERT. 1979. Professional orientations to contemporary genetic counseling. Birth Defects Orig. Artic.
Ser. 15(2):85-102.

SORENSON, J. R., J. P. Swazey, and N. A.
ScotcH. 1980. Impact of genetic counseling:
Results of the collaborative study. Paper presented at Birth Defects Conference, New
York City.

SorENSON, J. R. 1973. Counselors: A selfportrait. Genetic Counseling. 1:29~33.

TaRGuM, S. D. 1981. Psychotherapeutic considerations in genetic counseling. Amer. J. Med.
Genet. (in press).
