Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1990) Book notes, Social Biology, 37:1-2, 142-145, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1990.9988754

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988754

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Book Notes

DYNAMIC STRUCTURES IN BroLocy: By
B. Goodwin, A. Sibatani, and G.
Webster (eds.). Columbia University
Press, New York. 1989. 259 pp.
$68.50 (hardbound).

Contemporary biology is dominated
by functionalist and historical principles
of explanation, which stem from
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural
selection. This work challenges the explanatory adequacy of that theory and
sets out to articulate a structuralist perspective in biology.

Structuralism in biology seeks to explain how distinctive biological forms
and patterns are generated. The traditional explanatory themes of genetic
variation and natural selection are supplemented by generative principles of
space-time order that are characteristic
of living processes. These are revealed

in development, behavior, taxonomy, .

speciation, biogeography, and evolutionary dynamics.

The book is based on a workshop
held in Japan in 1986 and features contributions from an international team of
experts including R. Thom, H. Paterson, L. V. Beloussov, G. Sermonti, D.
Labert, M.-W. Ho, and A. Lima-deFaria. The papers range over the whole
biological realm, from the ordering
principles at the level of the genome to
those operating in the processes that
link biology, geography, and geology.

142

 

CONCEPTION TO BIRTH. EPIDEMIOLOGY OF
PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT: By Jennie
Kline, Zena Stein, and Mervyn Susser. Oxford University Press, New
York. 1989. 433 pp. $55 (hardbound),

Published as Volume 14 in Monographs in Epidemiology and Biostatistics, this book aims to convey the unique
contribution of epidemiology to the understanding of prenatal development,
through all of gestation from conception
to birth.

The volume is divided into five sections: I. Disorders of development:
Weighing the evidence for environmental causes; II. Conception and early gestation; III. Later gestation; [V. Age and
parity; V. The physical environment, reproduction, and surveillance.

The first section guides readers in
evaluating observed associations between suspected teratogens and developmental outcomes. The second and
third sections draw an epidemiological
map of development. The fourth section
explores maternal age and pravidity,
and the fifth section takes up the public
health challenge of detecting and controlling environmental hazards to reproduction.

With their longstanding interests in
prenatal development, the authors review, synthesize, and reformulate epidemiological data and concepts in the

 

 
Vol. 37, No. 1-2

hope that they will (p.v) “stimulate the
scientific imagination as well as the critical faculties” of their readers. A bibliography of 76 pages as well as author and
subject indexes add to the usefulness of
the volume.

SELECTED READINGS IN THE CULTURAL,
SOCIAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH: By John C.
Caldwell and Gigi Santow (eds).
Health Transition Centre, National
Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National
University, Canberra. 1990. 303 pp.
$14.95 (paper).

The Health Transition Centre of The
>. Australian National University is carry— ing out a major research program on the
* cultural, social, and behavioral determi= nants of health in the Third World,
‘= funded by the Rockefeller Foundation.
S This volume, the first in a projected se“= ries, brings together a representative selection of the best work in this new field.
< Contributions range from global studies
- that place historical morbidity and mor~ tality decline in perspective to reports of
= small-scale anthropological investigations. The volume indicates the general
'g directions of needed research and will
= be of value to health professionals, poli= cymakers, and researchers and an essen© tial textbook for students in this area.

3 08 December 2015

THE EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL SYSTEMS: By
John Paul Scott. Monographs in Psychobiology: An Integrated Approach, Vol. 3. Gordon and Breach
Science Publishers. 1989. 355 pp. $90
(hardbound). $49 (paper).

In this volume J. P. Scott for the first
time combines genetic theories of evolution, systems theory, and theories of be
Book Notes

 

143

haviora] evolution to explain the evolution of social behavior and organization.
‘He proposes that caregiving has evolved
from self care, to care of fertilized eggs,
to developing embryos, to hatchlings.
Care may then be extended to adult offspring, collateral relatives, and to unrelated others. Humans, Scott shows, are
unique in the degree to which caregiving
behavior is extendable to nonrelated humans, other animals as pets, and even to
plants. He concludes that social organization is based on caregiving as well as
processes such as unconscious physiological cooperation, site attachment,
sexual behavior, defensive behavior,
competition, and conflict. Competition
is thus not the sole mode of evolution.
This view challenges some of the conventional sociobiological theories of the
evolution of altruism. The book’s broad
interdisciplinary scope and social relevance has significant import for the general reader as well as for researchers and
students.

SKULL SHAPES AND THE Map. CRANIOMETRIC ANALYSES IN THE DISPERSION
OF MopERN Homo: By W.W. Howells. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Volume
79. 1989. 189 pp. (paper).

This distinguished scholar presents a
painstaking survey of present-day regional skull shapes, viewed in a special
way. From 28 good-sized cranial samples (26 in the female series), 18 were selected in order to represent six main geographic areas by using three

independent series from each area.
Fifty-seven measurements, taken on all
individuals, were standardized to control size within each sex and to make
shape comparisons easier. Inspection at

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

144

this point showed some special shape
trends for each area. For example, Europeans expectedly show relative retraction of the alveolar region together with
a prominent nasion and a face that is
narrow and pulled back at the size. Qmode factor analysis confirmed these
limited regional distinctions.

Analysis also suggested that recent
humanity is relatively homogeneous in
cranial shape. Within the limits of the
evidence, no support is apparent for
tracing the perceived distinctions any
considerable distance into the past (i.e.,
to a Homo erectus level), and no distinctions of sub-Saharan Africans suggest
that they are parental to other modern
populations.

CREATED FROM ANIMALS: THE MoRAL
IMPLICATIONS OF DARWINISM: By
James Rachels. Oxford University
Press, New York. 1990. 245 pp.
$19.95 (hardbound).

Since the Origin of Species was first
published, Darwinism has been attacked for undermining traditional morality. Darwin’s remarks on morality
and religion are often treated as irrelevant to his strictly scientific project. This
book argues that, on the contrary,
Darwin should be seen as a systematic
thinker whose views on all these subjects are closely related. In so doing, it
provides an introduction to the whole of
Darwin’s life and thought.

Rachels goes on to survey the controversies that followed in Darwin’s wake,
ranging from Social Darwinism to sociobiology and discusses how the work of
such intellects as Descartes, Hume,
Kant, T.H. Huxley, Henri Bergson,
B. F. Skinner, and Stephen Jay Gould
has contributed to, or been overthrown
by, evolutionary science.

Book Notes

Social Biology

Western philosophy and religion,
Rachels argues, have been shaken by
the implications of Darwin’s work, most
notably the idea that humans are simply
a more complex kind of animal. Rachels
assesses a number of studies that suggest
how closely humans are linked to other
primates in behavior, and then goes on
to show how this idea undercuts the
work of many prominent philosophers.
What we need now, Rachels contends,
is a philosophy that does not discriminate between different species, one that
addresses each being on an individual
basis. Rachels lays the foundations for
an enlightened ethnic regarding both
the value of human life and our treatment of nonhuman animals. The book’s
detailed presentation of this new ethnic
includes its specific consequences for
such matters as suicide, euthanasia, and
animal rights.

GENES, CULTURE, AND PERSONALITY.
AN EmpiricaL Approacu: By L. J.
Eaves, H.J. Eysenck, and N.G.
Martin, with contributions by R. Jardine, A.C. Heath, L. Feingold,
P. A. Young, and K. S. Kendler. Academic Press, Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, Publishers, New York.
1989. 465 pp. $32.50 (hardbound).

The diversity of human behavior is
one of the most fascinating aspects of
human biology. What makes our individual attitudes, lifestyles, and personalities different has been the subject of
many physiological and psychological
theories. In this book the emphasis is on
understanding the genetic and environmental causes of these differences.

As the authors state (p. vii): “The
main purpose of the book is to give the
reader a clearer idea of the state of
knowledge, and ignorance, about the

 

 
Vol. 37, No. 1-2 Book Notes 145

causes of individual differences in personality and attitudes, a good feeling for
the kinds of data on which such inferences are based, and a sense of the
methods of data analysis that are appropriate for answering basic questions
about the role of biological and cultural
inheritance in human populations. As a
consequence, parts of the book are
more technical than is often the case;
there are many more tables and more
‘than usual caution in circumscribing our
Siless than certain conclusions. By provid®ing much of the original data, we have

mb

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 Dece

allowed the reader scope to develop and
test his/her own ideas and models and to
retrace our steps, at least in some of the
simpler cases.”’

Genes, Culture, and Personality is an
expansive account of the state of current
knowledge about the causes of individual differences in personality and social
attitudes. Based on almost two decades
of research, the book makes a significant
contribution to the debate on genetic
and cultural inheritance in human be
havior.

 

 

 
