Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

A benefit-cost analysis of amniocentesis

Ralph L. Andreano & Daniel W. McCollum

To cite this article: Raloh L. Andreano & Daniel W. McCollum (1983) A benefit#cost analysis of
amniocentesis, Social Biology, 30:4, 347-373, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988550

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988550

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles @

wa Citing articles: 2 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

A Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

 

Ralph L. Andreano and Daniel W. McCollum

Department of Economics,
University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin

ABSTRACT; This study applies benefit-cost analysis to one area of prenatal diagnosis—
amniocentesis. The ultimate purpose of such a study is to provide useful guidelines to policy
makers. An attempt is made to exhaustively list benefits and costs, whether measurable or not.
Those which can be quantified are estimated. On the basis of these benefit-cost estimates, the
study concludes that a program of amniocentesis for all pregnant women beyond age 32 would
be warranted. This economic analysis, however, is only one aspect of a policy decision. Moral,
legal, and ethical questions must also be considered.

Amniocentesis is a process whereby
fluid is withdrawn from the amniotic sac
surrounding a developing fetus by inserting a needle into the uterus. The am
niotic fluid is composed of water and a '

large array of solutes. Suspended in the
fluid are a number of intact cells together with cell debris and metabolic byproducts of the developing fetus. For
prenatal diagnosis, both the cells and
the soluble constituents are of interest.
The amniotic fluid and cell cultures derived from it are used to look at the chromosomal karyotype as well as to look
for various compounds indicating the
presence or absence of certain characteristics (such as monitoring levels of alphafetoprotein in looking for neural
tube defects) or defects in certain metabolic processes (such as the breakdown
of a particular amino acid). The amniotic fluid can also be used to assess,
more accurately, the degree of development of the fetus, or fetal maturity.
This study is an attempt to advance
the state of the art in benefit-cost analysis aS applied to the area of prenatal

diagnosis—in particular, amniocentesis.
A few analyses have been set forth in the
medical literature, none of which, in the
opinion of the authors, presents a complete enough picture (Glass, 1975; Hagard and Carter, 1976; Hook, 1979;
Stein et al., 1973). Our intention is to set
out an exhaustive list of benefits and
costs. Some of them it will be possible to
measure accurately; others can be estimated utilizing some plausible assumptions. Some of the benefits and costs,
while not estimable in terms of numerical value, can reasonably be signed so as
to provide useful, though nonquantifiable, information. Lastly, some benefits
and costs can only be listed with no a
priori indication of whether they will
add to or subtract from net benefits. The
ultimate purpose of such a study is to
provide useful input to policy makers in
deciding on future directions.

This study takes as counterfactuals:
(1) a state of the world with no amniocentesis or prenatal diagnosis, so all
genetically-abnormal fetuses are allowed to be born, and (2) a state of the

347

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

348 Andreano and McCollum

world in which there is a program of amniocentesis, offered to all pregnant
women beyond some cut-off age, following which abortions would be available to women whose test results indicate
they are carrying a genetically-defective
child.

In performing an amniocentesis and
its associated analyses, the tests usually
performed are: an examination of the
chromosomes to look for any chromosomal aberration (such as the absence of
a chromosome or the presence of an extra one, as is the case for Down’s syndrome) and a measurement of the level
of alphafetoprotein (AFP), which is
used as an indication of the presence or
absence of neural tube defects. If there
is reason to suspect some other problem, such as an inborn error of metabolism (for example, Tay Sachs disease or
PKU) because of family history or ethnic background, an additional search for
diagnostic clues in the amniotic fluid is
made. Because of the rarity of such inborn errors and the large number of possibilities, it is virtually impossible to test
everyone for all of them. The “‘big”’
anomalies are Down’s syndrome and
the neural tube defects: anencephaly
and spina bifida. While anencephaly is
one of the more frequently occurring
congenital anomalies, the data show
that the overwhelming majority of infants born with anencephaly die perinatally (within about the first two weeks of
life). The rest die by about the end of the
fourth week of life (Chamberlain, 1978;
Taffel, 1978). For this reason, in our calculation of benefits, we will look only at
Down’s syndrome and spina bifida.

We should stress, however, that
many other anomalies will be detected
through a program of amniocentesis.
The chromosomal analysis will pick up
virtually any recognizable chromosomal

Social Biology

aberration. Data compiled by Nevin
(1982) show incidences of 2.1 per 1,000
live births for sex chromosomal anomalies; 2.3 per 1,000 live births for structural chromosomal anomalies and 0.2
per 1,000 live births for autosomal trisomies besides Down’s syndrome. Many
of these cases would be detectable
through a program of amniocentesis offered to women beyond some given age,
as would inborn errors of metabolism
sought out in specific cases. Hence our
final benefit estimate will be a conservative One since we are counting benefits
only for prevented Down’s syndrome
and spina bifida births. This will be mentioned again later in the paper.

INCIDENCE OF CONGENITAL
ANOMALIES

The incidence of congenital anomalies, in general, shows some interesting
trends. Studies have looked at racial differences in incidence of congenital
anomalies, where it seems no real consensus emerges as to the significance of
the difference (Taffel, 1978). Some have
looked at ethnic differences and sex differences as well as differences due to
plurality (i.e., more than one infant
born in the same delivery), birth order
(first, second, or third child born to a
mother) and socioeconomic status. The
major differences, however, seem to be
related to age of the mother and birth
weight of the child (Taffel, 1978). The
relevant incidence rates for this study
(and, we would assert, the most relevant
from a policymaking viewpoint) are
those broken down by age of the
mother.

For congenital anomalies in general,
the incidence rates initially decrease as
the age of the mother increases, reaching a minimum in the 25-29 year age

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 4

bracket, then rapidly increase as maternal age increases beyond 30. The most
striking illustration of the relationship is
Down’s syndrome, which shows a steadily increasing incidence with maternal
age. Table 1 illustrates the relationship
between maternal age and the incidence
of Down’s syndrome. The incidence of
this anomaly is 33 times as great for children born to mothers over age 40 than
for those born to mothers aged 20-24
years. Perhaps a better way to look at it
is to notice that women aged 35 or over
accounted for about 5 per cent of total
live births but about 30 per cent of
Down’s syndrome births. This relationship, as well as the ease of observation,
provides the motivation for looking at
an amniocentesis program with eligibility based on maternal age.

BENEFITS OF A PROGRAM OF
AMNIOCENTESIS

Our objective in this study is to look
at the amniocentesis program in terms
of the resources which will be saved by

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

349

society as a result of the program. We
therefore define as a benefit (or disbenefit) anything that comes under the
heading of resources not consumed as a
result of certain births being prevented.
The benefits, defined in this manner,
deal with the saved cost of raising a
genetically-abnormal or developmentally disabled child (i.e., emanating
from the affected child not being born),
whereas costs will deal with the amniocentesis program itself (i.e., costs emanating more or less directly from the
program). Since we are heading toward
a net benefit calculation, the definition
of costs and benefits is not critical, i.e., a
cost is not distinguished. If we wanted to
arrive at a benefit-cost ratio, this definition would be critical. Whether something was defined as a cost or a disbenefit would lead to a different result.
The purpose of this section is to set
out the benefits accruing from a program of amniocentesis and briefly explain or comment on them. There are
three categories to consider: (1) direct
benefits (or costs) are those which are

TABLE 1

INCIDENCE OF Down’s SYNDROME BY MATERNAL AGE
(BASED ON U.S. Data For 1978 AND 1973-1974)

Number of
Maternal Age Live Births
All Ages ............. 3,335,000
Under 20 ............ 556,000
D024. 0 cengeea wa BN os 1,140,000
2529 Lee eee eee 1,015,000
30-34 Lo... eee eee eee 474,000
35-39 ec eee eee 126,000
40andover .......... 24,000
35andover .......... 150,000
30 andover .......... 624,000

Estimated Per Cent

Per Cent Number of Of Total

of Total Affected Affected
Live Births Infants Infants

100 1209.8 100

16.7 97.3 8.0
34.2 230.3 19.0
30.4 299.4 24,7
14.2 220.9 18.3
3.8 201.0 16.6
0.7 160.9 13.3
4.5 361.9 29.9
18.7 582.8 48.2

Source: Live Births: Statistical Abstract of the United States. Incidence of Down's Syndrome: Taffel, Congenital Anomalies
and Birth Injuries Among Live Births: United States, 1973-74

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

350 Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

TABLE 2
BENEFITS FROM AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM (SUMMARY)

A. Direct and Indirect Benefits

1. Saved cost of institutional care for mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons.
2. Saved cost of home care for mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons not institu
tionalized

3. Saved cost of hospital and medical care for persons born with neural tube defects and other

conditions requiring special medical care

4. Saved cost of educating and training mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons
5. Saved cost to society of lost productivity of retarded or developmentally disabled persons
6. No loss of parental income due to retarded or disabled child

B. Intangible Benefits

7. Relief of anxiety and reduction in uncertainty for parents
8. Benefit to a family of not having a retarded or disabled child
9. Better ability to prepare for the birth of a child under fetal distress because of better measure of

fetal maturity

10. Benefit from basic research and expanded knowledge due to further development of amniocen
tesis

11. Benefit to society of a decrease in the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities, neural tube

defects, and other congenital anomalies

current expenditures or savings, i.e.,
tangible savings in the use of health resources or tangible costs; (2) indirect
benefits (or costs) are those earnings
lost, for whatever reason, such as due to
a disability; and (3) intangible benefits
(or costs) are those rather nebulous ones
that really cannot be measured but
should enter into consideration, such as
reducing pain, discomfort, or grief. Table 2 summarizes the benefits described
below.

1. Saved cost of institutional care for mentally retarded or developmentally disabled
persons. A substantial proportion of
mental retardation is the result of Down’s
syndrome, which would be greatly reduced under a program of amniocentesis
and abortion of affected fetuses. Not all
mental retardation is the same. It ranges
from mild to profound with different degrees of developmental capability associated with each. Table 3 gives some developmental characteristics for each degree
of retardation. While not all mentally retarded persons require institutional care,
many do, as may some physically handicapped persons. To the extent that insti
tutional care is desirable or necessary,
there would be a savings in expensive institutional care if Down’s syndrome and
other congenital anomalies were reduced. The amount of savings depends
on the proportion of retarded and disabled persons who used to be institutionalized, the level of care required, and the
age at which they are institutionalized.

2. Saved cost of home care for mentally
retarded or developmentally disabled persons not institutionalized. Many retarded
persons are kept at home and cared for,
at least part of their lives. There are likely
to be costs of home care above and beyond those required for a nonretarded
person. Developmentally disabled persons are also likely to require additional

_ care at home. Special facilities might

need to be installed. Therapists or other
health care professionals might have to
visit at some interval of time. To the extent that the incidence of retardation or
developmental defects is reduced, these
costs would be saved.

3. Saved cost of hospital and medical care
in cases of neural tube defects and other
conditions requiring special medical care.
The two main defects in this category are
anencephaly (which consists of a markDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 4

Mild Can develop social and

 

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis 351

TABLE 3
DEVELOPMENT CHARACTERISTICS OF MENTALLY RETARDED PERSONS

~

Degrees of
Menta! Pre-School! Age 0-5
Retardation Maturation & Development

communication skill;
minimal retardation in
sensorimotor areas; often

capacity for functioning in
sensorimotor areas; needs
nursing care.

School Age 6-20
Training & Education

Can learn academic skills
up to approximately sixth
grade level by late teens.
Can be guided toward

present; may respond to
minimal or limited training
in self-help.

 

 

Adult 21 and Over
Social and
Vocational Adequacy

 

Can usually achieve social
and vocational skills adequate to minimum selfsupport but may need

not distinguished from social conformity. “Educa- guidance & assistance
normal until later age. ble” when under unusual social
or economic stress.

Moderate Cantalk or learn to com- Can profit from trainingin | May achieve selfmunicate; poor social social & occupational maintenance in unskilled
awareness; fair motor skills; unlikely to progress or semi-skilled work under
development; profits from | beyond second grade level _ sheltered conditions; needs
training inself-help;canbe in academic subjects; may supervision & guidance
managed with moderate learn to travel alone in when under mild social or
supervision familiar places. economic stress.

Severe Poor motor development; Can talk or learn to com- May contribute partially to
speech is minimal; gener- municate; can be trainedin —_ self-maintenance under
ally unable to profit from elemental health habits; complete supervision; can
training in self-help; little profits from systematic develop self-protection
orne communication skills —_ habit training. skills to a minimal useful

. fevel in controlled environment.

Profound §Grossretardation; minimal Some motordevelopment | Some motor and speech

development; may achieve
very limited self-care;
needs nursing care.

 

Source: Yearbook of Special Education, 1977-78, Third Edition, p. 227. Marquis Academic Media, Marquis Who's Who,

Inc., Chicago, 1977.

edly defective development of the brain
together with the absence of some of the
bones in the cranial vault) and open spina
bifida (a defect consisting of the absence
of vertebral arches through which the spinal membrane, with or without spinal
cord tissue, may protrude). Conditions
such as these require extensive medical
care. While the number of cases prevented through a program of amniocentesis would be relatively small, the cost
saving in each case prevented would be
relatively large.

4. Saved cost of educating and training
mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons. These benefits are selfexplanatory. They would include costs of
special schools, vocational programs,
sheltered workshops and so forth. It

should be noted that this represents the
total cost of educating and training the retarded or developmentally disabled person and not merely the costs above and
beyond educating and training a “normal” person.

5. Saved cost to society of lost productivity
of retarded or developmentally disabled
persons. Persons who are retarded or developmentally disabled may work at a
lower level of productivity than a nondisabled person, if they can do so at all. They
still, however, consume. They must eat,
be clothed, and consume other necessities. Society experiences a net drain when
resources are consumed and not replaced
with productive effort.

6. Saved cost of loss of parental income
due to a retarded or disabled child. When

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

352

a retarded or disabled child is cared for at
home, one of the parents is likely to feel
that he or she cannot work or can only do
so at a lesser level of time than he or she
otherwise would, in order to stay at home
and care for the child. The family loses income, and society loses some productive
effort.

7. Relief of anxiety and reduction in uncertainty. Expectant parents (and other
people close to them) can be very anxious
when they know there is an increased risk
of having a retarded or disabled child, as
would be the case when there is some history of abnormality in the family or when
the mother is older. By being able to undergo amniocentesis and be relatively
certain their child is “‘normal,”’ if the test
results are negative, the parents avoid
psychological stress.

8. Benefit to a family of not having a retarded or disabled child. One would expect that, given the choice, parents would
not choose to have a genetically abnormal
or developmentally disabled child. From
this, one can infer a higher level of utility
for having a ‘normal’ child than a disabled one. It is less clear, however,
whether having a disabled child yields
more or less utility than having no child.
This would likely affect different families
differently. One must be somewhat careful because of the stories told by some
parents of retarded or disabled children
of the progress that can be made with
proper training, how satisfying they
found it to raise such a child, and the
benefits they have received from the experience. These cases notwithstanding,
the fact remains that many, if not most,
Down’s syndrome children are severely
retarded. They are not “simple beautiful
people,” are not maintainable at home
and, in many cases, are true human tragedies. On balance, we cannot be sure
which way this part of the benefit will go.

There could also be an effect on
siblings of the disabled child. To the extent that more care or attention must be
given to the disabled child, less may be
given to other children in the family. This
could lead to extra costs to the family
(though we will define them as disbenefits), both direct and intangible. Par
Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

ents may put other children in a preschool, for example, to be able to give
more attention to the disabled child. On
an intangible level, the “normal” child
may experience stress or some psychological disbenefit as a result of receiving less
of the parents’ attention.

9. Better ability to prepare for the birth of
achild under fetal distress because of a better measure of fetal maturity. Fetal distress has a great deal to do with the timing
and method of delivery. There is a sizeable group of infants whose chances for
survival are enhanced by early intervention, frequently by Caesarean section,
and for whom retention in the uterus and
delivery through the birth canal can be
hazardous. Selecting the optimal time for
intervention is a problem and is dependent on the degree of fetal maturity. The
major cause of fetal distress (affecting
some 50,000 infants annually, about half
of which die) is immaturity of the pulmonary function manifested as Respiratory
Distress Syndrome (RDS). Maturity of
the lung does not always coincide with
other indices of maturation. However,
measurement of phospholipids in amniotic fluid differs from other approaches to
the estimation of fetal maturation in that
it provides specific information about the
lungs. The decision to intervene in the
pregnancy often is not made until later in
the pregnancy than the 16th to 18th week,
when amniocentesis for prenatal diagnosis would be done. The existence of a
widespread program of amniocentesis,
however, and the necessary personnel
and facilities to perform it, as well as a
more universal acceptance and awareness of the procedure, could lead to better preparation and therefore reduced
cost or reduced level of mortality or morbidity for those infants born under fetal
distress.

10. Benefits from basic research and expanded knowledge due to further development of amniocentesis. Amniocentesis
and its associated chromosomal analyses
could lead to advances in the field of genetics. Gene mapping ts one possible application of chromosomal research that
could be advanced via the expanded use
of amniocentesis. At some point in the fuDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 4

ture, intrauterine treatment of disease or
errors in metabolism may be an option
rather than termination of a pregnancy.
There have already been instances where
intrauterine treatment has taken place to
remove blockages in the urinary tract and
drain fluid from lungs or brain cavities of
fetuses. In at least one case, a fetus was
removed from the womb, operated on
and returned to the womb ( Wisconsin
State Journal, Nov. 16, 1981).

11. Benefits to society of a decrease in the
incidence of chromosomal abnormalities,
neural tube defects, and other congenital
anomalies. This is a difficult thing to think
about. Certainly, society would be better
off if these anomalies were decreased;
but would society be better off if certain
people, namely the retarded or developmentally disabled, were not born? Something seems inherently wrong about making such a claim on an individual level;
but it seems reasonable to assume that,
given the choice, society would not
choose to have disabled children. Therefore, we would infer a benefit. The specific benefit here is more of a psychological nature. Society in general would be
expected to gain utility just by knowing
that the incidence rate of congenital
anomaly is now lower than it had been
previously.

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis 353

COSTS OF A PROGRAM OF
AMNIOCENTESIS

This section will detail the costs of a
program of amniocentesis. As with
benefits, there are three categories to
consider: direct, indirect, and intangible. Table 4 summarizes the costs described below.

1. Publicity to make the program known.
Starting up a new program would entail
costs in making people aware of the program, what the program is supposed to
accomplish, who is eligible, and so forth.

2. Administration of the program. Another necessary part of any public program is the administration. The machinery has to be set up to run the program
and to make sure things proceed as they
are supposed to.

3. Genetic counseling. Along with amniocentesis, there is some counseling
done with expectant parents. They must
be told about amniocentesis procedures
and what to expect. They must be informed about the risks of the procedure,
however slight they may be. The options
must be explained to them in case of a
positive test. The meaning of test results
must also be explained—what they tell

TABLE 4
Costs OF AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM (SUMMARY)

A. Direct and Indirect Costs

1. Publicity to make the program known
2. Administration of the program
3. Genetic counseling

4. Hospital, physician, and laboratory costs associated with drawing and analyzing the amniotic

fluid sample

5. Associated care costs for abortion, etc., in case of a positive test
6. Any additional facilities required for widespread program including hospital and laboratory

facilities and personnel

7. Time costs involved in women actually going through the amniocentesis procedure

B. Intangible Costs

Increased social cost of more older women having children because of decreased risk of bearing
(by terminating the pregnancy) a genetically abnormal or developmentally disabled child
9. “Mental anguish” of an abortion from a false positive test
10. Possibility of parents “rejecting” an abnormal child allowed to be born as the result of a false

negative test

11. “Psychological” cost to those opposed to abortion from legitimized use of abortion with counseling and family planning, probably resulting in an increased use of abortion
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

354

us, what they don’t tell us, and so forth.
The cost here will be primarily labor,
namely, the cost of the counselors.

4, Hospital, physician, and laboratory
costs associated with drawing and analyzing the amniotic fluid sample. These costs
involve capital cost for the equipment
necessary to draw and analyze the sample
as well as for the ultrasound analysis to locate the fetus; but the main costs, again,
are labor. Chromosomal analysis is a
labor-intensive procedure. It involves
someone actually looking at the chromosomes to see if there is some aberration
present. Some of the biochemical analyses can be done by machine, but some of
them also are done manually. Thus, labor
is a large share of the laboratory cost as
well as that of actually drawing the sample. Also included in this category would
be any additional medical care required
because of complications due to the amniocentesis procedure.

5. Abortion and associated care costs in
case of a positive test. One of the assumptions in amniocentesis is that should the
test results be positive, indicating an abnormal child, the parents will elect to terminate the pregnancy through abortion.
The costs included here would be for the
abortion procedure and any associated
care required, such as for any complications that might develop.

6. Any additional facilities required for a
widespread program, including: hospital
and laboratory facilities and personnel. At
present, the number of amniocenteses
performed is relatively small. It is conceivable that additional facilities would
have to be added or existing facilities expanded to handle the increased demand
resulting from the implementation of a
widespread program of amniocentesis.

7. Time costs of women going through the
amniocentesis program. There is a value
attached to the time a woman would
spend going through the amniocentesis
that could be spent doing something else.
Associated with this would be time spent
in traveling to and from the place where
the amniocentesis is performed as well as
time actually spent at the site to draw the
sample, receive counseling, etc.

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

8. Special cost of more older women having children because of a decreased risk of
bearing (by termination of the pregnancy) a genetically abnormal or developmentally disabled child. This is a rather
vague category but would include the cost
to society of an increased population.
These costs, of course, would have to be
net of any contributions made to societal
welfare by the increased population. One
would have to consider living costs and
resources consumed by these extra people net of the benefits of having the extra
workers (or cost of too many workers)
and the presumably increased output of
society, as well as extra congestion from
those additional people. This could turn
out to be a negative cost or in effect, a
benefit.

9. ‘‘Mental anguish” of an abortion from
a false positive test. Though studies have
found amniocentesis to be a highly accurate procedure—one study reports an accuracy rate of 99.4% (Lowe et al.,
1978)—it seems inevitable that some mistakes will occur. Assuming this to be the
case, there will be some cost incurred
(largely psychological) by the people involved: family, physician, etc.

10. Possibility of parents “rejecting” an
abnormal child allowed to be born as a
result of a false negative test. This cost is
the mirror image of the previous one. If
parents are “surprised” by the birth of an
abnormal child when the amniocentesis
test results had falsely assured them of a
“normal” child, there could be problems.
The parents might feel they are unfairly
burdened by this child and harbor resentment toward the child. They might not
care about the child and therefore not
give it the proper care or attention.
Whether or not the child was rejected,
some cost would be incurred by the parents or others. Here again, there would
be psychological costs to the parents, to
the child—and, quite possibly, to others
involved, such as the physician—in addition to real or direct costs of inadequate ©
care to the child.

11. Psychological costs to those opposed
to abortion from legitimized use of abor
 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 30, No. 4

tion with counseling and family planning,
probably resulting in an increased use of
abortion. Obviously, from the amount of
debate in recent years, there are many
people who are opposed to abortion.
With a program of amniocentesis and the
likely increased use of abortion that
would accompany it, there would be a
cost imposed on these people.

THE MODEL

The figure we want to arrive at in this
study is an estimate of the net benefit to
society of preventing children with
Down’s syndrome and neural tube defects from being born. In order to arrive
at this estimate, we look at the expected
number of people born in a single year
with the relevant birth defects and follow these people through their expected
lives. We set out to estimate the net cost
to society imposed by these people for
each year of their life. These net costs
are adjusted by the relevant survival
rates at each year, then discounted back
to some year zero—the beginning of the

project. This net cost to society, which |

would be saved if these people were not
born, is what we call the benefits of a
program of amniocentesis. These benefits are then compared to the cost of running the program (the fixed costs) and
the cost per participant (the variable
cost). The result is the net benefit of the
amniocentesis program.

The estimate of benefits is calculated
as:

B=)ng ad; +b:E;+4,C;—eY;+
giPig Si(At+r)

where B is benefits, / is institutionalization costs, E is education and training
costs, C is personal consumption, Y is
personal income, P is lost parental income, q is the expected number of abnormal births averted in a year, S is the

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

355

survival rate, and r is the discount rate.
The lower case letters (a,b,d,e,g) are the
proportions of people who fall into each
benefit category for each year, i.e., a; is
the percentage of the cohort under institutional care in year i, etc. The survival
rate is zero at age 70, hence the summation for 70 years. I, E, C, and P are all
paid out of society’s total bundle of resources to support the person in question over his or her lifetime. Y represents the person’s own contribution to
that support, so it must be netted out of
the benefit calculation. Looked at in
these terms, we believe the logic is consistent. In the case of a “normal” person, one would expect the personal contribution to outweigh the resources used
up in providing a lifetime of support. On
balance, society gains resources as a
result of that person being alive. In
other cases, this is not necessarily so.
The estimate of costs is calculated as:

C=A+Tn+Kq

where C is the total cost of the amniocentesis program for one year, assumed
to be paid at year zero, the beginning of
the program; A is the administrative
cost of the program (which includes
both the administration and publicity
costs talked about earlier); T is the cost
of the amniocentesis (which includes the
genetic counseling, hospital, physician
and laboratory costs associated with
drawing and analyzing the fluid sample);
n is the number of procedures performed in a given year, K is the cost of
an abortion, and g is the number of positive tests expected (equal to the expected number of abnormal births
averted in the benefit calculation).

The estimate of net benefits of the
amniocentesis program then is B—C.

A couple of studies from the medical
literature talk about what they term
CY
=
©
N
mei
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
nN
on
om
=
—
CS
‘'S
Ss
oD
=
oo
O
=
Ce
©
>>
—
=
N
mi
oO
>
—
c
~.
va
Oo
vo
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
Ss
©
A

356

“the replacement case” (Hagard and
Carter, 1976; Hock, 1979). This is the
case where, upon receiving a positive
test result and terminating the pregnancy, some proportion of women try
again. Statistically, the chance of having
two consecutive positive test results is
even smaller. This will be the case
whether or not the events are independent. The replacement case assumes a
“normal” child is born the second time.
The claim is that in calculating benefits,
the final figure must be net of the cost of
raising a ‘‘normal’’ child for those
women who go on to have a “normal”
child under the replacement case. We
came to the conclusion that the replacement case is not a relevant consideration. Whether the child is replaced or
not, the same resources are saved by society. In the case of a “norma!” child,
society does not give up resources;
rather, it would be expected to gain resources on balance. In a study such as
this where gross benefits are the relevant
consideration, i.e., resources saved by
society by preventing the birth of disabled children rather than resources lost
by those children being born disabled
rather than “‘normal,”’ we feel the replacement case is not a relevant consideration. Hence, we will not include replacement versus nonreplacement in
our calculations.

Several assumptions are made in this
analysis. First, with regard to institutional care, two levels of care are assumed: a high level of care, taken to bea
complete-care institution, and a low
level of care, taken to be a skilled-care
nursing home. We assign people to a
care facility based on the degree of their
disability. Hagard and Carter (1976) cite
estimates based on data collected in
Scotland, that 20 per cent of children
with Down’s syndrome have an IQ in

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

the range of 50-69; 75 per cent, in the
range 20-49; and the rest (5 per cent),
below 20. Using these data, we assume
that the 5 per cent with an IQ below 20
and 5 per cent from the low end of the
20-49 range go into the high level of institutional care. The rest go to the low
level of care. Consistent with Hagard
and Carter (and roughly consistent with
assumptions made by Glass [1975]), we
assume that 5 per cent of the Down’s
syndrome cohort is institutionalized immediately. These would be those with
the most severe level of retardation. At
age 15, a total of 25 per cent of the cohort would be under institutional care
(10 per cent at the high level and 15 per
cent at the low level). Half of the
Down’s syndrome cohort would be institutionalized by age 25, three-quarters
by age 35, and all by age 45. These assumptions are based on medical information, and we see no reason to assume
otherwise (Glass, 1975; Hagard and
Carter, 1976). The increments to the institutionalized population are added at
the ages specified rather than evenly
over the period.

In the area of education and training,
we assume that the entire surviving cohort would be involved in education and
training from the age of six through
twenty. This assumption is consistent
with classifications made in the Yearbook of Special Education when discussing developmental characteristics of
mentally retarded persons. We assume
20 per cent of the cohort (those in the
50-69 IQ range) to be in the ‘‘educable”
category for education and training.
Those persons institutionalized at the
high level of care, over the relevant time
period, are educated/trained at the institution. The remainder of the cohort is
assumed to be in the “trainable”’ cate
gory.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 30, No. 4

Following the period of education
and training, it is assumed that all noninstitutionalized survivors are employed.
We assume no overlap of the period of
education and training and the period of
employment, i.e., the people are in
training through age 20, then become
employed at age 21.

In terms of lost parental income, we
assume that the income lost is maternal
income. Further, we assume that as a
result of having mentally retarded or developmentally disabled children, mothers will enter the work force at half the
participation rate observed for mothers
of “normal” children.

An assumption made in deriving the
cost estimate for the amniocentesis program involves the number of women
who are offered the procedure. The live
birth statistics do not reflect the number
of women who are pregnant at the time
an amniocentesis would be offered, usually at the 16th to 18th week of gestation. There is some number of women
who are pregnant at this time but for
some reason do not give live birth; they
may miscarry or have a stillbirth, for example. For this reason, we add the number of fetal deaths to the number of live
births to derive an estimate of the number of women to whom an amniocentesis would be offered. Accurate statistics
on fetal mortality are only available for
20 weeks or more of gestation. The
number of fetal deaths between weeks
18 and 20, which we would ideally include in our estimate, would be a
smaller number, so the available statistics can provide a good proxy for fetal
deaths over the relevant period.

Under the terms of the program we
are looking at, all women who show positive results in the amniocentesis are offered an abortion to terminate the abnormal pregnancy. Even though the

 

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

357

pregnancy may later be terminated by
miscarriage by stillbirth, there is no way
to know this and the induced abortion
would be offered.

The incidence rate of abnormality for
those pregnancies ending in miscarriage
is substantially higher than for those
ending in live birth. As a result, we expect relatively more positive test results
and relatively more abortions for the
former group. Keep in mind, however,
two points:

1. We want to look at the resources saved
by society, i.e., not expended, as a result
of the amneocentesis program compared
to the counterfactual.

2. Those pregnancies ending in miscarriage require resources to care for the resulting abortion.

The procedures and care required for a
miscarriage are similar to those required
for an induced abortion. The costs, or
resources expended, would be similar as
well (Olson). For this reason, we can
view the abortion performed on the
group whose pregnancy would have otherwise ended in miscarriage as a substitute for the miscarriage. Therefore, the
costs for these abortions are merely a
transfer of resources expended, transferred from caring for a miscarriage to
inducing an abortion, and do not represent a real cost of the amniocentesis program.

In sum, we are assuming that an amniocentesis is offered to all women pregnant at the 16th to 18th week of gestation, both those ending in live birth and
those ending in miscarriage or stillbirth.
We include in the cost of the program,
however, only those abortions offered
to women who would have given live
birth.

We assume no adverse effects, leading to increased costs, due to risks associated with the amniocentesis procedure
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

358

itself. In our literature survey, we found
three large-scale studies in the U.S. and
Canada which indicated there is no excess risk to women undergoing amniocenteses (Lowe et al., 1978; Simpson et
al., 1976; Goldbus et al., 1979). They
find amniocentesis to be a safe procedure. Based on these studies, we feel
confident in not considering costs due to
complications of the procedure itself.
We also assume, though with a lesser
degree of confidence, that there will be
no extra costs associated with complications encountered in performing abortions on those women showing positive
test results. Complications and their associated costs could have such a wide
range, both in magnitude and incidence,
that gathering such information would
be a task of monumental proportions,
and their expected effect in this study
would seem to be relatively small.

‘In addition, we assume 100 per cent
accuracy of the procedure and that the
procedure is performed once for each
participant, i.e., that only one visit is
necessary to obtain the fluid sample. It is
assumed that there is a 100 per cent participation rate for the program, and all
those women showing positive test
results actually go through with an abortion. In the case where there was less
than 100 per cent participation, both the
benefits and costs would be reduced.
There are a couple of possible cases.
One is that those who choose not to participate in the program would be similar
in characteristics to those who do participate, specifically in their chances of
having a child with Down’s syndrome or
some neural tube defect. If this were the
case, benefits and costs would each be
reduced by the proportion of nonparticipation. One could also make an argument that the nonparticipants would
have, overall, a smaller chance of having

Andreano and McCollum

 

Social Biology

an affected child. The logic is as follows:
If there is a family history of birth defects or some other factor which would
indicate a woman is at an increased level
of risk, she would be more likely to become involved in an amniocentesis program than would a woman who was not
at an increased level of risk. In this case,
one would again expect both benefits
and costs to decrease but with the costs
decreasing proportionately more than
the benefits since women who were at a
lower risk level and did not participate
would lower costs but have a smaller effect on benefits. This situation would
show greater net benefits and make the
program more attractive.

We must also consider the discount
rate. If one can assume that the costs of
the program, the market value of the resources which must be devoted to the
project, are an accurate reflection of the
opportunity costs of those resources,
1.e., they are an accurate representation
of the discounted value of these resources invested elsewhere, then no adjustment to these costs is necessary. No
matter who would undertake a project
of offering amniocentesis to all pregnant
women—the government, the insurance industry, or some private charitable organization—they all have to compete for funds in capital markets. In light
of this fact, one can assume that the
price paid for the resources devoted to
amniocentesis accurately reflects the
true discounted value or opportunity
cost of those resources. Further, the
costs are defined in this study are for one
year’s operation of the program and are
all assumed to be paid out at the beginning of the year, so no time adjustment
is necessary. The real concern then is the
social rate of time preference applicable
to the benefits of the project which occur
over a relatively long period of time.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 30, No. 4

One prominent view about the social
rate of time preference, as expressed by
Gramlich (1981), is that it should be the
same as the economy’s real growth rate.
The long-run U.S. growth rate is in the
neighborhood of 31/2 per cent, so we will
use 31/2 per cent as our discount rate. All
costs and benefits are expressed in 1980
dollars. We will assume that real values
remain constant throughout the period
of analysis.

Another assumption regarding costs
is that no additional facilities will be necessary to implement the amniocentesis
program. We assume that no additional
hospital or laboratory facilities will be
required to accommodate the program.
This assumption is based primarily on
the feeling that there is a significant
amount of excess capacity in the hospital
and laboratory industry. In addition, it
is based on the fact that amniotic fluid
samples can be preserved and transported to other locations for analysis. A
large share of hospital laboratory work
is done ‘at central laboratory facilities
rather than being done “‘in-house.”’
Such facilities typically exhibit economies of scale. Hence, we feel that existing facilities can accommodate the increased demand for their services.

In attempting to estimate the benefits
from averted neural tube defect births,
we employ a similar set-up to that used
in the case of Down’s syndrome. The
differences come in the assumptions
used to arrive at the components of the
estimate. A major difference is in the
survival rates for those born with neural
tube defects. In the data we looked at,
all those born with anencephaly died in
the first year of life. In the case of spina
bifida, 56 per cent died perinatally and
17 per cent died in the first year of life
(Chamberlain, 1978). The estimated
survival rate at 5 years of age is 24 per

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

359

cent. Beyond the age of 5, we were unable to find any data on survival rates, so
we will assume that the survival rates beyond age 5 are similar to those in the
Down’s syndrome case. For severity we
assume the breakdown given by Chamberlain (1978). Of the 24 per cent surviving at age 5: 13.2 per cent have minimal
handicap, 21.7 per cent have moderate
handicap with normal intellect, 47.6 per
cent have severe handicap with normal
intellect, and 17.5 per cent have severe
handicap with some degree of mental
retardation. Specifically, we assume
that all those with the combination of severe physical handicap and mental retardation are institutionalized immediately at the aforementioned high level of
care. We assume, in addition, for the
purpose of analysis, that none of the
physically handicapped people with normal intellect are institutionalized.

The education and training cost assumptions are the same as for the
Down’s syndrome case, i.e., that this
period of life runs from age 6 through
20.

The assumptions for lost parental income are the same as those used in the
case of Down’s syndrome. The final assumption needed in the derivation of
benefits from averted neural tube defect
births is one concerning income. Since
the noninstitutionalized population in
this case consists solely of people with
normal intellect, we assume that upon
completion of the education and training period all of the people will be employed at the same level of wages as a
nonhandicapped person.

There is another source of benefits in
the case of neural tube defects: averted
medical costs. These medical costs involve a tremendous amount of variability. Procedures could involve plastic surgery to repair and cover the defect,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

360

repair to nerve damage or impairments,
possible tendon repair and transplant,
among other things. The surgical procedures involved can easily run into the
tens of thousands of dollars. In addition,
all of these would likely be inpatient
rather than outpatient procedures, involving high hospital costs. A study of
the Myelodysplasia and Hydrocephalus
Program in Nebraska by Angle et al.
(1977a, 1977b) estimates the extra medical costs associated with these defects.
The defects considered by this program
are myelodysplasia (which is a defective
development of any part, especially the
lower segments, of the spinal cord), hydrocephalus (which is a condition characterized by the abnormal accumulation
of fluid in the cranial vault, accompanied by enlargement of the head, prominence of the forehead, atrophy of the
brain, mental weakness and convulsions), and encephalocele (which is a
hernia of the brain, manifested by protrusion of brain substance through a
congenital or traumatic opening of the
skull). The nature of these defects is relatively close to that of neural tube defects. In fact myelodysplasia, which is a
neural tube defect, makes up 65% of the
sample, so we feel relatively comfortable in using these cost estimates as a
proxy for the additional medical costs
associated with neural tube defects. We
will assume that these expenses are incurred only in those surviving past the
age of 5.

THE DATA

The expected numbers of live births,
fetal deaths and congenital anomalies
for the United States and Wisconsin are
shown in Table 5.

The benefit and cost data used in this
study came from a wide variety of

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

sources. The cost figures on institutional
care are from the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services
(DHSS), Division of Health. One set of
cost estimates is for a high level of care.
These cost figures include everything
but education and training (i.e., room
and board, medical care, etc.). The annual cost of this care is $30,588. The second set of cost figures is for the care of a
mentally retarded person in a skilled
care nursing home. This type of facility
would be expected to provide a lower
level of care than that covered by the
first set of cost estimates. This lower
level of care is estimated at $12,775 annually. The level of care required is dependent on the severity of mental retardation or disability.

The costs of education and training
come basically from two sources. One is
a Colorado study cited in a discussion report to the U.S. Congress in 1979 on the
implementation of the Education For
All Handicapped Children Act (U.S.
Department of Health, Education and
Welfare, 1979). The other source of information is the Wisconsin Department
of Health and Social Services (Division
of Vocational Rehabilitation; Division
of Policy and Budget). Using information from these sources on the excess direct special education cost per student
and information on the cost of educating
a “normal” student, we arrive at the following estimates of annual cost:

Limited Intellectual Capacity

“Educable” ............... $4,128
“Trainable” ............... $4,777
Physically Handicapped ....... $4 243

Mentally Retarded and/or Physically
Handicapped in an Institutional Care FaCity eee eee eee eee cee $2,636

In addition we added $246 as an estimate of administrative and case worker
cost for the Division of Vocational Re 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

361

TABLE 5

BIRTHS, FETAL DEATHS (20 WEEKS OR MORE GESTATION), AND EXPECTED NUMBER OF CASES OF
Down’s SYNDROME, ANENCEPHALY, AND SPINA BIFIDA FOR WISCONSIN
AND THE UNITED STATES
(BASED ON 1978 LIVE BIRTHS)

1978 Fetal
Age of Mother Live Births Deaths
Wisconsin
Under 15 .. 72 3
15-19 ..... 8,805 107
0-24 ...... 23,197 198
25-29 ..... 23,447 193
30-34 ..... 10,033 116
35-39 ..... 2,503 48
40 &over . 516 14
Total .... 68,573 679
United States:
Under 20 .. 556,000 5,316
20-24 ..... 1,140,000 9,641
25-29 ..... 1,015,000 9,377
30-34 ..... 474,000 5,646
35-39 ..... 126,000 2,311
40 &over . 24,000 660
Total .... 3,335,000 32,951

Expected

Down's Expected Expected
Syndrome Anencephaly Spina Bifida

0 0 0

La 1.3 4.0

4.7 5.0 10.6

7.0 5.4 9.5

4.7 2.6 3.9

4.0 0.5 1.2

a3 0 0.3

25.4 14.8 29.5

97.3 79.0 252.4

230.3 247.4 522.1

299.4 235.5 412.1

220.9 123.2 183.0

201.0 23.6 60.5

160.9 Zend) 14.4

1,209.8 711.2 1,444.5

Sources: Wisconsin births: Public Health Statistics—1978, Supplement. U.S. births: Statistical Abstract of the United States.
Incidence of Down’s syndrome, anencephaly, spina bifida: Taffe!, Congenital Anomalies and Birth Injuries Among Live Births:
United States, 1973-74. Fetal death rates: Vital Statistics of the United States—1977, Volume II, Mortality, Part A.

habilitation or similar organizations
working with the disabled students.
Estimates of personal consumption
expenditures were arrived at using a
Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey (U.S. Department of Labor, 1978).
Ideally, we wanted to use age-specific
personal consumption needs for retarded and physically disabled persons
not under institutional care. To our
knowledge, however, such data do not
exist, nor do age-specific consumption
patterns or needs for a “normal” person. We settled on an assumption that
the consumption patterns of a noninstitutionalized retarded or disabled person
would not be substantially different
from those of a “normal” person. We
then used the Consumer Expenditure

Survey to derive an estimate for the personal consumption part of child-raising
costs. The estimate we used was the difference in personal consumption expenditures between a two-person and a
three-person family. The amount came
out to be $3,461 annually. This was the
personal consumption figure used from
birth through the age of 20, corresponding to the pre-school and school-age
years. From age 21 through the end of
life, or until institutionalization, we applied per capita personal consumption
expenditures from the National Income
accounts on the assumption that this was
the best estimate we could use in view of
the diversity of situations our cohort of
retarded and disabled persons would actually be in (U.S. Bureau of the Census,

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

362

1980). This amount was $7,735 annually.

Estimates for income of retarded
workers used in the study came from the
Wisconsin DHSS, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation (DVR), and are
the average earnings at closure, i.e.,
when DVR feels the person has been
adequately trained and is now employable to some extent, helped to find a job
and sent out into the world. The estimates used for annual income for mild
and moderate mental retardation are as
follows:

Mild retardation .............. $5,891

Moderate retardation ......... $5,233
For the benefit calculation in the neural
tube defect case, the income used was
the median income for workers aged 25
or below and that for workers over age
25 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1980).

The figures for lost parental income
are derived from median weekly wages
of “women who maintain families.”’ The
derived estimate of these annual earnings is $10,572 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1980). The data on labor force participation rates are from the Statistical
Abstract of the United States (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1979, 1980) and are
averages (weighted by proportions of
married women with husband present,
separated women and divorced women)
for the following three categories: No
children under age 18; children aged 617 only; and children under 6 years of
age. The participation rates for these
three categories are 47 per cent, 60 per
cent and 44 per cent, respectively. In
calculating benefits we assumed a participation rate of one-half these rates for
mothers of disabled children.

The benefits for Down’s syndrome
prevention were calculated based on
survival rates of people with Down’s
syndrome taken from two comprehen
Andreano and McCollum

 

Social Biology

sive surveys cited in the Hagard and
Carter Study (1976). Those for spina
bifida prevention are calculated based
on survival rates given by Chamberlain
(1978).

To estimate the averted medical costs
associated with spina bifida we used the
aforementioned studies by Angle et al.,
(1977a, 1977b) which found an average
duration of hospitalization of 129 days
with an average of 6.3 operative procedures. The cost of these, plus the cost for
an average of four annual clinic visits,
including laboratory and x-ray studies,
spread over an eight-year period, is estimated at $21,140, exclusive of the cost
of braces and outpatient medicines. This
cost estimate is in 1977 dollars, and no
discounting is applied for the eight-year
period. We adjust their figure for inflation to bring the units up to 1980 dollars, comparable with the other cost and
benefit estimates. To adjust for the time
value, we will assume the cost to be
spread evenly over the eight-year per10d.

Let us now turn to the cost side of the
study. To arrive at an estimate for the
cost of making the program known to
the population it seeks to serve and the
administration of the program, we used
the analogy of another social program as
similar as possible both in size and purpose, and assumed that administration
and publicity costs of this program
would be a reasonable approximation to
those for a program of amniocentesis.
The main programs looked at were the
Genetic Awareness Program (GAP)
and the Rubella Screening and Vaccination Program (RSVP), both offered by
the Planned Parenthood Association of
Wisconsin. The unit costs of these programs (per expected person served), as
well as some other programs considered, were remarkably similar. We set 

 

Vol. 30, No. 4

tled on an estimate for administrative
and publicity costs of $4.77 per person
served (Planned Parenthood Association of Wisconsin, 1979).

The cost for the amniocentesis procedure itself, which includes ultrasound,
drawing the sample, analyzing the fluid,
reporting and interpreting the results,
and some genetic counseling, came
from insurance data for the State of Wis
w consin (Wisconsin Blue Cross and Blue
© Shield) and from personal communications with two physicians on staff at a
hospital in the Greater Chicago area—
one a family practitioner, the other an
obstetrician and gynecologist (Engstrom, Burke). The cost of the amniocentesis procedure had a wide variation
over the areas covered, from a low of
$121 up to $500, depending both on the
place where the procedure was per
at 13:39 08 December 2

—_

Downloaded by [University of Michigan

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

363

formed and on the battery of tests performed on the fluid sample. After careful consideration and much discussion
we settled on an estimate of $200 to use
in our cost calculation.

The final piece of datum included in
the cost calculation is the cost of an
abortion and its associated care to those
women who show positive test results.
Our estimate for an abortion, done as an
outpatient procedure, is $275 (Engstrom, Burke).

Lastly, note that all data are expressed in 1980 dollars. Adjustments
were made to data from older sources to
assure uniformity of units.

RESULTS

Tables 6 and 7 present the results of
the benefit-cost calculations for the

TABLE 6
Net BENEFIT OF AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM——UNITED STATES

(1) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 40 and over

Expected Live Births ................. 24,000
Expected Down’s Syndrome ........... 161
Expected Spina Bifida ................ 14.4
00] $ 5,097,836
Benefits ...........0.000. $25,743,004
Net Benefits ............. $20,645,168

(2) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 35 and over
Expected Live Births ................. 150,000
Expected Down’s Syndrome ........... 362
Expected Spina Bifida ................ 75
0 «a $31,443,992
Benefits .............05- $60,145,381
Net Benefits ............. $28,701 389

(3)

Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 30 and over
Expected Live Births ................. 624,000
Expected Down’s Syndrome ........... 583
Expected Spina Bifida ................ 258

 

$129,772,180
$104,102,850
~ $25,669,330

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

364

Andreano and McCollum

 

Social Biology

TABLE 7
Net BENEFIT OF AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM— WISCONSIN

(1) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 40 and over

Expected Live Baths ws esos es aewus ne ae 516

Expected Down’s Syndrome ........... ad
Expected Spina Bifida ................ 3

Costs. asses es ea oa rene cane $109,573

Benefits ..............6- $559,280

Nét Béftefits . occu xa ws saws $449,707

(2) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 35 and over

Expected Live Births ................. ;

Expected Down’s Syndrome ........... 7.5
Expected Spina Bifida ................ 1.5

CostS ..... cece cece ee eee $633,371

Benefits ................ $1,243,694

Net Benefits ............. $610,323

(3) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 30 and over

Expected Live Births ................. 13,052

Expected Down’s Syndrome ........... 12.2
Expected Spina Bifida ................ 5.4

0s $2,713,947

Benefits .............0- $2,179,296

Net Benefits ............. — $534,651

United States as a whole and for the
State of Wisconsin. We see that the
break-even point of an amniocentesis
program, in terms of total benefits and
costs, would occur in the early 30’s age
group. Given the magnitude of the net
benefits for extending the program to
women aged 35 and over, and those for
extending the program to women aged
30 and over, as well as the relevant birth
and abnormality incidence rates, we
speculate that the break-even point
would occur about age 32. Note that the
net benefit figure derived is for one
year’s operation of the program; hence
it can be interpreted as annual benefit.
These results presume that all of the
women with positive test results will go
through with termination of the pregnancy. If some proportion of women decide not to go through with the abortion,

of course, the net benefit calculation will
be affected. The benefits will decrease
by the proportion of women who decide
against abortion. The costs will be reduced by $275 (our estimated cost of an
abortion) for each woman declining the
abortion. This will raise the break-even
age of the program. At the level of offering amniocentesis to all pregnant
women 35 and older, a5 per cent rate of
decline to go through with the abortion
would reduce net benefits to
$25,700,126. A 10 per cent rate of decline would reduce net benefits to
$22,698,863. From these comparisons
one can see that, unless the proportion
of women declining abortions was large,
say 40 per cent or more, the viability of
the program would not be substantially
affected.

These results compare favorably to

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 4

the few previous studies done. The
break-even age is a bit lower in this
study than some of the others, which is
to be expected since we looked at
benefits from averted Down’s syndrome
cases and averted neural tube defects,
whereas others have focused primarily
on Down’s syndrome. Glass (1975)
found that under no set of assumptions
was cost less than benefit in the 35-59
year old group of mothers in the United
Kingdom. Hagard and Carter (1976),
also working in Great Britain, found a
break-even point at about age 35. Hook
(1979), using older data and some different assumptions, arrived at a breakeven age in the early 30’s.

Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of our results. The figure
shows the total benefit and total cost of
extending an amniocentesis program to
all pregnant women beyond certain
ages. The horizontal axis gives the cutoff ages. For example, the total benefit
of extending the program to all women
at or beyond age 35 is about $60 million
and the total cost is about $31 million.
The curves cross at about age 32. This
represents the program break-even age,
or the point where total benefit equals
total cost. The marginal break-even age,
where total net benefit to society is at a
maximum, Occurs somewhere around
age 36. The aforementioned study by
Hook found a similar marginal breakeven age.

The significance of the marginal
break-even point 1s that, up to this
point, each additional woman entering
the program adds to the total net
benefit. Beyond the marginal breakeven point, i.e. as successively younger
women are added to the program, each
additional participant subtracts from the
total net benefit. While the total net
benefit is still positive, 1.e. total benefits

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

365

outweigh total costs, it is decreasing.
For each new participant the additional
(or marginal) cost outweighs the additional (or marginal) benefit.

The excess benefit from older participants is, in effect, subsidizing the entry
of younger women into the program.
This is illustrated in Table 8. The ‘‘average”’ figures refer to the entire group included in the program; the “marginal’’
figures refer to the last group added to
the program. For example, if the program is extended to all women aged 35
or over, the average annual benefit is
$401. The average annual cost is $210.
The marginal benefit, the benefits
added when the 35-39 year old age
group is included, is $273 per participant. The marginal cost is $209. In this
case the marginal benefits and costs of
the entire program are equal to the average benefits and costs for the last included age group, i.e. the average
benefit and cost for the 35-39 year age
group equals the marginal benefit and
cost of the program offered to all
women aged 35 or over. A finer age
breakdown would show marginal
benefit and marginal cost equal at the
marginal break-even age.

A graph of total net benefit would
start at zero, with no participants. It
would increase and reach a maximum at
the marginal break-even age (around
age 36). It would then decrease and
reach zero again at the program breakeven age (around 32), as younger
women are successively added to the
program. If the priority of policy makers
is to maximize the benefit to society, the
amniocentesis program should be offered to all women age 36 or over. If the
priority is to extend the program to as
many people as possible, the amniocentesis program should be offered to all
women age 32 or over.

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

366

   

Millions of
Dollars

200

175

150

125

100

75

50

30
25

30

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

Total Costs

Total Benefits

25 20 15 10
Maternal age in years

FIGURE 1

Further, we claim that our estimates
of net benefit will be conservative estimates. The reasons for this claim are
threefold. First, as alluded to earlier,
there are many congenital anomalies besides Down’s syndrome and spina bifida

which, in specific cases, could be
averted. In many cases, as a result of evidence from family history or previous
pregnancies, other anomalies may be
detected and the pregnancy terminated.
To the extent that this occurs, net

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 30, No. 4 Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis 367
TABLE 8
AVERAGE AND MARGINAL BENEFITS AND CosTS
Average Average Average Marginal Marginal Marginal

Age Group Benefit Cost Net Benefit Benefit Cost Net Benefit
40 and over .. $1,073 $212 $861 $1,073 $212 $861

35 and over ... 401 210 191 273 209 64

30 andover ... 167 208 —14 93 207 —114

benefit will be increased. The absolute
number of cases would be relatively
small but the amount of benefit would
be relatively large for each abnormal
birth averted.

Secondly, the benefits and costs measured in the study did not include intangible benefits and costs. These benefits
and costs cannot be quantified but many
can be signed as to the direction of their
effect on net benefit. Table 9 presents
the intangible benefits and costs along
with what we believe is the probable direction of their effect. The major intangible effect, we believe, is the “relief
from anxiety and reduction in uncertainty.” Left out of Table 9 but also not

explicitly measured are the saved costs
of home care for mentally retarded or
developmentally disabled persons. We
were unable to find reliable data in this
area, although some outpatient medical
costs are included in the Nebraska study
on developmentally disabled persons
(Angle et al., 1977a, 1977b). We expect
this effect on net benefits to be positive
but small relative to some others, such
as institutional care. This, coupled with
the information in Table 9, again leads
us to conclude our net benefits are conservatively estimated.

Thirdly, some of our assumptions
lead to conservative benefit estimates.
In particular, our assumption on institu
TABLE 9
INTANGIBLE BENEFITS AND COSTS AND THE PROBABLE SIGN OF THEIR EFFECT ON NET BENEFIT

imtangione Benefits
Relief of anxiety and reduction in uncertainty

; Benefit to a family of not having a retarded or disabled child
3. Better ability to prepare for the birth of child under fetal distress because of better mea
sure of fetal maturity

4. Benefit from basic research and expanded knowledge due to further development of

amniocentesis

5. Benefit to society of a decrease in the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities, neural

tube defects and other congenital anomalies
Intangible Costs

1. Social cost of more women having children because of decreased risk of bearing (by

mm ON pn

+9 +

(+)
(+)

(?)

terminating the pregnancy) a genetically abnormal or developmentally disabled child

2. “Mental anguish” of an abortion from a false positive test
3. Possibility of parents ‘‘rejecting” an abnormal child allowed to be born as a result of a

false negative test

4. “Psychological” cost to those opposed to abortion from legitimized use of abortion with

(-)
(-)

(-)

counseling and family planning, probably resulting in an increased use of abortion

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

368

tionalization, that 10 per cent go to the
high level of care and the rest to the low
level of care, we feel is a conservative assumption. Our assumption of equal
earnings for a physically handicapped
person with normal intellect and a nonhandicapped person is likely to be an
over-estimate which would lead to conservatively estimated benefits. Recall
that almost half the survivors at age 5 in
the physically handicapped cases were
severely handicapped. We would expect
the earnings of these people to be lower
than the median, all other things equal.
Other assumptions as well could lead to
an understatement of benefits. In our literature survey, some author mentioned,
in passing, a feeling that retarded and
especially physically handicapped persons might have higher morbidity rates
than nonhandicapped persons. If this
were the case, though we could not find
definite data on this question, medical
costs averted would be larger, thus further understating benefits of the amniocentesis program.

On the cost side, however, there is
one area left out of our calculation that
would lead to an understatement of
costs. This is the area of time costs of the
participants in the program, which
would definitely add to the costs but, we
feel, not enough to detract much from
the net benefit. Time costs are a very difficult thing to estimate and would likely
be very diverse for a large group of
women.

A factor leading to a slight overestimate of costs is multiple births. Our estimate of the number of women offered
an amniocentesis implicitly assumed single births. To the extent that pregnancies involve more than one fetus, fewer
women will be offered an amniocentesis, thus lowering costs.

On balance, we feel justified in mak
Andreano and McCollum

 

Social Biology

ing the claim that we conservatively estimated net benefit. The omniscient analyst would arrive, we believe, at a lower
break-even age for the amniocentesis
program.

In order to test the robustness of the
net benefit statements, benefits and
costs were calculated using several different assumptions. The major factor in
the benefits calculation is institutional
care for the Down’s syndrome cohort.
We calculated the benefits using extremes in institutional care assumptions
to derive an upper bound and lower
bound on the benefits calculation. We
also had to vary the education and training assumptions to fit the institutional
care. In the upper bound case, all institutionalized persons are at the high level
of care mentioned previously. All persons institutionalized during the education and training period, therefore, receive training at the institutional care
facility while they are institutionalized.
All other assumptions are the same as
previously mentioned. In the lower
bound case, all institutionalized persons
are assumed to be in skilled care nursing
homes—the low level of care. Accordingly, for education and training, they
are in the “trainable” category. Again,
all other assumptions remain the same.
The ‘“‘mixed case”’ is the case originally
presented in Tables 6 and 7. The total
benefit calculations for these three sets
of assumptions are displayed in Table
10. The end result—the total benefits
calculation—does not change much, regardless of the institutional care assumption chosen. Comparing these
benefit calculations to the cost figures
shown in Table 6, the program still
breaks even between age 30 and 35. The
exact break-even point will vary depending on the assumption chosen. It
will be lower for. the high level of care
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

369

TABLE 10

TOTAL BENEFITS USING DIFFERENT ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT INSTITUTIONAL CARE, EDUCATION
AND EMPLOYMENT— UNITED STATES

Age Group Assumption Total Benefits
Allages .......... All institutional care at low level $243 533,620
*Mixed levels of institutional care $264,140,273

All institutional care at high level $311,036,220

50% employment of non-institutionalized persons $279,925 ,272

40+over ......... All institutional care at low level $23,002,830
*Mixed levels of institutional care $25,743,004

All institutional care at high level $31,979,002

50% employment of non-institutionalized persons $26,115,307

35+over ......... All institutional care at low level $53,982,119
*Mixed levels of institutional care $60,145,381

All institutional care at high level $74,171,532

50% employment of non-institutionalized persons $61,395,740

30+over ......... All institutional care at low level $94,177,593
*Mixed levels of institutional care $104 102,850

All institutional care at high level $126,690,410

50% employment of non-institutionalized persons $107,450,010

25+over ......... All institutional care at low level $157,316,170
*Mixed levels of institutional care $172,340,300

All institutional care at high level $206,531,700

50% employment of non-institutionalized persons $180,123,210

“Denotes the assumption used and presented in the primary analysis (see Table 6).

(higher cost of institutionalization,
therefore more benefit per affected
birth averted) and higher for the low
level of care.

Also displayed in Table 10 are the
results of changing the assumption on
employment. We assumed that 50 per
cent of the noninstitutionalized cohort
would be employed rather than 100 per
cent. The results for total benefits do not
change substantially. The expected
value or average benefit per Down’s
syndrome birth averted changed less
than 1 per cent when the employment
assumption was changed to 50 per cent.
The average benefit per spina bifida
birth averted, however, increased by 18
per cent when this assumption was
changed. Similar changes would be expected if the level of income earned by
the noninstitutionalized group were

halved. Employment is a much larger
factor in the case of spina bifida than in
the Down’s syndrome case, so benefits
from averting spina bifida births would
be expected to be more sensitive to
changes in employment.

On the cost side of the analysis, the
major expense is the cost of the amniocentesis procedure. Aside from being a
major expense, under the program we
are examining, it is offered to all pregnant women. We examined extreme assumptions on the average cost of an amniocentesis procedure to set upper and
lower bounds to the costs of the amniocentesis program. The “low amniocentesis” assumption is that the average
cost of the procedure is $121. In the
“high amniocentesis” case, the average
cost of the procedure is assumed to be
$400. The ‘‘medium amniocentesis”

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

370

case is the one assumed in deriving Tables 6 and 7, namely an average cost of
$200 per procedure. In each case, all
other assumptions remain the same.
The total cost calculations for these alternate assumptions are displayed in Table 11. There is a wide range of costs between the upper and lower bounds, the
upper exceeding the lower by about a

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

factor of three. Comparing the total
benefits derived from the “‘mixed levels
of care” assumption of Table 10 to the
total cost figures in Table 11, it is evident
that the results are quite different depending on the cost assumption applied.
Assuming a high cost of amniocentesis,
the program breaks even slightly beyond age 35. With a low cost of amnio
TABLE 11

Tota Costs UsING DIFFERENT ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT CosT OF AMNIOCENTESIS PROCEDURE,
ABORTION, AND ADMINISTRATION

AGE Group ASSUMPTIONS

Low amniocentesis
*Medium amniocentesis

High amniocentesis

Low abortion

High abortion

High administration

Medium administration

owe eee eo nwe

Low amniocentesis
*Medium amniocentesis

High amniocentesis

Low abortion

High abortion

High administration

Medium administration

eoraeteoes

Low amniocentesis
*Medium amniocentesis

High amniocentesis

Low abortion

High abortion

High administration

Medium administration

35 + over

Low amniocentesis
*Medium amniocentesis

High amniocentesis

Low abortion

High abortion

High administration

Medium administration

30+ over

Low amniocentesis
*Medium amniocentesis

High amniocentesis

Low abortion

High abortion

High administration

Medium administration

25+ over

orpteveonve

*Denotes the assumptions used and presented in the primary analysis (see Table 6).

Tora. Cost

$424 317,130
$690,385 260
$1 363,975,500
$690,318,900
$690,451 ,620
$741 ,679,150
$707 999,640

$3,149,696
$5,097,836
$10,029,836
$5,093,453
$5,102,218
$5,473,408
$5,226,808

$19,359,283
$31,443,992
$62,038,192
$31,433,072
$31,454,912
$33,773,740
$32,244,030

$79,795,433
$129,772,180
$256,295 ,580
$129,751,160
$129,793,190
$139,406,930
$133,080,760

$208 826,990
$339 729,520
$671,128,320
$339 690,710
$339 768,320
$364 965,540
$348,395 ,600

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 30, No. 4

centesis, the program would break even
below the age of 30—maybe around age
28.

In addition to varying the assumption
on the cost of the amniocentesis procedure, Table 11 shows the total cost derived using alternative assumptions on
abortion cost and program administration costs, other things being equal. The
low abortion cost case assumes a cost of
$250 per abortion; the high abortion
case assumes a cost of $300 per abortion.
This reflects the range of abortion costs
found in our collection of data. The assumption used in the earlier results was
$275 per abortion. Table 11 indicates
that varying this assumption did little to
change the total cost calculation. It is a
small range and it affects a relatively
small number of women—only those
found to be carrying an affected fetus.

The “high administration”’ cost case
used an average cost of $20 per person
served. The “medium administration”
case assumed an average cost of $10 per
person served. Again, all other assumptions remain in the same as the medium
amniocentesis case used to derive earlier results. This change in our assumptions did little to change the total cost
figures.

The upshot of this discussion of different assumptions is that the end results
do not change very much. Even under
the most unfavorable assumptions for
benefits and cost (from the proamniocentesis program point of view),
those of “low level institutional care”
and “high amniocentesis procedure
cost” the program will still break even
around age 37.

IMPLICATIONS

Based on the results of this study, it
would seemingly be in the interest of society to offer a program of amniocente
Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

371

sis to all pregnant women beyond the
early 30’s in age. The program could economically be extended to younger
women who were at a high level of risk
of bearing a genetically abnormal child
due to a family history of genetic defects
or some other circumstance. Such a program, we would imagine, would most
likely be administered by a governmental agency. It could also feasibly be offered by the insurance industry.

A caveat to be issued here is that a
benefit-cost study such as this one is only
one aspect of a decision to go ahead with
a program of amniocentesis such as the
one examined here. There are several
moral, ethical and legal issues that must
be considered as well, not the least of
which is the question of abortion. Other
questions raised include: using amniocentesis and then abortion to terminate
pregnancies for “‘trivial” reasons, such
as a child of the “wrong sex,” a broader
issue of genetic management, the responsibility of the physician to provide
and/or advise patients of the availability
of such procedures as amniocentesis.
These issues are discussed in the medical
literature, and we feel their importance
must temper any policy conclusions
drawn from an analytical example such
as this one.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank the Biomedical
Research Fund, Graduate School, University of Wisconsin-Madison, for research support. They are also indebted to Timothy Tyson, Susan Kidder, and Florence O’Donnell
of the Wisconsin Department of Health and
Social Services for assistance in locating
data. The authors additionally benefitted
from discussions with Barbara Wolfe, Michael Welsh, Michael! Rothschild and Robert Haveman, as well as comments by Richard Osborne. The views expressed are solely
those of the authors, as are any remaining errors.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

372 Andreano and McCollum Social Biology
REFERENCES
ANGLE, Caro R., E. J. TREMBATH, and WIL- aspects of health planning. North Hollard
LIAM L. STROND. 1977a. The Myelodysplasia Publishing Co.
and Hydrocephalus Program in Nebraska: GoLpBus, MITCHELL S., WILLIAM D.

A 15-year review of costs and benefits, Part
I. Nebraska Med. J. (October), pp. 359361.

. 1977b. The Myelodysplasia and Hydrocephalus Program in Nebraska: A 15year review of costs and benefits, Part II.
Nebraska Med. J. (November), pp. 391393.

BANTA, HENRY Davib, and STEPHEN B.
THACKER. 1979. Costs and benefits of electronic fetal monitoring: A review of the literature, U.S. Dept. of Health, Education
and Welfare, Public Health Service, Office
of Health Research, Statistics and Technology. DHEW Publication No. (PHS) 793245.

BENNET, M.J., K. Blau, R.D. JoHNson, and
G.V.P. CHAMBERLAIN. 1978. Some problems of alphafetoprotein screening. The
Lancet 2(8013):1296-1297. December 16.

BritisH MEpIcAL JOURNAL. 1978. Hazards of
amniocentesis. Vol. 2, No. 6153, pp. 16611662. December 16.

BurKE, JoserH, M.D. Personal communication.

CHAMBERLAIN, JOCELYN. 1978. Human benefits
and costs of a national screening programme for neural-tube defects. The Lancet 2(8013):1293-1296. December 16.

CoNLEY, R., and A. Mitunsky. 1975. The economics of prenatal genetic diagnosis. In A.
Milunsky (ed.), The prevention of genetic
disease and mental retardation. W.B.
Saunders Co.

E.uioT, Joun. 1979. Abortion for “‘wrong”’ fetal sex: An ethical-legal dilemma. J. Amer.
Med. Assoc. 242(14):1455-1456. October
5.

EncGstTrom, C. Davip, M.D. Personal communication.

Etzioni, Amrrat. 1976. Issues of public policy
in the U.S.A. raised by amniocentesis. J.
Med. Ethics. 2(1):8-11. March.

FLETCHER, JOHN C. 1979. Sounding board—
ethics and amniocentesis for fetal sex identification. New England J. Med.
301(10):550-553. September 6.

Fucus, Fritz, and Lars L. CepERQuisT. 1978.
Use of amniotic fluid cells in prenatal diagnosis. In D.V.I. Fairweather and
T.K.A.B. Eskes (eds). Amniotic fluid, research and clinical application. Elsevier/
North Hollard Biometical Press.

Grass, N. 1975. Economic aspects of the prevention of Down’s syndrome. In N.T.J.
Bailey and M. Thompson (eds.), Systems

 

LOUGHMAN, CHARLES J. EpsTEIN, GIESELA
HALBASCH, JOHN D. STEPHENS, and BRYAN
D. HALv. 1979. Prenatal genetic diagnosis
in 3000 amniocenteses. New England J.
Med. 300(4):157-163. January 25.

GRAMLICH, Epwarp M. 1981. Benefit-cost
analysis of government programs. PrenticeHall.

HAGARD, SPENCER, and Feticiry A. CARTER.
1976. Preventing the birth of infants with
Down’s syndrome: A cost-benefit analysis.
British Med. J. (March) 27:753-756.

Hossins, JOHN C., ROGER FREEMAN, and JOHN
T. QUEENAN. 1979. The fetal monitoring debate. Obstet. Gynedol. 54(1):103-109.
July.

Hook, Ernest B. 1979. Genetic counseling and
prenatal cytogenetic services: Policy implications and detailed cost-benefit analyses of
programs for the prevention of Down’s syndrome. Jn Ian H. Porter and Ernest B.
Hook (eds.), Service and education in medical genetics. Academic Press, New York.

LANCET, THE. 1979. The risk of amniocentesis.
Vol. 2, No. 8103, pp. 1287-1288. December
16.

LIEBER, ERNEST, PALOMA SHAH, and MARILYN
Hack. 1978. Hazards of amniocentesis: An
unidentifiable fragment. Clin. genet.
14(3):130-132. September.

Lowe, CHARLES V., DUANE ALEXANDER, DoLORES BryLa, and Danie. SEIGEL. 1978.
The safety and accuracy of mid-trimester
amniocentesis. U.S. Dept. Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service,
National Institute of Health, National Institute of Child Health and Development.
DHRE Publication No. (NIH) 78-190.

MacurrE, PHILir J. 1976. Amniocentesis: a
brief discussion. J. Oklahoma State Med.
Assoc. 69(10):425—428. October.

MiLunsky, Ausrey (ed.). 1975. The prevention of genetic disease and mental retardation. W.B. Saunders Co.

NEvIN, NorMAN C. 1982. Genetic disorders.
Clinics Obstet. Gynecol. 9(1):3—27. April.

OLSon, RONALD, M.D. Personal communication

PERNOLL, MARTIN L., GERALD PRESCOTT,
FREDERICK HECHT, and CATHERING L.,
Otson. 1974. Prenatal diagnosis: practice,
pitfalls and progress. Obstet. Gynecol.
44(5):773-783. November.

PLANNED PARENTHOOD ASSOCIATION OF WISCONSIN, Inc. 1980. 1980-81 application for Title
V Social Security Act maternal and child
 

Vol. 30, No. 4

health funds and general program revenue
family planning funds, volumes I-IV. Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

SIMPSON, Nancy E., L. DALLAIRE, J.R.
MILLER, L. Simmnovicu, J.L. HAMERTON,
JANET MILLER and CAROL MCKEEN. 1976.
Prenatal diagnosis of genetic disease in Canada: Report of a collaborative study.
Canad. Med. Assoc. J. 115:739-746. October 23.

SOUTHERN MEDICAL JOURNAL. 1978. The case
against fetal monitoring. Vol. 71, No.9, pp.
1058-1061. September.

STEIN, ZENA, MERVYN SUSSER, and ANDREA V.
AUTTERMAN. 1973. Screening programme
for prevention of Down’s syndrome. The
Lancet, pp. 305-310. February 10.

TAFFEL, SELMA. 1978. Congenital anomalies
and birth injuries among live births: United
States, 1973-1974. Vital and health statistics: Series 21 no. 31. U.S. Dept. Health,
Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, DHEW Publication No. (PHS) 791909.

TURNBULL, A.C., D. V.I. FAIRWEATHER, B.M.
HisBARD, P.E. PoLani, H. Reiss, L.B.
STRANG, I. SUTHERLAND, D. ROTHMAN, and
H. Bantock. 1978. An assessment of the
hazards of amniocentesis: Report of the
M.R.C. working party on amniocentesis.
Brit. J. Obstetrics Gynecol., Vol. 85, Suppl.
No. 2.

U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSuS. 1979, Statistical
abstract of the United States 1979. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

U.S. Dept. of HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE, PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE, NATIONAL IN
—|
=
©
N
~
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
CO
©
nN
of
oN
=
—
wo
'S
ws
oN
=
a
O
=
Cd
©
>>
—
=
N
~
oO
>
=
c
,
va
2
co
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

 

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

373

STITUTE OF HEALTH. 1979. Antenatal diagnosis. NIH publication no. 79-1973.

U.S. Dept. oF HEALTH, EDUCATION AND WELFARE, OFFICE OF EpucaTION. 1979. Progress
toward a free appropriate public education,
A report to the Congress on the iniplementation of Public Law 94-142: the Education
of all Handicapped Children Act. Washington, D.C.

U.S. Dept. OF LABOR, BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTics. 1978. Consumer expenditure interview
survey, 1972-1973: Annual expenditures
and sources of income cross-classified by
family characteristics. Bulletin 1985 (NTIS
Publication No. PB 275-418).

WISCONSIN BLUE Cross AND BLUE SHIELD. Personal communications.

WISCONSIN Dept. OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVIces. Division of Health, Bureau of Health
Care Financing. Madison, Wisconsin. Unpublished data.

. Division of Health, Bureau of Health

Statistics. 1978. Public health statistics—

1978, Supplement. Madison, Wisconsin.

. Division of Policy and Budget, Bureau

of the Budget, Madison, Madison, Wiscon
sin. Unpublished data.

. Division of Vocational Rehabilitation,
Bureau of Planning, Evaluation and Program Development. Madison, Wisconsin.
Unpublished date.

WISCONSIN STATE JOURNAL. 1981. Baby put
back in womb after surgery. November 16:
Section 4, page 4, Madison, Wisconsin.

YEARBOOK OF SPECIAL EDUCATION, 1977-1978.
1977. Marquis Academic Media, Marquis
Who’s Who, Inc. Chicago.

 

 

 
