Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Interdisciplinary symposia published in social
biology 1954 (Vol. 1) through 1988 (Vol. 35)

Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne

To cite this article: Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne (1999) Interdisciplinary symposia
published in social biology 1954 (Vol. 1) through 1988 (Vol. 35), Social Biology, 46:3-4, 232-264,
DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1999.9989005

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9989005

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 6

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Interdisciplinary Symposia
Published in Social Biology

1954 (Vol. 1) through 1988 (Vol. 35)

 

Richard H. Osborne?
Barbara T. Osborne?

*Editor, 1961-1977, 1982-1999; Professor Emeritus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
*Technical Editor, 1968-1976; Managing Editor, 1977-1999
1129 East Eighth Street, Port Angeles, WA 98362

The American Eugenics Society’s sponsorship of Interdisciplinary Symposia was
begun in 1953 as a method for stimulating interdisciplinary exchange and research.

In cooperation with the American Society of Human Genetics, the Society cosponsored its first symposia held in conjunction with the annual meetings of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) December 29, 1953 in
Boston, Massachusetts.

The multidisciplinary AAAS annual meetings were well attended by representatives from a wide range of disciplines. Symposia held in conjunction with the AAAS
meetings were therefore attended by a diverse group of scientists rather than being
limited to members of a single presenting organization.

The following pages reproduce the contents and participants as published in Social
Biology of thirteen symposia and five Princeton Conferences, along with brief commentary on the significance of the symposia and conferences.

232

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 233

First Symposium—1953

It was recognized in the late 1940s to early ’50s that one of the most pressing needs
in the Life Sciences was to bring demographers, anthropologists, psychologists, sociologists, and geneticists together for an open exchange of ideas and to promote cooperative research. Interest was being expressed within each of these academic areas in
the others’ subject matters, but little one-on-one exchange or collaborative work was
taking place. The genetic basis for intelligence was in particularly high profile, and
very contentious, so it was decided to make this the topic of the first symposium.

(Reprinted from Eugenics Quarterly, 1954, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 28-57)

Genetic Factors Affecting Intelligence

Jointly sponsored by the American Eugenics Society
and the American Society of Human Genetics
December 29, 1953, Boston, MA
Frederick Osborn, Chairman

Heredity and Learning Ability in Infrahuman Mammals 28
John L. Fuller and J. P. Scott
Roscoe B. Jackson Memorial Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME

Fertility and Intelligence Among Families of the Mentally Deficient 44
S. C. Reed, Elizabeth W. Reed, and J. D. Palmer
Dight Institute of Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN

Intelligence in Family Groups in the Blue Ridge Mountains 53
C. Nash Herndon, Professor of Medical Genetics
Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Wake Forest College, Winston-Salem, NC

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

234 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

Second Symposium — 1957

The teaching of genetics was not introduced into medical school curricula until the
early 1950s. William Allan and C. Nash Herndon successfully introduced a course into
the curriculum at the Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina. It was not until the late fifties and early sixties that genetics began to impact the
practice of clinical medicine; until then it was treated as a laboratory science, most
conspicuously in blood laboratories and in blood transfusion. Although DNA was discovered in 1939, it would be fifty years before DNA would make a practical contribution to the medical sciences.

The First International Congress of Human Genetics held in Copenhagen, August
1-6, 1956 was possibly the first general alert to the medical sciences of the practical
importance, and the potential, that genetics held for both the practice of medicine and
medical research. The majority of papers presented in Copenhagen dealt with topics
relevant to many aspects of medicine.

Genetic counseling of patients with familial diseases was becoming a widely recognized necessity in medical practice, and in 1956 the Society chose this as the topic for
its Second Symposium “Heredity Counseling,” to be held the following year, 1957, in
cooperation with the New York Academy of Medicine.

The New York Academy of Medicine also coordinated a Medical Genetics Committee funded by Frederick Osborn to explore ways to include genetics more effectively in both the teaching and practice of medicine. This committee established genetic training fellowships for medical doctors, first at Lionel C. Penrose’s Laboratory
at the University of London (two of the eminent recipients were Victor McKusick of
Johns Hopkins and Amo Motulsky of the University of Washington). Later larger
numbers of medical doctors were to receive summer trainingships in genetics at the
Jackson Laboratories at Bar Harbor, Maine under the authority of this committee. It
was in the course of serving on this committee that Richard Osborne first worked with
Frederick Osborn.
 

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 235

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1958, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 3-62)

Heredity Counseling
Nov. 1, 1957

Sponsored by the American Eugenics Society
At the New York Academy of Medicine Building

Morning Session: Genetics in Medical Practice
Chairman, John C. Bugher, M.D.,

Director, Medical Education and Public Health
The Rockefeller Foundation, New York City

Introduction 3
The Need for Parental Counseling in Pediatrics 4
Josef Warkany, M.D.
Children’s Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH
Discussion
Genetics in Psychiatric Practice 9

 

John R. Whittier, M.D.
Creedmore State Hospital and Institute for Psychobiologic Studies
Discussion

Genetics and Dentistry 15
Carl J. Witkop, Jr., D.D.S.
National Institute of Dental Research,
U.S. Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare, Bethesda, MD
Discussion

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Genetics in Public Health Nursing 23
Hazel R. Dyson, R.N., Carl J. Witkop, Jr., D.D.S., Shirley S. Butters, R.N.
National Institute of Dental Research, National Institute of Health, Public
Health Service, Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare, Bethesda, MD
Discussion

Genetics in Relation to Cardiovascular Diseases 30
Victor A. McKusic, M.D., Associate Professor of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
Discussion

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

236 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

Afternoon Session: Heredity Counseling Panel
Chairman, Bentley Glass
University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY

Introduction
The Structure of Heredity Counseling Services
Lee R. Dice
Dept. of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI

The Meaning of Empiric Risk Figures for Disease or Defect
James V. Neel, M.D.
Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI

Procedures for Referral to Heredity Counselors
C. Nash Herndon, M.D.
Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC

Types of Problems Presented to Genetic Counselors
F. Clarke Fraser, M.D.
Dept. of Genetics, McGill University and Montreal Children’s Hospital,
Montreal, Canada

Types of Advice Given by Heredity Counselors
Franz J. Kallman, M.D.
Dept. of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, —
Columbia University, New York City

Types of Advice Given by Heredity Counselors
Sheldon C. Reed
The Dight Institute for Human Genetics, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN

Discussion
Discussants: Clarence P. Oliver
Dept. of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, TX
Harold Falls, M.D.
University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI
William J. Schull

37

38

41

43

46

48

31

53

Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School,

Ann Arbor, MI
 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 237

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1959, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 64-147)

Third Symposium—1959

Differentiation in Current Mating
And Fertility Trends

February 14, 1959

Sponsored by The American Eugenics Society, Inc.
The New York Academy of Medicine Building

Program Chairman: Franz J. Kallmann, M.D.,
New York State Psychiatric Institute

Morning Session: General Mating and Fertility Trends
Chairman: Frederick Osborn, The Population Council

Current Mating and Fertility Patterns and Their Demographic Significance 65
Clyde V. Kiser
Milbank Memorial Fund, New York City

Discussion, Robert C. Cook
President, The Population Reference Bureau, Washington, DC

Differentiating Effect of Intelligence and Social Status 84
Anne Anastasi
Dept. of Psychology, Fordham University, The Bronx, NY

Discussion, Joseph Zubin
Division of Medical Psychology, Dept. of Psychiatry, Columbia University,
New York City

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Biochemical Fertility Regulation 94
Sheldon J. Segal
Laboratory of the Population Council, Rockefeller Institute, New York City

Inbreeding Effects on Man 102
William J. Schull
Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI

Discussion
Richard Levins
Dept. of Zoology, Columbia University, New York City

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

238 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

Afternoon Session: Special Reproductive Patterns in the Presence of
Psychiatric Family Problems

Chairman: Paul H. Hoch, M.D., Commissioner of Mental Hygiene, State of New York

and Professor, Clinical Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons,

Columbia University, New York City
Introductory Remarks by the Chairman

Fertility Trends in Some Types of Mental Defects
Jan A. Book, M.D.
Professor and chairman, Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Uppsala,
Sweden

Mating and Fertility Patterns in Families with Early Total Deafness
John I. Rainer and I. Lester Firschein
Dept. of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute,
and Institute for the Study of Human Variation, Columbia University,
New York City

Discussion, W. Edwards Deming
Consultant in Statistical Surveys, Washington, DC

Families with Manic-depressive Psychosis
Aubrey Lewis, M.D.
Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, London

Discussion, Ornulv Odegaard, M.D.
Gaustad Mental Hospital, Norway

Mating and Fertility Patterns in Families with Schizophrenia
Erik Essen-Moller, M.D.
University of Lund, Sweden

112

113

117

130

142

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 46, No. 3—4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 239

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1962, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 1-74)

Fourth Symposium—1961

Medical Genetics in the Pacific Area

August 24 to September 6, 1961

Sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences,
the Bernice Paualii Bishop Museum and the University of Hawaii
Tenth Pacific Congress, Honolulu, Hawaii
Published by The American Eugenics Society, Inc.
Conference Editor and Organizing Chairman—Amo G. Motulsky

Medical Genetics in the Pacific Area 4d
Arno G. Motulsky
Dept. of Medicine and Genetics, Univ. of Washington, Seattle

Preliminary Report of Activities of the Consanguity Study Group of the Science
Council of Japan 5
Ken’ ichi Kishimoto
Dept. of Neuro-Psychiatry, Nogoya City University Medical School, Japan

Inbreeding and Maternal Effects in the Japanese 14
William J. Schull
Dept. of Human Genetics, Univ. of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor

Genetics of Interracial Crosses in Hawaii (Abstract) 23
Newton E. Morton
Dept. of Medical Genetics, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison

Child Spacing Following Stillbirth and Infant Death 20
Howard B. Newcombe and Philip O. W. Rhynas
Biology Branch, Atomic Energy of Canada Limited, Ontario

Selective Mechanisms Operating on ABO and MN Blood Groups with Special
Reference to Prezygotic Selection 36
Ei Matsunaga
Dept. of Human Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan

Blood Groups, Secretor Phenomenon, and Gastric Cancer in Various Ethnic Groups
(Abstract) 44
R. G. Desai and W. P. Creger
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA
 

240 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

Haptoglobins and Transferrins in Pacific Populations 45
E. R. Giblett
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle

 

The Significance of “Bart’s” or Fessas and Papspyrou Hemoglobin 49
Lie-Injo Luan Eng
Institute for Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur, Federation of Malaysia

Gout and Hyperuricemia in a Pacific Population Group 54
John L. Decker
Dept. of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA

Population and Family Studies on Kuru 59
J. H. Bennett
Dept. of Genetics, Univ. of Adelaide, South Australia

 

Kuru: An Appraisal of Five Years of Investigation 69
D. Carleton Gajdusek
National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness, Bethesda, MD

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 241

The year 1964 was a milepost in the recognition and acceptance of the important
role human genetics could and would play in anthropology, demography, and medicine. On June 5-11, 1964, the Twenty-ninth Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology was titled “Human Genetics.” Theodosius Dobzhansky, then at the
Rockefeller Institute, gave the opening address for the Symposium which included 43
papers and discussion.

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1964, Vol. 11, No. 3, p. 234)

Human Genetics — 1964
An Outsider’s View

The overall importance of human genetics and the rapidity of its growth provide the
fullest justification for frequent review and stock-taking. One approach to the subject
is that of learning more about man as such; another approach is to utilize human material for the investigation of general problems of biology.

A geneticist who regards medical science as an outsider, while warmly welcoming
the increased appreciation of human genetic heterogeneity shown by clinical practitioners and the increased number of courses of genetics in medical schools, might nevertheless consider this “discovery” of his discipline as rather sudden and recent.

Although the advantages of human material for genetic research can hardly be measured, it is obvious that no laboratory species is being investigated more extensively or
in greater detail today than ours. One crude indication of man’s importance is reflected
by the number of genetic loci which may have been described: these now may be estimated at 400, plus or minus some 100, adding hypothetical loci to those rather well
established, in contrast to the total of 517 listed by Bridges and Brehme in 1944 for
Drosophila melanogaster, man’s closest competitor.

While such figures are admittedly unreliable, they do give some indication of the
ranking of our species as a source of genetic knowledge—in second place among perhaps two million other species of living things.

Theodosius Dobzhansky
The Rockefeller Institute
New York, NY

Dobzhansky’s comments in 1964 about the rapid growth of human genetics are
put into sharper focus when we realize that the first issue of the American Journal of
Human Genetics had been published only 15 years earlier, in 1949. The First International Congress of Human Genetics had been held only 8 years earlier, in 1956, in
Copenhagen.

In October of that same year Frederick Osborn organized the first Princeton Conference to bring together demographers and population geneticists to exchange ideas.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

242 Interdisciplinary Symposia

 

Social Biology

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1965, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 42-89)

First Princeton Conference — 1964

October 16-17, 1964

Sponsored by the American Eugenics Society
Princeton Inn, Princeton, NJ
Frederick Osborn, Chairman

Genetics
Allen, G.

National Institutes of Mental Health

Bodmer, W. F.
Stanford University

Cavalli-Sforza, L. L.
University of Pavia, Italy

Glass, H. B.
The Johns Hopkins University

Lewontin, R. C.
University of Chicago

MacArthur, R.
University of Pennsylvania

Osborne, R. H.
University of Wisconsin

Reed, S.C.
University of Minnesota

Scott, J. P.
Jackson Memorial Laboratory

Spuhler, J. N.
University of Michigan

Participants

Demography
Campbell, A. A.
Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare

Coale, A. J.
Princeton University

Demeny, P.
Princeton University

Hajnal, J.
The London School of Economics and
Political Science

Kirk, D.
Center for Advanced Study in the
Behavioral Sciences

Kiser, C. V.
Milbank Memorial Fund

Kunstadter, P.
Princeton University

Osborm, F. H.
Population Council

Ryder, N. B.
_ University of Wisconsin

Westoff, C. F.
Princeton University
 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 243

A description of the First Princeton Conference, 1964, prepared by Dudley Kirk
and published in Eugenics Quarterly the following spring (1965, Vol. 12), stated:

The primary function of the demographers at the workshop conference was to outline and
explain the kinds of data they produce which might be useful to students of population genetics, indicating as far as possible their limitations and the pitfalls of interpretation, and to
outline their own aims and methods. Population geneticists were to indicate which demographic data they could use, in addition to their own data, what shape it must be in, and what
additional data they would like to have. The second function of both groups was to comment
on each others’ work through group discussion from whatever point of view they believed
might clarify, stimulate, direct, or in other ways mutually aid one another ( p. 42).

An interesting revelation in the course of the workshop was the importance of different definitions of technical terms as barriers to communication between the geneti
ists and demographers.

The opening paper on Demography was presented by Clyde V. Kiser of the Mil
® bank Memorial Fund, “Types of Demographic Data of Possible Relevance to Populao tion Genetics” (pp. 72-84), summarized on pp. 44—45. The opening paper on PopulaSs tion Genetics was by James N. Spuhler, Department of Anthropology, University of
= New Mexico. Spuhler stressed Inbreeding and Behavior (p. 45) and Associative Mat~ ing and Behavior (pp. 45-47). Drs. Parnum of the University of Washington, Westoff
— of Princeton University, and Cavalli-Sforza of Stanford University and Pavia UniverSp Sity in Italy presented a discussion of “Mathematical Models of Population Change”
= (pp. 47-49).
S _ For the publication of this First Princeton Conference, Dr. Kiser prepared a compre‘6 hensive summary (pp. 72-84), following which was a paper (pp. 85-89) by Walter
= Bodmer, “Data From Large-Scale Social Surveys.” Bodmer’s paper had been pre5 sented on October 19, after the close of the Princeton Workshop, at the joint Harvard5 MIT Center for Urban Studies In addition to the valuable content of Bodmer’s paper,
-. the point is made that interest in demographics-genetics as an interdisciplinary entity
= had now become high-profile.

The success of the First Princeton Conference resulted in immediate planning for
a second such conference to be held in 1965, one that would include anthropologists,
animal behaviorists, psychologists, and sociologists.

ember 2015

Downloaded
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

244 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1966, Vol. 13, No. 2, p. 147-151)

Second Princeton Conference — 1965
November 18~—20, 1965

Sponsored by the American Eugenics Society
Princeton Inn, Princeton, NJ
Frederick Osborn, Chairman

At the Second Princeton Conference in 1965, background presentations from three
of the new participating disciplines—psychology, anthropology, and sociology—set
the stage for broadening discussion and interdisciplinary exchange. The first conference had focused entirely on the interface of demography and population genetics.

John Loehlin, Department of Psychology, University of Texas-Austin, presented:
“Measuring the Phenotype in Human Behavior Genetics.” Herbert R. Harvey, Department of Anthropology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, addressed “Recent Trends in
Social Structure Studies with Implications for Population Genetics.” John Paul Scott,
Jackson Memorial Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, presented “Social Genetics”.

The discussions that followed centered on defining units of measurement: What is a
trait? An interesting dichotomy in point of view was revealed between the population
geneticists and the psychologists. The geneticists viewed variance within groups or
populations rather than viewing and contrasting such groups as though the groups
were individuals, which the psychologists tended to do.

The debate between the population geneticists and the psychologists at this second
Princeton Conference not only carried over to the third conference, but led eventually
to the Society’s role in organization of the Behavior Genetics Association as a forum
for exchange among and between animal behaviorists and psychologists and as a
means of removing these interests and disciplines from the purview of the society and
the journal.

Potential population studies among Old Colony Mennonites (Allen and Redekop)
and Wisconsin students and families (Osborne) were also discussed at this second conference.

 
 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 245

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1967, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 199-237)

Third Princeton Conference — 1966
October 20-22, 1966

Sponsored by the American Eugenics Society
Princeton Inn, Princeton, NJ
Frederick Osborn, Chairman

The third conference was a direct extension of the second. The studies presented in
their planning stage at the second conference, now in progress, were updated and critiqued.

Old Colony Mennonites

Gordon Allen and Calvin Redekop extended the first description of their 1965 conference presentation and reported on its progress.

The Huixquilucon Project

Herbert R. Harvey and Richard H. Osborne described the University of Wisconsin
study of an Otomi Indian Population in the municipio of Huixquilucon.

Ethnicity and Inherited Disease

Dr. Victor McKusick, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, commented briefly on
the progress and findings in studies of Old Order Amish in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and
Indiana. This study had been originally reported in the Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology, 1964, Vol. 29, pp. 99—114.

Wisconsin University Alumni

Richard Osborne described the study now underway of students and alumni of the
University of Wisconsin, initially reported and discussed at the Second Princeton Conference in 1965.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Ethnic Isolate Studies

James Spuhler, Department of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, entered a
plea for more ethnic isolate studies.

Carl Jay Bajema, Population Research and Training Center, University of Chicago,
presented a bibliography relevant to the demography-genetic interface (Vol. 14(3):
205-237).

 

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

246 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

(Eugenics Quarterly, 1968, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 71-143)

Fourth Princeton Conference — 1967
November 9-11, 1967

Sponsored by the American Eugenics Society
Princeton Inn, Princeton, NJ
Frederick Osborn, Chairman

The subject for discussion at this fourth conference was “Assortative Mating.” To
fully reflect the changes that had taken place in the society’s and the journal’s directions, a change in name of the journal from Eugenics Quarterly to Social Biology was
suggested by Norman B. Ryder. The suggestion was discussed, agreed upon, and instituted with Volume 16 (1969).

Theories of Mate Selection 71
Bruce K. Eckland
Dept. of Sociology, University of North Carolina

The Effect of Assortative Mating on the Genetic Composition of a Population 85
James F. Crow
Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and
Joseph Felsenstein
Institute of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh, Scotland

Assortative Mating by Educational Attainment in Relation to Fertility 98
Clyde V. Kiser
Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, NY

Assortative Marriage 113
Robert I. Garrison, V. Elving Anderson and Sheldon C. Reed
Dight Institute of Human Genetics, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN

Assortative Mating with Respect to Physical Characteristics 128
J. N. Spuhler
Dept. of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM

Selective Mating: Assortative Mating, and Inbreeding: Definitions
and Implications 141
Richard Lewontin, Dudley Kirk, and James Crow
Harvard University, Stanford University, University of Wisconsin

 

 
Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 247

(Social Biology, 1970, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 253-323)

Fifth Princeton Conference — 1969
November 6-8, 1969
Sponsored by the American Eugenics Society

Princeton Inn, Princeton, NJ
Richard H. Osborne, Chairman

—|

= This final Princeton Conference, “The Genetic Restructuring of Human Popula8 tions,” resembled a symposium more than a conference. The purpose was to bring to= gether the learning from the previous Princeton conferences and basically to set the
© course for the society over the coming years.

"

Co

Conference Committee

>. Dudley Kirk

— Richard Lewontin

= Richard H. Osborne, Chairman

SS
oD

8

Sponsor
American Eugenics Society, Inc.

= Presenters Discussants
‘S Larry Bumpass Edwin Driver
‘= Candido Procépio Ferreira de Camargo Otis Dudley Duncan

& Bruce K. Eckland
« Clarence E. Glick
-& Paul C. Glick

~, Dudley Kirk

= Richard Lewontin
Clyde V. Kiser

S Kenneth Morgan
5 Lalit D. Sanghvi

Norman Ryder

©

a Conference Participants
Gordon Allen Richard Osborne
Elving Anderson Edward Perrin
Carl J. Bajema William Pollitzer
L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling Sandra Scarr
Irving Gottesman David Sills
John Loehlin Harry Shapiro
Frank Lorimer James Spuhler

Frederick Osborn

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

248 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

The Genetic Restructuring of Human Populations
Preface
Richard H. Osborne, Chairman

Population control methods and policies in consonance with cultural, economic,
and social factors have the potential of bringing about an extensive restructuring of
human populations. To fully understand the implications of the differential effects of
population control methods upon fertility and thus upon the genetic structure of populations, it is necessary to consider together changing trends in both mating patterns and
fertility.

The Fourth Princeton Conference (Eugenics Quarterly, June, 1968) considered assortative mating. This Fifth Princeton Conference was an extension of this theme. The
subjects developed were impending trends in fertility, methods of ascertaining gene
flow between segments of the population, and changes in mating boundaries.

Changes in Mating Boundaries

The Trend of Interfaith Marriage in the United States 253
Larry Bumpass
Dept. of Sociology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI

Marriage Patterns and Fertility in Sao Paulo 260
Candido Procépio Ferreira de Camargo, Elza Salvatori Berqué,
Neide Lopes Patarra, Maria Stella Ferreira Levy, Maria Irene
Queiros Ferreira Szmrecsanyi, and Cecilia Helena Ornellas Renner
Universidade de Sdo Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

New Mating Boundaries in Education 269
Bruce K. Eckland
Dept. of Sociology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC

Interracial Marriage and Admixture in Hawaii 278
Clarence E. Glick
Dept. of Sociology, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI

Intermarriage among Ethnic Groups in the United States 292
Paul C. Glick
Bureau of the Census, Washington, DC

Changing Patterns of Caste in India 299
L. D. Sanghvi
Cancer Research Institute, Bombay, India
Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 249

Fertility Trends and Estimation of Gene Flow

Changing Patterns of Fertility in the United States 302
Clyde V. Kiser
Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, NY

Gene Flow and Structure of United States Negro Populations 316
Kenneth Morgan
Dept. of Biology and Population Research Center, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL

The Princeton Conferences from 1964 through 1969 took the place of symposia.
Their purpose was to clarify the respective roles of genetics and demography, to define
heir most productive interface, and to bring this interface into a relationship with anhropology, psychology and sociology, and, ultimately, to re-examine and redirect the
American Eugenics Society. This accomplished, the sponsorship of symposia was reinstituted in 1970.

> =|

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015
250 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

(Social Biology, 1971, Vol. 18, Supplement, pp. S1-S136)

Fifth Symposium — 1970

Differential Reproduction in Individuals with
Mental and Physical Disorders

November 13-14, 1970

Jointly sponsored by the American Eugenics Society and the Bio-Medical Division
of the Population Council, held at the Rockefeller University
I. I. Gottesman and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling
Conference Editors and Organizing Chairmen

Prologue: A Foundation for Informed Eugenics S1
Irving I. Gottesman and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling
Dept. of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN

Overripeness of the Egg and a Possible Cause in Mental and Physical Disorders S9
Emil Witschi
Bio-Medical Division, The Population Council, Rockefeller University,
New York, NY

Discussion: The Overripeness Hypothesis, James L. German, IIT $16
Laboratory of Human Genetics, The New York Blood Center,
New York, NY

The Offspring of Phenylketonuric Women . S19
R. Rodney Howell and Roger E. Stevenson
Dept. of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine;
and the Harriet Lane Service, Johns Hopkins Children’s Medical
and Surgical Center, Baltimore, MD

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Discussion: Maternal Effects in Genetic Diseases S30
V. Elving Anderson
Dight Institute for Human Genetics, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN

Fertility of Narcotics Addicts and Effects of Addiction on the Offspring $34
George Blinick
Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Beth Israel Medical Center,
New York, NY

 
Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 251

Discussion: Addiction, Fertility, and Pregnancy S40
Roy Hertz
Bio-Medical Division, The Population Council
Rockefeller University, New York, NY

Mental Retardation and Fertility $42
Elizabeth W. Reed

Dight Institute for Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN

Differential Fertility and Intelligence: Current Status of the Problem S50
Arthur Falek
Division of Human Genetics, Georgia Mental Health Institute,
and Dept. of Psychiatry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA

Marriage and Fertility of Psychiatric Patients Compared with National Data S60
Eliot Slater, E. H. Hare, and John Scott Price
Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, London, England, and
Dept. of Psychological Medicine, University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England

Marital Status of First Admissions to Psychiatric Beds in England
and Wales in 1965 and 1966 S74
John Scott Price, Eliot Slater, and E. H. Hare
Dept. of Psychological Medicine, University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
Newcastle Upon Tyne, England, and Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley
Hospital, London, England

Discussion: Mental Illness and Reproduction S95
Sheldon C. Reed
Dight Institute for Human Genetics, Minneapolis, MN

'S Perinatal Conditions and Infant Development in Children with

© Schizophrenic Parents $103
C Sarnoff A. Mednick, Elaine Mura, Fini Schulsinger and Bergitte Mednick

New School for Social Research and Psykologisk Institut, Kommunehospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark, and Columbia University, New York

wnloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Discussion: Schizophrenia—Onset in Infancy? $114
Leonard L. Heston
Dept. of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN

Discussion: Genetic or Traumatic Developmental Deviation $117
Barbara Fish

Dept. of Psychiatry, University Hospital, New York University
Medical Center, New York, NY

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

252 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

Mental Disability as a Basis for Contraception and Sterilization $120
Ronald A. Chez
Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, Magee-Women's Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA

Discussion: Family Planning and the Law $127
Harriet Pilpel
Attorney, Greenbaum, Wolff, and Ernst, New York, NY

 
Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 253

(Social Biology, 1972, Vol. 19, Nos. 2, 3, and 4, pp. 99 to 368)

Sixth Symposium — 1971

The Sixth Symposium was the most ambitious and the most successful, due to the
joint sponsorship of the American Museum of Natural History, and its site in New

York City, all made possible by its chairman, Dr. Harry Shapiro, Chairman of the Mu
seum’s Department of Anthropology and Past President of the Society, and by Freder
ick Osborn, a member of the Museum’s Board.

Human Evolution’s Past, Present, and Future

November 18-20, 1971

Jointly sponsored by the American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY
and the American Eugenics Society/Society for the Study of Social Biology

Harry Shapiro and Frederick Osborn, Chairmen
Man’s Evolutionary Past: Sessions I and II

New Fossil Evidence for the Evolution of Man 99
Richard E. Leakey
The National Museum, Nairobe, Kenya

-< Adaptive Responses of Hominids to Their Environment as Ascertained

by Fossil Evidence 115
David R. Pilbeam
Dept. of Anthropology, Yale University, New Haven, CT

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Past, Session I 128
F. Clark Howell
Dept. of Anthropology, University of California, Berkeley, California

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

The Problem of the Evolution of Human Races, Classification or Clines? 136
Joseph B. Birdsell
Dept. of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA

Evolution of Human Behavior 163
S. L. Washburn and E. R. McCown
Dept. of Anthropology, University of California, Berkeley, CA

Natural Selection and Differential Population Growth of Human Races 171
Frederick S. Hulse
Dept. of Anthropology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

254 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Past, Session II 180
Stanley M. Garn
Center for Human Growth and Development
The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI

Continuing Evolution of Man: Sessions III and IV
of a Symposium on Human Evolution: Past, Present, and Future

November 18-20, 1971

Trends in the Intensity and Direction of Natural Selection 215
Bruce K. Eckland
Dept. of Sociology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC

Transmission of Information About the Environment in the Human Species:

A Cybernetic View of Genetic and Cultural Evolution 224
Carl Jay Bajema
Dept. of Biology, Grand Valley State College, Allendale, MI

Cultural Evolution: The Darwinian Model 227
Alexander Alland, Jr.
. Dept. of Anthropology, Columbia University, New York

The Role of Technology in Cultural Evolution 240
Robert S. Merrill
Dept. of Anthropology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY

The Devolution of Evolution 248
Robert H. Carneiro
American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY

Discussion: Continuing Evolution of Man, Sessions III & IV 259
Peter A. Corning
Institute of Political Studies, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA

Man’s Evolutionary Future: Sessions V & VI

Eugenic Implications of the New Reproductive Technologies 326
Bentley Glass, Distinguished Professor of Biology
The State University of New York at Stony Brook, and Visiting Professor,
Crown College, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA
Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia

The Eugenic Hypothesis
Frederick Osborn and Carl Jay Bajema
American Eugenics Society, New York, NY, and
Grand Valley State College, Allendale, MI

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Future, Session V
Richard H. Osborne, Dept. of Anthropology and Dept.
of Medical Genetics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI

Genetic Consequences of Cultural Decisions in the Realm of Population
Garrett Hardin
Dept. of Biological Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Future, Session VI
Dudley Kirk, Food Research Institute,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA

48 08 December 2015

~. Closing Address: The Ascent of Man
Theodosius Dobzhansky
Dept. of Genetics, University of California, Davis, CA

oN
=
—
CS
‘SS
CS
OQ
—
oo
O
5
Cd
©
>>
—
=
N
~
oO
>
=
c
~.
ra
Oo
vo
oO
vO
wo
©
—
c
S
©
a

 

255

337

346

350

362

367
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

256 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

(Social Biology, 1973, Vol. 20, No. 1, p. 112)

Seventh Symposium — 1973

By the early 1970s the profound though subtle changes that had been taking place
in health care were having an impact. Communicable diseases and environmental hazards were no longer in the forefront, greatly increasing the relative importance of inheritable disease. Genetic counseling, first established in the 1940s, could claim only
ten counseling centers in the United States in 1951, but by 1974 there were 387 such
centers, 890 worldwide. Forty-three states had enacted laws by 1962 which made
screening of all newborns for phenylketonuria (PKU) mandatory. By the early 1970s
screening for galectosemia, Tay-Sacks disease. and sickle cell anemia had been added
to the list. A new phase had been reached in human genetics and, most particularly, in
its medical applications.

The American Society of Human Genetics and the Society for the Study of Social
Biology were in agreement as to the need for maintaining attention on basic human
genetics, and agreed to sponsor a symposium at joint 1973 annual meetings.

What is Happening to Gene Frequencies in Man?

October 24, 1973
Jointly sponsored by the American Society for Human Genetics
and the Society for the Study of Social Biology
Atlanta, Georgia

Announcements and papers were published in the American Journal of Human
Genetics.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 257

(Social Biology, 1976, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 108-157)

Eighth Symposium — 1976

Genetic Counseling in Psychiatric Disorders:
State of the Science and the Art

May 17, 1976

Jointly sponsored by NIH and the University of Indiana,
School of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN

Chairman: Roy M. Antley

Variables in the Outcome of Genetic Counseling 108
Ray M. Antley
Dept. of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, School of Medicine,
University of Indiana, Indianapolis, IN |

The Genetics of Affective Disorder and Genetic Counseling 116
Remi J. Cadoret
Dept. of Psychiatry, University of Iowa, lowa City, IA

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas 123
L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling
Dept. of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute and
Dept. of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY

Genetic Counseling and the Presenile Dementias 135
L. L. Heston
Dept. of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling in Psychiatry 142
Gilbert S. Omenn
Division of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Medicine
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

258 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

(Social Biology, 1976, Vol. 23, No. 2, p. 175)

Ninth Symposium — 1977

Differences in Nutritional Requirements Among and Within
Human Populations: Their Significance

February 22, 1977

Jointly sponsored by the Society for the Study of Social Biology and
the American Society for the Advancement of Science, Section G
Annual Meetings
Denver Hilton Hotel, Denver, Colorado

Chairman: Irving I. Gottesman

The symposium addressed the broad topic of the interactions that exist between the
kinds and quantity of food and the health and fertility of selected populations. The
need to individualize diets as a function of the differences that exist among and within
relatively endogamous groups was examined.

The papers to be presented included “Food Intake, Fatness, and Fertility” by Rose
E. Frisch; “Genetic Aspects of Geographical Medicine,” by Baruch S. Blumberg;
“Diet by Disease Interactions: Vitamin E and Malaria,” by John W. Eaton; “Quality of
Diet in the Pima Indians and Diabetes,” by Peter H. Bennett; and “Sucrose Intolerance
in Eskimos,” by H. H. Draper.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 259

(Social Biology, 1979, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 93-160)

Tenth Symposium — 1979

Genetics in Epidemiology

January 4, 1979

Jointly sponsored by the AAAS Section on Biological and Medical Sciences,
the Society for the Study of Social Biology, and the American Public Health
Association at the Annual Meeting of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, Houston, Texas

Gordon Allen and Bernice H. Cohen, Chairmen

Introduction: Genetics in Epidemiology 93
Gordon Allen and Bernice H. Cohen
Division of Biometry and Epidemiology, National Institute of Mental Health,
Rockville, MD; and Dept. of Epidemiology, School of Hygiene and Public Health,
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD

Diseases Determined by Major Genes 94
N. E. Morton
Population Genetics Laboratory, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI

Human Germinal Mutations: Monitoring for Environmental Effects 104
Ernest B. Hook
Birth Defects Institute, Division of Laboratories and Research
New York State Health Dept., Albany, New York, and
Dept. of Pediatrics, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York

Genetics and Epidemiology: Medical Interventions and Public Policy 117
Gilbert S. Omenn
Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President,
Washington, DC

Quantitative Genetics: A Critique 126
Edmond A. Murphy
Division of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD

 
 

260 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

Epidemiology and Genetics of Schizophrenia 142
B. S. Dohrenwend, B. P. Dohrenwend, I. I. Gottesman, and R. Neugebauer
School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, NY;
Dept. of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, NY; and
Dept. of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN

Invited Discussion: Genetics in Epidemiology 154
Helen Abbey
Dept. of Epidemiology, School of Hygiene and Public Health,
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD

Richard H. Ward 156
Dept. of Epidemiology, School of Medicine, Univ. of Washington, Seattle, WA

Leon Gordis 158
Dept. of Epidemiology, School of Hygiene and Public Health
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia 261

(Social Biology, 1983, Vol. 30, No. 1, p. 115)

Eleventh Symposium — 1983

Changing Patterns of Diseases
May 27, 1983

Jointly sponsored by Society for the Study
of Social Biology, the American Public Health Association,
and Sections N, G, K, & U of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science

Organizers and Chairmen:
Beatrice A. Rouse: Department of Behavioral Epidemiology,
Boston University Medical Center, Boston, MA;
Gordon Allen, Division of Biometry and Epidemiology, National Institute
of Mental Health, Rockville, MD;
Robert Murray, Jr., Division of Medical Genetics, Howard University,
Washington, DC

The symposium presented an interdisciplinary overview of the recent significant
epidemiological changes in the major diseases, explored ways they interface, and examined the commonalities in the medical, behavioral, and socioeconomic factors of
these changes.

The Changing Patterns of Infectious Diseases
Walter R. Dowdle
Center for Infectious Diseases, HHS, Atlanta, GA

Changing Patterns in Cardiovascular Diseases
Manning Feinleib
National Center for Health Statistics, HHS, Hyattsville, MD

Some Consequences of the Increasing Prevalence of Mental Disorders
Morton Kramer
Department of Mental Hygiene, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD

Changing Patterns of Cancer Incidence and Mortality
Barbara S. Hulka
Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
262 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

(Social Biology, 1985, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 143 to 321)

Twelfth Symposium — 1984

Genetics and the Human Encounter with Alcohol
July 6 and 7, 1984

Jointly sponsored by an anonymous donor through Union College,
and the Society for the Study of Social Biology
Union College, Schenectady, New York

Gerald E. McClearn, Chairman

Preface
Genetics and the Human Encounter with Alcohol 143
Gerald E. McClearn
College of Human Development, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA

Historical Review
Alcohol and Heredity: Theories About the Effects of Alcohol Use
and Offspring 146
Lawson Crowe
Institute for Behavioral Genetics and Dept. of Philosophy,
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO

Current Research: Human Studies
Individual Differences in Sensitivity and Tolerance to Alcohol 162
James R. Wilson and Robert Plomin
Institute for Behavioral Genetics, Alcohol Research Center, and
Dept. of Psychology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Prevention and Treatment of Alcohol Abuse: Uses and Limitations

of the High Risk Paradigm 185
Soren Sigvardsson, C. Robert Cloninger, and Michael Bohman
Dept. of Child and Youth Psychiatry, Univ. of Uhmed, Uhmed, Sweden;
and the Dept. of Psychiatry and Dept. of Genetics, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO

Ethnic Differences in Alcohol Use, Abuse, and Sensitivity: ,

A Review with Genetic Interpretation 195
T. Edward Reed.
Dept. of Zoology and Anthropology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada

 

 
 

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 Interdisciplinary Symposia

Current Research: Animal Studies
The Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals
John L. Fuller
Dept. of Psychology, State University of New York at Binghamton,
Binghamton, NY

Genetic Influences on Acquisition of Tolerance to Alcohol
V. Gene Erwin
Alcohol Research Center and School of Pharmacy, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO

Development of an Animal Model of Alcohol Dependence
James R. Wilson
Institute for Behavioral Genetics, Alcohol Research Center, and
Dept. of Psychology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO

Genetic Correlates and Search for Mechanisms
Neurophysiological Mechanisms in the Genetics of Ethanol Sensitivity
Michael R. Palmer

Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO

Neurochemical Mechanisms in the Genetics of Alcohol Phenotypes
Toni N. Smolen and Allan C. Collins
Institute for Behavioral Genetics and Alcohol Research Center,
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO

Research and Practice
Multivariable Causal Modeling in Alcohol Use Research
John R. Nesselroade and J. Jack McArdle
Dept. of Individual and Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA; and Dept. of Psychology, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA

—|
=
©
N
~
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
Q
Co
©
Co
v.
oN
=
—
CS
‘SS
Ss
OQ
—
oo
O
5
Cd
©
>>
—
=
N
~
oO
>
=
c
~.
ra
Oo
vo
oO
vO
SC
©
—
c
S
©
a

Basic Research on Heredity and Alcohol: Implications for
Clinical Application
James R. Stabenau

263

210

222

119

241

Alcohol Research Center and Dept. of Pharmacology, University of Colorado

2a3

272

297

Dept. of Psychiatry, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

264 Interdisciplinary Symposia Social Biology

(Social Biology, 1988, Vol. 35, No. 3-4, pp. 163-222)

Thirteenth Symposium — 1988

The Genetics of Mental Illness
February 17, 1988

Jointly sponsored by Biological and Medical Sciences,
American Association for the Advancement of Science
and the Society for the Study of Social Biology
AAAS Annual Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana

Barbara A. Cornblatt and Richard S. E. Keefe, Chairmen

Genetics and Mental Illness: An Overview 1
Barbara A. Cornblatt and Richard S. E. Keefe
Dept. of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY

Trials and Tribulations in the Search for Genes Causing

Neuropsychiatric Disorders 163
Kenneth K. Kidd
Dept. of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT

X-Linkage and Manic-Depressive IlIness: A Reassessment 179
Miron Baron
Dept. of Psychiatry, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons,
and Dept. of Medical Genetics, New York Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY

Linkage Analysis of Schizophrenia: Challenges and Promise 189
Anne S. Bassett
Queen Street Mental Health Centre and Dept. of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Refining Phenotype Characterization in Genetic Linkage Studies

of Schizophrenia 197
Richard S. E. Keefe, Jeremy M. Silverman, Larry J. Siever,
and Barbara A. Cornblatt
Dept. of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
