Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1996) Book notes, Social Biology, 43:3-4, 290-292, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1996.9988929

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1996.9988929

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Book Notes

GIRLS’ SCHOOLING, WOMEN’S AUTONOMY. AND FERTILITY CHANGE’ IN
SoutH AsIA. Edited by Roger
Jeffery and Alaka M. Basu. Sage
Publications, New Delhi, Thousand
Oaks, London, 1996. 340 pages.
$29.95.

Of all the links between social factors and demographic change in the
developing world, the relationship between female schooling and fertility
decline has long been argued to be one
of the most powerful. However, there
is as yet little agreement on how the
correlations should be understood and
explained, and what impact this should
have on public policy.

This volume challenges the popular
notions that there is a universal and
causal relationship between rising levels of schooling and declining levels
of fertility, and that schooling enhances female autonomy. Presenting
primary evidence from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh and
utilizing existing census and survey
data, the eleven original papers in this
book explore the interrelated issues of
women’s autonomy, girls’ schooling,
and fertility reduction in South Asia.

This book will be essential reading
for demographers, planners, funding
bodies and social anthropologists and
will also be of considerable interest to
students of gender studies and South
Asian affairs.

Born TO REBEL. BIRTH ORDER, FAMILY
DYNAMICS, AND CREATIVE LIVES.
By Frank J. Sulloway. Pantheon

Books, Random House, New York,
1996. 653 pages. Hardcover. $30.

Through an analysis of individuals
involved in revolutions in social and
scientific thought—from the Reformation to Darwin’s theory of natural
selection—the author attempts to
prove his hypothesis that a primary
engine of history is located within familtes.

Sulloway views the family not as a
‘shared environment,” but rather as a
set of niches that provide siblings with
different outlooks. He seeks to prove
through examination of historical families that the personalities of siblings
vary because they adopt different strategies in the universal quest for parental
favor.

Sulloway sees eldest children as
identifying with parents and authority
and supporting the status quo, whereas
younger children rebel against it. Many
graphs and charts of birth-order compared with political, religious, and scientific viewpoints of historical figures
are presented.

THE ELDERLY IN INDIA: By Kumudini
Dandekar. Sage Publications, New
Delhi, Thousand Oaks, London,
1996. 230 pages. Hardcover. $29.95.

Thanks to improved health care resulting in increased longevity, the age
profile of India’s population is changing rapidly. The elderly are beginning |
to face new problems as a consequence, but both official policies and
voluntary action aimed at the aged remain far from adequate. Even though

290

 
Vol. 43, No. 3-4

the difficulties being faced by the country’s senior citizens are now a matter of
urgent social concern, it remains a
poorly researched and little understood area.

This book describes the conditions
of the elderly in India. It utilizes nationwide National Sample Survey
(NSS) data relating to 50,000 households, supported by first-hand portraits

— of the inmates of old age homes in the
“state of Maharashtra. Based on this
6 wide sample, Kumudini Dandekar
E studies regional variations and the dif® ferences between the rural and urban
oo Old in terms of health problems, finan< cial constraints, and both the geo=. graphical spread and functioning of
"_ old-age homes. She evaluates the effi= cacy of old-age pension schemes and
S suggests new institutional arrange= ments needed for the aged.
‘S Dandekar concludes that old-age
‘S homes may offer a viable solution to
e the problems afflicting the urban old—
« particularly, poverty, housing short‘< age, and the often harsh conflict be~ tween the generations. However, in
= rural areas, where about three-fourths
3 of India’s elderly reside, she argues
that the thrust of government pro< grams and policies should be directed
= at providing old-age pensions. This is
© not only because the rural old are both
well-integrated with their social milieu
and not favorably disposed toward living in old-age homes, but also because
pension schemes are a cheaper alternative.

Kumudini Dandekar retired as Professor and Head, Department of Demography and Population Studies,
Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, Pune, a post she held for more
than three decades (1949-80). Over

 

Book Notes

291

this period, she was extensively involved in the various fertility, mortality
and health surveys conducted by the
Institute in the state of Maharashtra
and elsewhere in the country.

LiFE ITSELF. EXPLORING THE REALM OF
THE LIvING CELL. By Boyce Rensberger. Oxford University Press,
New York, 1996. 290 pages. Hardcover. $30.

Many fascinating scientific discoveries are happening on the cellular level,
thanks to the power of the newest microscopes. Rensberger provides a clear
introduction for the layman or student
to cell biology, a field still understood
by few.

Answers to questions of what guides
the growth of a human embryo, turning it into a complete complex human
being, and of why the body grows old
and dies, are to be found within the
cell. The inside of individual cells are
‘more crowded with components than
the inside of a computer.”

Cell biologists now know of at least
ten molecular motors that move things
about inside the cell. In most cells, this
motion is short, because the cell is tiny.
However, in the single-celled nerve fibers that run from the base of the spinal cord to the toes, measuring three or
four feet in an adult human, transported molecules can take several days
to make the trip.

Neural crest cells, found early in
embryonic development, crawl over
the embryo to sites where they will pursue their fates—as nerve cells, or cartilage, or skin. Dust cells are nomadic
cells in the lung that swallow and store
indigestible particles, then migrate to
the gullet where they themselves are

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

 

292 Book Notes Social Biology

swallowed and digested. Natural killer
cells roam the body looking for cancerous cells.

Rensberger discusses the work of
Rita Levi-Montalcini, who discovered

nerve growth factor, and of Leonard
Hayflick, who discovered that most human cells die after about fifty divisions.
He also discusses AIDS and why this
virus is so difficult to defeat.

 
