Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Discussion: Methodologies in human behavior
genetics

Robert C. Elston

To cite this article: Robert C. Elston (1973) Discussion: Methodologies in human behavior
genetics, Social Biology, 20:3, 276-279, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988054

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988054

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Discussion: Methodologies in Human

Behavior Genetics

Robert C. Elston

Department of Biostatistics
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

I wish to make it clear at the outset, in
discussing the four papers that have been
presented at this symposium, that I know
very little about the genetics of schizophrenia; and the only possible justification I can
see for my being asked to be a discussant
here is that this ignorance is shared by the
other speakers, who have been studying the
subject much longer than I have. It therefore seems pertinent to ask why we know
so little about the genetics of schizophrenia,
and what we can do about this state of
affairs. To this end, it will be convenient
for me to group my remarks into four sections, in an attempt to answer in turn the
following four questions:

1. Why have we been unable to demonstrate Mendelian segregation?

2. Is there any good evidence for polygenic inheritance?

3. What is the heritability of schizophrenia?

4. Where do we go from here?

1. Why have we been unable to demonstrate Mendelian segregation? Several
answers to this question have been suggested. The first possibility is that we have
not yet tested the appropriate genetic
model. Only segregation patterns for one
 

and two-locus models have been considered,
and perhaps more loci are involved. Indeed,
the lack of fit to a one-locus model is often
used as evidence that the underlying genetic
model must be polygenic, i.e., each family
must be segregating simultaneously at several loci that. determine the presence or
absence of schizophrenia. But, as far as I
know, no one has examined family or pedigree data to see if the observed segregation
patterns agree with what might be expected
from such a polygenic model. As we have
seen today, analyzing the data in the form
of pairs of relatives cannot distinguish between a simple major gene model and the
simplest of polygenic models. Such an analysis can only distinguish between models if
we include pairs of relatives from families
in which there has been inbreeding, or if the
polygenic models considered involve a fair .
amount of linkage or epistasis (see James,
1971). )

The second possibility is that there is
genetic heterogeneity among the families
being analyzed. It could be that in any one
family in which there is schizophrenia the
disease is determined by segregation at a
single locus, but that in different families
different loci are involved; so that in the
population as a whole many loci are in
276
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 20, No. 3

volved. This is not polygenic inheritance,
though it is sometimes confused with it.
I do not think this can be a major reason
why we have been unable to demonstrate
Mendelian inheritance, for some investigators have in fact unsuccessfully studied
large single pedigrees, which would not have
this heterogeneity.

The third possibility that has been mentioned is what I shall call “noise.” Different
investigators define schizophrenia differently, and this gives rise to “measurement
noise”; and the fact that the environment
plays an important role leads to “environmental noise”. Measurement noise can be
greatly reduced by not pooling the data obtained by different investigators. At present
we can do little about environmental noise;
but if we knew what environmental factors
are important, then we could control them
(at the very least statistically) and so
sharpen our genetic analysis. The fact is
that if heritability is not high it will be very
difficult to identify the genetic mechanism
underlying any segregation pattern, even if
we consider complete two-generational
family data (see Smith, 1971).

Lastly, I want to mention something that
has hardly been considered, and that I think
may be the most important cause of all for
our inability so far to demonstrate Mendelian segregation. I refer to the variability
in the age of onset of schizophrenia. Extensive analyses that I have recently undertaken would indicate that the age of onset
distribution for schizophrenia is virtually
lognormal. It should not surprise us, therefore, if a genetic analysis that ignores this
fact, either by not applying any age corrections at all or by applying an inappropriate
age correction (e.g., using Weinberg’s correction, which assumes the distribution of
age of onset is symmetrical), fails to demonstrate Mendelian segregation. In fact, I
have performed preliminary pedigree analyses utilizing the lognormal distribution for

 

Discussion

 

277

age of onset as part of the model, and these
appear to demonstrate clear segregation of
two alleles at one locus. That is why I think
this may be more important than all the
other causes listed above; but at this stage
these findings are only tentative.

2. Is there any good evidence for polygenic inheritance? Here I am in perfect
agreement with the conclusions arrived at
by Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza on the basis of
their analysis. However, I should like to
take up again a couple of points raised by
the other speakers, in case they may have
misled you into believing that there is in
fact some good evidence that schizophrenia
is polygenically inherited.

It is simply not true that a single-gene
model cannot explain an increased morbid
risk among the proband’s siblings as the
number of affected relatives in the parent
generation (including the proband’s aunts
and uncles) increases. The monogenic
theory, whether formulated in the manner
presented by Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza or by
Elston and Campbell (1970), would predict
just this same increase.

With regard to the low concordance
found between monozygotic twins, this is as
easily explainable (or unexplainable) on
either a monogenic or a polygenic hypothesis. In fact, when a monogenic model is
fitted to the data, the observed concordance
is found to be Aigher than that expected.
Although we must certainly expect monozygotic twins to differ from each other for
both environmental and non-environmental
reasons, such as differences in X-inactivation and autosomal allelic suppression, any
variability in these differences from twin
pair to twin pair is hardly relevant to the
question of whether the trait is monogenically or polygenically determined; I personally think it is a poor argument to say
that we expect genotype-environment interaction to be greater if more genes are
involved. Similarly, the fact that the herit
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

278

ability of liability to schizophrenia can be
high even when the concordance between
monozygotic twins is low is also irrelevant.
This does not so much imply that monozygotic twin pair differences may include a
purely genetic component as that there is
something wrong with our definition of
heritability. This brings me to my third
question.

3. What is the heritability of schizophrenia? In the first place, we must readily
admit that any estimate of heritability derived from human data is basically questionable. Even if pairs of relatives reared
apart are included in the analysis, there is
no way to disentangle the effects of the
uterine environment. If individuals reared
apart are not included, then we can see
immediately from Fulker’s Table 1 what
the dangers are. It is not unreasonable to
suppose that, for the individuals raised
together, the appropriate coefficients in the
column headed “common environment variance” could be the same as those in the
column headed “additive variance”. In such
a situation, without data on individuals
reared apart, the additive genetic variance
and the common environment variance
would be completely confounded. Including
in the analysis individuals raised apart certainly helps, but we still have no guarantee
that the coefficients then used for common
environment are really appropriate.

But how do we explain that, with exactly
the same assumptions about common environment, a monogenic model of schizophrenia leads to a heritability of about
10-15%, whereas an equally well-fitting
polygenic model leads to a heritability of
75% or more? The paradox is easily explained when we realize that what has been
estimated is not the heritability of schizophrenia but the heritability of liability to
schizophrenia. This “conceptual phenotype”
has a completely different distribution
under the two different models, as is seen

Elston

 

Social Biology
in Figure 1 of Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza’s
paper; what is happening is that two different phenotypes are being considered. This
does not raise doubt about the meaning of
the term Heritability, but does about the
meaning of the term lability. If we analyze
the phenotype that is actually observed
(assuming this to be a dichotomy), then
we can let the absence and presence of
schizophrenia be represented by any two
distinct quantitative values (e.g., 0 and 1),
and we shall always come up with the same
estimate of heritability from a given set of
data: whether the model is monogenic or
polygenic will have no effect, so long as wé
have random mating, no linkage, and no
epistasis. The result will be the heritability
of schizophrenia.

I do not, however, think that such a
parameter will be very useful. Heritability —
of susceptibility to schizophrenia may be a
little more useful; here a person is classifled according to what his eventual phenotype would be, if he lived long enough (of
course this has to be done by means of a
statistical analysis that takes into account
the age of onset distribution). This subtracts from the denominator of the heritability ratio the variance due to variable
age of onset, so that the parameter is no
longer affected by the age structure of the
population being considered. But in general
T tend to agree with Fisher (1951), who
pointed out the foolishness of the concept
of heritability in animal breeding. I consider it even more unfortunate in human
genetics, not only because we can never be
sure that our estimates are unbiased, but
also because the parameter itself is so often
misunderstood.

4. Where do we go from here? There is
no doubt in my mind that if formal genetic
analysis is going to help us unravel the
mode of inheritance of schizophrenia extensive pedigrees need to be examined, and by
much more sophisticated techniques. At the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 3

same time, we must use as much data as
can be readily observed concerning the
phenotype of each individual in the pedigree; it is wrong to suppose that pedigree
analysis can only be used for discontinuous,
or clearly bimodal, traits (see Elston and
Stewart, 1971).

Furthermore, whatever the mode of inheritance, the finding of a genetic linkage
relationship between schizophrenia and a
definite polymorphic genetic marker would
provide incontrovertible proof of genetic
involvement in the etiology of the disease.
Recently, tentative evidence has been found

Discussion

279

suggesting such a linkage relationship with
the Gm locus (Elston, Kringlen, and
Namboodiri, 1972). Although this result
must be considered highly speculative at
present , I do believe it points to a method
of analysis, complementary to biochemical
studies, that will lead to future success. It
will help in the identification of groups of
families in which the main determinant of
schizophrenia is in all probability a particular allele at a particular locus, and hence
supply more homogeneous material for determining biochemical correlates of each
form of the disease.

REFERENCES

Exston, R. C., and M. A, CAMPBELL, 1970. Schizophrenia: Evidence for the major gene hypothesis. Behav. Genet. 1:3~-10.

Euston, R. C., E. Krincren, and K. K. NamBoopirt. 1972. Possible linkage relationships
between certain blood groups and schizophrenia
or other psychoses. Behav. Genet.

Etston, R. C., and J. Stewart. 1971. A general

model for the genetic analysis of pedigree data.
Hum, Hered. 21:523-542.

Fisuer, R. A. 1951. Limits to intensive production
in animals. Brit. Agric. Bull. 4:217-218.

James, J. W. 1971. Frequency in relatives for an
all-or-none trait. Ann. Hum. Genet, 35:47-49.

SmitTH, C, 1971. Discriminating between different
modes of inheritance in genetic disease. Clin.
Genet. 2:303-314.

 

 
