Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Call for papers for open peer commentary
treatment in the behavioral and brain sciences

To cite this article: (1977) Call for papers for open peer commentary treatment
in the behavioral and brain sciences , Social Biology, 24:3, 253-254, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1977.9988292

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988292

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

e
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 24, No. 3

Communications

 

253

Formation of the International Association

for Statistical Computing, an Open

Association of the International Statistical

Institute

This notice is to announce the formation
of the International Association for Statistical Computing (IASC), a section of the
International Statistical Institute. IASC
will be open to membership to those interested in promoting the theory, methods,
and practice of statistical computing. The
objectives of the Association will be to
foster interest and knowledge in effective
statistical computing through international contacts among statisticians, computing professionals, organizations, institutions, governments, and the general
public in different countries of the world.

The Association will pursue its objectives throughout the world with special
attention to developing countries. It will
promote collaborative efforts with international, national, regional, and other organizations and institutions having similar
aims; it will foster evaluations of statistical
computing techniques and programs and

will facilitate the exchange of computer
programs and their documentation. The
Association will arrange programs and
meetings, particularly in conjunction with
sessions of the International Statistical
Institute. Many statisticians and computer
experts have been working on an international cooperative basis toward the founding of the IASC, which will formally come
into existence and have its inaugural meeting in December, 1977, during the 41st
Session of the International Statistical Institute in New Delhi, India.

For further information, including details of membership, contact: International Statistical Institute, 428 Prinses
Beatrixlaan, Voorburg, Netherlands. Annual individual member’s dues structure
is: (1) members from developed countries,
$15 per year; and (2) members from developing countries who request a reduced
rate, $7 per year.

Call for Papers for Open Peer Commentary

Treatment in The Behavioral and Brain

Sciences

The Behavioral and Brain Sciences
(BBS), a new quarterly journal beginning
publication in 1978, will provide open
peer commentary treatment for appropriate submitted papers from any area of
psychology, neuroscience, behavioral biology, or cognitive science. Modeled on
Current Anthropology, the journal will
circulate accepted papers to 50 commentators chosen by the referees and editors

from among the Board, Corresponding
Associate Commentators, and appropriate
specialists not affiliated with BBS, including those recommended by the author.
Publication will consist of the joint appearance of the article, commentaries, and
author’s response. Any continuing commentaries and replies will appear in subsequent issues of the journal.

BBS is now calling for papers, as well as

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

254

for recommendations of topics and already
published articles or books. Respondents
are requested to provide an explicit rationale for seeking or recommending open
peer commentary treatment, including
names of possible commentators.

A paper for BBS can be (1) the report
and discussion of empirical research that
the author judges to have broader scope
and implications than might be reported in
a specialty journal; (2) an unusually significant theoretical article that formally
models or systematizes a body of research;
or (3) a novel interpretation, synthesis, or
critique of existing experimental or theoretical work. Occasionally, articles dealing

Communications

Social Biology

with social or philosophical aspects of the
behavioral and brain sciences will be considered.

The journal is also accepting nominations for Corresponding Associate Commentators, who will provide open peer
commentary on accepted articles, and for
members of the Board of Editorial Commentators, who will referee submitted
manuscripts in addition to performing
open peer commentary.

Full information on the journal and
manuscript submission can be obtained by
writing: Steven Harnad, Editor, The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, P.O. Box
777, Princeton, N.J. 08540.

 
