Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

The problem of the evolution of human races:
Classification or clines?

Joseph B. Birdsell

To cite this article: Joseph B. Birdsell (1972) The problem of the evolution of human races:
Classification or clines?, Social Biology, 19:2, 136-162, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987979

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987979

 

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 12
»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

The Problem of the Evolution of
Human Races: Classification or Clines?

Joseph B. Birdsell

Department of Anthropology
University of California
Los Angeles, California

Race formation within a species provides
opportunities for the study of ongoing
microevolution, but at the same time presents obstacles to the construction of a
scientific taxonomy of its races. The identification and evaluation of evolutionary process in economically simple human populations will be the major concern of this
paper. At the same time, it is appropriate
to present some past and present efforts to
classify the races of man and to examine
the various reasons for their failures. Description and classification have been visibly
successful in ordering genera and higher
categories; hence, many workers have assumed that similar results can be obtained
within the species.

From the times of classical Greece onward, men have attempted to classify their
own kind and have never produced a
scientifically successful, closed taxonomy
system. In part, their failures can be traced
to the essentially continuous variation of
biological characters in space, a reality now
amply demonstrated by the prevalence of
clines in various polymorphic traits. At the
same time, classifiers have incorrectly assumed that similarities within the species
are a measure of relationship by descent.

 

Such a belief fails to take into account the
directed complexities of selection and the
indeterminacies of random genetic drift.
It presumes that gene flow is the only
evolutionary process operative. After several
centuries of effort, there is still no agreement among anthropologists even as to how
many major races can be found in the
human species. Therefore, it should not be
surprising that subdivisions within the major
groups achieve no consensus of opinion.
Nonetheless, there is something real about
the concept of race, and if efforts to classify
were limited to the description of central
tendencies among regionally varying populations of man and if efforts to geographically bound such groups were given up,
perhaps progress might be made.

After a brief review of some past and
present efforts to impose a scientific taxonomy upon man, this paper will pass on to
a more fruitful area, a quantitative analysis
of clines. Data will be presented to indicate that in simple human populations in
nature, microevolution proceeds rapidly,
with random genetic drift triggering the
initial disturbances and the coadaptive processes of selection stabilizing the resultant
gene pools.

136

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

PAST EFFORTS TO CLASSIFY
HUMAN RACES

A recent rereading of many papers devoted to the analysis and classification of
race has been a depressing task. They reflect a few limited themes, greatly overlapping in time, and in general their authors
reject the biological principles of evolution.
The racial classifications of the seventeenth
century were naturally descriptive in nature, based upon observations of colonial
travelers and explorers, and contained much
error. Even so, the major races of man were
recognized as well by eye in those days as
they have since been identified by complex
computer exercises in our time.

A few landmark figures should be noted.
The great naturalist Buffon (1749 et seq.)
summarized the known variability of man
in the mid-eighteenth century in a travelogue manner and attempted little formal
classification. Blumenbach (1795), recognized as the father of craniometry, correctly
classified mankind as belonging to a single
species, which he divided into five principal
varieties or, as we would call them today,
races. His criteria included the shape of the
skull when viewed from above, plus some
variable factors in body build. The Caucasian race was the basic and superior form,
from which the others had degenerated.
Mongolians and Ethiopians were of primary
importance among the fallen varieties, while
the Americans and Malays occupied intermediate positions between the Caucasoids
and the other two poles of his scheme.

This visual kind of classification continued down through the next century and
usually involved more numerous and finer
subdivisions. Background noise in such
schemes included visible ethnocentricity,
theocratic concern as to whether man
sprang from a single or from multiple
origins, and economic overtones reflecting
white destiny as a superior race and, of
course, Negro degradation leading to

Evolution of Human Races

137

slavery. Still, some taxonomic progress was
made; for it was realized that no single
character could serve to divide the human
species into natural regional populations
and thus an increasing variety of traits
were used in the construction of the taxonomies of the ‘day.

Biological anthropology, in common with
other more matured sciences, passed from
a stage of qualitative description to one in

“which characters were quantified by mea
surement. Usually such a trend is beneficial; but it created something of a disaster for students of man. In 1840 the
Swedish anatomist, Anders Retzius, (1860)
invented the first accurate anatomical measurement of the human skull. The cephalic
index was a simple ratio derived by dividing
the maximum breadth of the skull by its
length. Thus armed, Retzius divided the
peoples of the world into two polar types:
the longheaded or dolichocephalic, and the
broadheaded or brachycephalic. For the
next century the classifiers of man focused
their attention upon craniology, especially
the cephalic index, The metrical side of this
approach culminated in the first quarter of
the twentieth century in Karl Pearson and
his school. Pearson was a gifted statistician,
but posessed no great biological knowledge. He and his coworkers turned out
many studies on human crania and reached
an intellectual climax with the formulation
of the “coefficient of racial likeness.” This
single-number statistic purported to describe the distance or proximity between
populations in terms of real relationship
by descent. Its use led to the embarrassing
claim by Woo and Morant (1932) that the
little Negritos of the Andaman Islands in
the Bay of Bengal must be closely related
to the diminutive Mongoloids of Southeast
Asia because the coefficient of racial likeness between them was very low. They
necessarily argued that the dark skin and
woolly hair of the former and the contrastDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

138 Birdsell

ing light skin and lank hair of the latter
must be superficial characters, whereas
those of the skulls were of fundamental
nature. Thus, it was claimed that dimensional similitude overrode morphological
differences. With the passing of Karl Pearson, this racial school rapidly lost vigor and
went-on to extinction. Of course, Pearson’s
statistical contributions remained vital and
are much used today.

Thomas Huxley (1865) represented a
different and unfortunately rather minor
intellectual thrust in racial analysis. He
concluded that cranial characters were of
secondary importance and based his classification of the races of man upon variations
in hair form and color, and skin pigmentation. His taxonomy had serious defects,
including the positioning of his Australoid
type in such disjunct areas as Australia,
southern India, and a portion of Egypt. He
categorized two kinds of Caucasoids, a fair
Northwestern and a dark Mediterranean
type. Negroids were identified below the
Sahara in Africa and in Melanesia. He
correctly placed Mongoloids throughout
Asia and out into both Indonesia and the
American continents. While he leaned too
heavily upon the belief that similarities
were the key to relationship, he was of
some importance in opposing a general trend
toward craniology.

The investigation of living men received
a new impetus from the survey by Otto
Ammon (1890) who measured recruits for
the army in the Grand Duchy of Baden.
This late nineteenth-century study revealed
a higher frequency of longheaded recruits
from the cities than from the country. He
speculated that brachycephalic individuals
died out faster in cities, a hypothesis which
implied selection. Similar surveys were conducted by others on the living in France,
Italy, and Germany. These provided material for the study of regional variations on
a population basis, but produced no bio
Social Biology

logical insights. Too often they were used
to promote nationalism on a racial level,
compounded with factors of language,
politics, and culture. Claims for both Celtic
and Aryan superiority were fueled by these
efforts.

At the expense of omitting reference to a
host of worthy workers throughout Europe,
it is appropriate to focus attention upon a
brilliant American physical anthropologist,
Ernest A. Hooton. He was a superb teacher
and for a quarter of a century trained most
of the physical anthropologists in this
country. He was a convert from the classics, self-taught in his professional field,
and unfortunately not knowledgeable in
biology. Methodologically, he was important for inventing a form of typological
analysis which was practiced by some of
his students until recent decades. A few
still reveal cryptic signs of typological
thinking in their current researches.

Hooton (1930) was convinced that he
could detect the origins of populations by
typing each individual in terms of the major
racial types they revealed to his eye. He
was intuitively an excellent morphologist,
so that a very real plausibility became built
into his claims. Hooton’s rationale for this
approach Jay in his belief that ancestral
forms “occasionally Mendelize out” in individuals and give clues to those ancient
elements which hybridized to produce
present populations.

Hooton’s analytical approach was much
more sophisticated than that of most of his
contemporaries, but he was caught up in
the feeling of that period that a skull was
what it looked to be. If a cranium looked
Negroid, because of a combination of features including a long, high, narrow vault
combined with a broad nasal aperture and
some subnasal prognathism, it must be
Negroid, no matter where the individual
it belonged to had lived and died. Thus,
Hooton, along with other anthropologists of

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2

the day, could see Negroids in such geographically unlikely places as northeast
Asia, the tip of Baja California, or as
members in prehistoric communities in New
Mexico and Ohio. This confidence rested
upon a belief that morphological and metrical similarity positively identified individual skulls according to their ancestral
racial origins. Needless to say, this typological approach was totally in biological
error.

One of the interesting aspects of racial
anthropology is that it has been practiced
by so many individuals with little or no
training in biology. William Z. Ripley published a definitive study on The Races of
Europe in 1899 in which he extensively
documented the existence of three principal
racial types, the Teuton, the Alpine, and
the Mediterranean. It was not a bad study
for its day, considering that its author was
a professor of sociology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Roland
Dixon, a well-thought-of ethnographer at
the Peabody Museum of Harvard University, in 1923 produced a mechanistic
scheme of analysis which he applied to the
peoples of the world. Using three cranial
indices, he arbitrarily defined eight fundamental types of races from their polar distribution and a further 19 permutational
types of races involving-intermediate combinations of the indices. Dixon is said to
have laughingly referred to this work as
“my crime,” and perhaps it was.

Other interesting endeavors of comparable nature include the zones and strata
hypothesis put forward by geologist Griffith Taylor (1937). Hooton’s typological
conclusions applied to the peopling of the
New World inspired Harold Gladwyn, a
retired businessman turned archaeologist,
in his Men Out of Asia (1947). Even
Kenneth McGowan, a retired movie producer, in collaboration with archaeologist
Joseph Hester, produced a simpler work

Evolution of Human Races

139

Early Man in the New World (1950) following the Hootonian hypothesis. ‘The typological approach to the classification of race
has faded out everywhere but in Poland,
where even today practitioners exist. Geneticists have backed them into the corner
of conceding that in order for their racial
typological schemes to work, most racial
characters must be carried by a single gene.
Throughout the long decades in which
students of racial anthropology groped for
understanding and continued their fumbling
analyses, biological principles were glaringly
absent from their work. Charles Darwin
might never have lived, and the work of
Gregor Mendel not have been rediscovered,
for the notice that was taken of their findings. In a general way, they all began with
archetypal races of unexplained origin, from
which they derived the living peoples of
the world by hybridization alone. It is not
surprising that they ignored mutational
pressures and random genetic drift in their
schemes, but it is appalling that the forces
of selection were totally disregarded too.
A fortunate turning point in the study
of human population variation occurred
with the organization of the Cold Spring
Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology
by Theodosius Dobzhansky in 1950. It
was conceived to expose younger biological
anthropologists to geneticists and other
practitioners of the new systematics. Its
impact was enormous and successful. Reflecting the same stirrings of the period,
Carleton S. Coon was the first anthropologist to seriously inject hypotheses involving
the process of selection into schemes of
racial evolution. His ideas were primarily
framed as speculative assertions, but generally rested upon sound biological and
physical principles. His book Races (1950)
was generally greeted by his peer group
with disapproval and displeasure; yet, as
a seedbed for ideas, it has been a profitable
work, and the ideas it contained are today
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

140 Birdsell

being subjected to tests, including those of
laboratory nature.

Coon had, quite independently, reinvented the basic racial classification of
Immanuel Kant (1775), in which the
philosopher proposed as sensible a racial
scheme as anyone has since. Kant divided
mankind into four major races: Whites,
adapted to cold, damp climates; Mongoloids, living in cold dry regions; Negroids,
originating in the dry heat of tropical
Africa; and finally the inhabitants of
Peninsular India, similar in their dark skins
and linear body builds, evolving in a
regime of the same climatic characteristics.
While the insights of Kant were hardly
framed in Darwinian terms, it is surprising
that a sterile century and three-quarters
passed before Coon again tied the diversity
of man to geographic differences of domain.

NEW TREND IN RACE RESEARCH

The advent of the computer generated
a whole new series of thrusts in the area
labeled numerical phenetics. This has been
manifested in the generalized measure of
distance, D?, of Malanabois, in the way in
which Penrose has partitioned his measures
of similitude into those referring to form on
the one hand and size on the other, and of
course the “numerical taxonomy” of Sokal
and Sneath (1963). The relation between
the new taxonomy generated by computers
and the taxonomy based upon classical
morphological principles has been incisively
discussed by Mayr (1965) in his paper
“Numerical Phenetics and Taxonomic
Theory.” There is a general consensus that
the taxonomies generated by the principles
of numerical phenetics do not necessarily
reflect pathways of descent as generated
by classical taxonomy. In the few instances
in which pertinent tests have been made of
the validity of phenetic taxonomy, the results are unconvincing. Slight changes in

Social Biology

numerical value produce different family
trees. Species which can be demonstrated
by morphological taxonomy to be closely
related are shown by numerical phenetics
to be distantly so. For all of the intriguing
statistical devices utilized in such schemes,
the biological consequences are chaotic.
Thus, at a time when students of human
races have gradually come to the conclusion that the game of classification cannot
be conducted scientifically because of the
biological complexities inherent in subspecification, the new generation of statistically-minded researchers have turned once
more to classification as a primary goal.
Whatever the new numerical phenetics may
achieve at higher categorical levels, where
genetic distances are great and lapsed time
intervals long, their exercises now have
little validity when applied at the subspecies level, particularly as demonstrated
with human materials. Even the idea that
a single figure can adequately summarize
and measure biological variability between
populations is unrealistic. When the single
figure of magnitude approaches are compounded with the necessary assumption
that the degree of similitude is a measure
of relationship by descent, the venture
becomes unsupportable. It may be excusable
to ignore mutational pressures, since these
operate slowly in evolutionary time and are
generally unmeasurable; but to assume in
numerical phenetics that the varied and
complex directive changes produced by selection can be ignored is to cut the heart
out of adaptive evolution as a concept. To
further remove all indeterminacies from
biological systems is to ignore the stochastic
realities which are present in nature. It is
probably fair to conclude that no scheme
of numerical analysis can succeed which
necessarily precludes both selection and
drift from its perspectives and believes evolution to proceed by gene flow alone.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Evolution of

Vol. 19, No. 2

THE PROBLEM OF RACE IN THE FUTURE

One of the realities which complicates
the classification of human populations is
the growing evidence that man as a species
characteristically shows the regional gradations which are called clines. Wherever
population structure is suitable, clinal patterns emerge for the simple serological
genes and for both simple and complex
phenotypic characters. Livingstone (1962)
stressed that clinal patterns for different
characters are independent of each other
and so produce a chaotic effect where
classification is attempted. There is a general agreement that in most organisms, and
certainly in man, clines are evidence of
the operation of either gene flow or selection or both conjointly. This generalization
does not preclude mutational components
and stochastic influences from drift from
the total scene, but stresses that uniform
clines are primarily structured by the
former two evolutionary processes.

Once deterministic selection and indeterminate drift become a part of the admitted picture of subspeciation, efforts at
classification, whether by eye or whether
aided by the computer, become untenable.
A scientific subspecific taxonomy could
only be held valid where both selection
and drift were known and incorporated into
the analytical schema. It is unlikely that
this will ever be realistically achieved.
Therefore, it may well be that the investigation of the nature and intensity of evolutionary forces is the endeavor to be pursued,
while the pleasures of classifying man fall
away, perhaps forever.

THE REAL PROBLEM POSED BY REGIONAL
VARIATION IN MAN

With the dismissal of future exercises
in racial taxonomy, the polytypic nature of
human population presents a challenging
question. What evolutionary forces have

Human Races

141

produced the regional variations so evident
in our species? It is ironic that the hypothesis proposed by Sewall Wright (1931)
forty years ago has been almost totally
ignored by racial anthropologists. In this
formative paper, which developed the
theory of shifting balance, Wright indicated
clearly that random components did have a
place in evolution and that evolution would
proceed most rapidly when they were combined with selection in properly structured
populations. He noted that the conditions
which were most favorable for rapid evolution involved a numerous species subdivided
into small local breeding populations, or
demes, which were partially isolated from
each other. In this situation, chance changes
in gene frequencies, particularly those involving bottlenecks such as founder effect,
would produce random deviations, some of
which would trigger new selective direction
and so new levels of adaptive equilibrium
in the gene pools. Where the level of genetic
coadaptation has been heightened, the new
combinations might be expected through
interdemic competition to spread widely in
the species. Wright has reasonably claimed
that much of the materials of general evolution substantiate his view, and he has
successfully refined the theory of shifting
balance in subsequent papers (1959, 1964).
Other contributors to the new systematics have expressed concordant views.
Julian Huxley (1943, p. 208) obviously
referred to genetic coadaptation without
using the term as follows:
Let us now consider what will happen within
a continuous population spread over a large
area in which markedly different climatic
conditions occur in different regions, but
with the extremes connected by environmental gradations. Selection will then be
operative and will tend to adapt the population locally; however, this local adaptation will be impeded and graded by gene
flow. But whenever some accident, such as

a temporary or partial isolation, allows selection full scope, local adaptation will be
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

142

intensified and the major adaptive genes

will be fortified by internal adaptation until

a locally harmoniously-stabilized gene-com
plex is built up. Once this occurs, the re
sultant extra vigor and fertility will permit
the bearers of their gene-complex to spread
beyond the area to which they were originally adapted.
While this is a convincing statement about
genetic coadaptation, it should be noted
that random components in the evolutionary process are not specified here and that
the emphasis is essentially upon directed
processes, however local the forces of selection might be.

The well-developed experimental procedures with Drosophila allow for the design
of critical experiments in the laboratory.
Dobzhansky and his collaborators have
investigated the relationship between the
interaction of random genetic drift and
natural selection. Dobzhansky and Pavlovsky (1957) and Dobzhansky and Spassky
(1962) in a pair of elegant experiments
have demonstrated that both random and
directed components do occur in evolution,
but each has its own type and time of
importance. Essentially, some degree of
indeterminacy is present in microevolution.
These results should have interested students of human races, but both are systematically omitted from their constructs and
their analyses. Since man does not lend
himself to laboratory experiment, it is
necessary to investigate his evolution in
natural populations. With the fossil record
as scanty as it is, living populations recommend themselves for this effort.

AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES REPRESENT AN
EXPERIMENT IN NATURE

In well-designed laboratory experiments,
nonessential and confusing factors are either
eleminated or held constant, while attention
is focused on the relationship between two
or more important covarying characters.
While all natural populations evolve, few
of them are so structured as to provide

Birdsell

Social Biology

meaningful insight into evolutionary processes. In some, evolution proceeds too
slowly. In others, the basic breeding populations are difficult or impossible to identify
and are only definable through that leveling
factor, isolation by distance. In many existing human populations, numerical expansion proceeds at a relatively rapid rate,
personal mobility is high, and social struc-.
ture complex and even stratified. The
Australian aborigines possess very special
features which give them some of the
characteristics of a carefully designed
laboratory experiment.

At the time of contact, the natives of
Australia are estimated to have numbered
300,000 persons. They populated the entirety of the continent leaving no empty
spaces, so their distribution was continuous.
Everywhere they lived in a hunting and
gathering state of economy. Their material
technology was simple and relatively uniform throughout their continental domain.
Aboriginal tools were sufficiently adaptable
to allow them to live in a wide range of
temperate to tropical environments, with
mean annual rainfall varying from a
minimum of four inches to a maximum of
160 inches. This represents an environmental range from stony desert on the one
hand to climax Indo-Malayan rain forest
on the other. Everywhere these natives
were in an optimal equilibrium with their
environment (Birdsell, 1953), and their
densities were related to their land with a
mathematical precision. Under such circumstances, their overall population numbers
were constant, with only a little transient
fluxing at the local level.

The population structure of the Australian aborigines is characterized by strong
homeostatic tendencies and fortunately is
well known. Field research by Norman B.
Tindale, my longtime collaborator (1940,
1941, 1953), and myself (Birdsell, 1950,
1953, 1957, 1968) has demonstrated the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2 Evolution of
following structural details. Aboriginal society consists of three essential units, all
of which socially and demographically
represent stable equilibrium systems. The
basic unit is the nuclear family which is
the primary foraging unit, especially in
impoverished environments and at difficult
seasons of the year. Its numbers are carefully regulated through rigorously practiced
infanticide, which in its net effect is preferentially female. Reproduction follows a
truncated Poisson distribution with numbers of children surviving into adulthood
ranging from zero to eight in number. At a
given time, such a steady-state family
averages a man, his wife, and about three
offspring. Multiple wives occur only in
about 15% of the marriages in desert
regions,

A primary landowning unit in Australia
is the band, or horde, which consists of a
group of related families in which residence
and land ownership pass down through the
male line. Territoriality is strongly manifest
in these bands, and they serve as a primary

‘spacing mechanism throughout the conti
nent. Marriage is exogamous, with wives
coming into the band in exchange for
daughters and sisters sent out. Thus, the
bands themselves do not constitute the
genetic isolate, but are subdivisions of it.

The largest social unit in Australia is the
dialectal tribe, which consists of a group of
contiguous and presumably distantly related bands. Its cohesion comes without
political force, which is totally lacking, but
rather through a dialect spoken in common
and maintained by the density of communication arising from foot mobility and the
array of face-to-face contacts. The tribe
does not operate as a cohesive unit in any
sense, but it does have the important attribute of representing a true island type of
genetic isolate.

Tindale (1953) established that in precontact time the overall rate of intertribal

 

Human Races

143

marriages in Australia averaged 14.7%.
Conversely, 85.3% of the marriages involved individuals within the same dialectal
tribe, This is an island type of isolate and
a very tight one. Further, a great majority
of the intertribal marriages were contracted
with members of immediately adjacent
tribes, with only a small minority representing matings between tribes once removed.
Thus, the rate of exchange of persons is
such that m equals 0.074, which, as will be
shown later, is not sufficient to swamp out
and degrade evolutionary changes occurring on each local scene.

The size of the effective breeding population in the Australian tribe is essentially
indeterminate, but some bracketing estimates can be made. It has been shown
(Birdsell, 1953) that dialectal tribal numbers range around a mean value of 500
persons. The minority of tribes larger than
this tend to proceed toward fragmentation
as isolation by distance produces linguistic
differentiation. Tribes smaller than the
average tend to lose their identity since
their rate of intertribal marriage is necessarily higher. In another experimental
aspect in aboriginal Australia it can be

. Shown (Birdsell, in press) that the spread

of such initiation ceremonies as circumcision and subincision produced transient
fragmentation, in which tribal populations
were reduced on the average to perhaps 150
persons. The evidence indicates that with
the passage of time these smaller units reintegrated and later stabilized around the
average number of 500 individuals. ~
Rough estimates of the size of the effective tribal breeding population suggest a
figure of magnitude of about 185 persons.
This is based upon such demographic variables as differences in sex ratios, the proportion of families not raising children to
adulthood, and ages of marriage in terms of
effective reproduction. However, the calculation of this figure does not take into

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

144.

account the periodic phases of drastic population reduction which certainly occurred
throughout much of this essentially arid
continent. With the understanding that the
harmonic mean of such oscillations is closer
to the lower figure than to the homeostatic
optimum value, a better estimate of the
effective size of the tribal breeding population might be in the neighborhood of 100
persons. The exact value is surrounded by
the indeterminacy resulting from the impossibility of now ever recording the past
cyclical variations in weather and their impact upon the human populations. In spite
of its essential indeterminacy, it is clear
that the effective size of the breeding population of these aboriginal isolates was suffciently small to fayor random components
in their evolution.

DATA

The data presented here was obtained
on 1,678 full-blooded Australian aborigines
who constitute a total sample of those to
whom access was available at the time of
this fieldwork, 1953-54. The research was
undertaken to identify and, if possible, to
evaluate the various microevolutionary
processes operating in populations of this
advantageous structure. The survey was
made around the fringes of the Western
Desert in the state of Western Australia.
This region was chosen solely because it
offered the largest number of tribes continuously distributed in a space which could
be sampled at that late date. Originally it
had been hoped to survey 50 contiguous
tribes; in actuality 28 tribal isolates were
sampled, together with scatterings of aborigines in surrounding areas of older settlement. Figure 1 shows the area sampled. It
will be noted that three southern tribal
isolates are separated from 25 northerly
ones by an unfortunate gap. This resulted
from the fact that at that time the interior
desert tribes had not yet come into white

Birdsell

Social Biology

settlements, while an earlier wave of migrants out of the desert to the stations at
the southern end of the Canning Stock
Route were already nearly extinct. Tindale
(1941) has shown through his careful
genealogical investigations that once effective white contact was established, Australian natives declined 50% per generation.
Each individual was identified genealogically by his own tribal affiliation, those
of his parents, and where possible, those of
his grandparents. This tedious but necessary work was undertaken during the first
year of fieldwork by Norman B. Tindale,
with the task falling upon the writer during
the second year. Blood group determinations were made by Roy T. Simons and
the maximum-likelihood calculations by
John Graydon, both of the Commonwealth
Serum Laboratories, Parkville, Victoria.
Tribal samples varied in size from a few
in the high twenties to one approaching
200 individuals. On the average, the 28
isolates are represented by about 50 bloods
each. The statistical reliability of such
small samples is worth some discussion. In
one paper (Birdsell and Brooks, ms.), it is
shown that tribal isolates such as are found
in Australia constitute small, unique, and
finite genetical universes. Each can be
treated as a separate entity whose gene
pool reflects the cumulative effects of clines
independent in nature and varying in slope
at all of the variable loci. In another paper
(Brooks and Birdsell, ms.) it is shown that
for genetical universes of this type the best
estimate for the confidence limits is obtained by the Bayes method. The nature of
this statistic, which is appropriate for small
finite universes, is such that its 95% confidence limits, when compared to others
frequently used, result in a sampling error
of ascertainment so compressed that a
sample of 50 persons, that is 100 bloodgroup genes, has an error of approximately
+5%. If binomial-sampling confidence
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

T-28

an

YY

Si i

Evolution of Human Races

 

Fic, 1

limits were used, the population size necessary to produce equal reliability would
approximate 160 genes, or 80 persons.
The environment represented by this
sample of aboriginal tribes is relatively
unvarying, a point of some importance in
Sewall Wright’s (1964) discussion of the
theory of shifting balance. While a few of
the northern tribes in the sample live in
a coastal and monsoonal regime with as

much as forty inches of rainfall annually,
most of our tribal series were more impoverished. Twenty-three of the 28 tribes
were inland in their location, thus lacking
all marine resources. In 16 of the central
and southerly tribes, mean annual rainfall
averaged less than 15 inches and fell below
10 inches in 11 of them. Thus, the majority
of these tribes lived in a uniform desert
environment. This is reflected in the floristic
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

146 | Birdsell

regime in which all of the 16 desert tribes
consisted basically of spinifex, or as it is
better known, porcupine grass. In the
southern margins this was relieved with
patches of mulga scrub, while in the northern tribe there was some scrub acacia.
The ecological monotony of these interior
tribes is stressed here, for below it will
be shown that their genetic variation is
great.

A METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE
ANALYSIS OF CLINES

Students of microevolution agree that
clines hold some of the secrets which may
lead to the evaluation of processes. Clines
are sloping surfaces, usually characterized
by some irregularities, which define the
frequency of spatially varying genes or
phenotypes. The cline itself is usually sufficiently complex to defy ordinary mathematical attempts of analysis. However,
transects through such two-dimensional
surfaces are simpler to handle. Early empirical attempts included the finding of
Alpatof (1929) that in honeybees the length
of the tongue changed in so regular a
gradient from north to south in Europe
that the relationship could be mathematically expressed in an equation. Salomonson
(1933) quantified Bergmann’s rule through
finding that regular increases in wing length
correlated with degrees north latitude for
three polytypic species of birds in western
Europe. The equational constant differed
with each species.

The new breed of evolutionists showed
a mounting interest in characters which
varied continuously in space. R. A. Fisher
(1937) mathematically defined the form
of the wave of advance of an advantageous
gene in linear space. Julian Huxley (1939)
wrote the definitive article on spatially
graded characters and proposed the title of
cline for the phenomena. Huxley summa
 

Social Biology

rized the clines reported in the literature
and showed their frequent occurrence. He
was primarily concerned with using clines
as an auxiliary method in taxonomy and
did not stress that they might hold the key
to unlock some of the secrets of evolutionary processes. Haldane (1948), using data
on the Floridian deer-mouse (Peromyscus)
showed that the coefficient of selection required to maintain the stationary cline
separating the lighter beach form from the
darker inland race could be calculated,
yielding the very low value of about 0.1%.
Fisher once more (1950) returned to the
problem of clines, mathematically investigating the special case in which a gene
enjoys a selective advantage in one portion
of the species range, while it is at a disadvantage in the remainder of its range.
These early investigations were all limited
to the examination of the properties of
transects through a clinal surface. A clinal
transect provides only a fraction of the
information contained in the full regional
display of a continuously varying character. Holgate (1964) extended Wahlund’s
formula to a cline maintained by the random diffusion of a simply advantageous
gene. The method allowed the calculation
of overall genotype frequencies, the selection and diffusion constants, and rates of
change of gene frequencies at the boundaries of the section being considered. Perhaps because of the limiting assumptions
involved, this method does not seem to
have been applied to natural populations.
Crow and Kimura (1970), in An Introduction to Population Genetic Theory, do
not consider the problem of the cline, possibly because of the complexities it would
introduce into mathematical genetics.
One method for a quantitative analysis
of a cline in two-dimensional space can be
illustrated by the use of the simple model
shown in Figure 2. The data are in the
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2 Evolution of Human Races 147

N=40
Mean=2.50
S.D.=2.55

a
©
o
@ 10
oC
2
rm

5

OFOTS 01520

Dyadic Differences

 

Frequency

Dyadic Differences

Fic. 2

form of adjacent genetic isolates and are
presented in the geometry of a 5X5
matrix. Since the data utilized are in terms
of genetic isolates, the data are transformed
from geographical space into genetic space
(Birdsell, 1950). On the left-hand side of
the figure, genetic data range from 0.20
to 0.40 by 0.05 intervals and have been
arranged to represent a simple sloping surface of uniform gradient in one direction.

An appropriate method for analyzing this

 

 

surface is to take the paired differences
between all adjacent isolates in all interface of contacts. In this particular model,
these dyadic differences number 40, of
which the 20 transverse ones show no
difference, while an equal number of vertical dyads show a difference of 0.05. The
resulting polygon shows a very limited
range. It allows the calculation of the mean
and the standard deviation of the dyadic
differences which in this case are both low
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

148 Birdsell

in value. The mean of the cumulative
dyadic differences expresses the degree of
overall slope of the clinal surface. The
standard deviation reflects numerically the
irregularity of the surface.

On the right-hand side of Figure 2 is a
model in which the same data have been
placed at random in the 25 cells representing the genetic isolates. If clinal contours
were drawn for these values they would
result in a visual: hodgepodge. When the
dyadic differences are again summarized,
they deviate markedly from those of the
first model. Now the frequency polygon is
spread out to cover the full extent of the
range of the data. The mean value of the
differences has risen from 2.50 to 8.25, a
more than threefold increase. At the same
time the standard deviation has risen from
2.55 to 5.93. Granting that this is only one
random arrangement out of a great many
possible ones, these same tendencies would
be expected where the data are essentially
random in their distribution.

Models are much simpler than real
nature, and the actual geometry of the 28
Australian tribal isolates shown in Figure
1 emphasizes the point. There, tribal
samples are indicated by the prefix T and
arranged from 1 to 28. Pooled samples,
representing individuals from a number of
tribes and thus heterogeneous in nature,
range on this map from P-1 through P3. They are not used in the following analysis, but their data lend security to the
projection of the isogenes displayed outside of the area covered by the individual
isolates. Visually, these 28 tribes cover
an impressive regional area in Australia;
but in fact they constitute only between 4
and 5% of the total number of breeding
isolates originally upon the continent.

The first model illustrated a method of
analysis which is quite feasible but somewhat unwieldy, even for the computer, in
that each random arrangement would re
Social Biology

quire the separate calculation of such
statistical constants as the mean of the
cumulative dyadic differences and their
standard deviation. The ingenuity of Dr.
Samuel B. Brooks, who programmed the
problem for the computer, devised the
necessary changes. The problem was visualized as one in which an operational scale
is established for each genetic variant. At
one polar end, the scale is limited by the
ideal cline for the data which produces the
most uniformly sloping clinal surface, as
judged by the minimum value of the
cumulative dyadic differences. The other
polar end of the scale is fixed by that
random combination of the data which
produces the greatest irregularity in the
clinal surface as shown by its maximum
value for the cumulative dyadic differences.
With this numerical scale defined, it is
then possible to take the cumulative dyadic
differences for the real cline in nature and
place it in its proper position upon its
own scale.

The random end of the scale is the more
easily fixed. The real data for a given
genetic variant are assigned to the specific
tribal isolates survey by a random numbers
technique. This exercise is replicated a
thousand times with the sum of the cumulative dyadic differences between adjacent
isolates calculated in each instance. Even
with this considerable number of replications, the frequency polygon never exactly
represents the normal distribution. Therefore, from the values provided by the computer, the mean cumulative sum of the
dyadic differences, and <3 times its standard deviation, it is possible to construct a
normal probability curve defining the full
set of expectations which random combinations of the data should yield. As a reasonable convention, a point three standard
deviations greater than the mean of the
distribution is taken to define the absolute
random pole of the scale. The mean minus

 
149

Evolution of Human Races

Vol. 19, No. 2

three standard deviations is used to indi
27 values in such a way around this arbitrarily chosen peak that the clinal slopes as

cate the lowest cumulative sum of dyadic
differences that random distributions of
the data would yield. The effect can be

seen in Figure 3.

expressed through the dyadic differences

will constitute a cumulative minimum.

This solution provides the smoothest and

140

S.C — omen

6.1764 i

c
5
@

=

 

SNOILVOINdSY WOONVY OOO! 40 ADNANDSYS

Ws
CDRE_t«\A
: WWW
on ———
erento
a
YL
SS — ———
—_—_—_
— —
—— ————
—_—_—
= ——
a

"BD m7

“sO

Fic. 3

40
CUMULATIVE SUM OF DYADIC DIFFERENCES

3.0

2.0

1.0

oO

STO Joquiaseq BO TEE] Ie [URSTYSIIA[ JO Aissotu)] Aq popeojumog

hence the most perfect cline, in that

The next step in the analysis involves

the identification of the ideal cline into

secondary peaks and troughs will be elimi
which the real data could be arranged in nated in the computer construct. An ideal

cline constructed in this fashion is always
considerably more perfect than any apt to
be found in nature, and this has some effect

the geometry of this series of tribal popula
tions. Since the possible permutations repre
sent a very large number, this exercise has

been kept close to the evolutionary reality upon the use of the scale.

by assigning a fixed peak value in the com
The search for the ideal cline could have

puter simulation to the same tribal cell in been programmed in a linear fashion, but
which it occurs in nature. Thereafter, the at considerable expense in time in perfecting

computer exercise is to arrange the other

 

the program. Instead, it was decided to use

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

150 Birdsell

a random walk search type of program
which had been used by Dr. Brooks for
other optimal goal-seeking problems. In
essence, with the highest frequency fixed at
the real natural peak, the remaining 27
values were assigned at random to the
other cells. Thereupon, adjacent pairs of
values were exchanged at random, and the
results in terms of the cumulative dyadic
means calculated. If the value was reduced,
that pair remained temporarily fixed. If the
value was increased, showing a heightening
of the clinial irregularity, the trial was
rejected. The pair interchange went on a
random rotating basis covering the whole
configuration of the data until terminated
after 300,000 trials. Long before this number was reached, no further improvement
in the cline emerged, so that the value of
the best cline and the configuration of the
data which produced it were both fixed and
recorded. It is this optimal cline with the
actual data which determined the righthand pole of the scale as shown in Figure 3.
Since the highest random end of the scale
included 99.75% of the theoretically possible random universe, the scale for all
intents and purposes exhausts the possibilities in a given set of data.

The actual position of the cline for the
rhesus chromosome R? is shown in Figure
3. It falls on the lowest side of the random
probability distribution, and it can be
calculated that there are two chances in
1,000 of the distribution found in nature
being random in origin. This is a very low
likelihood; thus it must be concluded that
the real cline is actually selectively structured, since here gene flow could not have
produced it.

ANALYSIS OF THE CHROMOSOMAL
VARIANTS AT THE RHESUS LOCUS

In this Australian data, five chromosomal
variants at the Rh locus were identified. Of
these D® involved but 11 individuals out

Social Biology

of the series of 1,678 and is not considered
here, being included in the frequencies for
R?, By this convention, the data yield four
chromosomal arrangements, R1, R?, R®° and
R*, This of course gives three degrees of
freedom. In Figure 4 all four clines are
displayed together for visual purposes. In
each case it will be noted that the major
features reveal a rather systematic cline,
but that the uniformity of the surface in
every case is interrupted by peaks and sinks
of greater or lesser magnitude. In no sense
do the data create a chaotic or mosaic impression, so that it may be tentatively concluded that in all four of these genetic
variants the distribution is primarily structured by selection, with some random components present. This preliminary impression is concordant with the expectations
of the shifting balance theory of Sewall
Wright.

With the three degrees of freedom resulting from the data, the R! chromosome has
been considered to be the residual category.
In part this decision arises from the fact
that it is the most frequent chromosome in
the data, with values running from 0.40
to 0.84; thus it is numerically proponderant, At the same time it shows rather less
interesting clinal features than the other
three chromosomes and so its discussion
will be put off until later.

The R? (cDE) cline is given in Figure 5
and shows a systematic major clinal structure in which the highest values are
marginal to the south and west where peaks
in the range of 0.50 to 0.54 are reached.
Then the surface generally slopes to the
north and east in our 28 tribal isolates.
These peak values are worth a comment
for they reach a maximum found nowhere
else in the world but among the coastal
Indians of British Columbia. Since no one
would claim a close relationship by descent
between Western Australian aborigines and
the British Columbian natives, the parallel
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2 Evolution of Human Races 151

R'
GENE FREQUENQUES
4o-4a 3°"

a5 ag FPF
50-54 2077
$5—59 5773
60-564 BSS
66-69 FY
70~74 ESY
75-73 U7
so-—63 i

R*
GENE FREQUENCIES
oo SN
o1-05 73
06 ~ 10 SSS
i-b 7H
A6~ 20 FEI

 

Re
GENE FREQUENCIES
05-09 [77]
o-14 EY
Is -19 EJ
20-24 KY
2-29 Eg
30-34 EX]
35-39 E
40-44 EY
as-49 EES

GENE FREQUENCIES
po -04 [4
95-09 XY
$0 —14 E273
18-19 FY
20-24

Fic. 4

frequencies stand in direct evidence against
any contention of similar gene frequencies
indicating relationship.

The analytical constants for the R? chro
mosome are given in the top row of Table 1,
and it will be noted that its relative position
has a value of 53.7%. This value means
that taking the distance defined by the two

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

152

Re
GENE FREQUENCIES
05-09
Io — 14
15 ~— 19
20 —.24
25-29 REY
30-34

.
S

 

40-44 Ns

 

Birdsell

ED
Ze 0
——
KX)
SSO
OSS
0% 05050
8 x O25

sete XO
o

COS e
52 x
2% Q 'S

%
O
eee

Ce

x
SKS
YS

&

50

cx)
EOE
P5555
C5250
SES
Reh
SX

8 BS
o8, N Be
SX KOOKT WN
6 x
x BaNN aR

NWS

x CE

 

Fic. 5

Social Biology

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 19, No. 2 Evolution of Human Races 153

poles of this scale—in this case the most
random configuration three standard deviations higher than the mean, 7.949, and the
other end of the scale where the best cline
is 1.42—the position of the actual cline,
with a cumulative dyadic difference of
4.682, is 53.7% of the scale away from
the worst random pole and toward the

2/1,000

PRoBABILITY
OF RANDOsL
ORIGIN
34/1,000
242/1,000

4/1,000

53.79%
60.9%
52.3%
50.1%

Relative
Position

géi2 3 8 8 best cline. At first thought, this would not
Ela ae tw seem to be a very satisfactory value since
the computer has been able to take the
se/F 8 8 § actual gene frequencies for the 28 isolates
oRA;o Ns NO and arrange them in a considerably better
pattern, thus minimizing the average
g2i8 3 8 8 genetic slope between the adjacent isolates.
~ he rr However, returning to Figure 5 it will be
a : 8 tle ew we noted that the real distribution shows some
Ag 7 Ba Ss 2 @€ & rather abrupt genetic escarpments. Both
Cell & ~ om e of the peak values to the south and west
p 2 “a rapidly pass through four or more isogenes,
5 ‘s z Ba eg & g revealing very steep clinal surfaces and, of
a g glace oF Fon course, great dyadic differences in gene
A eo fll z frequencies. At the same time, the northerly
A A a e ga 2 we ss 8g portion of the cline is chopped up with no
eH o8 a0 ~— «= a less than three sinks or depressions in
ps which the value of the chromosome falls
<3 S fF sg below 0.09. The sinks to the north and the
Ef eata a oa a higher values to the south are separated by
B g va 4 7H a band of intermediate value in which the
Ss oom nm changing slopes are nonetheless moderately
p18 3 8 & steep. It is apparent that, even though the
A oUF real data presents a very visible cline, the
position taken on the bipolar scale has been
zie sg 2 2 considerably degraded, that is, pushed
els 2 S S toward the random end of the scale. It may
be concluded that the scale is very sensitive toward the end represented by the ideal
cline and very few real surfaces will approach closely to the computerized optimum
rearrangement of their values.
E z The chromosome R®° (cDe) is the next
Be ~ tA tk to the rarest genetic variant at this locus
Foimoid ie in Australia. Its values range from zero
ee to 0.30 in terms of tribal isolates in this
s 2 s s series. No particular configuration of its

clinal surface was visualized during field
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

154. Birdsell

work so that the plotting of the actual
values produced a surprise, yielding the
most regular cline of any among the five
serological loci. The configuration is shown
in Figure 6. Note the rather unusual arrangement of the group intervals, designed
to show the three tribal isolates in which
the frequency was zero.

The clinal topography of R®° is characterized by a crest of peak values arising
out of a rather extensive plateau. The
highest values occur in three adjacent
tribes, increasing in value from west to
east. This area of high frequencies is
bounded by a steep genetic escarpment,
involving no Jess than four isogenes, to the
south and east of the peak. This drop
amounts to two-thirds of the total range
and, of course, is dramatic when related to
these numerical values. There are no other
special features in this clinal topography
whose surfaces otherwise are generally uniform and concentric about the peak.

In quantitative terms R° has a relative
scale position of 60.9% which reflects the
uniformities of the clinal surface. Nevertheless, its position does fall within the
possible random universe, and the probability of it having occurred by chance is
34 in 1,000. It becomes evident that the
scalar position of the cline does not relate
directly to its position relative to the random probability distribution. Here again
the scale penalizes this genetic variant
which represents a dynamic microevolutionary thrust, rather than an old static
stabilized selective surface. Had selective
forces remained constant over a long period
of time, the central peak of value should be
surrounded in all directions by a uniformly
sloping concentric gradient. The ideal cline
generated by the computer is of this type.
Therefore, the genetic escarpment dropping
off from the peak penalizes the scale position of R® since it involves dyadic differences of considerable magnitude.

Social Biology

If we interpret the R®° cline in terms of
Sewall Wright’s theory of shifting balance,
then the high central peak should correspond to the isolate in which some stochastic
disturbance, possibly set off by a population
bottleneck, changed the contents of the
isolate gene pool. After this trigger effect,
Wright’s construct calls for competition
within the tribe, that is, at an intrademic
level. In Dobzhansky’s terms, this would
involve genetic coadaptation within the
originating tribe. Thereafter, the situation
shifts to interdemic competition according
to Wright, and the favorable combinations
of genes previously evolved now spread to
adjacent isolates.

The reality in the Australian isolates
does not altogether fit such an explanation.
The steep escarpment to the east and south
of the peak represents no features in the
real topography of the region and thus
cannot result from physical isolation. The
suggestion that it might result from social
inhibitors finds no support in the other
genetic variants either at this or other loci.
Wright seems to have conceived of his third
phase of interdemic competition in terms
of more fit people actually replacing less
fit ones. His spread seems to involve
physical migration, or at the very least gene
flow. This is difficult to accept in the
present situation, for all of the other genetic
variants which should reflect such movements do not. The R® peak stands alone
on its own. This fact suggests that Sewall
Wright’s model may not yet be complex
enough, and that we are not yet ready to
handle various indeterminate aspects of
genetic coadaptation.

The chromosomal arrangement R72
(CDE) is relatively rare in all human
populations. In aboriginal Australia its frequencies seem a little higher than elsewhere
and generally range from 0.02 to 0.04. Its
distribution is shown in Figure 7. The
general appearance of the cline is choppy
~Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

R°
GENE FREQUENCIES
00 KWN
Ol -05
06 —.10

 

 

Evolution of Human Races

 

Fic. 6

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

156 Birdsell

with three isolated peaks, each limited to
a single tribal isolate, rising out of the
generally undulating surface of low values
which shows no consistent slope.

The three peaks which dominate this
clinal topography are well separated in
space. The central one, representing the
Mandjildjara tribe shows a chromosome

* frequency of 0.18. To the west stand the

Indjibandi in which R* reaches the unprecedented value of 0.20. To the east lie
the Ngardi in whose gene pool R? reaches
0.24. All three of these tribal peak values
greatly exceed previously recorded world
frequencies. They naturally are surrounded
by very steep escarpments which involve
four isogenes in both the Indjibandi and
the Ngardi cases. These steep genetic cliffs
cover 80% of the chromosomal frequency
here recorded. If this surface was modeled
in three dimensions these peaks would
stand out like great mesas. With regard to
the errors of ascertainment in sampling it
is worth noting that the individual members of all three of these tribes early established the final value which oscillated very
little as the tribal samples increased. Sample
size ranged from 35 to 58 persons in these
three instances (i.e., 70 to 116 genes).
The positions of these three R? peaks are
best illustrated in the frequency polygon
displayed in the upper portion of Figure 8.
The range throughout Eurasia for this
chromosome varies from zero to 0.10. The
Australian range vastly exceeds this,
spreading from zero to 0.24. In the lower
portion of figure, frequency polygons are
given for the dyadic differences for this
chromosome between adjacent Australian
isolates. The freestanding clusters of eight
high dyadic values relate to the three peaks
and their neighbors. Not shown is the interesting fact that separated by a narrow
strip of land from the Ngardi, with their
world’s record value of 0.24, are the
Wandjira among whom the 35 individuals

Social Biology

sampled had a frequency of zero. Thus, the
world’s extremes for this rare chromosome
occur in nearby tribes who actually do
exchange women.

Insofar as gene flow would be expected
to swamp these peaks and degrade them
toward the values of their low-frequency
neighbors, their sharp escarpments suggest
that they are of relatively recent origin.
They surely arose as a result of genetic
bottlenecks resulting from drastic population reductions in numbers in the three
affected tribes. Falling as they do in approximately the same rainfall regimes and
below the fringe of reliable monsoonal
weather, it is tempting to speculate that a
single severe and prolonged drought may
have been the actuating factor. The fact
that other tribal isolates in this geographical situation do not show peaks for this
same chromosome is of course expected,
since drift operates in indeterminate directions.

The quantitative analysis of the R? cline,
shown in Table 1, reveals a few interesting
points. The relative position of this chromosome upon its own polar scale is 52.3%
away from the random pole and has 242
chances in 1,000 of being a chance arrangement. This is very little below the value
for R?, and as will be seen, higher than for
R!, How much the relative scale position
is affected by the numerical magnitude of
the frequencies, the number of group intervals used, and the type of geometry of the
distribution is not yet certain. Generalized
models of these variables will be analyzed
on the computer in the near future. The
moderate scale value for this chromosome,
in spite of its three dramatic peaks, may
result from the fact that the rest of the
distribution is relatively uniform with
variation counting for no more than 40%
of the total value recorded. Thus, for most
dyadic comparisons, their differences are
small. This general uniformity is apparently

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Evolution of Human Races

Vol. 19, No. 2

RZ
GENE FREQUENCIES

00 —.04 —

05-09 BYy WS ¢
IO —.44 NS 5
a8 78 SS

 

Fic. 7

’
’
4

7
7

7

157

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

   

    
   
   
   
   
     
 
   

      

158 Birdsell Social Biology
EURASIATIC
RANGE
o 84) 8
3 7 7
Z GENE Rz FREQUENCIES BY ISOLATES |.
x $ N = 28 °
i ATE Range = .00-.26 4
34 Mean = .065 3
= 2 $.D. = .061 2
2. V = 93.54
— ot 0
‘ -40 wo .60 70 . 90 00

Rz Gene Frequency

DIFFERENCES IN

lsolates

Pairs of Adjacent

-00 10 ‘ 30 .40

Rz Gene

 

Rz GENE FREQUENCIES

BETWEEN ADJACENT ISOLATES

50 .60 70 80 90 1.00
Frequency Differences

Fic. 8

enough to offset the disturbing effects and
the dramatic differences surrounding the
peaks. Another contributing factor in the
tribal distribution involves the fact that all
three peaks are isolated in marginal positions relative to the general geometry.
This factor reduces the number of dyadic
comparisons that they could influence. Had

they been embedded in a more central
tribal geometry it is safe to predict that
the relative scale value of R* would be
considerably lowered.

The fourth chromosomal arrangement,
R! (CDe) shows the highest frequency and
the next to the largest total range of frequencies. Because it has been excluded

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

from the three degrees of freedom, it is
dealt with last. The cline shown in Figure
9 is clearly under selective control with
a tendency for the lowest values to occur
in the south and west, while the highest
ones are concentrated in the north and east.
It is complementary in a general way to
the R? cline. However, the surface of the
R! cline contains many irregularities, including a sink defined by two tribal isolates
in the center of its distribution surrounded
on three sides by a rising escarpment three
isogenes in height. Immediately adjacent
to the east is a minor, single tribe peak.
In a variety of other locations, the compressed nature of the isogene indicates
relatively steep sloping surfaces for the
clinal topography. These features serve to
explain the statistical consequence of the
quantitative analysis of this chromosome.
Its relative scale value is the lowest of the
four genetic variants at this locus, 50.1%.
On the other hand, the cumulative sum of
the dyadic differences of the cline lie at
the outside edge of the random distribution, so that there are only four chances
in 1,000 that the real arrangement is of
chance structuring. Were it not for the
degrees of freedom involved, the cline for
R!? would be visually satisfactory in an
overall sense, and interesting in its details.

Errors in ascertainment have not been
important in producing those clines. In the
first place, these small, unique, and finite
populations are represented in the Bayes
method by considerably. tightened confidence limits. Again, many of the topographic features show serial concordance.
There tend to be neighborhood effects in
the terms of Cain and Currey (1963). This
is most evident in the cline for R®; but in
R? the northerly tribes are all depressed
in value, and the sinks within this region in
one instance are multitribal in makeup. In
the same fashion, in R! the high values for
the chromosomal frequency in the north

 

Evolution of Human Races

159

cover a good many tribes. The central sink
involves no less than three tribes. These
internal features suggest that while errors
of ascertainment of true chromosomal frequencies are present, they are relatively
unimportant.

SUMMARY

Data for the four chromosomal arrangements for the rhesus locus for 28 minimal
tribal isolates in Western Australia reveal
clinal topographies.

A quantitative method for the analysis
of such clines is given, with the cline in
nature positioned on a scale operationally
defined by the most random arrangement
of the data at one end and the most ideal
cline derived from the data at the other.
The relative scalar positions range from
50.1% for R} to 60.9% for R°. It is explained why actual natural clines will never
closely approximate the ideal cline, which
presumes long established and_ static
natural selection.

The four clines differ in character but
in common show that selection is the primary structuring force, that random genetic
drift operates, particularly in the chromosomes of lower frequency, and that together these processes override gene flow
which in these populations approximates
0.075 persons exchanged per generation.
In these populations evolution is predominantly Darwinian.

While the clines for R1 and R? are
primarily structured by selection, their general characteristics are complementary to
each other. In two areas, R? exceeds values
of 0.50 which approximates the world’s
maximum recorded frequency.

The cline for R® shows a central elongated peak rising out of a plateau of heightened frequencies. It appears to be the
coadaptive spread of a gene complex caught
in action, that is, an example of Sewall
Wright’s interdemic competition. Neither

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

160

R!
GENE FREQUENCIES
40~44
45 —49
50 —54
55 — 59
60-64
65 —69
70~74
75-79
80 —84

Ce 2 uN CR PERS o.0eee ee
SERRE
SSN III
ESS 555
RECO PIERO
SS pment g
am

Wie

Birdsell

Sox SG
RO eke

 

Fic. 9

Pr
SS)

Social Biology

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2 Evolution of
topographic features nor cultural behavior
explain the steep genetic escarpment to the
east of the peak, suggesting a need for more
complex evolutionary models.

The cline for R? shows three isolated,
single tribal peaks, each of which exceeds
the frequencies previously recorded for this
rare chromosome. This pattern is attributed
to random genetic drift, presumably operating through its founder-effect bottleneck,
in so recent a period in the past that gene
flow has had little time in which to depress
the high values of this chromosomal arrangement.

These Australian aboriginal populations
are ideally structured to further test the
shifting balance theory of evolution originated by Sewall Wright. At the rhesus
locus, as well as for other serological loci,
the visible features offer additional validation for the essential operation of evolution
as described in Wright’s construct, even
in areas of environmental uniformity.

CONCLUSIONS

This paper began as a discussion of
methods of analysis of race and some of
the problems such ventures pose. More than
twenty years ago this writer stated (1951)
that the methods of racial analysis then
used were bankrupt and needed drastic

Human Races

161

revision, At the present time it seems clear
that no such revision is possible, for the
very processes of race formation contain
indeterminacies as well as strong selective
thrusts. Neither of these are taken into
account by any present method of analysis,
even the most modern, nor is it likely that
they can be. Instead, it seems fair to propose that since microevolution is here revealed as proceeding at very rapid rates,
producing extremes in the fluctuations of
genetically simple characters, these mani
‘festations should be used to study evolu
tion itself, and the relatively sterile exercise
of classifying subspecies should give way to
that goal. After all, the classifications by
eye two centuries ago have been little improved today by the use of sophisticated
serology, multiple quantitative measurements, and the speed of the uncomplaining
computer. If major races can be convincingly identified by the uneducated eyes of
travelers and explorers, and further subdivisions do not yield to say scientific
method, the practice seems pointless.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Financial support for this project by the
National Science Foundation, the WennerGren Foundation for Anthropological Research, the Fulbright Exchange Program, and
the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation is
gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

ALPATOov, W. W. 1929. Biometrical studies on
variation and races of the honey bee (Apis
mellifica). Quart. Rev. Biol. 41:1-58.

Ammon, Otto. 1890, Anthropologische Untersuchungen der Wehrpflichtigen in Baden.
Samml. gemeinverst. wiss. Vortrage, near Folge,
Ser. V, Heft 707, p. 1-36.

BIRDsELL, JosEpH B. 1950. Some implications of
the genetical concept of race in terms of spatial
analysis, p. 259-314. In Origins and evolution
of man, Cold Spring Harbor symposium on
quantitative biology, Vol. 15. Biological LabSato Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, New

ork,

. 1951. The problem of the early peopling

of the Americas as viewed from Asia, p. 1-68a.

In Papers on the physical anthropology of the

American Indian. The Viking Fund, New York.

. 1953. Some environmental and cultural

 

 

factors influencing the structuring of Australian

eee populations. Amer. Natur. 87:171
207.

. 1957. Some population problems involving

Pleistocene man, p. 47-69. In Population

Studies, Animal Ecology, and Demography,

Cold Spring Harbor symposium on quantitative

biology, Vol. 22. Biological Laboratory, Cold

Spring Harbor, Long Island, New York.

. 1968. Some predictions for the Pleistocene

based upon equilibrium systems among recent

hunters, p. 229-240. In R. Lee and I. DeVore,

Man the hunter. Aldine, Chicago.

. A basic demographic unit. Current Anthropology, in press.

BrrpsEtt, Joseru B., and Samuet B. Brooks.
On the occurrence of unique, finite, small populations in nature. Ms.

BLUMENBACH, JOHANN FRiepricH. 1795. De Ge
 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

162 Birdsell

naris humani Varietate nativa. (Translation of
third, revised edition by Thomas Bendysshe.)

Brooxs, SAMUEL B., and JoszEPH B. BIRDSELL.
A comparison of methods for estimating confidence limits in gene populations. Ms.

Burron, CoMTe DE (George Louis Leckre). 1860.
A natural history. (Translated by William
Smallie. First editions began to appear in 1749.)

Cary, A. J., and J. D. Currey. 1963. Area effects
in Copaea, Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. London
(Series B) 246:1-81.

Coon, CarteTon S., STANLEY GARN, and JosEPH
B. Brirpsetr. 1950. Races. Charles C. Thomas,
Springfield, Il.

Crow, James F., and Motroo Krarura. 1970. An
introduction to population genetics theory.
Harper and Row, New York.

Drxon, Roranp B. 1923. The racial history of
man. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.

DoszHANSEY, T., and ©. PavLovsxy. 1957. An
experimental study of interaction between genetic drift and natural selection. Evolution 11:
311-319. ,

DoszHAnsky, T., and B. Spassky. 1962. Genetic
drift and natural! selection in experimental populations of Drosaphila pseudoubscura. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 48:148-156.

Fisner, R. A. 1937. The wave of advance of advantageous genes. Ann. Eugen. 7:355.

. 1950. Gene frequencies in a cline determined by selection and diffusion. Biometrics
6:353-361.

Giapwin, Harorp STERLING. 1947. Men out of
Asia. McGraw-Hill, New York.

HatpaneE, J. B. S. 1948. The theory of a cline.
J. Genet. 48:277-284.

Hotcate, P. 1964. Genotype frequencies in a section of a cline, Heredity 19:507-509.

Hooton, Ernest A. 1930. The Indians of Pecos
Pueblo. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

Huxtey, Jurran S. 1939. Clines: An auxiliary
method in taxonomy. Bijdr. Dierk. 27:491-520.

. 1943, Evolution. The modern synthesis.
Harper and Brothers, London.

Huxtey, THomas. 1865. On the methods and
results of ethnology. Fortnightly Review [in
“Lectures and Lay Sermons’.

Kant, IMMANUEL. 1775. Von den verschiedenen

 

 

 

Social Biology

Racen der Menschen. Zur Ankiindigung der Vor
lesungen der physischen Giographie in Sommer
lohre jahre 1775.

LIVINGSTONE, FRANK B. 1962. On the nonexistence
of human races (with comment by Theodosius
Dobzhansky). Curr. Anthrop. 3:279-281.

MacGowan, KENNETH, and JoserpH A. HESTER,
Jr. 1950. Early man in the New World. Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y.

Mayr, Ernst. 1965. Numerical phenetics and
taxonomic theory. System. Zool. 14:73-97.

ReEtTzrus, ANDERS. 1860. A glance at the present
state of ethnology, with reference to the form
of the skull. From translation in the British and
Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review 25:503514; 26:215-229.

RIPLEY, WmLL1AM Z. 1899, The races of Europe.
D. Appleton-Century, New York.

SALOMONSEN, F, 1933. Troglodytes-Studien. J.
Ornithol. 81:100.

Sorat, R. R., and P. H. A. SNeATH, 1963. The
principles of numerical taxonomy. Freeman,
San Francisco.

Taytor, T. GriFFITH. 1937. Environment, race
and migration. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

TINDALE, NorMAN B, 1940. Distribution of Australian aboriginal tribes: A field survey. Trans.
Roy. Soc. South Australia 64:140~231.

. 1941. Survey of the half-caste problem in

South Australia. Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. South

Australia 42:66-161.

1953. Tribal and intertribal marriage
among the Australian aborigines. Hum. Biol.
25:169-96.

Woo, T. L., and G. M. Morant. 1932. A preliminary classification of Asiatic races based on
cranial measurements. Biometrika 24:108-134.

Wricut, SEWALL. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian
populations, Genetics 16:97-159.

. 1959, Physiological genetics, ecology of

populations and natural selection, p. 429-475,

In J. Tax (ed.), Evolution after Darwin. Univ.

of Chicago Press, Chicago.

1964. Stochastic models in evolution,

p. 199-244. In John Garland (ed.), Stochastic

models in medicine and biology. Univ. of Wis
consin Press, Madison.

 

 

 

 
