Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Genetics: Today and tomorrow

Svetiland Vinokurova

To cite this article: Svetland Vinokurova (1970) Genetics: Today and tomorrow, Social Biology,
17:1, 54-56, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987842

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987842

 

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

 

Genetics: Today and Tomorrow*

Svetland Vinokurova

Man is nature’s most valuable creation,
but he is also her greatest paradox. Having
become master of his environment, he is
capable of transforming continents and
creating new seas, but thus far he has been
incapable of controlling the development of
his own organism.

However, the past decades have been
marked by stunning discoveries. The foundations of heredity on the molecular level, the
physical and chemical nature of the gene,
and the genetic code in which nature has
stored hereditary information have all been
uncovered. Moreover, scientists recently
succeeded in synthesizing a gene in artificial conditions and in reproducing viral
particles according to a live model.

In addition, a number of ways of dealing
with defective human genes are being developed, including the use of antimutagens.
A group of substances capable of suppressing
the organism’s natural mutation has already been discovered. Research at the
General Genetics Institute of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, for instance, has
shown beta-carotene, ionol and cachetenes
possess this capacity. Large quantities of

* Courtesy of the Novosti Press Agency (APN),
Moscow.

beta-carotene are found in carrots, tomatoes
and peaches. Using them in his food, man,
without realizing it, introduces into his
organism the substances that defend him
against spontaneous mutation. Tea is rich
In ionols, and some wines and fruit-peels are
rich in cachetenes. The discovery of these
substances makes the elaboration of certain
formulas for enriching human food with
them a reality.

In addition, we may be able to successfully increase the operation of damage reduction systems in the cell. For almost forty
years geneticists thought that every effective impact upon the gene by even the
smallest particle of radiant energy was
bound to kill the gene or cause mutations.
There was even a “target theory”? which
formulated this rigid rule in mathematical
language. Investigations in recent years
have shown the cell to be capable of healing
itself of the ‘‘wounds” inflicted upon it by
chemical agents or radiation. Four enzymes
capable of removing some damages in
genes have now been discovered. There
must be many of these enzymes. Scientists
are hopeful that these enzymes may make
possible the regulation of the outcome of
mutations,

54

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vo). 17, No. 1

The concept of mutation is well known,
not only by scientists but also by laymen
not versed in the biological sciences. Mutation means changes in the tiniest units of
heredity, genes, which precede the birth of
any new character. In nature, the usefulness
of the new is appraised by a strict judge—
natural selection. However, for man, society
often mediates the stringent effects of
natural selection. As a result, many deleterious mutations are preserved and passed
on to coming generations. The relaying of
defective genes preserves the possibility of
the development of hereditary diseases,
Each one of us carries some five to ten of
these genes in a latent state. About 4% of all
infants are born burdened with the effects
of hereditary disorders, even though their
parents may be perfectly healthy. In them,
the changes in the genes may be hidden and
not manifested in any way. In the Soviet
Union, there are special consulting centers
which warn parents about the possible appearance of hereditary disorders in their
children, particularly in cases of marriages
of relatives in whom identical genes may
carry a defect. The swift development of
molecular and general genetics gives us
hope of lifting the heavy genetic burden
upon people’s lives, and this may be the
greatest responsibility of modern science to
the mankind of today and of the future.

Not long ago, scientists at the General
Genetics Institute headed by Nikolai Dubinin performed research which disproved a
long-established mutational theory. They
found that mutation did not take place
instantaneously, but could exist ‘‘potentially” for weeks and even months after the
genes had been affected. In other words,
between the moment the gene is acted upon
and the appearance of mutations there is a
whole chain of events still unknown. This
discovery provides hope that the initial
period of mutations can be fully reversed.

“In my opinion,” says Dubinin, ‘‘the
most radical way [to correct mutations] is

 

Brief Reports 55

that of molecular surgery which in the
future will give us the chance of penetrating
into the defective gene and mending the
mistake in it or introducing artificially produced normal genes into the cell (genotherapy).”

There is a great future in research connected with the control of gene activity.
Scientists must ultimately put under their
control the individual development and vital
activity of the cell. This will decide the outcome of the struggle against viral infections,
and against cancer, the evil of our century.
It becomes more and more evident that the
“‘mad” cancer cells are also a result of mutations, changes in the heredity apparatus of
the cell, Success in this field will also promote the solution of the problem of incompatibility which frustrates the most brilliant
operations for the transplantation of organs.

Modern genetics has turned into a ramified science, vitally involved in the problems
of medicine and farming. Bionics draws its
models from the structure and operation of
the heredity apparatus. Physics, chemistry,
and mathematics are on the threshold of
many discoveries connected with heredity
phenomena. However, the greater the
knowledge accumulated, the more boundless
seems to be the scope of what we do not
know and the more branchings appear on
the road. On the other hand, the more
powerful science becomes, the greater is its
duty to mankind. The health of man in our
time, the reserves of man in the future, the
degree to which he influences the earth’s
entire organic system and food sources depend on the solution of many problems of
genetics.

By the year 2000 the world population is
expected to have increased to six or seven
billion people. Intensification of farming
will have to serve as the basis of enlarging
our food resources. But will there be enough
resources on the earth to meet the growing
needs of the human race? As a start on the
problem, new methods of genetics evolved in

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

56 Brief Reports

laboratories have taught us to control
heterosis—the creation of hybrids of higher
productivity and vitality. Heterosis has
been successful in many crops: maize,
tomatoes, onions, millet, rye, cucumbers,
buckwheat, and others.

Having enlisted the help of chemistry,
geneticists made chromosomes—the heredity apparatus of the cell—divide without
allowing the cell itself to divide. In this way
they could produce a doubled, quadrupled
and many-fold multiplied set of chromosomes, This phenomenon—polyploidy—is
no rarity in nature. Wheat, potatoes, pineapples, cherries, apples, and lemons, all of
which form a staple part of the human diet,
are but a few of the polyploids we use. Scientists succeeded in reproducing polyploidy artificially. For instance, triploid
varieties of sugar beet containing 25% more
sugar than ordinary varieties were evolved
in the Soviet Union. Polyploid varieties of
clover, rye, and grapes are being sown. Hybrids of maize and vegetables show yields
increased up to 50%. The creation of a
hybrid wheat promises a revolution in grain
production, with yields from 50 to 100%
higher than before. New non-lodging and
disease-resistant varieties have been evolved
with the aid of genetics. And this list is
bound to grow immeasurably.

Scientists still have no precise information on the changes in the gene structure
that lead to the birth of a wanted character.
Irradiation and chemistry help them to
solve but a part of the problem—to obtain
organisms with various mutations, both
valuable and harmful ones. This is followed
by the selection of what is useful and, if cer
Social Biology

tain properties of two forms have to be combined, there comes crossing.

Heterosis is being applied to livestock
breeding. Livestock farming all over the
world is changing to the production of meat
that is rich in proteins, but not in fat.

But the significance of genetics in the
struggle for world food resources does not
come to this alone. It is the problem of
artificial protein synthesis and photosynthesis that must now be solved.

“This is where we are on the threshold of
decisive events,’’ says Nikolai Dubinin. “‘A
knowledge of the protein synthesis mechanism will allow us to take any quantities of
food and industrial raw materials, proteins,
hormones, enzymes and antibodies and to
change their properties in any wanted
direction.”” While man will never give up
natural foodstuffs, he will gain an inexhaustible supply of foodstuffs, some of which may
be irreproducible in nature, and, most important, medicinal agents. As a simple
example, the solution of photosynthesis
mysteries would enable him to produce unlimited amounts of sugar from water and
carbonic acid gas.

In the coming thirty years, man will start
controlling nature on a qualitatively new
level. Having learned to enrich nature, and
not just to restore its losses, he will take
from it a hundredfold more than he takes
now and make it follow the evolution rate he
wants it to follow. In the struggle against
disease, man should be able to take advantage of the great possibilities latent in his
own organism and also learn to control
heredity. But will amyone object to man
remaining outwardly as we are used to
seeing him?

 
