Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Premarital childbearing in northwest Kenya:
Challenging the concept of illegitimacy

Bettina Shell-Duncan & Matthew Wimmer

To cite this article: Bettina Shell#Duncan & Matthew Wimmer (1999) Premarital childbearing
in northwest Kenya: Challenging the concept of illegitimacy, Social Biology, 46:1-2, 47-61, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1999.9988987

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9988987

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 54
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Premarital Childbearing in Northwest Kenya:
Challenging the Concept of Illegitimacy

 

Bettina Shell-Duncan and Matthew Wimmer

Department of Anthropology
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington 98195-3100

ABSTRACT: A number of African countries, including Kenya, have experienced a marked rise in
births among unmarried women. In Western countries, reproduction outside of marriage is assumed to be illegitimate and a social problem. One hypothesis used to explain the increasing incidence of premarital fertility in Africa is a breakdown of traditional social controls by the extended family over the sexual behavior of adolescents. A competing hypothesis suggests that
unmarried women use sexual relations to achieve goals such as marriage. Among Turkana pastoralists of northwest Kenya, we find a pattern of premarital birth that fits either hypothesis only
loosely. Premarital fertility among the Turkana is both widespread and culturally acceptable,
with over 30 per cent of women having at least one child prior to marriage. Although women
with premarital births initiate childbearing on average one year earlier than women with only
marital births, women’s marital status does not influence the length of the interval between first
and second births. Marriage among the Turkana is not a social trigger for the onset and continuation of reproduction or a means to legitimate reproduction. Marital status of the parents simply
determines the custody of a child. In a premarital birth, the father pays a set fee to the mother’s
family, and the custody of the child remains permanently with the mother’s family. If the parents
later marry, the father must purchase custody of the child by another fee at that time. Since the
Turkana have experienced few effects of modernization, the existence of such a practice suggests
that cultural factors must be taken into account before assessing premarital fertility in Africa as
a social problem.

The topic of nuptiality in sub-Saharan broadly, from 15 to 21 years of age (KaufAfrica has recently gained increasing atten- man et al., 1987). Additionally, Bledsoe
tion among demographers as assumptions and Pison (1994, p. 4) have drawn attention
about the pattern of marriage, and its rela- _ to the fact that marriage “‘is only tenuously
tionship to childbearing, become challenged. connected to childbearing in many African
For decades, marriage in sub-Saharan Africa countries.” At the same time, analyses of
was considered to be an “early and univer- World Fertility Survey (WFS) and Demosal” social institution (van de Walle, 1968), graphic and Health Survey (DHS) data
and marriage was considered to be the cru- demonstrate that, particularly in urban arcial event for gauging the onset of child- eas, the age at first marriage is rising, while
bearing (Bledsoe and Pison, 1994). More the age of onset of reproduction remains
recently, these notions have been identified _ relatively stable (Meekers, 1994a; Cochranne
as overgeneralizations. Data reveal that and Farid, 1989). Consequently, premarital
nuptiality patterns are more accurately childbearing is becoming increasingly comcharacterized as heterogeneous, with the mon (Bledsoe and Cohen, 1993; Meekers,
average age at first marriage ranging 1994a).

47

 
48 Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

A growing body of literature devoted
to documenting the prevalence and determinants of premarital childbearing in
sub-Saharan Africa draws from the model
of Western industrialized nations in labeling this phenomenon a “social problem”
(Gyepi-Garbrah, 1985; Adegbola, 1987;
Bledsoe and Cohen; Meekers, 1994b).
Reproduction outside of marriage is as
..sumed to be “illegitimate,” and the negaStive social and health consequences are
«stressed (Gyepi-Garbrah, 1985; Adeggbola, 1987). To explain the increase in
Spremarital childbearing in sub-Saharan
AAfrica, Cherlin and Riley (1986) have
proposed two opposing (though not nec@essarily contradictory) causal framecoworks: (1) “social disorganization” and
(2) “rational adaptation.”
‘Ss The social disorganization argument is
an extension of Caldwell’s (1982) theory
.Lof fertility transition, emphasizing the ef“fect of modernization in the erosion of
Ctraditional parental and community con‘ztrol over adolescent sexuality. According
Sto this hypothesis, urbanization, education, Westernization, and structural eco“Shomic changes result in a breakdown of
“traditional means of social control over
adolescent sexual behavior and socializaStion. As disparities in educational and
Feconomic opportunities increase between
Aurban and rural communities, a growing
number of adolescents migrate to urban
areas for schooling or employment opportunities and are thus separated from
the social control of their kingroup
(Lesthaeghe, 1980, 1989). Urbanization
and education are also believed to contribute to the erosion of traditional moral
codes by exposing adolescents to Western
values about sex, sexual autonomy, and
conjugal life (Caldwell, 1982; Nichols et
al., 1986; Worthman and Whiting, 1989;

Social Biology

Lesthaeghe, 1989). In this context, Cherlin and Riley (1986) propose that adolescent sexual activity occurs because of opportunity and impulse, and without the
intent to achieve any particular goal.
Pregnancy is neither planned nor desired.

An alternative perspective, known as
“rational adaptation,” argues that unmarried adolescent females use sexuality and
pregnancy as a rational or strategic way
to achieve financial, career, and social
goals. Cherlin and Riley (1986) distinguish these women in two ways: (1) those
for whom sexual activity is a rational
choice, but who do not intend to become
pregnant; and (2) those for whom pregnancy in and of itself is a rational strategy. Women in the first group may enter a
sexual relationship with an older man, or
“sugar daddy,” to obtain money for school
fees or other expenses (Gage and Bledsoe,
1994; Dinan, 1983; Calves, 1997) or to
obtain employment or job advancements
(Bledsoe, 1980; Mann, 1985). Women in
the second group may enter a sexual relationship for similar reasons, but also intend to become pregnant with the hope of
facilitating marriage, creating emotional
or obligational ties to a man, or improving
status or marriage prospects by proving
fertility (Cherlin and Riley, 1986; Meekers, 1994a; Calves, 1997).

Both the social disorganization and rational adaptation models rest upon the assumption that the institution of marriage
legitimates sexual relations and reproduction, and that women who become pregnant before marriage, either wittingly or
unwittingly, are defying a social norm.
This assumption, however, does not hold
true for all societies throughout subSaharan Africa. For example, Meekers
(1994a) reports that among the Bagenda
of Uganda, virginity at marriage is not

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

highly valued, and parents actually encourage premarital sexual relations by
building a separate house for sexually active adolescents. Similarly, the Rendille
pastoralists of northern Kenya encourage
sexual activity among unmarried adolescents, viewing it as an opportunity to
practice and perfect the traditional family
planning method, withdrawal (Muruli et
al., 1998). By contrast, other groups are
known to have strong prohibitions against
premarital sexual activity and childbearing. Clearly, discerning whether premarital sexuality and/or childbearing constitutes a violation of social norms requires
an understanding of the cultural context
in which it occurs.

The purpose of this study is to document the level and pattern of premarital
fertility in a rural Kenyan community and
to evaluate the cultural context surrounding this phenomenon. Specifically, we hypothesize that premarital childbearing is
discouraged because paternal support
would not be assured. Additionally, because polygyny is practiced in this society, we assume that marriage among
women is early and universal and that
premarital pregnancies among young
teenage women arise from a breakdown
of control over adolescent sexuality. Consequently, we hypothesize that women
with premarital pregnancies do not marry
at later ages, but initiate reproduction earlier, and consequently have higher levels
of fertility.

SOCIAL DISORGANIZATION VS.
RATIONAL ADAPTATION:
PREVIOUS RESEARCH

To date, the few studies that explore
the explanatory power of the social disorganization and rational adaptation hy
 

Premarital Childbearing

 

49

potheses have been limited by their focus
on national or supranational level statistics. In the absence of information on ethnicity and cultural values, it is impossible
to evaluate social norms regarding premarital childbearing, and only indirect inferences can be drawn. Adegbola (1987)
was the first to examine premarital fertility in sub-Saharan Africa using data from
the Nigerian Fertility Survey. Variables
relating to urbanization were found to be
positively associated with an increased
percentage of women reporting premarital fertility, while the per cent practicing
traditional religion was negatively associated with the same dependent variable.
These findings were interpreted as supporting a version of the “social disorganization” hypothesis, which argues that
Westernization results in the breakdown
of traditional institutions.

In Meekers’ (1994) examination of
DHS data from seven sub-Saharan countries, the findings that premarital childbearing is more common among literate
than illiterate women and that, on average,
literate women become sexually active and
marry at a later age are interpreted as support for the rational adaptation hypothesis.
However, the survey data also reveal a
high incidence of induced abortion and
unwanted premarital pregnancy, suggesting that the social disorganization hypothesis cannot be fully excluded. Consequently, Meekers (1994a, p. 57) concludes
that “only scattered support exists for each
of these hypotheses, and there is no information on the relative importance of each
type of behavior in different socioeconomic and cultural groups.”

Calves (1997) has also attempted to
test the relative validity for each explanatory framework for premarital fertility for
Cameroon. Recognizing the limitations

 
50 Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

of large-scale survey data that lack information on motivations, Calves supplemented the Cameroon DHS (CDHS) with
qualitative data from focus group discussions among adolescents and parents of
adolescents. However, because CDHS did
not include information about ethnicity,
and focus group discussions were conducted only in the city of Yaounde, inferin ences about the ethnic differences in the
= social context of premarital childbearing
“are limited. This study does, however,
S provide powerful insight to the social
© context and motivations surrounding preA marital childbearing in Yaounde.
cc Results from this study indicate that
oo the current pattern of adolescent fertility
cis partially explained by the breakdown
~ of social control of the elders over adoralescent sexuality, as adolescents who live
Soaway from their parents are more likely
‘Sto be sexually active (Calves, 1997).
a However, focus group discussions among
= adolescents from various socioeconomic
+= subgroups demonstrate that the rational
D adaptation model also applies. Across all
‘Seconomic subgroups, sexual behavior
“was reported as used for economic gain
as well as for networking to meet a
3 . . ;
© spouse. Premarital childbearing was
S largely unwanted among younger adoles§ cents, while it was reported that older
& adolescents choose to have a child prior
to marriage to provide security for their
future, prove their fertility, and create financial and emotional ties to a man
(Calves, 1997).

These studies demonstrate that while
the social disorganization and rationalchoice explanatory frameworks are mutually exclusive for individual cases, both
phenomena may apply to individuals at
different stages in their lives or to different subgroups of the population. More
 

Social Biology

over, distinguishing the two explanatory
models requires that the cultural norms
regarding premarital sexuality and childbearing are understood and that individual motivations are evaluated within their
specific sociocultural context.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
STUDY POPULATION: THE TURKANA

The Turkana are a tribe of traditional
nomadic pastoralists who inhabit the
harsh semidesert region of northwest
Kenya. This study concentrated upon the
Ngisonyoka, one of nineteen territorial
subsections of the Turkana, numbering
approximately 10,000 individuals. They
are located in a 9,000 km® territory of
Turkana District that is roughly bound by
the Turkwel and Kerio rivers and the
southern border of the district (Figure 1).
This area is one of the harshest and least
productive regions of East Africa, characterized by extreme heat and wind, low
and unpredictable rainfall with annual accumulations typically under 300 mm per
year, and scattered, patchy resources.
They exploit this region by herding mixed
stock including camels, cattle, goats,
sheep, and donkeys and are entirely dependent upon their herds for subsistence,
either directly from animal products of
milk, blood, meat, and fat, or indirectly by
exchanging animals for farm goods such
as maizemeal, tea, and sugar.

The Turkana are an ancephalous society, organized by kin groups with patrilocal residence and patrilineal descent.
Membership in a patrilineage determines
social identity in terms of affiliation with
one of more than 25 brands (emechar/
ngimacherin) which are tribal subdivisions with distinct customs, rules, and
Vol. 46, No. 1-2 Premarital Childbearing 51

ateau

ws, Veleki's
2.-Nolicane

© Lokichar
3
or?

7
wal! s

©\© Kaputir

G
a
L
6
aad

Katine

7 kori®
oKori
Me pw

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

kilometers

20 40 aee

 

Fic. 1.—Map of south Turkana.

laws (Barrett, 1987). The Turkana live in awi typically include a head herd-owner,
polygynous family units, know as ngawei his wives, their sons and unmarried
(s., awi), which usually range in size daughters, and possibly other extended
from ten to fifty persons. Members of an _ relatives such as widowed parents.

 

 

 
52 Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

The Turkana are highly mobile, moving approximately once every three
weeks, driven by the needs of their herd
animals. To accommodate the different
foraging and watering needs of their different species of livestock, the Turkana
have developed complex herding strategies involving high mobility and herd fission and fusion based on species and production (McCabe et al., 1988). In the wet

= season all the animals can be congregated
‘because of the proximity of water and
2 grazing areas. In the dry season, the herds
Obreak apart by species and age and are
Ataken to various locations to meet their
eneeds. For example, camels need to be
cowatered only once every three days, so
cothey can be taken to distant desert locations. Cattle, however, need to be watered
adaily, so they are grazed in the limited
comountain regions which have closer ac“Scess to water holes.
Maintaining large herds of mixed
© species is extremely labor-intensive. It in= volves not only travel over long distances
©in search of adequate grazing areas, but
‘Ealso watering the animals, work that is
—done by adolescent girls and young
women. Also, women, assisted by chil3 . .
-Odren, are responsible for laborious tasks
Sincluding fetching water for their family,
collecting firewood, building huts, and
A milking animals twice daily. Children are
also highly valued for their assistance in
herding animals. Very small children (age
five or six) are responsible for tending
herds of baby goats and sheep. Preadolescents and early teens are responsible for herds of goats and sheep that often number in the hundreds. Older teens
and adults typically divide the responsibility of herding the cattle and camels.

Because of the Turkana’s reliance on

livestock for subsistence, the demography

f Mi

rsity

Social Biology

of livestock and humans is closely linked.
In the wet season when forage and water
are available in sufficient quantities, families and their herds congregate in neighborhoods or grazing associations called
adakars. {n the dry season, as herds disperse and split apart, homesteads dissociate
and eventually break into “satellite” camps.
As the families and their livestock migrate
and divide, household composition changes.
Having a fluid, flexible household composition is Critical because of the need to balance the number of food-producing livestock and the number of people required
for efficient herd management. In order to
adjust to changes in labor demands or
food supplies, animals may be exchanged
between households. However, more commonly, children are transferred between
households to accommodate changing labor needs and resource availability (ShellDuncan, 1994). Because of the labor intensive nature of herding, and because
children contribute significantly to labor,
the demand for children is very high.

DATA

Data were collected in 1990 and 1991
over the course of an 18-month field
study of sociocultural and biological determinants of maternal and child health
among the Turkana. Households (ngawei)
from the Ngisonyoka territorial subsection were randomly selected, and all
women ages 15 and over were identified
to be interviewed and to complete a questionnaire regarding marital status, completed fertility, child mortality, household
composition, and child fostering. Dates
of vital events were determined through
the use of a local event history calendar
established by Little and Leslie (1990).
Because the Turkana name wet and dry
seasons in each year, it is possible to estiDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

mate dates of vital events with a degree
of precision not normally possible in
nonliterate populations lacking vital registration systems. These data do, however, suffer from a number of potential
sources of bias. The number of children
in the sample is most certainly an underenumeration of children born to the
women interviewed. This underenumeration is due, in part, to recall error, particularly by older informants. Quite often
one or several children are “forgotten,”
particularly those who died at an early
age. The Turkana also are quite reluctant
to mention children who have died because of the painful nature of the subject.
If children born outside of marriage are at
an elevated risk of mortality, perhaps because of being firstborn or because of
suffering from lack of paternal support,
they would be underenumerated relative
to marital births. Complete reproductive
histories were collected from a total of
358 women, and data on 343 women who
had ever given birth were analyzed for
this study. Differences in age-specific fertility rates of women with at least one
premarital birth versus those with only
marital births were compared using chisquare analysis.

Ethnographic information was obtained through extensive participant observation over the course of fieldwork.
Additionally, in-depth interviews were
conducted with key informants, and focus group discussions were conducted on
gender-separated groups of adolescents,
young adults married less than ten years,
and elders. Topics that were raised in focus group discussions include (1) attitudes toward premarital sexual activity,
(2) attitudes toward premarital pregnancy,
(3) male responsibility for premarital
pregnancy, (4) rights and responsibilities

Premarital Childbearing

53

of parents and kin for a child born prior
to marriage, and (5) factors considered in
negotiating marriage arrangements. The
goal of these interviews and focus group
discussions was to obtain information
about perceptions and viewpoints on premarital childbearing across generations
and by gender and to gain insights as to if
and when premarital childbearing is considered an individual or social problem.

RESULTS
MARRIAGE AMONG THE TURKANA

Defining whether children are born
within marriage requires understanding
what is meant by “marriage” among the
Turkana. As is typically found in African
societies, marriage among the Turkana is
a process, rather than a discrete event
marked by a single ceremony. An unmarried woman is known as an apese (literally, “girl”), and when she is approaching
a marriageable age, she is visually distinct. As a display of her family’s wealth
she will wear as many beaded necklaces
(ngakoromwa) as the family can afford to
provide. In addition, she will wear distinct skins and will often accentuate her
appearance by smearing her skins, beads,
and hair with fat mixed with red ochre
(emunyen). A married woman is referred
to as aberu (pl., ngaberu), and wears distinctly different jewelry and skins. For
example, the number of beaded necklaces
are reduced, and she wears a brass or aluminum neck ring (alagama) which denotes her married status. In addition, the
design and animal source of her skins
(gazelle, calf, sheep, etc.) are prescribed
by the brand of her husband. A third category is apese ngabus, which literally
means “girl of the skins.” This title is

 
 

54 Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

given to an unmarried woman who has
borne a child. Even though she is unmarried and lives with her father’s family, she
wears the skins of a married woman,
builds her own hut, and is allotted milking
animals for herself and her dependent(s).
The process of marriage among the
Turkana is initiated by negotiations about
bridewealth which 1s paid in animal stock.
_, Unlike some East African pastoralists, the
= Turkana do not have a fixed bridewealth.
‘\ The payment varies widely, depending on
2 the wealth of the families involved.
® Turkana bridewealth can be as much as
A 100 to 200 small stock and 65 to 100 large
oo stock, among the highest of any East
African pastoral society (Galvin, 1985).
The bridewealth payments can be paid
slowly over a long period of time, extending up to twenty or more years. Once
bridewealth has been agreed upon, and an
initial payment (usually one-half of the animals) has been received by the woman’s
family, the woman typically leaves her father’s awi and begins to reside with her
husband. Although the residence change is
acceptable and expected, the actual
™— process of transfer is shrouded by an at2 mosphere of covertness. Members of the
2 husband’s family sneak into the bride’s
é awi in the middle of the night to “kidnap”
E the bride and bring her to the husband’s
& awi. The following morning a nitual
known as akinyonyo is performed, which
involves removing the bride’s skins and
beads of a girl and replacing them with
those of a married woman. The bride will
reside with the senior wife of her husband
or, if she is the first wife, with her husband’s mother until she gives birth to her
first child, at which time she will make her
own hut and be allocated her own animals.
The marriage process is not considered
complete until all bridewealth animals

y [University of Michigan] at 13:48 0

Social Biology

have been paid. The completion of payments is marked by a ceremony highlighted by the killing of an ox.

A survey of 87 post-reproductive women
showed that the interval between the onset
of cohabitation and killing the ox can
range from 1 month to 28 years, and in a
small number of cases bridewealth payments were never completed. Clearly, the
marriage process among the Turkana is
prolonged, and estimates of the level of
premarital childbearing depend on how
marriage is defined. For the purpose of
this study, the onset of marriage was defined as the date of initiation of cohabitation. Selection of this event to define marriage is justified by two factors: (1) When
asked to identify women as married or unmarried and to provide a date of marriage,
the Turkana emphasize initiation of payments and change of residence. (2) Initial
animal payments and residence change
demark Turkana classifications of unmarried girls (apese) and married women
(aberu).

MARRIAGE PATTERN AND PREMARITAL
CHILDBEARING

Using date of cohabitation to define
the onset of marriage, information on premarital childbearing was obtained
through the collection of reproductive
histories from 343 women in the nomadic
sector of the Turkana population. Our
data confirm that the Turkana are highly
polygynous with 55.2 per cent of married
females sampled living in polygynous
unions. By comparison, Kaufman and
colleagues (1987) report that the range in
proportion of women living in polygynous unions in sub-Saharan Africa ranges
from 53.8 per cent (Congo) to 10.2 per
cent (Kinshasa).
Vol. 46, No. 1-2

It has long been asserted that in
polygynous societies the demand for
wives is high and promotes a pattern of
early and universal marriage for women
(Bledsoe and Pison, 1994; Goldman and
Pebley, 1989; Ezeh, 1997). By contrast,
marriage among the Turkana is neither
early nor universal. Among ever-married
women, the mean age of marriage is

20.8 years, placing them at the upper
Send of the range of variation in average
sage at marriage in sub-Saharan African
"Epopulations (Kaufman et al., 1987). An
Sanalysis of DHS data from seven African
countries revealed that the per cent of
Swomen with at least one premarital birth
Sranges from 2.6 per cent to 20.3 per cent
“(Table 1), with Kenya displaying the
Shighest rate of premarital childbearing
‘S(Meekers, 1994a).
= In Turkana, a region not included in the
“Kenyan DHS survey, this pattern is even
+more pronounced: Over 30 per cent of all
ssurveyed women had their first birth prior
“Zto marriage, and quite notably, a significant proportion of higher order births are
= premarital as well. This finding prompts
‘>the question whether women who have
~ypremarital births are initiating childbearing
Sat earlier ages and/or whether they are deStaying marriage. The overall mean age at
Sfirst birth among women in this survey
Ais 20.1 years old (Figure 2), while on
average, unmarried women initiate childbearing 1.05 years before married women
(p < 0.01).

Examination of these data across cohorts indicates no secular trend in age at
first birth. The mean age of marriage of
ever-married women is 20.8 years (Figure
3). Controlling for age, we found that
married women who have had at least
one premarital birth marry on average
3.28 years later than women with only

Universit

b

 

Premarital Childbearing 55

marital births (p < 0.01). It is noteworthy, however, that of women sampled
who had at least one nonmarital birth, 17
per cent were currently unmarried, with
ages ranging from 17 to 42 years, and
that many have more than one birth outside of marriage. The Turkana indicate
that some women may never marry, particularly if their fathers are wealthy herdowners and no potential husband can
meet the family demand of a high bridewealth. Because of the labor-intensive
nature of herding, a wealthy herdowner
may attach more value to increasing his
family size, and potential labor pool, than
to increasing herd size through bridewealth payments. The sample size of this
study is too small to shed light on this
phenomenon.

Estimates of age-specific fertility
(Table 2) reveal small but significant differences in fertility patterns and levels of
women who initiate childbearing prior to
marriage as compared to those with only
marital births. In particular, the early
segment of the reproductive period (ages
15-19) reveals dramatically higher agespecific fertility rates for women with
premarital births. This process culminates in a higher total fertility rate for
women with premarital births, who
achieve 21 per cent higher fertility than
their counterparts. The underlying determinants of this fertility differential are
that women with premarital births initiate childbearing a full year earlier than
women with only marital births and that
marital status at first birth does not influence the length of the interval between
first and second births, a mean birth interval of 2.54 years. Consequently, marriage among the Turkana is not a social
“trigger” for the onset or continuation of
childbearing.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

56 Shell-Duncan and Wimmer Social Biology
TABLE 1
PER CENT OF RESPONDENTS WHO Hap FirsT BIRTHS BEFORE MARRIAGE
Country Per Cent
Berunidl «ne cc pee Hd we oe ae ERT peed WE HEH epee me me ed HS been Deed HE BS 2.6
Ghana ... ce cee cece ee eee eee eee tee cece enna eee ne eseeeeeees 8.2
ROWS. sc sss oo ee Oe 0s OO Re EE Oe Oe 20.3
Liberia... 0. ee ccc ee eee e cece nce eee nes aceceveseucs 17.6
Mall... ccc cc ccc cee cc cee ec e eee ete e nee ee weet et ee ne ereeeeeeres 9.7
TGE6 onc neue ou seen ses we we oe sees hE hd Se eee eee ee ee eed dd be 15.1
ZiMbaDwe 2... ccc ccc cc ccc cece eet cere eee e teen ence cece eseneneneecreees 13.0
TURAN ow ce ce ee racer nwen cans se biegeas ¥O04 pe ave aeeeens cine ee paeiedd ty 31.4

Source Demographic and Health Surveys, 1986-89, reported by Meekers, 1994

50

40

30

Mean Age at Marriage

20

10

25-29
20-24

35-39
30-34

Age Category

15-19

4 Women with no premarital births

40-44

 

45-49 55-60

50-54 60+

e Women with at least one premarital birth

Fic. 2.-Mean age at marriage among women who have had at least one premarital birth versus women

with only marital births.

SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT OF
LEGITIMATE REPRODUCTION AMONG
THE TURKANA

Given that such a high proportion of
births occur prior to marriage, it is important to consider what is the legitimate
context of childbearing among _ the
Turkana. For demographic purposes, a legitimate child is typically defined as one
who was conceived or born in an extant

legal union (Adegbola, 1987; Bledsoe
and Pison, 1994). By this definition, marriage legitimates sexual relations and reproduction, and premarital childbearing is
viewed as a violation of social norms.
The situation in Turkana is strikingly
different. Premarital childbearing is not
only acceptable, but often encouraged by
family members. Furthermore, the
process of bridewealth negotiations need
not be started for a man to have approved

 
 

n] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Mean Age at First Birth

35-39
30-34

15-19 25-29
20-24

4 Women with no premarital births

with only marital births.

Premarital Childbearing

 

40-44
Age Category

57

¢

45-49
50-54

55-60
60+

e Women with at least one premarital birth

Fic. 3.—Mean age at first birth among women who have had at least one premarital birth versus women

 

o
op
a
4
> TABLE 2
5 FERTILITY HISTORIES FOR WOMEN (POST-REPRODUCTIVE AND REPRODUCTIVE) WITH ONLY MARITAL BIRTHS
> VERSUS WOMEN WITH AT LEAST ONE PREMARITAL BIRTH
~
o MARITAL PREMARITAL
S AGE Person- PersonINTERVAL years Births ASFa years Births ASF x?
Bis-19 ie 1,010 95 94.06 424 92 216.98  38.71*
20-24 Mi nECRSEAR 960 283 294.79 399 104 260.65 1.45
25-29 ee 844 235 302.13 324 127 391.97 8.18*
330-34 eesesessestessecseeeceeseetens 585 165 282.05 234 79 337.61 2.2)
35-39 euseueeneesecsnencaneeceneenees 445 88 197.75 176 35 198.86 0.05
ADAG oo eecccsccsscreensceensenees 336 25 74.41 118 10 84.75 0.03
<)| 230 7 30.44 81 4 49.38 0.20
0): 918 1,275.63 451 1,540.2 16.94*
TFR = 6.38 TFR = 7.70

SASF = Age-Specific Fertility = Births/Person-years < 1,000
bn < 001.

or “legitimate” sexual relations with an
unmarried woman. Consent of the

woman’s family depends on their perception of the man’s ability to provide animals, labor, and political support from his
family. In many ways, he is evaluated as

a potential husband. However, if he
chooses not to marry the woman, no ill
feelings result. Obtaining consent of the
woman’s family is, however, very important, and women who are suspected of
having sexual relations with a man who

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

58

does not meet with the family’s approval
are severely punished, often by being
beaten. One key informant who became
pregnant by a man who did not meet with
her family’s approval was beaten so severely that she miscarried.

The birth of a child often accelerates
bridewealth negotiations or payments, but
pregnancy does not mandate marriage. If
a child is born before marriage, a man
must pay a fee called ekichul, which is a
fixed fee of 30 animals (20 goats or sheep
and 10 cows or camel) for the first child
and 11 animals (10 small stock and 1 cow
or camel) for each subsequent child. After the payment of this fee, the father no
longer has any responsibilities for or
rights to the child. Custody of the child is
held by the maternal grandparents.

When an unmarried mother eventually
marries, custody of any children born
prior to marriage remains with the maternal grandparents. The mother moves to
her husband’s awi without these children.
If a woman marries the father of any of
her children born prior to marriage, he
may obtain custody of the children by
“purchasing” them from his father-in-law
with payments that are added on to the
bridewealth. These payments are separate
from the earlier-paid ekichul. The maternal grandparents have the right to refuse
a son-in-law’s request to purchase his
children if they wish to retain custody.
They often do refuse because the elderly
are dependent upon young children for
assistance with domestic activities such
as fetching water and firewood. In addition, because of the labor-intensive nature
of herding, the demand for children is
very high.

Consequently, nonmarital childbearing
is an important source of “foster children,” that is, children residing with a

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

Social Biology

caretaker other than the biological
mother. An earlier study found that approximately 17 per cent of all Turkana
children live as foster children (ShellDuncan, 1994). Furthermore, children
born prior to marriage were found to be
over five times more likely to reside separately from their biological mother, and
in nearly 60 per cent of the cases the maternal grandmother is the foster mother.

From these results it can be concluded
that among the Turkana the importance
of marriage in relation to reproduction is
that it determines the custody of a child.
Because of the high demand for children,
coupled with a tradition in which custody
of premarital children is held by the biological mother’s kin group, premarital
childbearing is not only approved of, but
often encouraged. The high level of premarital childbearing results from delayed
marriage and earlier initiation of reproduction. It does not, in most cases, reflect
a breakdown of moral codes or familial
control over adolescent sexual behavior.
Rather, it demonstrates that, among the
Turkana, the sanctioned state of reproduction is not encompassed by the institution of marriage, and that “legitimate”
childbearing can occur among unmarried
women.

DISCUSSION

Although premarital childbearing in
sub-Saharan Africa increasingly is becoming labeled a “social problem,” it is important to appreciate the immense cultural diversity found within and between African
nations and to recognize the multifaceted sociocultural context of marriage
and childbearing in different ethnic
groups. Recent studies have demonstrated
that generalizable demographic “facts”
 

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

that hold true for all of sub-Saharan
Africa are difficult to support with DHS
or other data.

This study among the Turkana challenges a number of widely held assumptions. Although the Turkana are highly
polygynous, marriage among women is
neither early nor universal. Although
most reproduction occurs within mar
_ciage, it is not the only legitimate context
of childbearing. Although premarital
‘childbearing is common among the
‘Turkana, it does not necessarily reflect a
“widespread breakdown of contro] over
Cadolescent sexual behavior. For the
Turkana, the role of marriage in regard to
childbearing is that it determines custody
cof a child. In addition, premarital or ex<dramarital childbearing represents a dif‘ferent life course strategy; women who
Shave at least one premarital birth tend to
.Anitiate childbearing earlier, marry at later
Zages, and have higher total fertility than
Swomen with only marital births. A sub‘ystantial number of women have higher orHer births prior to marriage, and a small
‘fraction of unwed mothers never marry.
‘>, For the Turkana, premarital childbear“ing occurs in the context of a number of
features that promote or support the pracdice. First, children are highly valued as
Sconomic assets, and children born prior
Ato marriage are not discriminated against
or socially disowned. Second, “legitimate” reproduction entails familial approval of the child’s father, his acknow]edgment of paternity, and his payment of
a single set fee (ekichul). And finally, prolonged paternal support is not required, as
the child is integrated into the mother’s
extended family, most often becoming
fostered by the maternal grandparents. At
a later date, if the socially recognized father chooses to marry the child’s mother,

Premarital Childbearing 59

he may be allowed to purchase the child
through the payment of a fee added to the
bridewealth payment.

Isiugo-Abanihe (1994) has demonstrated that among the Ibo of Nigeria,
high bridewealth leads to the postponement of marriage. Similarly, for the
Turkana, who have one of the highest
bridewealth fees of any East African pastoralists, marriage among women is late.
Moreover, Meekers, (1994a), using data
from seven African countries, demonstrated that the overall strongest correlate
of premarital childbearing is later age at
marriage, as women who marry late have
greater exposure to the risk of premarital
pregnancy. Hence, in the broader African
context, it may be the case that premarital
childbearing is a common rational choice
in societies that display key features: high
demand for children, extended kin support for childrearing, and high bridewealth or other factors contributing to a
postponement of marriage.

This study also demonstrates that
Cherlin and Riley’s (1986) conceptualization of rational choice as a determinant of
premarital fertility may be manifest in
various forms in different cultural settings. Cherlin and Riley (1986) stress that
unmarried adolescents may intentionally
choose to have a child in order to achieve
financial or social goals, despite the fact
that they are defying a social norm. By
contrast, among the Turkana there is
widespread social approval of premarital
childbearing. Parents may actually encourage an unmarried daughter to have a
child before marrying to assure that they
have assistance from this child in old age.

Alternative forms of rational choice
models are also found in Western societies. For example, Hamburg (1986) identifies a subset of Western adolescent

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

60

mothers who follow a rational alternative
life course strategy. For these women,
early, and usually premarital, childbearing is viewed as a response to adverse
socioeconomic conditions, such as endemic youth unemployment. This strategy may also depend upon significant kin
network support, especially grandmothers’ care of children, and different subculture norms of fertility behavior (Burton, 1990). Clearly, recognizing that
premarital childbearing occurs in widely
varying cultural contexts and that the
broader social approval and support for
unwed mothers and their children vary
greatly in different social settings are important considerations for determining

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

 

Social Biology

the degree to which premarital fertility
is, in fact, a social problem.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to the many people who
assisted in various aspects of this research, including Dr. Rada Dyson-Hudson, Dr. Paul
Leslie, Ms. Leah Imoru Lobar, Mr. Michael
O’Neill, Dr. Sharon Stash, and Dr. James
Wood. We thank the Hon. S. M. Toyya, District Commissioner, and the Turkana District
Officers for their cooperation. This research
was supported by the National Science Foundation Award BNS-8914312 and BNS8718447, the Wenner-Gren Foundation for
Anthropological Research, the Sigma Xi Scientific Research Society, the Hill Foundation,
and the Biomedical Research Support Fund at
Pennsylvania State University.

REFERENCES

ADEGBOLA, O. 1987. An appraisal of non-marital
births in Nigeria, p. 77-98. In The cultural roots
of African fertility regimes: Proceedings of the
Ife Conference, February 25-March 1, 1987.
Population Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania, PA.

Avayl, A. A., L. T. MARANGU, J. MILLER, and J. M.
PAXMAN. 1991. Adolescent sexuality and fertility in Kenya: A survey of knowledge, perceptions, and practices. Stud. Fam. Plan. 22:
205-214.

BARRETT, A. 1987. Dying and death among the
Turkana. Spearhead No. 97. Gaba Publications,
Eldoret, Kenya.

BLEDSOE, C. 1980. Women and marriage in Kpelle
society. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, CA.

BLEDSOE, C., and B. COHEN (eds.). 1993. Social dynamics of adolescent fertility in sub-Saharan
Africa. National Research Council Report on
Population Dynamics of Sub-Saharan Africa.
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

BLEDSOE, C., and G. PISON (eds.). 1994. Nuptiality
in sub-Saharan Africa: Contemporary anthropological and demographic perspectives. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Burton, L. 1990. Teenage childbearing as an alternative life-course strategy in multigeneration
black families. Hum. Nat. 1:123-143.

CALDWELL, J. C. 1982. Theory of fertility decline.
Academic Press, New York.

CaLves, A. E. 1997. Premarital sexual activity and
childbearing in Cameroon: Social disorganiza
tion or rational strategy? Paper presented at the
Annual Meeting of the Population Association
of America, March 27-29, Washington, D.C.

CHERLIN, A., and N. RiLey. 1986. Adolescent fertility: An emerging issue in sub-Saharan Africa.
PHN Technical Note 86-23, The World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

COCHRANNE, S. H., and S. M. Farip. 1989. Fertility
in sub-Saharan Africa: Analysis and explanation. Discussion paper no. 43, The World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

Dinan, C. 1983. Sugar daddies and gold-diggers:
The white-collar single women in Accra, p.
344-366. In C. Oppong (ed.), Female and male
in West Africa. George Allen and Unwin, London.

Ezen, A. C. 1997. Polygyny and reproductive behavior in sub-Saharan Africa: A contextual
analysis. Demography 31:355-368.

GaGE, A., and C. BLEDSOE. 1994. The effect of education and social stratification on marriage and
transition to parenthood in Freetown, Sierra
Leone, p. 148-166. In C. Bledsoe and G, Pison
(eds.), Nuptiality in sub-Saharan Africa: Contemporary anthropological and aemographic
perspectives. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

GaGE, A., and D. MEEKERS. 1994. Sexual activity
before marriage in sub-Saharan Africa. Soc.
Biol. 41:44-60.

GALVIN, K. 1985. Food procurement, diet, activities
and nutrition of Ngisonyoka Turkana pastoralists in an ecological and social context. Unpub
 
Vol. 46, No. 1-2

lished doctoral dissertation, State University of
New York, Binghamton.

GOLDMAN, N., and A. PEBLEY. 1989. The demography of polygyny in sub-Saharan Africa, p.
212-237. In R. J. Lesthaeghe (ed.), Reproduction and social organization in sub-Saharan
Africa. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley.

GYEPI-GARBRAH, B. 1985. Adolescent fertility in
sub-Saharan Africa: An overview. The Pathfinder Fund, Boston.

HAMBURG, B. A. 1986. Subsets of adolescent mothers:
Developmental, biomedical, and psychosocial dimensions. Jn J. B. Lancaster and B. A. Hamburg
(eds.), School-age pregnancy and parenthood:
Biosocial dimensions. Aldine-DeGruyter, New York.

IstuGO-ABANIHE, U. C. 1994. Consequences of bride
2015

 

5 wealth changes on nuptiality patterns among the
Ibo of Nigeria, p. 74-91. In C. Bledsoe and G.
5 Pison (eds.), Nuptiality in sub-Saharan Africa:
3 Contemporary anthropological and demographic
Q perspectives. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
ooKAUFMAN, G., R. LESTHAEGHE, and D. MEEKERS.
© 1987. Marriage patterns and changes in sub& Saharan Africa, p. 45-76. In The cultural roots
cn of African fertility regimes. Proceedings of the
Ife Conference, February 25—March 1.

SLITTLE, M. A., and P. W. Lesuie. 1990. Report to the
‘= Government of Kenya, Office of the President:
a The South Turkana Ecosystem Project.
"SLESTHAEGHE, R. J. 1980. On the social control of
.2 human reproduction. Pop. Develop. Rev. 6(4):
= 527-548.

5 . 1989. Production and reproduction in sub>, Saharan Africa: An overview of organizing prin“= ciples, p. 13-59. In R. J. Lesthaeghe (ed.), Repro® duction and social organization in sub-Saharan
.2, Africa. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley.
‘SMANn, K. 1985. Marrying well: Marriage, Status

and social change among educated elite in Colonial Lagos. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

~McCase, J. T., R. Syson-Hupson, P. W. LESLIE, P.
H. Fry, N. Dyson-Hupson, and J. WIENPAHL.

by [

Downloade

 

Premarital Childbearing 61

1988. Movement and migration as pastoral responses to limited and unpredictable resources,
p. 727-734. In E. E. Whitehead, C. F. Hutchinson, B. N. Timmermann, and R. G. Varady
(eds.), Arid lands today and tomorrow. Proceedings of an International Research and Development Conference.

MEEKERS, D. 1994a. Sexual initiation and premarital childbearing in sub-Saharan Africa. Pop.
Stud. 48:47-64.

1994b. The implications of premarital
childbearing for infant mortality: The case study
of Cote d’Ivoire, p. 296-312. In C. Bledsoe and
G. Pison (eds.), Nuptiality in sub-Saharan
Africa: Contemporary anthropological and demographic perspectives. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

MvuRuLI, L., B. SHELL-DUNCAN, and W. OBIERO.
1998. Withdrawal and periodic abstinence for
family planning among the Rendille of northern
Kenya. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
of the Population Association of America, April,
Chicago.

NICHOLS, D., D. A. LApIpo, J. M. PAXMAN, and E.
O. OTOLORIN. 1986. Sexual behavior, contraceptive practice and reproductive health among
Nigerian adolescents. Stud. Fam. Plan. 17(2):
100-106.

SHELL-DUNCAN, B. 1994. Child fostering among
nomadic Turkana pastoralists: Demographic and
health consequences, p. 147-164. In E. Fratkin,
K. A. Galvin, and E. A. Roth (eds.), African
pastoralist systems: An integrated approach.
Lynne Rienner Publishers, Boulder, CO.

VAN DE WALLE, E. 1968. Marriage in African censuses and inquiries. Jn W. Brass et al. (eds.), The
demography of Tropical Africa. Princeton Univ.
Press, Princeton.

WORTHMAN, C. M., and J. W. WHITING. 1987. Social
change in adolescent sexual behavior, mate selection, and premarital pregnancy rates in a
Kikuyu Community. Ethos 15:145-165.

 
