Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Eugenic implications of the new reproductive
technologies

Bentley Glass

To cite this article: Bentley Glass (1972) Eugenic implications of the new reproductive
technologies, Social Biology, 19:4, 326-336, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9988005

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9988005

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Fone | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 7
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Eugenic Implications of the New

Reproductive Technologies

Bentley Glass

 

Distinguished Professor of Biology, The State University of New York at Stony Brook, and Visiting
Professor, Crown College, University of California, Santa Cruz, California

In writing The Descent of Man (1871),
Darwin was evidently much impressed by
the views of his cousin, Francis Galton,
who in 1869 had published his first study
of human heredity, Hereditary Genius. Although the word eugenics had not yet been
coined, the idea that high mental and moral
qualities can be inherited had been subjected to examination, and the relation of
the moral qualities to reproduction seemed
to be clearly of great concern.

In Chapter V of the Descent of Man,
Darwin discussed the action of natural
selection in civilized nations. He concluded
that sympathy, or as we would now more
strictly say, empathy, acts to support the
reproduction of the weak and inferior, but
he also identified sympathy as necessary to
bind society together. Among savages, and
even among apes, they must have acquired
such feelings prior to becoming social, Darwin (1871, p. 129-130) writes:

They would have felt uneasy when sepa
rated from their comrades, for whom they

would have felt some degree of love; they
would have warned each other of danger,
and have given mutual aid in attack or
defense. All this implies some degree of
sympathy, fidelity, and courage. Such social qualities, the paramount importance of
which to the lower animals is disputed by

no one, were no doubt acquired by the
progenitors of man in a similar manner,

namely, through natural selection, aided by

inherited habit.

Darwin assented to the argument that “it
is extremely doubtful whether the offspring
of the more sympathetic and benevolent
parents, or of those who were most faithful
to their comrades, would be reared in
greater numbers than the children of selfish
and treacherous parents belonging to the
same tribe” (p. 130); but he proposed that
general recognition of the advantages of mutual aid, reinforced by praise or blame from
one’s fellows, would greatly strengthen and
generalize this type of behavior. Moreover,
he wrote (p. 132),

Although a high standard of morality gives
but a slight or no advantage to each individual man and his children over the other
men of the same tribe, yet . . . an increase
in the number of well-endowed men and an
advancement in the standard of morality
will certainly give an immense advantage to
one tribe over another . . . and this would
be natural selection.

In civilized societies, Darwin thought
the intellectually superior would surely
succeed best in all occupations and thus
have a better chance of increasing in number, although he recognized that the multiplication of the improvident would tend to
offset this tendency. He presumed, however,
that this effect would be diminished by the

326
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 4

imprisonment of malefactors and the commitment of the insane, together with the
suicide of the mentally unstable. The
violence and intemperance of the quarrelsome would seriously check their reproduction; while profligacy was well known to
reduce the number of children.

Darwin was much concerned about Gailton’s point that the poor and reckless marry
early, whereas the careful and frugal tend
to postpone marriage until later years and
therefore have fewer children on the average. Darwin thought that maybe this was
counteracted by the higher death rate in
towns than in rural districts, an opinion
which makes an interesting commentary
on the mores of the times. Darwin was
interested in some French statistics which
showed that bachelors, at all ages, had a
higher death rate than married men, and he
supposed that this difference, too, might
exert a healthy selective effect. Nevertheless, he recognized clearly that “progress
is no invariable rule.’ He continued (p.
140),

It is dificult to say why one civilized nation

rises, becomes more powerful, and spreads

more widely, than another; or why the
same nation progresses more quickly at one
time than at another. We can only say that
it depends on an increase in the actual
number of the population, on the number of
the men endowed with high intellectual and
moral faculties, as well as on their standard
of excellence. Corporeal structure appears to

have little influence, except so far as vigour
of body leads to vigour of mind.

Darwin’s comments on the successes and
subsequent failures of the Greeks and the
Spanish, and the modern rise of the English
and Americans reinforce his view that the
action of natural selection is but tentative,
that development of all kinds depends on
many “concurrent favourable  circumstances,” and that it is always possible for
a people to fail on account of certain
characteristics or circumstances while possessed of high qualities in other respects.

New Reproductive Technologies

327

His censure of the effects of celibacy in the
Roman Catholic Church and of the Inquisition and his alarm at the increase of human
populations as having a pronounced adverse
effect on natural selection are consistent
with his general evolutionary views. His
conclusion (p. 142) deserves to be quoted
in full:

But as man suffers from the same physical evils as the lower animals, he has no
right to expect an immunity from the evils
consequent on the struggle for existence.
Had he not been subjected during primeval
times to natural selection, assuredly he
would never have attained to his present
rank.... (p. 142)

Judging from all that we know of man
and the lower animals, there has always been
sufficient variability in their intellectual and
moral faculties, for a steady advance through
natural selection. No doubt such advance
demands many favourable concurrent circumstances; but it may well be doubted
whether the most favourable would have
sufficed, had not the rate of increase been
rapid, and the consequent struggle for existence extremely severe. ... (p. 142-143).

With highly civilised nations, continued
progress depends in a subordinate degree on
natural selection; for such nations do not
supplant and exterminate one another as do
savage tribes. Nevertheless, the more intelligent members of the same community
will succeed better in the long run than the
inferior, and leave a more numerous progeny, and this is a form of natural selection.
The more efficient causes of progress seem to
consist of a good education during youth
whilst the brain is impressible, and of a
high standard of excellence, inculcated by
the ablest and best men, embodied in the
laws, customs and traditions of the nation,
and enforced by public opinion. It should,
however, be borne in mind, that the enforcement of public opinion depends on our
appreciation of the approbation and the disapprobation of others; and this appreciation
is founded on our sympathy, which it can
hardly be doubted was originally developed
through natural selection as one of the most
important elements of the social instincts.

(p. 143)

How extraordinary it is that these views
could have been overlooked or deliberately
ignored by the next generation of ‘social

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

328

Darwinists,” who used natural selection to
justify every aspect of ruthless industrial
oppression and injustice, as well as by those
who made of Darwinism a catchword for
their views of racial supremacy and imperialistic oppression.

Now, one hundred years after Darwin’s
and Galton’s expression of their eugenic
views, we actually possess techniques
capable of controlling human reproduction.
I have been asked specifically to analyze
the potential eugenic effects of artificial
insemination and artificial inovulation.
However, it should be apparent that no
application of those practices could become
widespread or be effective without reliance
upon effective contraception. The latter
subject will probably be discussed, in its
most recent aspects, by one or more other
participants in this symposium.

I shall, therefore, simply allude to recent improvements in contraception, especially to the development of an intrauterine
capsule containing progesterone and capable of suppressing implantation of the
fertilized ovum. Because the hormone seeps
through the plastic capsule in microdoses
and acts directly upon the endometrium, a
single capsule may last for a year and is
presumably without adverse side effects,
because of the low dosage used. Such
capsules are still undergoing large-scale
clinical trial A fully successful outcome
will mark a major advance in contraception. The new method could well surmount
the difficulties met in promoting population
control in countries where a great part of
the populace is impoverished and illiterate.
Again, the safety and effectiveness of diethylstilbestrol as a “morning-after pill”
has recently been confirmed on a sufficient
statistical basis, although not without a
lingering suspicion of dangerous side effects

1 Reported in the San Francisco Chronicle,
September 28, 1971, p. 1.

Glass

Social Biology

following repeated use.? This is another
significant advance in preventing unwanted
births. Reversible vasectomy, too, may scon
become feasible. In any case, we may
assume that fully effective contraceptive
practices will be available in the future.
Offspring will be produced only when
desired.

The difficulties that beset programs of
positive eugenics were set forth most explicitly by J. B. S. Haldane in Heredity
and Politics (1938) and New Paths in
Genetics (1942), and in a literate essay by
Alexander Weinstein entitled ““Palamedes,”
in 1933. I have surveyed those difficulties
myself in an essay entitled “Genetics in the
Service of Man” (1955, 1959) and need
not repeat them on this occasion. It is
sufficient to point out that the hazards, as
well as difficulties, involved in any program
of germinal selection applied to human
beings fall under two heads: first, the
difficulty of ascertaining the genotypes
undergoing selection because of recessivity,
multiple interaction of genes, and modifiability of the phenotypes by the environment; and second, the even graver problem
involved in a choice of values and goals
toward which to direct selection, for that
choice wavers between the poles of individual desire and social welfare and blindly
prefers the good here and now to what
might possibly be better in the long run
and in an altered world.

The ablest advocate of a positive program of eugenic selection in modern times
has unquestionably been Hermann Joseph
Muller, who from his early book, Out of
the Night (1936),° to his final essay on the
subject, “What Genetic Course Will Man
Steer?” (1967), frequently and ardently

2 Reported in Newsweek, November 8, 1971,
p. 74, from J. Amer. Med. Assn.

3In an even earlier paper on eugenics, Muller
(1933) strongly insisted that the capitalist system
is inherently inimical to effective eugenic programs.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 4

urged the use of artificial insemination
from selected donors as a basis for the
genetic improvement of our species. Although his criteria and choice of goals became somewhat modified in the course of
time, it is clear that he never altered his
view as to the main objectives. Simply, as
time passed, he placed less emphasis on
some of the minor characteristics he had
once listed as desirable and instead singled
out for major attention the two characteristics, cooperativeness and intelligence,
that seemed to him to be all-important.
We should not fail to note that Muller
chose as goals precisely those human characteristics that Charles Darwin, a century
before, had declared in The Descent of
Man to be the paramount bases of the evojutionary success of man, namely, sympathy which underlies mutual aid, and high
intelligence which enables man to learn by
experience, to exercise foresight and, in
short, to reason. “Of all the faculties of the
human mind,” he wrote, “it will, I presume,
be admitted that Reason stands at the
summit” (Darwin, 1871, p. 75).

Not many will deny the need for some
measures to prevent the slow but inevitable
deterioration of the human gene pool which
is threatened by the virtual cessation of
natural selection in human populations. As
Haldane (1963, p. 350) pointed out, “for
the last ten thousand years or so... selection has been mainly for immunity for infectious diseases.” Clearly, the elimination
of differential mortality through the virtual
elimination of infectious diseases, the
enormous reduction in infant and childhood mortality in all countries, and the
invention of drugs and prosthetic devices
that enable the genetically handicapped to
live and breed have tipped the balance of
natural selection heavily in the direction of
differential fertility (Crow, 1966). And
the latter may have little to do with either
cooperativeness or intelligence.

New Reproductive Technologies 329

In any event, it seems quite certain that
the role of differential fertility as the predominant selective agent operating on human genotypes will not last long, because
of the rapidly growing population pressure
now seen in all parts of the world. As it
becomes more and more necessary to restrict human reproduction to a replacement level (zero population growth), and
perhaps desirable even to reduce it below
the replacement Jevel so as to achieve an
optimum population in relation to resources,
social constraints will reduce all families to
a size of 0 to 3 children. Even at this level,
differences in family size might engender
natural selection, if those differences were
genetically influenced. It seems, however,
that such differences are far more probably
determined by nongenetic social and political factors. The further development of
reproductive techniques that will enable
many persons now unable to reproduce to
have their own children, together with the
utilization of germinal selection by any
significant proportion of the population,
will greatly reduce, or even eliminate, the
importance of any natural genotypic differences in fertility.

Muller strongly advocated the use of
artificial insemination for eugenic ends. He
foresaw the multiplication of sperm banks
that is currently taking place. He suggested
that preservation of sperm in a deep-frozen
state would reduce mutation from exposure
to radiation or chemical mutagens and that
the technique might ere long be extended
to human ova. He also conjectured that
cryogenic techniques might be applied to
immature germ cells. In these ways it would
become possible to preserve selected lines
of germ cells for fifty years or more, until
the passage of time would permit a more
perspicacious evaluation of their genetic
quality. Muller proposed a_ voluntary
utilization of germinal choice, currently
through selection of male donors of sperm
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

330 Glass

used for artificial insemination. He advocated the enlistment of ‘“prime-movers,”
persons who would participate in the production of children by artificial insemination with the sperm of selected donors.
What is now the state of the art? Since
1967, when Muller’s last address on this
subject as well as my own essay “What
Man Can Be” were published, such remarkable advances have taken place in the
laboratories devoted to experimental studies
of mammalian and human reproduction
that reality beggars our earlier imagination.
In 1970, piglets conceived on a farm at
Hull, Quebec, were flown across the Atlantic
Ocean in a tube and then implanted in a
sow in England, at Weybridge, Surrey. The
parents providing the embryos were three
sows and a boar of the Canadian Yorkshire
breed. The foster-mother was a sow of a
less improved breed. The superior piglets
were in due time delivered successfully. This
story, carried in the daily press, is matched
by the reported transfer of livestock embryos from South Africa to England in the
uterus of a rabbit which served as a temporary foster-mother. To be sure, implantation and placental types differ in different
orders of mammals, and what may be possible for pigs, sheep, or cattle may not be
possible for primates. We, therefore, look
with heightened interest at the experimental
procedures developed in the laboratory of
R. G. Edwards and his colleagues at
Cambridge University, leading already to
successful fertilization of human ova in
vitro. That was one of the developments
Muller believed to be relatively remote.
Edwards and Fowler (1970) have treated
women volunteers whose oviducts were
blocked, but who would like to bear children, with sex hormone to produce superovulation. At an appropriate time, the ova
were removed surgically and transferred
to culture dishes in the laboratory, after
which they were fertilized with spermatozoa

Social Biology

from the husband. The difficulty spoken of
by Muller, that spermatozoa require capacitation by some factor secreted by the
Fallopian tubes, has been overcome by an
appropriate addition to the culture medium.
Under these conditions, fertilization is successful. The embryos proceed to undergo
cleavage and some of them have developed
normally to the stage at which implantation
occurs. It seems that Edwards and his
colleagues have not yet performed an actual
successful implantation of an embryo in the
uterus of the wife in these experiments;
but Shettles long ago showed by actual test
that such is feasible.

Artificial implantation, which I prefer
as a term to “artificial inovulation,” is thus
already practicable. Moreover, it need by
no means be restricted to the woman who
supplies the ovum or the husband who
supplies the sperm. “Prenatal adoption”
of an embryo derived from selected
germinal donors of either or both sexes may
soon be a routine practice for any who
wish it—for Muller’s “prime movers,” let
us say. Nevertheless, because of the very
real and widespread social repugnance
which the practice might evoke, I suspect
that its initial use may be limited to those
men, and possibly women, who expect to
engage in especially hazardous occupations.
Both Muller and I independently suggested
in 1967 that astronauts or other workers in
hazardous situations exposed to high energy
radiation might be well advised to bank
their germ cells for future use.

But a far more compelling reason exists
for banking one’s germ cells in the deep
freeze. Although not established beyond
doubt, it seems probable mutations normally accumulate in germ cells with increasing age. This does not deny the possibility
of some selective elimination of seriously
damaged germ cells, but mutations that
are recessive and neutral or but mildly
detrimental in the heterozygous condition

 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Vol. 19, No. 4

can be expected to accumulate. Certainly,
the probability of chromosomal abnormality through nondisjunction, deficiency,
or translocation increases with increasing
age of the parent, as the rising incidence of
Down’s syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome,
etc., with increasing age of the maternal
or paternal parent reveals. In a society
where a pattern of small family size prevails
and in which economic circumstances tend
to make people postpone marriage and
parenthood to the late third or the fourth
decade of life, the effect of deferred parenthood may be quite the most significant of
the factors that raise the mutation rate.
It consequently becomes important to the
general social welfare, as well as the interests of the immediate family, that children
should be born mainly to young parents
rather than to older ones. To resolve this
conflict between economic and social pressures, on the one hand, and the genetic
welfare of the population, on the other,
reproduction must be deferred through
means that preserve germ cells while inhibiting mutation. To bank both spermatozoa and ova in deep frozen state and to
rely on artificial fertilization and implantation may offer a solution.

Such practices, if adopted by most of a
population, may themselves be sufficient to
counteract any increase in frequency of
deleterious mutations which is brought
about by an increasing exposure to mutagens and by those medical and other
social practices that have well-nigh eliminated natural selection in man. What is
more, the only really effective and sensible
protection of the future of man against the
terrible threat of nuclear weapons may,
indeed, be the preservation of ample stocks
of banked spermatozoa and ova in deep
shelters underground, together with a sufficiency of sheltered technicians and fostermothers. This suggestion, which I here set
forth in all seriousness, in view of the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

New Reproductive Technologies

 

331

enormous world expenditures on nuclear
weapons, anti-ballistic missile defenses,
and other accessories of deterrence and the
utter abandonment of any serious effort to
protect the population by bomb shelters,
may force us unwittingly into man’s first
real eugenic experiment since the time of
ancient Sparta.

Current knowledge and practice have not
quite reached the stage where all this is
practicable, but it cannot be far in the
future—at most, a half dozen years, I
would say. Much more work must be done
on the deep-freezing of human ova before
it can be ascertained that the treatment
will not kill the egg, cause chromosomal
abnormalities through nondisjunction or
breakage, or in any way interfere with the
subsequent normal development of the embryo. There is still inadequate knowledge
of mutation rates in mammalian ova or
spermatozoa kept in the deep-frozen condition, either while protected from external
agents or while exposed to measured doses
of radiation or chemical mutagens. Such
work should be undertaken at once in a
number of laboratories, it seems to me, and
should receive special support from the
federal granting agencies.

There is still insufficient information
respecting the frequency with which normal
development of the human embryo up to
the age capable of implantation can be
expected under artificial conditions. At
present the chances may not be very good,
but rapid improvement in the nature of the
culture medium may be expected. A recent
finding that a mouse embryo developing
in vitro will implant itself if the culture
dish is lined with precipitated collagen may
offer a lead to the more successful cultivation of the human embryo ix vitro. Amniocentesis may be employed to check the
implanted embryo at a later stage of development, up to the twenty-fourth week,
for example, in order to detect chromosome

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

 

332

duplications or deficiencies, breakages, or
translocations, so that a defective fetus can
be aborted at a legal (New York) age.

Within the coming decade we may
expect the previously described techniques
to be perfected and to be applied on a
voluntary scale by persons who desire to
postpone having children without incurring
a heightened probability of harmful genetic
effects, or who wish to surmount natural
obstacles to their own production of children. What further extension of the practice of prenatal adoption may we expect?
And what will be its eugenic consequences?
Either to avoid transmitting some genetic
defect known to exist in one’s family or to
select preferred germ lines of superior
quality requires some guarantee that the
chosen donor cells are free from genetic
defect, as well as superior in specified
respects.

It is in these respects that the proposed
applications of eugenics fall seriously short.
Morton, Crow, and Muller (1956) in a
classic paper demonstrated that the average
number of lethal equivalents per person is
four. A more recent estimate is 2.2 (CavalliSforza and Bodmer, 1971, p. 365). From
these values it may be derived that the
average number of seriously detrimental
recessive genes is four to twelve, on the
assumption, based on Drosophila evidence,
that the number of semilethal and detrimental genes combined is about three times
the number of lethals. There is, therefore,
a considerable danger that repeated utilization of the same selected strain of germ
cells might multiply the frequency of particular detrimental genes in the population
and increase the incidence of the defect.
To avoid this, it would be necessary to have
a careful registration of the descent of all
prenatally adopted individuals, lest unwitting incest produce homozygous defectives.

The danger is well illustrated by the
famous case (see Glass, 1959) of the two

Glass

Social Biology

prize Holstein-Friesian bulls which were
imported into Sweden in the early years of
this century to upgrade the quality of the
local cattle. Some generations later it became evident that each of these high-grade,
expensive animals had carried a recessive
lethal gene, different in the two cases. The
bull Gallus carried the recessive “amputated” abortion, a hideously deformed jawless and legless creature. The bull Prins
Adolf carried the slightly less gruesome but
just as fatal recessive gene for congenital
hairlessness. Either of these genes caused
a loss of about one calf in eight in the herds
in which they had become widely disseminated before discovery. The financial losses
they caused before they were eliminated
were many times greater than the original
stellar prices of the two bulls.

Muller himself, reminded of this eventuality, proposed in one of the addresses in
which he advocated a widespread choice
of sires through artificial insemination, that
semen from a given sire should be limited
to use about twenty times. Even that precaution would be insufficient without
further steps to register descent and to prevent inbreeding, at least between persons
related as closely as first cousins. With
biparental selection, the complexities of
registration of true genetic descent would,
of course, be multiplied.

Perhaps the recently rapid increase in
the number of recessive conditions which
may be detected in the heterozygote may
assist. Almost a hundred such conditions
can now be detected, many of them in cell
cultures. It is therefore imaginable that in
the future only strains of ova and sperms
will be banked, or immature germ cells
cultivated, which have been thoroughly
tested for the presence of known recessive
detrimental genes, or whose donors have
been so tested. Then a careful matching of
male and female cells to prevent possible
homozygosity in the offspring could be
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 4

made, even though that would somewhat
restrict germinal choice. Alternatively,
tests could be applied to the embryo prior
to implantation, or subsequently by means
of amniocentesis, to permit abortion in
cases of homozygosity for severe and irremediable defects. Without such practices,
any widespread use of a limited number of
selected germinal strains would be extremely hazardous. Possession of a serious
genetic defect might far outweigh any
possible improvement in the balance of the
genotype.

Finally, how can we assess the expected
improvement? One may concede that a
single additional genius in the population
may be more significant to mankind than
a general increase in the average level of
intelligence. Nevertheless, in spite of Galton’s claim of “hereditary genius,” it
seems that genius does not very frequently
beget genius. Most of the acknowledged
geniuses of human history have been born,
quite unpredictably, of ordinary or moderately superior parents. There is good
reason for this, as Muller was reminded by
Crow, with the result that the final form of
Muller’s ultimate address “What Genetic
Course Will Man Steer?” included a discussion of regression toward the mean, a
discussion which was missing from his delivered address and even from the abridged
form published in the Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists. It was Galton himself
who first discovered and pointed out this
phenomenon, and who named it his “Law
of Regression.”

Muller pointed out that there are two
reasons for this regression toward the mean.
First, the genes tending to produce an extreme deviation from the mean in a desired direction form “a uniquely favorable
combination” in relation to the actual
environment in which the development of
the individual takes place. Second, it is
likely that the genes producing extreme

New Reproductive Technologies

 

333

deviance are less dominant than their
alleles closer to normal in effect. In my own
opinion, the first of these causes of regression toward the mean is probably better
substantiated by the evidence and also far
more significant in effect. As everyone
acquainted with the basic nature of sexual
reproduction knows, meiosis will tend to
break up these uniquely favorable combinations of genes, both because of reduction
in chromosome number and because of
random segregation of unlinked genes.
Even the linked combinations undergo a
considerable breakup, because of crossing
over. Therefore, it is quite unclear to what
extent the children of a genius will be more
likely to inherit that genius than if they
were descended from other parents of the
same average quality. Only if the sort of
“oenius” in question is not a multifactorial
characteristic, but instead is one that is
determined by a single gene of high dominance or at most by a very few well-linked
genes might we expect a heightened probability of genius in the offspring.

Muller argued that in plant and animal
breeding great successes have been achieved
by using a “performance test” for the selection of the male and female ancestry and
that in human eugenics such a rough test
could be improved if the banked reproductive cells were not used for, say, fifty
years subsequent to the death of the donor.
That lapse of time would, he thought,
allow sufficient opportunity for reevaluation of an individual’s real merit. Take
note, however, that by his own delimitation, we should concentrate upon those two
traits of primary human importance and
need, cooperativeness and intelligence. It is
not clear to me how the passage of time
can assist in providing a better assay of
these two clearly multifactorial characteristics. Reputation, indeed, alters greatly.
Often, in literature and the arts, fifty years
after the great man’s death finds his repu
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

334.

tation at its lowest ebb. Witness the eclipse
of such personal reputations as those of
Johann Sebastian Bach, Rembrandt, or
Shakespeare. But cooperativeness and intelligence—with what assurance can we measure these more accurately with the passage
of time? Can we even define and measure
them sufficiently well while a person is
living to make them the basis of a performance test?

Our perscnality tests are primitive and
unreliable; our intelligence tests, mostly
verbal and culture-bound. High achievement, in whatever realm, remains a product
largely of motivation and integrity. Yet of
what value to society is intelligence without integrity, or of cooperativeness without moral energy? Of such stuff are criminals and despots, the indolent and the lazy
made. Neither is the question answered
whether we should require in our performance test both cooperativeness and intelligence in the same individual, or whether
sympathy without intelligence, or mental
gifts without cooperativeness may be
sought separately.

We are, in short, in possession or shortly
to be in possession of techniques capable
of being used for eugenic improvement;
but we have little power to identify our
goals or to measure the characteristics
which are most important in a eugenic program. Used voluntarily, on a restricted
scale, artificial implantation involving germinal selection on both sides of the parentage might reduce the transmission of
undesired genetic conditions. It does not
seem likely to increase the frequency of
genius or the general level of cooperativeness and sympathy among men. We should
not forget that the successes of animal
breeding have involved not only the rigorous selection of dams and sires but also,
quite as important, the elimination from
herd or flock of the phenotypically sub
Glass

Social Biology

standard offspring. Although that might be
accomplished in the human population
through sterilization or other restrictions
upon the right to procreate, rather than by
means of abortion, infanticide, or execution, even the milder measures of selection
seem abhorrent because of their interference with human freedom and their liability
to subornment by tyranny.

In the overpopulated world of the
twenty-first century, many nations may be
forced to stern measures in order to restrict population growth and to maintain a
population equal to resources. Then we may
see a general limitation to two offspring per
couple. Persons who desired a larger family
might then, to an extent limited to the
number of nonreproducing females or those
with only one child, be permitted to use
prenatal adoption to enlarge their families.
If the available banked strains of ova and
sperms were derived from individuals
graded very high in cooperativeness and
intelligence, and if they had been screened
with all available tests to eliminate known
genetic defects, approximately 5% of the
children born might represent the fruit of
the eugenic program. Then, slowly, and on
the basis even of such crude “performance
tests” as we have now, the decline in
quality of population attributable to our
elimination of natural selection and our
unwitting stimulation of the mutation rate
might be offset. Perhaps even some overall
improvement might be generated.

Until rigorous population control is instituted and can be used as a basis for a
eugenic program, it seems to me that
artificial fertilization and the implantation
of genetically selected embryos can have
very little effect upon the existing gene
frequencies in the present large human
populations on earth. Nor is it likely that
our crude measures of identifying genetic
worth will permit much progress toward

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 4

the goals of higher sympathy and reason
regarded by both Charles Darwin and
Hermann Joseph Muller as paramount in
human evolution. We must be patient and
restrained, for our reproductive technology
has outrun our understanding of behavioral genetics.

For some millions of years of human evolution the family has been the primary
social unit responsible for nurture and education, for the human environment in
which both cooperativeness and intelligence
normally mature. The family as optimum
environment fails when individuals fail. It
succeeds when individuals provide an ambience of love and wisdom. The growing
freedom and self-responsibility of the young
must be tempered by discipline and generosity. Whatever alterations of our reproductive patterns we tacitly permit or
explicitly introduce, in the name of eugenics
or other social betterment, the cohesion of
the family must be safeguarded. For this
reason, it seems to me, voluntary prenatal
adoption is an acceptable path for us to
take, whereas the brave new world of
babies reared in flasks by means of an artificial placenta, and conditioned in their
development by regulation of the nutrient
media and by hormones evokes fear and
horror.

Voluntary prenatal adoption should
evoke fully the parental feelings on which
the family is based far more than can the
adoption of an infant or child already
distinctly of another parentage. After all,
it is no consciousness that a babe is offshoot

New Reproductive Technologies

335

of one’s own germ line that generates
affection and care, but rather the slow
growth of consciousness of the developing
new life during the pregnancy of the
mother and the first helpless days of infancy. Nevertheless, we must recognize
that the technology that makes prenatal
adoption practicable will also make it possible for the rich or favored to avoid the
inconvenience of pregnancy and the care
of young infants by seeking surrogate
mothers; that the same technology threatens the permanence of the family by
making the male parent unnecessary; and
that it marks an enormous step toward the
transfer of human reproduction in toto
from the family to the brave new world’s
laboratory.

I am not sanguine about the capacity of
our blundering social evolution to say,
“Thus far and no farther.” Contrary to
Muller, whose daring and idealism I deeply
respect, I believe that man should pause on
the threshold of these ominous powers over
his own reproduction and evolution and
take stock. If, as I believe, it is still possible to produce almost unlimited improvement in man’s cooperativeness and intelligence by bettering his environment, why
should we not first probe the limits of
cultural evolution in that direction? As
every geneticist knows, only when we have
controlled the environment’s effect upon
the phenotype can we discern clearly the
variance produced by differences in genotype. In this sense, eugenics must wait
upon human ecology.

REFERENCES

CAVALLI-SForzA, L. L., and W. F. Boomer. 1971.
The genetics of human populations. W. H.
Freeman, San Francisco.

Crow, J. F. 1966. The quality of people: Human
evolutionary changes. Bioscience 16:863-867.
Reprinted in C. J. Bajema (ed.), Natural
Selection in Human Populations, John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 1971.

Darwin, CHARLES. 1871. The descent of man and
selection in relation to sex. D. Appleton, New
York. Second edition, 1874. Page nos. are from
the second edition, revised and augmented,
1896.

Epwarps, R. G., and RutH E. Fowter. 1970.
Human embryos in the laboratory. Scien. Amer.
223:44-54.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

336

Gatton, FrAncis. 1869. Hereditary genius: An
inquiry into its laws and consequences. Macmillan, London.

Giass, BENTLEY. 1955. Genetics in the service of
man. Johns Hopkins Mag. 6:2-5, 12-16. Reprinted, Ann. Rep. Smithsonian Instn., 1955,
p. 299-315.

. 1959. Genetics in the service of man,

p. 3-53. In Science and liberal education.

Louisiana State Univ. Press, Baton Rouge.

. 1967. What man can be. Educ. Rec. 48:
101-109. Separately printed by the Thomas
Alva Edison Foundation, Detroit, 26 pp.

Hawpane, J. B. S. 1938. Heredity and politics.
W. W. Norton, New York.

. 1942. New paths in genetics. Harper, New

York and London.

. 1963. Biological possibilities for the human

species in the next ten thousand years. In G.

 

 

 

 

Glass

 

Social Biology

Wolstenholme (ed.), Man and his future. J. &
A. Churchill, London.

Morton, N. E., J. F. Crow, and H. J. Mutter.
1956. An estimate of the mutational damage
in man from data on consanguineous marriage.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 42:855-863.

Mutter, H. J. 1933. The dominance of economics
over eugenics. Scien. Monthly 37:40-47.

. 1936. Out of the night: A biologist’s view

of the future. Vanguard Press, New York.

. 1967. What genetic course will man steer?,
p. 521-543. In Proc. III. Intern. Congr. Human
Genet., Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.
Abridged version, Bull. Atomic Scien. 24 (Mar,
1968): 6-12. Reprinted in C. J. Bajema (ed.),
Natural selection in human populations, John
Wiley, New York, 1971.

WEINSTEIN, ALEXANDER. 1933. Palamedes. Amer.
Natur, 67:222-253.

 

 
