Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Book notes

To cite this article: (1994) Book notes, Social Biology, 41:3-4, 283-287, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1994.9988882

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1994.9988882

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

 

Book Notes

HEALTH AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE: Edited by
Lincoln C. Chen, Arthur Kleinman,
and Norman C. Ware. Harvard Series on Population and International
Health. Harvard University Press,
Boston, 1994. 508 pages. $15.00,
paperback.

This edited volume brings together
eighteen essays by demographers, epidemiologists, economists, anthropologists, and public health scientists focusing on the social dimensions of health
change around the world.

In exploring the social causes and
consequences of health change, the authors reach consensus in some areas,
while engaging in critical debate in
others. Questions addressed are: What
are the forms and structures of health
transitions? Do these changes assume
universally recognized patterns, or are
health transitions particularistic with
regard to space, time, and community?
What are the methodological issues
in definition and measurement? How
can understanding improve health policy, interventions, and the research
agenda?

The five sections of the volume are:
(1) Patterns of Change, (2) Conceptual
and Methodological Issues; (3) Rediscovering the Social Nature of Mortality
Change; (4) Social, Behavioral, and
Cultural Mediators; (5) Health, Policy
and Promotion.

As the editors state in the foreword
(p. vii), ‘“Transitions in health, positive
and negative, characterize the human
condition in our time. The challenge
for research is not simply to produce
knowledge for health action, but also

 

to advance understanding of the
factors—social and _ biological—that
have accompanied these health transitions.”

The volume is the product of a seminar series on the Health Transition
that was held at the Harvard Center for
Population and Development Studies
from 1987-1990, supported by the
Rockefeller Foundation. The scope
was global, with special emphasis given
to developing countries. A major objective was to foster interdisciplinary
dialogue across a range of relevant
fields.

The health transition concept which
evolved in the seminar series and is
presented in this volume moves beyond previous theories of the “demographic transition” and the ‘“‘epidemiologic transition.” The editors
comment:

“A major argument of this volume is
that these demographic and epidemiologic theories are woefully inadequate
for understanding health and social
change. For us, the concept of the
health transition moves beyond demography and epidemiology to explore sociocultural, economic, political, historical, and public health dimensions of
health change. . . . Generalizations are
difficult; it is not easy to come to terms
with global processes that affect radically different societies.”

Section I, Patterns of Change, consists of three chapters which examine
the theory and empirical evidence related to health, mortality, and social
change. The works as a whole challenge the primary thrust of current
thinking regarding the universality of
mortality and cause-of-death change.

283
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

284

Section II, Conceptual and Methodological Issues, grapples with the definition of health itself. Its four chapters
challenge the established wisdom that
we understand how to define health
and know how it should be measured.

The three chapters in Section III,
Rediscovering the Social Nature of
Mortality Change, examine the history
of health improvements in industrialized societies and the socio-behavioral
dimensions of health transitions.

Section IV, Social, Behavioral, and
Cultural Mediators, is comprised of
three chapters on the social constructs
of illness, the impact of maternal education, and the nature of patriarchal
societies and their consequences for
health.

Health, Policy and Promotion is the
topic of the five chapters in Section V.
Two chapters examine health policy
from the perspective of economic theory and political science, a third provides a case study of Kenya, 19871900, a fourth examines health
education, and the fifth chapter proposes practical ways of applying the
health transition concept to health policy formulation and implementation.

Authors include: David E. Bell,
Nancy Birdsall, Jose-Luis Bobadilla,
John Caldwell, Pat Caldwell, Lincoln
C. Chen, Nicholas A. Christakis,
Gretchen Condran, Clara Sunderland
Correa, Goran Dahlgren, Veena Das,
Tomas Frejka, Julio Frenk, Kris
Heggenhougen, Arthur Kleinman,
Stephen J. Kunitz, Robert A. LeVine,
Sara E. LeVine, Rafael Lozano, David
Mechanic, Christopher J. L. Murray,
Joseph E. Potter, Samuel H. Preston,
Michael R. Reich, Amy Richman,
Amartya Sen, Claudio Stems,
Jonathan A. Sugar, F. Medardo Tapia
Uribe, and Norma C. Ware.

Book Notes

 

Social Biology

FINDINGS FROM Two DECADES OF FAMILY PLANNING RESEARCH: By John
A. Ross and Elizabeth Frankenberg. The Population Council, New
York, 1993. 101 pages. $12, paperback.

This monograph presents a selection of empirical conclusions, or findings, from the body of family planning
research that has accumulated over the
last two decades. Twelve topics of current interest are reviewed, as a sequel
to three similar publications issued in
1971, 1972, and 1974.

A “Findings’”’ document compresses
what has been learned into straightforward declarative statements, giving
summary evidence to support each
statement. In cases where a conclusion
is quite well founded, with extensive
supporting evidence, only illustrative
or summary references are needed. In
other cases citations are required for
individual studies. Generalizations
that are unsupported or too ambiguous
to permit a definite statement do not
qualify for inclusion. Methodology and
theory are not the primary concern;
the focus is on research results that
merit particular attention.

Twenty years ago the first “Findings’? report was introduced, for reasons that remain true today. As new
workers enter the field they encounter
an oral tradition consisting of mixed
opinions, prejudices, and information.
Lacking a concise compilation of empirical results, the newcomer faces a
plethora of material of varying quality,
too much ever to be fully absorbed.
Furthermore, conclusions that seemed
certain a few years ago have undergone
a shifting base of support as past studies have been forgotten, rejected, and
supplanted. It has seemed important,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 41, 3-4

therefore, to establish a record outlining evidence that indeed underlies each
finding, with identification of which
country or region it comes from. With
time, this record should evolve, and
then the current compilation will serve
as a point of departure for restatement.

The 12 chapters fall naturally into
four groups. The first two chapters,
Prevalence of Contraceptive Use and
Fertility Patterns, and Large-scale
Family Planning Programs, give an
overall view of the massive changes
that have occurred in reproductive behavior and in the organized programs
designed to service and encourage
them.

The next four chapters follow naturally, to present approaches taken by
the programs: Community-Based Distribution; Contraceptive Social Marketing; Postpartum Programs; and
Charges and Payments. These chapters
deal with prominent features in the extension of services to different publics.
The matter of charges, and cost recovery in general, has received increasing
attention and is an issue for the first
three types of programs. All four chapters concern program approaches for
which considerable experience has accumulated and extensive data are
available.

The next three chapters, Contraceptive Continuation and Effectiveness;
Sterilization; and Induced Abortion,
relate to specific birth-control methods. Contraception, including sterilization, has produced most of the historic
fertility decline throughout the developing world, but all contraceptive
methods carry some risk of failure, and
abortion is often used as a back-up
method or, more often, as a separate
recourse. Septic abortion is a leading
public health problem, one that is re
Book Notes

285

sponsible for a large percentage of maternal deaths in the developing world.

The final three chapters, Contraception, Fertility Patterns, and Infant/
Child Mortality; Contraceptive Use
and Maternal Morbidity/Mortality;
and Contraceptive Use and Health,
pertain to the health advantages of
contraceptive methods, as well as to
the risks they may carry.

Partial funding for the project was
provided by the United Nations Population Fund and by the Rockefeller
Foundation. In developing countries,
professionals may obtain single copies
from The Population Council free of
charge by writing John Ross Research
Division, One Dag Hammerskjold
Plaza, New York, NY 10017 or by FAX
at (212) 755-6052.

This monograph, with its invaluable
tables, figures, and references, belongs
in the library of every scholar, student,
and clinical or case worker involved
with population issues. The three years
the authors worked to compile, assess
and condense this vast body of information and to present it succinctly
were well spent indeed.

GLOBAL COMPARATIVE ASSESSMENTS IN
THE HEALTH SEcToR: DISEASE BurDEN, EXPENDITURES AND INTERVENTION PACKAGES: Edited by C.J. L.
Murray and A.D. Lopez. World
Health Organization, Geneva, Order no. 1150420, 1994. 196 pages.
$18, paperback.

The eight articles collected in this
volume show how a new way of assessing the world health situation can be
used to generate health data unprecedented in their completeness, comparability, and objectivity. Already recognized as capable of revolutionizing

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

 

286

the processes of priority setting and resource allocation in the health sector,
the approach was first used to develop
the empirical basis for the World Development Report 1993: Investing in
Health. Close to one hundred disease
experts collaborated in this project.

The book, which has two parts, discusses the methods, findings, and implications of the first comprehensive
assessment of the global burden of disease, of the financial resources available to the health sector in every country, and of the options for costeffective interventions.

Articles in Part One describe the
concept, applications, and results of
the use of disability-adjusted life years
(DALYs) for measuring the global burden of disease. The indicator, which
measures the time lived with a disability and the time lost due to premature
mortality, has been used to estimate
the burden of disease due to more than
a hundred causes, for five age groups,
by sex, throughout the world. Detailed
information is given on the technical
basis of DALYs, global and regional
cause-of-death patterns, methods for
quantifying the health consequences of
disabilities, and the main findings and
implications of the global burden of
disease approach. Articles and authors
are:

Part One: Global Burden of Disease

Quantifying the Burden of Disease: The
Technical Basis for Disability-adjusted
Life Years (C. J. L. Murray)

Global and Regional Cause-of-death
Patterns in 1990 (C.J. L. Murray and
A. D. Lopez)

Quantifying Disability: Data, Methods
and Results (C. J. L. Murray and A. D.
Lopez)

Book Notes

Social Biology

The Global Burden of Disease in 1990:
Summary Results, Sensitivity Analysis
and Future Directions (C. J. L. Murray,
A.D. Lopez and D. T. Jamison)

Articles in Part Two provide comparative assessments of financial resources available to the health sector
and the range of interventions that can
be purchased with these resources.
These assessments allow identification
of a minimum package of essential
public health and clinical interventions, which are highly cost-effective
and capable of reducing the disease
burden in low-income developing
countries by about 25% at a cost of US
$12 per person per year. Articles and
authors are:

Part Two: Health Expenditures and Intervention Packages: A Global Overview

National Health Expenditures: A
Global Analysis (C.J.L. Murray, R.
Govindaraj and P. Musgrove)

External Assistance to the Health Sector in Developing Countries: A Detailed Analysis, 1972~90 (C. Michaud
and C.J. L. Murray)

Design, Content and Financing of an
Essential National Package of Health
Services (J. L. Bobadilla, P. Cowley, P.
Musgrove and H. Saxenian)

Cost-effectiveness Analysis and Policy
Choices: Investing in Health Systems
(C.J.L. Murray, J. Kreuser and W.
Whang)

Christopher Murray is Associate
Professor of International Health Economics at the Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, USA. A physician and
health economist, he has worked extensively on tuberculosis, cost effectiveness, and health status assessment.
He is currently Chairman of the WHO
Tuberculosis Operational Research
Steering Committee.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 41, 3-4 Book Notes

Alan Lopez is a scientist in the Programme on Substance Abuse at the
World Health Organization in Geneva,
Switzerland. A specialist in medical
statistics and epidemiology, he has

 

 

worked at WHO for over ten years on
the analysis of mortality data and,
more recently, on the quantification of
the global tobacco epidemic.
