Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Balance and Dissonance Theories of the Adoption
and Diffusion of an Innovation Applied to the IUCD

Han Young Kim

To cite this article: Han Young Kim (1970) Balance and Dissonance Theories of the Adoption
and Diffusion of an Innovation Applied to the IUCD, Social Biology, 17:1, 43-53, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1970.9987841

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987841

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 2
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 2 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Balance and Dissonance Theories of the Adoption
and Diffusion of an Innovation Applied to

the TUCD

Han Young Kim

Department of Sociology
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario

When an innovative item, idea, or practice recommended by established scientific
communities is introduced into a given
population, it is readily adopted by some but
not by others, and adopters may or may not
be instrumental in its further diffusion. The
attempt to account for variation in adoption
and diffusion of innovations has been a
major concern of diffusion research which
has been summarized by Katz (1963).

This paper is concerned with the applicability of “balance theory” as an explanatory
device for the adoption and diffusion of an
innovation, with specific reference to attitudinal and behavioral changes manifested
in the use of contraceptive devices among
female clients of public health clinics.

BALANCE THEORY

The basic postulate of balance theory 1s
that there exists a need for the socialized
human being to establish and maintain
stable and consistent orientations toward
the self, other person(s), and the non-person
object, and this need motivates a wide range
of behavior (Heider, 1946).

Since Heider’s (1946) well known P-O-X
model, balance theory has been formalized
by Cartwright and Harary (1960) in terms

43

 

of “linear graph” theory. This has been
further restated by Davis into a number of
sociological and social psychological postulates. The present formulation of the theory
of adoption and diffusion of an innovation
follows closely the definitions and postulates
set forth by Davis.

BASIC DEFINITIONS

1. Person, (P), is the individual whose
adoption and diffusion of an innovative
item is predicted by the theory.

2. Other(s), (O), is some additional individual(s) or group(s) which is the
source of social influence for P in reference to X, that is O represents “significant other(s).”

. X is the innovative item.

. These three components constitute the
cognitive system, i.e., P-O-X system.

. The line P-X is P’s orientation toward X
which varies in sign and numerical value.

. The line P-O is P’s orientation toward O
which varies in sign and numerical value.

. The line O-X is P’s perceived orientation
of O toward X which varies in sign and
numerical value.

. For analytical purposes, however, the

lines are conceived only as either ‘‘posi
tive” or ‘‘negative’ in the present
scheme.

The line P-O is given as positive.

The P-O-X system is balanced when the

product of the signs of its lines is positive.

The P-O-X system is unbalanced when

+ CO th PGS

o.
10.

11.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

44,

12.

13.

14.

15.

Kim

the product of the signs of its lines is
negative.

The P-O-X system is “positively balanced” when both P-X and O-X are
positive, given that P-O is positive.

The P-O-X system is “negatively balanced”? when both P-X and O-X are
negative, given that P-O is positive.

The P-O-X system is “positively imbalanced”? when P-X is positive, but
O-X is negative, given that P-O is positive.

The P-O-X system is “negatively imbalanced”? when P-X is negative, but
O-X is positive, given that P-O is positive.

BASIC ASSUMPTIONS

. Since a state of cognitive imbalance is

tension-producing, people tend to reorganize their cognitive structures in the
direction of achieving balance.

. People tend to achieve balance in their

cognitive structures by making as few
attitudinal changes as possible.

. People tend to behave in the direction

which maintains, reinforces, or maximizes
the existing state of cognitive balance.

. Definition of situation, meaning stabiliza
tion of the cognitive system into a state
of either “positive” or ‘negative’ balance, is assumed to precede decisionmaking of whether or not to adopt X.

. Decision-making and the behavior which

follows the decision-making are “unbiased” manifestations of the state of the
cognitive system immediately before the
decision is made.

Positive Balance

Positive Imbaiance
P
if Nt

oO ——— x

Social Biology

In an innovative situation, which is defined as the situation in which an individual,
being aware of the existence of the innovative item, is faced with the decision to adopt
or not to adopt the item, four types of
cognitive systems as given in the definitional
scheme may be assumed to exist; balanced
either positively or negatively or imbalanced
positively or negatively (see Fig. 1).

If definition of the situation is assumed to
precede decision-making, a person in a state
of either type of balance is in a position to
make the decision either to adopt or not to
adopt the innovative item more easily and
with less delay than the person who is in a
state of either type of imbalance. Further, if
the assumption holds that an actor tends to
act in the direction of maximizing balance,
it follows that the person in a state of positive balance is more prone to adopt and
favorably diffuse the innovative item to
others than the person in negative balance,
who is more prone to reject the item and unfavorably diffuse it.

INTERACTION HYPOTHESIS

What the balance theory in fact claims is
that the relationship among the lines in the
balance system is multiplicative rather than

Negative Balance

 

Negative Imbalance

Pp
YN
0 ——— x
+

Fic. 1—Four possible types of cognitive systems in an innovative situation

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 17, No. 1

additive.! If this is true, one may anticipate
an interaction effect jointly produced by
P-X and O-X (assuming P-O is positive) on
adoption and diffusion? of an innovation
which, according to the present formulation,
can be predicted by the state of a given
balance system. Further, if in fact there is an
interaction effect, it will be no surprise that
independent findings based on one variable
at a time would yield inconsistent evidence,
as a number of previous studies indicate.’

The probable nature of the interaction
effect of P-X and O-X on adoption and diffusion of an innovation is not only suggested
by balance theory, but also by previous empirical findings. For example, Coleman,
Katz, and Menzel (1957), in their study of
the diffusion of new drugs among physicians,
found that early adopters were likely to be
the most “integrated” only when the innovative item required neither risk nor pervasiveness. Even though they were not specifically concerned with the cognitive system
of the potential adopter, their findings suggest that the relationship between the influence of other(s) and the proneness to
adopt an innovative item is contingent upon
the nature of the item. It follows then that
the verification of the interaction model in
the present formulation would not only
resolve some of the inconsistencies in diffusion research, but also test the tenability
of the empirical implications of balance
theory, by specifying the contingencies of a
given relationship.*

1 See Definition 6 of the P-O-X equation in Davis,
66.

2 Since the diffusion of the information concerning the innovative item itself is not the primary concern of this paper, the sequence of “adoption and
diffusion” is purposefully so designated in contrast
to the conventional usage “diffusion and adoption.”

3 Previous studies point to the importance of both
social influence and perceived attribute dimensions
in diffusion process, but the simultaneous effect of
these two dimensions have seldom been examined.

‘Statistically, there will be an interaction effect
between X and Z (two independent variables) in
their impact upon Y (the dependent variable), when:
Fy2 AQ; Pye. > yz} and ryz.., = 0. See Hyman,
1963, p. 242-329,

Balance and Dissonance Theories 45

Based on the foregoing observations, the
following set of propositions are set forth:
In an innovative situation, given that P-O is
positive:
1. If P-X is positive

a) P is more prone to adopt X than
when P-X is negative.

b) Once having adopted X, P will be
more prone to favorably diffuse X
to other person(s) than will a person
who has adopted X under the condition where P-X is negative.

2. If P-X is negative

a) P is more prone to reject X than
when P-X is positive.

b) Once having rejected X, P will be
more prone to unfavorably diffuse X
to other person(s) than will a person
who has rejected X under the condition where P-X is positive.

However, the propositions under Section
1 are “conditional” upon O-X as perceived
by P, and the original relationships increase
when O-X is positive and decrease when
O-X is negative.

The propositions under Section 2 are
“conditional” upon O-X as perceived by P,
and the original relationships increase when
O-X is negative and decrease when O-X is
positive.

DISSONANCE THEORY

Even though it is generally assumed that
the adoption and diffusion of an innovative
item takes place after definition of the situation, it is also acknowledged that the adoption and diffusion of an innovative item may
take place prior to this. According to the
theory of cognitive dissonance, given alternatives, no decision-making waits until
the cognitive system is perfectly stabilized;
hence the decision-making itself creates
cognitive dissonance.

The crucial difference to Festinger (1964)
is that conflict before the decision is more
“Impartial” and “objective,” since there is
no need for any justification of one’s commitment to a given alternative. Once the
decision is made, however, a person tends to
“rationalize” his choice by changing his

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

46 Kim

attitudes in an attempt to reduce dissonance
created by the decision-making.

Since the magnitude of dissonance is
positively related to the magnitude of the
pressure to reduce the dissonance (Festinger,
1964), it follows that if a person makes a
decision in a state of imbalance, he will tend
to rationalize the choice more than those
who make the decision in a balanced cognitive state.

One plausible way of a person attempting
to reduce the dissonance may be through
diffusing his experiences or attitudes toward
X to others (including the significant
others), the ‘“‘correctness” of his decision
being reinforced when others adopt a corresponding attitude toward the innovative
item.

Thus, if a person in the state of positive
imbalance decides to adopt the innovative
item, he will be likely to strive to achieve
balance post-decisionally by changing O-X
from negative to positive, in an attempt to
stabilize his cognitive system in a direction
favorable to his decision. The dissonance
could also be eliminated by P’s changing
P-O from positive to negative, rejecting O
as a source of influence in respect to X. If
he decides not to adopt the innovative item,
he will tend to strive to achieve balance by
changing P-X from positive to negative,
post-decisionally.

If a person in the state of negative imbalance decides to adopt the innovative
item, he will tend to achieve the balance
after the adoption, by changing P-X from
negative to positive. If he decides not to
adopt the innovative item, he will be likely
to change O-X from positive to negative
post-decisionally, or he could change P-O
from positive to negative. Based on these
observations, the following alternative propositions are set forth following dissonance
theory.

Given that P-O is positive and assuming that
no dissonance is reduced by changing P-O to
negative:

Social Biology

1. In an innovative situation, if P decides
to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive but P perceives that O-X is negative, or under
the cognitive condition in which P-X is
negative but P perceives that O-X is
positive (imbalance), then P will display more proneness to favorably diffuse
X than will a person who decides to
adopt X under the cognitive condition
in which P-X is positive (balance).

2. In an innovative situation, if P decides
not to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive but P
perceives that O-X is negative, or
under the cognitive condition in which
P-X is negative but P perceives that
O-X is positive (imbalance), then P will
display more proneness to unfavorably
diffuse X than will a person who decides
not to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is negative and P
also perceives that O-X is negative
(balance).

3. In an innovative situation, if P decides
to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive but P perceives that O-X is negative, or that in
which P-X is negative but P perceives
that O-X is positive (imbalance), then
P will tend to display more favorableness toward X by changing his attitude
in a more positive direction as compared
to a person who decides to adopt X
under the condition in which P-X is
positive and P also perceives that O-X
is positive (balance).

4, In an innovative situation, if P decides
not to adopt X under the cognitive
condition in which P-X is positive but
P perceives that O-X is negative, or
that in which P-X is negative but P
perceives that O-X is positive (imbalance), then P will tend to display
less favorableness toward X by changing
his attitude in a more negative direction
as compared to a person who decides
not to adopt X under the condition in
which P-X is negative and P also perceives that O-X is negative (balance).5

5 The above are true only when the individual
chooses to reduce dissonance by changes in O-X or
P-X. A person in “positive imbalance” who achieves
balance by changing P-O from positive to negative
after adoption of the item would not be expected to
diffuse the item more than the person who chose the
item while in a state of positive balance. The same is
true of a person in “negative imbalance” who rejects
the item and changes P-O from positive to negative
versus one who rejects the item in a state of negative
balance.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 1

Thus, the theory of cognitive dissonance
suggests somewhat different theoretical implications than conventional balance theory
in predicting behavior taking place after the
decision to adopt or reject the innovative
item has been made.

Under balance theory, it has been proposed that P is most likely to favorably diffuse X under conditions of adopting X while
having positive P-X, positive P-O, and
positive O-X (positive balance). Under dissonance theory, P is thought most likely to
diffuse X favorably under the condition of
adopting X while having either positive
P-X, positive P-O, and negative O-X (positive imbalance), or negative P-X, positive
P-O, and positive O-X (negative imbalance).

Similarly, under balance theory, it has
been proposed that P is most likely to unfavorably diffuse X, under the condition of
rejecting X while having negative P-X,
positive P-O, and negative O-X (negative
balance). Under dissonance theory, P is
thought most likely to negatively diffuse X,
under the condition of rejecting X, while
having either positive or negative imbalance
as defined above.

METHODS

Since 1962, studies throughout the world
have been directed toward determining the
safety, effectiveness, and acceptability of
the intrauterine contraceptive method. Even
though the mode of action of the TUCD is
not clearly understood, in 1965 the Committee on Human Reproduction of the
American Medical Association strongly recommended the use of the [UCD as a contraceptive method.

The intrauterine device is characterized
as an innovative item by its newness and
its being advocated by the established scientific community for introduction in mass
programs.®

Balance and Dissonance Theories 47

DEFINITION OF CASES AND
DATA COLLECTION

The cases of study consist of female clients, between the ages of 16 and 45, of three
public health clinics in King County, Washington. Since family-planning centers were
established in these three clinics, the first in
February, 1965, a total of about 300 patients
visited them for family-planning purposes as
of the end of January, 1967. Of these, 206
patients adopted the IUCD, most of the
remainder being refused the IUCD for
medical reasons. The entire set of 206 TUCD
adopters were used as the cases which
represent the adopters. A comparable number of “potential” non-adopters were randomly selected from Public Health Department immunization records, as the comparison group.

The data were gathered through mailback questionnaires which had been sent to
the addresses obtained from clinical records.

The percentage of the returns for adopters was 69.0% (79.8% with “non-deliverables” not included in the computation).
The majority (94%) of the adopters had
used the device more than two months at
the time the questionnaires were filled out.

Two hundred and seventy-five questionnaires were sent out to “potential nonadopters.” After a forty-day waiting period
166 questionnaires were returned, a percentage of 60.4% (66.9% if non-deliverables are excluded),?

6 It may be argued that oral contraceptive users
(pill users) must also be considered as “‘innovators.”’
However, by 1965, the mode of action of oral contraceptives had been well understood, and a number
of products had already received clearance from the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Further, it was
the opinion of the researchers that oral contraceptives had already received a rather widespread acceptance at the time of the research, and the acceptance of oral contraceptives was far less problematical than the acceptance of the IUCD by the potential adopters.

7 In order to check the possible sampling bias due
to “non-returns,” the early responses and the later
responses were compared in terms of a number of
background variables. The distributions of these
variables did not differ significantly between early
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

A8 Kim

Out of 166 “potential non-adopters,” 99
turned out to be those who from now on will
be referred to as “‘non-adopters,” or those
who were aware of the availability of the
IUCD but had decided not to adopt the
device. Excluded from the non-adopter
category were those who said that they intended to adopt the device (20 cases), those
who had used the device in the past (23
cases), and those who belonged to the
vasectomy or hysterectomy categories (17
cases).

Using the Smirnov chi-square test at 0.05
level, the two groups did not significantly
differ in terms of transiency of residence,
rural-urban background, age, actual number
of children, or ideal number of children.
However, the two groups differed significantly in terms of their husbands’ occupations, family income, education, religion,
and the contraceptive methods they had
mainly been using (for adopters prior to
using the IUCD). Among the non-adopters,
as compared to the adopters, there were
more husbands in blue-collar occupations,
lower levels of income and education, a
higher proportion of Catholics, and a lesser
use of the more effective contraceptive
methods. Ideally, it is desirable that the
effects of the latter group of variables be
controlled so that the two groups are comparable. However, it is assumed that what
might be attributed to these variables will,
in fact, be explained by the dimensions of a
more abstract plane as attempted in the
present formulation.®

MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES

PERCEIVED ATTRIBUTES OF THE INTRAUTERINE
CONTRACEPTIVE DEVICE (P-X)

Rogers (1962) isolates five important

dimensions of an innovation: (1) relative ad
vantage, the degree to which an innovation

and late returns in either the adopter or non-adopter
groups.

§ The substantive interpretation of these differences is discussed in Kim, 1969.

Social Biology

is superior to the items it supersedes, (2)
compatibility, the degree to which an innovation is consistent with existing values
and past experiences of the adopters, (3)
complexity, the degree to which an innovation is relatively difficult to understand and
use, (4) diversibility, the degree to which an
innovation may be tried on a limited basis,
and (5) communicability, the degree to
which the result of an innovation may be
easily diffused to others. Katz (1964), on
the other hand, proposes three basic criteria
by which the attributes of an innovation,
including innovative contraceptive methods,
may be characterized: communicability,
pervasiveness, and risk. Berelson (1964) emphasizes the ‘‘easy or hard to use” aspect of
new contraceptive methods.

On the bases of these criteria set forth by
various authors, and as the result of a pretest, the following eight dimensions of the
intrauterine contraceptive were measured
on four-point Likert-type scales by asking
the following questions:

When you first heard about the intrauterine
device did you think that use of the device
would:

. seem unnatural.
. go against my moral beliefs.®

1. have bad side-effects in general.

2. be economical.

3. require little attention and effort on my
part.

4, be sure to prevent unwanted pregnancy.

5. be easy to have it removed if I wanted
to.

6. be annoying, unpleasant or painful to
me.

7

8

Yn order to assure the internal consistency
among the eight dimensions, each dimension was correlated with the average score of the eight dimensions, giving in Gamma (Goodman and Kruskal,
1963) the following results:

A-H — 0.63 (Z = 2.83) A Side-effects dimension

B-H = 0.66 (Z = 2.72) B Economy dimension

C-H = 0.68 (Z = 3.12) C Attention-effort dimension

D-H = 0.43 (Z = 1.58) D Effectiveness dimen
sion

E-H = 0.65 (Z = 3.05) E Reversibility dimension

F-H = 0.72 (Z = 3.76) FF Naturalness dimension
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 17%, No. ]

The subjects were then asked to indicate
how strongly they agreed or disagreed with
each item by checking one of four alternatives: strongly disagreed, mildly disagreed,
mildly agreed, and strongly agreed. The
subjects were also asked how they think
about the intrauterine device “now” in
terms of the same dimensions.!®

“SIGNIFICANT OTHERS” ATTITUDES TOWARD
THE INTRAUTERINE DEVICES PERCEIVED
BY THE RESPONDENTS (O-X)

“Significant others’ were identified by
the respondents through the following question: “Whose opinions, In your case, are
especially important in matters of birth
control? Please circle two names whose
opinions you consider most important.”
Five alternative choices were given: husband, mother, best friend, doctor, priest or
rabbi, and others.

The respondents were further asked
about how they thought each of the above
feel about the use of the intrauterine contraceptive device through the following
question: ‘Without really knowing what
other people think, most of us sometimes
have feelings about what others seem to
think. Do you feel that the opinions of each
of the following persons agree or disagree

G-H = 0.82 (Z = 4.89) G Personal Morality dimension

H Average score of the
above eight dimen
sions

All correlation coefficients are significant at the 0.01
level except the “reversibility” dimension, which is
significant at the 0.10 level. Therefore, one may rea~
sonably assume that these eight dimensions, in fact,
belong to a single domain.

10 Given that the sample was of public healthclinic
clients with presumably low income and education
and that the questionnaires involve “recalls,” a reliability check on responses was deemed specially
important. As a reliability check, the self-reported
“months of adoption” by adopters were correlated
with the month of actual adoption recorded in the
clinics. The Pearsonian correlation coefficient turned
out to be 0.96, indicating rather high reliability in
recalling. It must be also noted that more than 90%
of both adopters and non-adopters had at least some
high-school education.

Balance and Dissonance Theories 49

with your own opinions about the intrauterine device?”’ Four alternative responses were
given: Strongly disagree, mildly disagree,
mildly agree, and strongly agree. The
“significant others” opinions toward the
device were subsequently identified on the
basis of responses to these two questions.

PRONENESS TO ADOPT THE
INTRAUTERINE DEVICE

Four operational] indicators were used in
measuring the proneness to adopt the innovations: adoption vs. non-adoption; the
time lapse between “‘first heard about the
device” and “first adopted the device’’; the
time lapse between ‘first heard about the
clinic” and ‘‘first visited the clinic” and
sustained vs. non-sustained use of the device. It was assumed that, other things
being equal, adoption vs. non-adoption was
the most obvious indication of the proneness to adopt. Further, for adopter, it was
assumed that the more “prone” an individualis to adopt the innovative item the earlier
would she visit a clinic and adopt the device
after she first knew of the availability of the
device. It was also assumed that if one is
more ‘‘prone” to adopt the item, she is less
likely to discontinue it once she adopts the
item.

PRONENESS TO DIFFUSE THE
INTRAUTERINE DEVICE

Five operational indicators were used:
diffusion vs. non-diffusion, direction of diffusion, amount of diffusion, distance of
diffusion, and temporal immediacy. Diffusion vs. non-diffusion was measured by
asking a “yes or no” question: “Since you
started using the intrauterine device, have
you ever told other persons about your experience with the device?” For the direction
of diffusion, the question read: “If you have
told (or might sometime tell) anyone about
the device, how have you (or would you)
describe it?” Four alternative responses
were given: very favorably, somewhat favorably, somewhat unfavorably, and very unDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

50 Kim

favorably. For the amount of diffusion, the
respondents were asked the number of persons they have told about their experiences
with the device. To measure the distance of
diffusion, the respondents were presented
with a cumulative distance scale (family,
close friends, friends who are not very close,
neighbors, strangers, and others) and were

TABLE 1

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND
PRONENESS TO ADOPT THE JUCD

Correlations

(Gamma)
Adoption vs, non-adoption............ 0.44*
Time lapse between ‘‘first heard” and
“first adopted” the device.......... —Q.05
Time lapse between “first heard” and
“first visited” the clinic............ —0.31
Sustained use of the device ........... 0.47*
*P< 0.05.
TABLE 2

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND
PRONENESS TO DIFFUSE THE IUCD

Correlations

(Gamma)
Direction of diffusion................. 0.75*
Amount of diffusion................06 0.14
Extensiveness of diffusion............. 0.40*
Temporal immediacy of diffusion...... 0.38*

*P < 0.05,

asked to indicate to whom they had diffused
their experiences with the device. For temporal immediacy of diffusion, the respondents were asked to indicate how soon after
adoption they first told someone about the
device.

FINDINGS

BALANCE THEORY AND INTERACTION HYPOTHESES

In order to examine the interaction effect
of P-X and O-X, the dichotomized summary
score of P-X was first cross-tabulated with
every index of proneness to adopt and
diffuse the item. The cross-tabulated results
were then subdivided under dichotomized
conditions of O-X. Tables 1 and 2 indicate
the marginal relationship between P-X and

Social Biology

proneness to adopt and diffuse the device."

Of eight indicators of proneness to adopt
and diffuse, only five—adoption vs. nonadoption, sustained use of the device, direction of diffusion, extensiveness of diffusion,
and temporal immediacy of diffusion—
turned out to be significantly correlated
with P-X in the anticipated directions.

However, it was also anticipated that nonsignificant relationships among the remaining indicators and P-X might conceal an
interaction effect of P-X and O-X if the
directions of the conditional relationships
(partial relationships) happened to be opposite. Therefore, all marginal relationships,
regardless of the magnitudes, among the
eight indicators of proneness to adopt and
P-X were partialled in terms of different
conditions of O-X (Tables 3 and 4) in order
to examine the existence of interaction effect.

The comparisons between Tables 1 and 2
(marginal relationships) and Tables 3 and 4
(partial relationships) show marked discrepancies—clear signs of interaction effects
—in the predictive indicators of adoption
vs. non-adoption, sustained use of the device, and direction of diffusion. A small
number of interaction effects are noted for
amount and temporal immediacy of diffusion, but none for the remaining indicators.

11 All scales in the present research consist of
ordinal or nominal measurements. This consideration led to the choice of Lambda and Gamma developed by Goodman and Kruskal as measures of association. The utility of these proportional reduction-in-error measures for nominal and ordinal data
in comparison with conventional chi-square-based
measures has been explicitly discussed by Costner
(1965). Costner contends that these measures of
association in sociological research are more advantageous to use than chi-square-based measures because they are “operationally interpretable” and
have a norming function. The norming function of
these measures seems vitally important when partial
relationships are to be compared with the original
relationship. The Lambda measure was reserved specifically to measure the relationship between nominal-ordinal or nominal-nominal scales, but whenever
an implicit assumption of order could be meaningfully given toa given nominal scale, it was treated as

“ordinal,” and the Gamma measure was used for the
purpose of improving the power of the relationship.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 1

However, the theoretical assumptions
and the patterns of original and partial
relationships suggest that the propositions
involving the time lapse between “first
heard” and ‘“‘first adopted” the device, the
time lapse between “‘first heard” and “first
visited” the clinic, and the extensiveness of
diffusion turned out to be untenable, probably not because of inadequate theoretical
formulations but because of erroneous choice
of indicators. These “unobtrusive” measures may not be valid indicators for proneness to adopt or diffuse in this particular situation in the sense that there are innumerable incidental factors affecting these variables. From the general outcome of the analysis, however, one may conclude that P-X
and O-X are in general independently related to proneness to adopt and further
diffuse the innovative item. Further, P-X

TABLE 3

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND
PRONENESS TO ADOPT THE IUCD,
CONTROLLING FOR O-X

O-X

CATEGORY Positive Negative

Adoption vs, non-adoption... 0.51 0.14
Time lapse between “‘first
heard” and “first adopted”

the device..........00-0. —0.02 —0.09
Time lapse between ‘“‘first
heard” and “first visited”

the clinic................ —0.53 —0.29

Sustained use of the device. . 0.66 0.03

and O-X are likely to “interact” in producing effects on the adoption and diffusion of
the innovative item.

DISSONANCE THEORY AND ALTERNATIVE

HYPOTHESES REGARDING THE POSTDECISIONAL DIFFUSION

It has been pointed out that the theory of
cognitive dissonance suggests somewhat different theoretical implications from con
Balance and Dissonance Theories 51

ventional balance theory in predicting the
proneness to diffuse after the decision to
adopt or reject the innovative item and in
predicting attitudinal change after adoption.

Under balance theory, P is expected to
be more likely to favorably diffuse X when
X is adopted under a positively balanced

TABLE 4

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND
PRONENESS TO DIFFUSE THE IUCD,
CONTROLLING FOR O—X

O-X
CATEGORY Positive Negative
Direction of diffusion....... 0. 84 0.42
Amount of diffusion. ....... 0.17 0.15
Extensiveness of diffusion... 0.33 0.34
Temporal immediacy of dif{USION.... ce eee eee eee .39 0.29

TABLE 5

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN COGNITIVE CONDITION AT ADOPTION AND INDICES
OF PRONENESS TO DIFFUSE

Correlations

(Gamma)
Direction of diffusion..............-.5 0.52*
Amount of diffusion..............00.- 0.02
Extensiveness of diffusion............. —0.13
Temporal immediacy of diffusion...... —0.17

*P <0.05.

cognitive condition, and we have found
some evidence supporting this proposition.
Under dissonance theory, however, this is
thought to be so when P adopts X under
either a positively or negatively imbalanced
cognitive condition. In order to test the
“dissonance” proposition, each indicator of
proneness to diffuse was cross-tabulated
with cognitive conditions at adoption (balance-imbalance dichotomy). Table 5 summarizes these correlations. The proposition
concerning non-adopters was not tested due
to the lack of relevant data.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

52 Kim

Table 5 shows that only one of the four
indicators (direction of diffusion) is significantly related to the cognitive condition at
the time of adoption. However, the direction of the relationship is opposite to the
direction predicted on the basis of dissonance theory, further adding to the evidence
for the tenability of balance implications.
The remaining correlations show that there
are no significant relationships between the
rest of the indicators of proneness to diffuse

TABLE 6

COGNITIVE CONDITION AT ADOPTION AND
POST-DECISIONAL CHANGE IN THE PERCEPTION OF THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE IUCD
AMONG ADOPTERS

Cognitive Positive No Negative
Condition Change Change Change Total

Balance....... 69 18 13 100

Imbalance..... 24 6 8 38
Total. ...... 93 24 21 138

Gamma = 0.11, P > 0.05

and cognitive conditions of adoption. These
evidences suggest that the theoretical implications based on dissonance theory regarding post-decisional diffusion as set forth
in the present paper are not empirically
tenable.

The difference between balance and dissonance implications can be further tested
by measuring post-decisional attitude change
toward X. If the magnitude of dissonance is
positively related to the magnitude of the
pressure to reduce the dissonance, as assumed by dissonance theory, one may
anticipate that P is most likely to show
favorable attitudinal change toward X when
he has adopted X under an imbalanced
cognitive condition, or unfavorable change
when he has rejected X under an imbalanced
condition.

In order to examine the difference, the
cognitive condition at adoption is correlated

Social Biology

with the post-decisional change in the perception of the attributes of the IUCD
among adopters (again, the proposition concerning non-adopters was not tested due to
the lack of relevant data). To measure this
post-decisional attitude change, a discrepancy score was computed based on the mean
of the item scores of P-X prior to adoption
and the mean after adoption. The discrepancy score was then reassigned to “negative change,” “no change,” and ‘‘positive
change.” Table 6 shows the cross-tabulated
result.

This result shows a slight indication of
relationship (not significant at the 0.05
level) between the two variables, but the
direction is again opposite to what was
anticipated using dissonance theory. These
findings suggest the implications of dissonance theory regarding the adopters’
post-decisional diffusion and post-decisional
change in perception of the item are not
tenable, while the predictive power of conventional balance theory seems strengthened in comparison.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The applicability of balance theory as an
explanatory device for the adoption and diffusion of an innovation has been examined.
The formulation proposes that the adoption
and diffusion of an innovation by an individual depends not only on his perception of
the attributes of the innovative item, but
also upon the perception of his “significant
others” opinion toward the item, the focus
of this study being on the anticipated interaction effect of these two factors. Based on
dissonance theory, an alternative set of
propositions in reference to post-decisional
behavior was also set forth and their tenability examined in comparison with propositions derived from conventional balance
theory. The existence of an interaction effect
of P-X and O-X on proneness to adopt and

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 1

diffuse an innovative item is, in general,
supported by the findings as are the implications for post-decisional behavior derived
from conventional balance theory as opposed to those based on dissonance theory.

 

Balance and Dissonance Theories 53

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is indebted to William R. Catton,
Jr., and Herbert L. Costner of the University of
Washington for their help in formulating this
research and their valuable comments on the

paper.

REFERENCES

BERELSON, BERNARD. 1964. On family planning
communication. Demography 1:94-105.

CARTWRIGHT, CoRWIN, and FRANK Harary. 1960.
Structural balance; A generalization of Heider’s
theory. In Dorwin Cartwright and Alvin Zander
(eds.), Group dynamics. Harper Row, New York.

CoLeMAN, JAMes S., Exumu Katz, and HERBERT
MeEnzeEt. 1957. The diffusion of an innovation
among physicians. Sociometry 20:235-270.

ComMMITTEE ON HuMAN Repropuction, 1965. The
control of fertility. J. Amer. Med. Assoc, 194:
462-470.

CostNER, HERBERT L. 1965. Criteria for measures of
association. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 30:341.

GoopmaN, Leo A., and W11L1AM H. Kruskat, 1963.
Measures of association for cross classifications.
J. Amer. Statist. Rev,

Heer, F. 1946. Attitudes and cognitive organization. J. Psychol. 21:107-112.

Hyman, HERBERT, 1963. Survey design and analysis.
The Free Press of Glencoe, Il.

Katz, Exrnu. 1966. Diffusion research and family
planning. Paper read at the Annual Meeting of
the American Sociological Association, Miami
Beach.

Katz, E., M. L. Levin, and H. Haminton, 1963.
Traditions of research on the diffusion of innovation. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 28:237-252.

Kr, Han Youne. 1969, Perceived attributes, adoption, and changes in attitude toward the IUD,
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
ial Association of America, Atlantic

ity.

RoceErs, E. M. 1962. Diffusion of innovations. The
Free Press of Glencoe, Ill.
