Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Richard H. Osborne, Retiring Editor: An
appreciation

Lee Ehrman for the Officers and Board of Directors

To cite this article: Lee Ehrman for the Officers and Board of Directors (1977) Richard
H. Osborne, Retiring Editor: An appreciation, Social Biology, 24:4, 255-257, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1977.9988294

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988294

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Richard H. Osborne, Retiring Editor:

An Appreciation

 

 

Lee Ehrman, for the Officers and Board of Directors

Division of Natural Sciences
State University of New York
Purchase, New York

Social Biology and its sponsoring society have reaped more than reasonable
shares of benefits from the largely unrewarded efforts of our currently retiring
Editor, Richard H. Osborne. It is appropriate therefore that we now firmly set
down our obligations and our gratefulness
so that his prodigious efforts no longer go
unheralded.

Since 1961, Richard H. Osborne has
been Editor of this journal, bringing it to
maturity in both size and scope from its
early days as the slender arm of the American Eugenics Society when it was titled
Eugenics Quarterly.' At that time, the
journal published only solicited manuscripts, and it was he who wisely terminated this restriction in order to sample
better “the push and direction of thought
in the [entire] scientific community.”

In the past seventeen years, the journal
has grown and prospered under his direction, achieving both national and international prominence for its publication ‘of
original research in the biological and social sciences. In addition, the journal has
been a leader in helping to define the new
area of social biology.

Today Social Biology draws both contributors and subscribers from all over the
globe. It is now a self-supporting scientific
journal, abstracted and indexed by all the
major services and represented in the

1 Changes in name of the journal and the society
were made in 1969 and 1972, respectively.

Council of Biology Editors. Perhaps the
most succinct indicator of the journal’s
development under Dick’s editorship lies
in the compilation of substantive primary
periodicals in the biological sciences made
in 1970 by the Council on Biological Sciences Information. After applying their
criteria for research content, availability
in national and foreign libraries, and listing by the major announcement services
to several thousand periodicals, they
classified only 190 journals published in
the United States as primary serial publications in the biological sciences. Social
Biology was one of these few.

And Dick Osborne has not nourished
Social Biology in a vacuum. During his
editorship, he has held elected offices in
the American Society of Human Genetics,
the American Association of Physical Anthropology, the International Society of
Cranio-Facial Biology, and the American
Eugenics Society. He was Chairman of the
Organizing Committee when the American Eugenics Society sponsored the formation of the Behavior Genetics Association and served as President Pro Tem of
the fledgling association. He has also
served on committees for the National Institutes. of Mental Health, the National
Institute of Neurological Diseases and
Stroke, and the National Research Council.

These assignments reflect a broadness of
training, his degrees attesting to compe
255
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

256

Ehrman

Social Biology

 

tence in more than one area of the life
sciences. His doctoral degree, for one instance, was earned at Columbia University’s Institute for the Study of Human Vanation; it was awarded as an interdepartmental doctorate in genetics, anthropology, and the health sciences. Through the
years, his primary research interests have
been in genetic-environment interaction in
both health and disease.

- Since 1964, Dick has been Professor of
Physical Anthropology and of Medical
Genetics at the University of Wisconsin—Madison. Prior to that appointment,
he was Head of the Human Genetics Sec
RICHARD H. OSBORNE, retiring Editor

 

tion of the Sloan-Kettering Institute for
Cancer Research. For his work in cancer,
he received the Career Scientist Award
from the Health Research Council of the
City of New York. He has also taught in
the departments of preventive medicine at
Cornell University Medical School and the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine and
has held research and hospital appointments at the Forsyth Dental Center,
Newington Children’s Hospital, the University of Connecticut, Memorial Hospital
for Cancer and Allied Diseases, and Columbia University.

He has coauthored, edited, or coedited

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 24, No. 4

no fewer than four well-received books,
three of them during his tenure as Editor:

OSBORNE, R. H., and F. V. DE GEORGE.
1959. Genetic basis of morphological
variation. Harvard University, Cambridge.

OSBORNE, R. H., ed. 1961. Genetic perspective in disease resistance and susceptibility. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 91;595-818.

LAUGHLIN, W. L., and R. H. OSBORNE,
eds. 1968. Human variation and origins.
W. H. Freeman, San Francisco.

OsBoRNE, R. H., ed. 1971. Biological and
social meaning of race. W. H. Freeman,
San Francisco.

His publications in the form of journal
articles number more than three dozen
with some selected for anthological reprinting. Other pertinent publications and

Richard H. Osborne: An Appreciation

257

activities on Dick’s part as they relate to
the society are discussed in Frederick Osborn’s “History of the American Eugenics
Society (Social Biology, 1974, Vol. 21,
No. 2, pp. 115-126).

It is perhaps appropriate to conclude by
switching from retrospect to prospect.
Looking back at his seventeen years of
dedicated service, the Officers and Board
of Directors of the Society for the Study of
Social Biology wish to express their profound appreciation to Richard H. Osborne
for the building of a fine scientific journal
for the society. Looking toward the future,
we sincerely hope that he will continue to
use his many talents in fostering the goals
of the society as he has so generously and
so ably done in the past.
