Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Physiognomic Homogamy: A test of physical
Similarity as a factor in the mate selection process

Victoria J. Chambers , John R. Christiansen & Phillip R. Kunz

To cite this article: Victoria J. Chambers , John R. Christiansen & Phillip R. Kunz (1983)
Physiognomic Homogamy: A test of physical similarity as a factor in the mate selection
process, Social Biology, 30:2, 151-157, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988529

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988529

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 18
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
Physiognomic Homogamy: A Test of Physical
Similarity As a Factor in the Mate Selection Process

 

Victoria J. Chambers, John R. Christiansen, and Phillip R. Kunz

Department of Sociology
Brigham Young Unwversity
Provo, Utah

~/Y

SABSTRACT: This study tests the hypothesis that physiognomic similarity is a factor in the procSess of mate selection. Judges asked to match photographs of males and females who looked
et alike actually paired engaged and newlywed couples to a significant degree. This study

ighlights the possible importance of similar physical appearance as a factor in the formation of

interpersonal relationships.

S The physical characteristics of those
éqwith whom face-to-face interactions
“take place are often noted in conversaStion and in written communications. In
‘spite of the frequency with which the
-=physical description of individuals ap=pear in various types of communications, the influence that those charactersistics have on the formation of
‘interpersonal relationships has been
Slargely overlooked in sociological re‘Ssearch. For example, Stone (1962)
‘>points out that Mead, Cooley, and other
“symbolic interactionists, while devoting
‘gmuch time and explanation to gestures,
-Soverlooked the importance that physical
Zappearance plays in nonverbal comAmunication.

One area of human interaction in
which physical appearance might seem
to be an important factor is that of mate
selection. Researchers in the field of
mate selection, however, have tended to
concentrate on indications of psychological, personality, or role comparisons;
and, with some notable exceptions,
have largely ignored physical appearance as a factor. Burgess and Wallin
(1944) reported positive homogamy in
couples for height, weight, state of

health, and level of physical attraction;
and when Spuhler (1968) compared
body measurements of married couples,
his data also indicated homogamy
among married couples for several different body measurements. Homogamy
in terms of level of attractiveness has
also been established by Murstein
(1972) and Shepard and Ellis (1972).
One study reported by Griffiths
(1970) and Griffiths and Kunz (1973)
appears unigue in that it tested the hypothesis that married couples may tend
to look alike, either at the time of marriage as a result of the selection process,
or as a result of a process of growing to
look more alike as the years passed. In
that study judges (college students)
were asked to try to match correctly pictures of individuals who were married.
The pictures were divided into groups of
five married couples each, based on
length of time married. Their results
failed to support the hypothesis that
married couples tend to grow to look
more alike over time, but for the couples
that had been married for only a few
years, the judges were able to correctly
match them to a significant degree. Griffiths (1970, p. 55) questioned whether

151
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

152 Chambers, Christiansen, and Kunz

this was an indication that people ‘‘(1)
seek out those who look like themselves; or (2) that, if the engagement period is of any length, the process of physiognomic homogamy has already
started.”’ Other than these studies, very
little has been done by professionals on
the subject.

Among nonprofessionals, however,
the importance of appearance in mate
selection seems to surface frequently. In
referring to engaged or married couples,
such statements as “‘they look enough
alike to be brother and sister,” or “‘people married for a long time always seem
to look alike,” are commonly heard.

There may be a generalized belief,
moreover, that people ought to have
about equal amounts of ‘“‘good looks.”
Comments are commonly made about
couples notably unequal in attractiveness. With a paucity of scientific data on
the subject available, and in view of
common beliefs on the subject, it was
decided to test the hypothesis that physiognomic homogamy is a factor in the
mate selection process.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

To test the hypothesis that people
tend to select mates who look like themselves it is necessary to define the concept “looking alike,” and to consider
more than one variable. The study reported by Griffiths and Kunz involved
the judging of black and white pictures
that included only the face of the subjects; however, Spuhler’s (1968) study
indicated physiognomic homogamy not
only for certain physical features of the
face and head, but also for various other
body measurements. This indicates the
possibility of a homogamous factor for
body build. Moreover, the probable im
 

 

Social Biology

portance that coloring assumes for people is illustrated by expressions in common usage such as “blonds have more
fun,” or “T like them tall, dark and
handsome.”’ Our popular songs are
loaded with references to coloring, in titles such as “Green Eyes,” and “The

‘Strawberry Blond,” or lyrics of “five

feet two, eyes of blue,” and “‘tall and tan
and young and lovely” in describing the
“oirl from Ipanema.”

The decision was made, therefore, to
use the technique of asking judges to try
to match correctly pictures of couples,
but to consider general body build and
coloring of the hair, skin, and eyes as
well as facial characteristics only.

To control for the remote possibility
that married couples may grow to look
alike over time, a group of engaged
couples was included as well as a group
of married couples, and the married
subjects were limited to couples who
had been married for one year or less.
Groups of ten couples each were used.
More than ten couples in a group is too
difficult to judge and would quickly discourage the judges altogether.

A list of names of couples who were
engaged and couples who had been married less than one year was obtained by
contacting students in several sociology
classes at Brigham Young University.
Students were not informed of the
study’s purpose, but asked only to submit names of appropriate couples that
they knew, themselves included.

A random sample of ten couples was
drawn from each of these groups. These
subjects were contacted, a brief explanation of the purpose of the study given,
and they were asked if they would agree
to participate by coming to a central location on campus to have their pictures
taken. All of those contacted were willing to cooperate except for one instance.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 2

Another couple was randomly chosen as
a replacement. All of those who showed
up to be photographed were of apparent
Caucasian background except for one
Mexican-American couple. Since this
couple’s appearance might provide a
hint for matching they were replaced by
the random selection of another couple.
One engaged couple consistently failed
to show up for the picture-taking, which
left nine engaged and ten married couples. To keep the sample sizes equal the
couple which had been married for the
longest period of time was eliminated.
The total of 36 subjects ranged in age
from 18 to 28 years.

At the picture-taking sessions, each
subject was photographed individually
using the same camera, film type, flash
attachment, and background. In order
to get an impression of general body
build the subjects were photographed
from the waist up. The resulting pictures
were submitted to various judges who
were recruited primarily from upper division and graduate sociology and family development classes.

The judging was accomplished with
each judge working alone while making
his or her decisions. Each judge was
asked to match the pictures of those subjects that he felt looked most alike,
matching male to female. The judges
were first presented with the pictures of
the engaged subjects, the pictures having been laid out on a table in random
fashion. A preliminary check was made
prior to each judging to be sure that the
judge was not acquainted with the subjects. In no case did this become a factor. After the judge had finished with
this first group, the pictures of the married couples were placed on the table in
a similar random manner. The scores,
which represented the number of correct matches for each group, were re
Physiognomic Homogamy

 

153

corded, resulting in two scores for each
judge, or a total of fifty-six scores in all.

The judging was conducted both during the Fall 1978 semester (fourteen
judges) and the Winter 1979 semester
(fourteen judges). At each of the two
times, there were eight female and six
male judges. They ranged in age from 18
to 33. Age appears not to be a factor in
the results because of the narrow age
band selected.

Frequency tables of the scores were
made and these data were compared
with scores that would be expected to be
obtained by chance. The expected frequencies were computed by using the
formula given by Feller (1968, pp. 107108):

PPT) = 1/i! [1/0!-—-1/1! + 1/2!-1/3!
+—...+1/(N-i)!]

The probability for 0 to 9 correct
matches being made randomly among
nine matched pairs is given in Table 1.
The expected frequency for a score of
eight is zero, as, in matching pairs, if
eight are matched correctly then the
ninth will also be matched correctly.

TABLE 1

PROBABILITIES OF CORRECTLY MATCHING
0 To 9 oF 9 MATCHED Pairs*

No of

Correct Matches Probability
Owe no ke ee oe nee we eo 0.367879
Lilie cece eee eee 0.367882
Dect eee e cease 0.183929
Dig pe we ERE ped A Bae 0.061343
MW oe eu oe 08 oe nme 6 ote 0.015278
Dec cece cence 0.003125
O ncn reed bigest ¥O8 0.000463
Eta pa OU OR BN Ne Re 0 000099
wa aa Go we oe On ae we Ae 0.000003

*The expected frequency for a score of eight 1s zero, asin
matching nine pair If eight are matched correctly, the ninth
will also be matched correctly The expected frequency for a
score of eight 1s therefore not included in the table
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

154

The expected frequency for a score of
eight is therefore not included in the table.

Because the expected frequencies for
matching three or more couples correctly are all less than 0.1, the cells for
three or more matches are grouped together in Tables 24, giving four groups
for each table. In these tables the first
column lists the number of correct
choices for each row. The second and
third columns show the raw scores (observed frequency) and per cents (observed per cent) of correct matches respectively. The last two columns show
the expected frequency for correct
matches (fourth column) and the corresponding expected per cent of correct
matches (fifth column).

Chi-square was chosen as the appropriate statistical test to determine if the
scores obtained by the judges were
significantly higher than they would be
expected to achieve by chance. Because
this is a fairly well controlled experimental design and because a stringent test of
significance was desired to avoid accepting the hypothesis if it were not true, the
level of significance was set at 0.001.
With the degrees of freedom (k—1) being 3, the region of rejection is 16.266.

RESULTS

Table 2 indicates the total scores obtained for both semesters for the engaged group only. The number of correct matches greatly exceeds the
number to be expected by chance. Out
of a total of twenty-eight scores, eight
had three correct matches, seven had
four correct matches and two had five
correct matches. The chi-square for Table 2 is 110.92, statistically significant at
the 0.001 level.

Table 3 lists the data for both semes
Chambers, Christiansen, and Kunz

Social Biology

TABLE 2

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBSERVED AND
EXPECTED FREQUENCIES OF CORRECT
MATCHES FOR ENGAGED COUPLES, BOTH

SEMESTERS*
Number of

correct Obs Obs Exp Exp

choices Freq % Freq %
O ....... 1 3.57. 10.30 36.79
L dnd Ba UR 3 10.71 10.30 36.79
2 aeseonws 7 25.00 3.15 18.39
3 and
above 17 60.72 2.25 8.03
Totals ... 28 100.00 28.00 100.00

*\?=110 92, df=3,p= <0 001

TABLE 3

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBSERVED AND
EXPECTED FREQUENCIES OF CORRECT
MATCHES FOR MARRIED COUPLES, BOTH

SEMESTERS*

No of

Correct Obs Obs Exp Exp

Choices Freq % %
0 ....... 5 17.86 10.30 36 79
T sages: 7 25.00 10.30 36 79
2 anwuwam 8 28.58 3.15 18.39
3 and
above 8 28.56 2.25 8 03
Totals ... 28 100.00 28.00 10000

*X?=20 06, df=3.p = <0001

TABLE 4

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBSERVED AND
EXPECTED FREQUENCIES OF CORRECT
MATCHES OF MARRIED COUPLES, FIRST

SEMESTER
No
Correct Obs Obs Exp Exp
Choices Freq % Freq %
O ic vaas vw Z 14.29 = 5.15 36.79
TD sean ue 6 42.85 o15 36.79
2 weunsan 3 21.43 2.58 18.39
3 and
above ... 3 21.43 1.12 8.03
Totals ... 14 100.00 14.00 100.00
*X?=5,3, df=3

 
 

Vol. 30, No. 2

ters for the married subjects only. Although the number of correct matches
exceeds those expected by chance, there
are not as many correct matches for the
married group as there are for the engaged subjects. The chi-square, nevertheless, is still significant at the 0.001
level.

In checking all chi-squares, those for
each semester separately as well as those
combined, the only value not statistically significant at the 0.001 level is that
of the married subjects only for the Fall
semester (see Table 4). Although the
number of correct matches exceed the
number that would be expected by
chance matching, it is not a significant
difference.

THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE

higan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

If a tendency for physiognomic hoS mogamy does exist, as these data indi‘S cate, then the question arises as to what
theoretical explanation there might be
for such a phenomenon. Speculating on
this question it can be noted that such a
~ tendency might be explained from sev& eral different perspectives.
A perhaps obvious explanation is
that most of us have narcissistic tendencies. Freud (1957, p. 88) states:

We say that a human has originally two
sexual objects—himself and the woman
who nurses him—and in doing so we are
postulating a primary narcissism in everyone, which may in some cases manifest itself in a dominating fashion in his objectchoice.

1C

1vers

Un

Downloaded

Thus, Freud asserts that all individuals have a tendency to direct their libidinal energy toward those who resemble
themselves, and the love object of the
individual may well be chosen to satisfy
this narcissistic need.

There are also other theoretical ex
Physiognomic Homogamy

155

planations for a tendency to physiognomic homogamy in mate selection.
There is often a pronounced look-alike
factor among members of a family, especially between parents and their offspring. Is it possible that what is really
happening is that people tend to be attracted to others who resemble some
family member, possibly a parent, and
that in choosing a mate who resembles a
parent that the result is a significant
number of look-alikes among married
couples? If this is what is occurring then
there are two or three additional theoretical perspectives that might explain
the phenomenon.

One might take the position that it is
the functioning of the Oedipus complex
as described by Freud, in which it is asserted that growing children, under normal conditions, ultimately form sexual
attachments to the parent of the opposite sex. In mate selection then, the attraction will be toward an individual
who, in both personality and physical
characteristics, resembles the opposite
sexed parent.

Perhaps, rather than being caused by
subconscious psychic factors, the tendency is explained in more sociological
terms. A social learning theory perspective might state that one learns to associate positive experiences and rewards
with the stimulus of the physical appearance of those who provide these rewards, primarily with the parents from
whom one has received love, nourishment, and physical care. Perhaps when
an individual meets someone who has a
physical resemblance to a parent from
whom he has received such positive
treatment, the appearance acts as the
stimulus by which he associates the behavior and somehow expects the same
kind of rewards.

Being attracted to those who physi
 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

156

cally resemble a parent could also be explained as the result of a basic interaction process. It is probable that
individuals would be inclined to have an
initial positive reaction to other individuals who physically resemble those,
such as their parents, with whom they
have shared their most intimate and intense interactions—people who, by
their appearance, evoke a sense of familiarity and confidence, those who
have particular physical characteristics
which are associated in the mind of the
observer with certain positive familiar
personality characteristics.

These theoretical perspectives,
though purely speculative, do offer possible explanations for the occurrence of
a tendency toward physiognomic homogamy in mate selection.

CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

The results of this study support the
hypothesis that there is a tendency for
people to choose mates who physically
resemble themselves. Out of the six chisquares, all but one is significant at the
0.001 level.

Since the subjects in this study were
recruited from a student population the
question of generalizability to the population as a whole is a legitimate one (see
Kerckhoff, 1974, pp. 72-73). It is to be
noted, however, that in Griffith’s study
his subjects were not drawn from a student population and yet, among his
newlywed subjects, the data indicated a
significant degree of physiognomic ho
Chambers, Christiansen, and Kunz

 

 

Social Biology

mogamy, giving a second source of support to the hypothesis.

One rather surprising finding is that
engaged couples are matched correctly
more often than are the married couples. This is interesting since among any
group of engaged couples it may be assumed that some will terminate their engagement and not follow through to
marriage. We would have expected that
the number of “look alike’ couples
should have been higher among the
married group. One explanation may be
that people initially choose partners
who look like themselves but that in
time, during courtship, other factors of
personality or role incompatibility may
cause termination of the relationship. In
these instances the individuals involved,
now presumably older and wiser, may
consciously seek a partner who is perceived as being similar in terms of these
personality or role factors and put less
emphasis on physical appearance. Additional work needs to be done to determine whether or not this explanation is
correct.

Further replications of this study are
of course necessary to establish the validity of the hypothesis, and many refinements are needed to confirm the applicability of any one general theoretical
perspective. It does appear that this is an
area of research that invites investigation, particularly as it helps to emphasize a factor that has generally been
overlooked, that of the effect that physical characteristics of others play on our
associations, our actions and reactions,
and ultimately in the shaping of human
behavior.

 

 

 
 

Vol. 30, No. 2

BurceEss, ERNEST W., and PAUL WALLIN. 1943.
Homogamy in social characteristics, Amer.
J. Sociol., Vol. 49(Sept):109-124.

FELLER, WILLIAM. 1968. An introduction to
probability theory and its applications, Vol.
1, p. 107-108. John Wiley, New York.

FREUD, SIGMUND. 1957. On narcissism: An introduction, p. 88. Jn the standard edition of
the complete psychological works of
Sigmund Freud, Vol, 14. Translated from
German by James Stackey (gen. ed.). Hogarth Press, London.

GRIFFITHS, R. WayNE. 1970. Assortative mating: A study of physiognomic homogamy.
Master’s Thesis, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Physiognomic Homogamy

157

REFERENCES

GRIFFITHS, R. WAYNE, and PHILLip R. Kunz.
1973. Physiognomic homogamy. Soc. Biol.
20:448-453.

MuRSTEIN, BERNARD I. 1972. Physical attractiveness and marital choice. J. Personal.
Soc. Psychol. 22:8-12.

SHEPARD, J. W., and H. D. E tis. 1972. Physical attractiveness and selection of marriage
partners. Psychol. Rep., Vol. 30.

SPUHLER, H. H. 1968. Assortative mating with
respect to physical characteristics. Eugen.
Quart. 15: 128-140.

STONE, GREGORY G, 1962. Appearance and the
self. Jn Arnold M. Base (ed.), Human behaviour and social processes. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.

 
