Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Evolution of human behavior

S. L. Washburn & E. R. McCown

To cite this article: S. L. Washburn & E. R. McCown (1972) Evolution of human behavior, Social
Biology, 19:2, 163-170, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987980

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987980

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 43
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 6 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Evolution of Human Behavior

S. L. Washburn and E. R. McCown

Department of Anthropology
University of California
Berkeley, California

Man strides bipedally (Napier, 1970),
manufactures skillfully (Oakley, 1954,
1972), and speaks using a phonetic code.
These fundamental abilities are expressed
by intelligent human beings living together
in societies. Man’s evolution is the complex
process by which selection has moved the
course of human evolution further and further from that of his ape-like relatives.
During the lifetime of an individual, biology makes the behaviors possible, but from
the long-term evolutionary point of view,
both behavior and biology evolve in a feedback relationship. For example, a human
child easily learns to speak because it has
both the neurological base and the articulatory apparatus, whereas a chimpanzee cannot be taught to speak because it lacks the
necessary biological base. In human evolution, the initial success of some system of
sound communication, a system different
from that of any existing primate, must
have led to selection for the genes responsible for the new structures.

The fundamental human behaviors
evolved at very different times, and to
facilitate discussion, may be divided into
four stages: Ape to Man; Australopithecus
(in the widest sense); Homo erectus (in
the traditional sense of Java, Peking, and
related forms); and Homo sapiens. Since

 

 

evolution is a continuous process, using
these divisions is not meant to suggest any
major discontinuities in the process.

APE (Pongidae) TO MAN (Hominidae)

Recent studies show that man is much
more closely related to the African apes
than to any other kind of primate (study
of higher organism DNA, Kohne, 1970;
sequence data, Goodman, 1971; immunological investigations, Wilson and Sarich,
1969, Sarich, 1970). According to the
molecular information, man and chimpanzee are so similar that they are almost indistinguishable (Washburn, 1972). Goodman (1963) noted the great similarity of
man, chimpanzee, and gorilla some years
ago, but there was reluctance to accept this
conclusion. It is now supported by so many
lines of evidence that the matter may be
considered settled. It is striking that the
phylogenetic tree of the primates based on
DNA hybridization published by Kohne in
1970 would have caused no comment in
1870; after all, it was the classic view of
Huxley and Darwin.

The field studies of the behavior of the
contemporary primates are in accord with
the conclusion of the biochemical data. The
results can be summarized under three
headings. First, the use of objects by chim
163

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

164

panzees is far greater than in any other
nonhuman primate (van Lawick-Goodall,
1970). Chimps use sticks in agonistic displays, in hitting, prying, digging, and in
gathering food; they use leaves to cleanse
themselves and get water; they throw
stones in displays and sometimes use them
for opening nuts. They use a wide variety
of objects in play. Limited as these uses
may be from a human standpoint, they
constitute more than all object use of all
other animals combined (Lancaster, 1968).

Second, hunting by chimpanzees may
take the form of a sudden attack or a cooperative action by several males (van
Lawick-Goodall, 1968). Third, the gestures
used by chimpanzees are remarkably human. They beg with the palm of the hand
held up and give reassurance by placing
the arm around the shoulders of another
animal (van Lawick-Goodall, 1971). Many
similarities in gesture and posture are the
result of having comparable anatomical
structures (stretching with arms held out
to the sides, balancing the same way, folding the arms, swinging the arms, leaping
with hind legs and landing on the hind legs
—a remarkably human way to jump which
is very different from that of a quadrupedal
monkey).

In summary, many of the behaviors
which were thought to be unique to man
have now been observed in free-ranging
chimpanzees. Obviously, the evolution of
ape behavior (of the general kind seen in
contemporary chimpanzee) to human behavior would be a transition of a lesser degree than from monkey to ape behavior
patterns.

The field studies have shown that rather
than being arboreal, both chimpanzee and
gorilla are ground-living and both are
knuckle-walkers. This fundamentally
changes the investigation into the origins
of man; the question now is how did a

Washburn and McCown

Social Biology

ground-living knuckle-walker become a
biped, not how an arboreal ape came to the
ground (Washburn, 1968).

The suggestion that there was a time
when our ancestors were knuckle-walkers
comes from several sources: (1) Human
hands are basically ape-like rather than
monkey-like (Marzke, 1971; Tuttle, 1969;
Lewis, 1969). (2) Hand bones from Olduvai Gorge dated at about 1.8 million years
ago are halfway between the hand of man
and the hand of gorilla (Napier, 1970).
(3) Man still uses the knuckle-walking
position on occasion, and though uncommon, it is anatomically possible and might
have been a part of the normal behavior
repertoire of our ancestors who had shorter
legs and longer arms.

Some investigators have taken the position that our ancestors could not have been
knuckle-walkers because man lacks some
anatomical features of the contemporary
chimpanzee and gorilla. This reasoning is
reminiscent of the argument that our ancestors could never have been brachiators,
although humans can be seen swinging in
typical ape style in any playground or gymnasium, Given the comparable problem of
moving along a bar too high to reach from
the ground, man, chimpanzee, and gorilla
all swing under the bar, using the same
anatomy in the same way. In the same situation, a monkey runs quadrupedally on top
of the bar. The fundamental point is that
if evolution is predominantly determined
by natural selection, and if success is mediated through behaviors, then anatomy must
be interpreted in terms of behavior; if man
can perform an action today, he may have
performed it more frequently in the past.

The anatomy must correlate with the
whole range of behaviors by which a species
adapts. A behavior profile is much more
useful than a term describing a single activity. A great deal of confusion has come

 

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

from labeling behaviors by such terms as
“brachiation,” with its implication that the
animal only did one thing. Chimpanzees
knuckle-walk, climb, and brachiate. From
a similar pattern of behaviors, our ancestors may have decreased their climbing activity, added bipedal running, and retained
slow knuckle-walking.

In comparing the anatomy of ape and
man, first the behavior must be considered
and then the structures which make it possible. Comparable actions based on comparable anatomy form the basis for
judgment. This can be illustrated in the
case of the gorilla foot. In walking, the heel
strikes the ground first and there is little
midtarsal bending; the big toe is important
in weight-bearing. The soft tissues make
the foot far more human in appearance and
function than would be predictable from
the bones, traditional proportions, or deep
anatomy.

However the problems of the origin of
man may be settled, the molecular information (which is quantifiable, countable,
and reproducible in different laboratories)
is putting new limits on evolutionary speculations. Since this kind of information is
increasing very rapidly, it can be expected
to further limit evolutionary theorizing.
The field studies suggest that the problems
of coming to the ground, walking, hunting,
and object-using all need fundamental reexamination. Anatomical studies need to be
reevaluated in the light of behavior and
molecular biology.

Australopithecus

The remarkable new discoveries in the
East Rudolf and Omo areas have already
been reported at this symposium. The interpretation of the specimens of Azstralopithecus from South Africa was hampered
because of the complicated nature of the
cave deposits and lack of radiometric dates.

 

Evolution of Human Behavior

165

Beginning with the determination of the
K-A dates for Olduvai Gorge which were
later supported by numerous dates from
northern Kenya and southern Ethiopia, it
became clear that there were at least two
kinds of Australopithecus living in the
African savanna for at least two million
years before Homo erectus appeared, approximately one million years ago (Howell
and Tattersall, 1971). Stone tools! of simple forms (Oldowan) had appeared by 2.6
million years ago, and it is probable they
will also be found in much earlier deposits
since the fragments of Australopithecus
have been dated at more than four million
years.

The radiometric dates show that the
stage of human evolution represented by
Australopithecus was relatively long and
that stone tools existed for millions of
years before Homo erectus. These facts
strengthen the notion that the success of
object-using was the new selection pressure
which led a knuckle-walker to evolve into
a biped. The whole range of behaviors
which become possible with carrying and
skillful object-using would have changed
the direction of evolution and made it possible for Australopithecus to live in the
savanna and to hunt more effectively. However this may be, the new dates and fossils
establish that the origin of man (the divergence of man and ape) is separated from
the origin of large-brained man by some
millions of years. The evidence suggests
that most of what is regarded as human
today (intelligence, skillful use of complex
tools, language) evolved in the last million
years, long after the human line had sepa
1 Qn the basis of extensive study of hyenas and
their lairs, Sutcliffe (1970) has shown that hyenas
do collect bones and that the collections known to
be of hyena origin are very similar to those found
in the South African deposits with Australopithecus. Claims for an osteodontokeratic culture
are certainly unfounded.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

166 Washburn and McCown

rated from that leading to the contemporary apes.

Homo erectus

Anatomically, Homo erectus differs from
Australopithecus by having approximately
twice the cranial capacity (Tobias 1971,
p. 98). As is to be expected, if Australopithecus evolved into Homo, there are intermediate forms with corresponding capacities, a subject which has been carefully
reviewed by Tobias (1971). It is probable
that there were important changes in the
pelvis and femur (Zihlman, 1971). Behaviorally, there appear to have been major
changes. Homo erectus may have evolved
from one species of Australopithecus and
displaced the other. After the advent of
Homo erectus there is no evidence for more
than one species of man, and this species
was distributed all over the tropical and
temperate zones of the Old World. Hunting
was a major activity, and the evidence indicates that large animals were killed frequently. A variety of complex tools was
manufactured. In contrast to the earlier
Oldowan stone tools, the Acheulian stone
tools are very difficult to make, and their
presence implies a level of skill far beyond
anything associated with Australopithecus.
This stage of unspecialized hunting has
been described by J. Desmond Clark
(1970) and the biological and cultural interrelations of evolution by Grahame Clark
(1970). .

But in spite of the use of fire and a way
of life more human than apelike, material
progress was very slow. The unspecialized
hunting way of life existed for several hundred thousand years, and even particular
tools (Acheulian biface) were made over
long periods of time and were distributed
over huge geographic areas. Archeological
evidence suggests that these ancient men
were not fully human from an intellectual
point of view and for this reason Hallowell

Social Biology

(1961) proposed that the learned, culturally patterned behavior of early man be
referred to as “protoculture,” and that the
word “culture” be reserved for modern man
(Homo sapiens sapiens).

Homo sapiens sapiens

With the advent of anatomically modern
man, the rate of cultural evolution undergoes a vast acceleration. The degree of
continuity between the populations of ancient man and those of modern man may
have been exaggerated. In a period of a
few thousand years (about forty thousand
years ago) man invented many kinds of
tools, weapons, and boats and established
agriculture. In this moment, from an evolutionary point of view, man invaded the
Arctic and peopled the New World. It is
possible that this cultural explosion was
based in large part on the evolution of
languages of modern form. Foster (1971),
in particular, has developed the theory that
all languages spoken today could have
evolved from a single language some 40,000
years ago. This is not to suggest that there
might not have been simpler forms of language in earlier times, The extensive anatomical base for language indicates that
there must have been a long evolution in
which simpler speech behavior evolved in
a feedback relationship with neural and
articulatory structures. The split brain operations have settled the long controversies
on the nature of localization of speech
(Gazzaniga, 1970).

The interrelations of human_behavior, as revealed by the archeological record, and human biology, as partially
reflected in the fragmentary fossils, show
slow change over some millions of years,
ending with the evolution of a creature
with a remarkable capacity for learning.
Yet this capacity is not unlimited, nor is it
general, and the evolutionary approach is
one way of examining the nature of modern

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

man. The matter may be simply stated:
Our biological nature evolved under conditions which no longer exist. Homo sapiens
sapiens evolved in small social groups.
Gathering and hunting supported sparse
populations. It was a world in which most
people died young (Vallois, 1961). There
may have been no more than ten to twenty
million people in the entire world twenty
thousand years ago. Human brains evolved
as adaptive mechanisms under these conditions, and this created an organ with remarkable abilities and peculiar limitations.

Consider some of the implications of
viewing the human brain as an outmoded
organ of adaptation. Man easily learns the
kinds of behaviors which have been important in the evolution of the species
(Hamburg, 1963) because of the feedback
relationship between successful behavior
and biological evolution. It produces brains
which learn certain behaviors far more
easily than others. This has already been
mentioned in the case of language, and the
point can be further illustrated with the
example of skillful throwing. Chimpanzees
throw both underhand and overhand. Powerful throwing requires the overhand throw,
which is anatomically possible only for apes
and man. However, chimpanzees only
throw when actually displaying or attacking, while man practices repeatedly to
attain skill in throwing stones, baseballs,
spears, or whatever is determined by the
cultural tradition. The skill is learned in
play and is rewarded by society; thus, the
abilities controlled by the brain only develop under social circumstances. Throwing
has been of the greatest adaptive importance in hunting and war, and it is remarkable how many games include throwing and
how pleasurable it is for the individuals
involved. Even such an apparently simple
act as throwing takes into account anatomy, the brain, learning, and social encouragement.

Evolution of Human Behavior

167

Hunting, a more complicated activity,
has been so important in the evolution of
man that people learn to enjoy it, even
without reasonable reward, and will hunt
or fish at great effort and expense. Our
government for many years has raised fish
and game exclusively for the pleasure of
hunters, and no one questions these expenditures. Here again is a behavior which
can be learned with facility and, unless
taught otherwise, men enjoy the chase and
the kill. Hunting not only illustrates the
principle of “ease of learning,” but points
to the very specific personal and social rewards which can only be determined by
studying human behavior. Examining the
activities of throwing and hunting provides
a new way of looking at human behavior.

The peculiarities of the human mind are
not limited to cases of this sort in which
evolution has produced a fit between human biology and formerly effective human
behaviors. Confronted with the experiences
of the small tribal world of primitive man,
the human brain makes a series of fundamental mistakes which are common to all
mankind, In the prescientific world, the
human brain interpreted the world as small
and flat; spontaneous generation was taken
for granted; causes were human actions or
the actions of spirits or gods; nature was
personified; and there was profound confusion between the conscious nature of man
and the nature of the world. In the physical
and biological sciences this primitive view
has been replaced, and every dimension of
reality—time, space, size, cause—is new.
All the theories of science are almost unbelievably different, a change due to the
techniques of science, not to the greater
intelligence of human beings.

But even in scientific thought, these
changes are very recent. Belief in spontaneous generation was abandoned by scientists less than a hundred years ago. Some
understanding of the nature of dreaming

PO

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

168 Washburn and McCown

has been achieved only in the last twenty
years. But social customs are old, and the
categories of the social sciences remain the
categories of the primitive world. This is
the fundamental reason for the difficulty in
relating biology to social science.

For example, all societies have religions
(Murdock, 1945), and some notion of their
variety may be obtained from the reader
compiled by Lessa and Vogt (1965). Institutionalized religion has numerous social
and psychological functions, and these cannot be attributed to biology. All religions
are based on the way the untrained human
mind deals with the problems of nature and
causes. Without the peculiarity of the human mind there would be no religions. The
personification of nature affects man’s view
of disease, Jaw, economics, and political
systems. The human mind is an organ of
adaptation which evolved-under conditions
which existed during the period in which
man lived in small hunting and gathering
groups and continued evolving in agricultural societies. Under those conditions, the
institutions of primitive society were a
natural development; but in any other
sense religion is not necessary, efficient, or
real,

This point may be further illustrated by
considering aggressive behaviors (Washburn and Hamburg, 1968). Man easily
learns to be aggressive, and the nature and
quantity of aggression through the ages
surpasses modern belief (Freedman, 1964).
Very aggressive behaviors were necessary
for the survival of most human societies.
The biological basis of aggression is in the
brain (Mark and Ervin, 1970) and is regulated by hormones (Hamburg, 1971). In
European society at least, aggression was
practiced in play and highly rewarded socially, which does not mean that man had
to learn to be aggressive, but that he was
very likely to. In our time aggression does
not account for the institution of war, but

 

Social Biology

it is very difficult to see how war could
have been so prevalent and so exalted had
man not been highly aggressive. Aggressive
acts (acts inflicting damage on another)
are not, and have not been, limited to war.
In the European tradition, damaging acts
were used in child rearing and teaching and
were regarded as the natural way to guide
the young. Over much of the world torture
has been a common human activity. Aggressive acts permeate societies, and in this
sense, it is not possible to understand aggression by studying only war. A full
understanding comes when the social situation is seen as a product of biology and
culture.

The notion that a species readily learns
those behaviors which have been important
in its evolutionary past is fundamental to
the evolutionary approach to human behavior (Hamburg, 1963). Man easily learns
to be religious, to be aggressive, to be
social. Social learning is complex and is
acquired more easily with the near and the
few (for these are the dimensions of primitive society) than with the many and the
remote. The Vietnam war exemplifies this
most clearly, where standards of behavior
tolerated in Vietnam would never have
been allowed near home.

Another way of using the evolutionary
data is to stress that customs are carried by
people and that different ways of acting
have different biological costs. For example,
warfare among Plains Indians put such demands on young men that some could not
adjust, and these men attired themselves in
women’s clothing and did not take part in
the system of attaining prestige through
extreme violence. Viewing customs as adaptations permits the assessment of ways of
life. Because a custom exists does not mean
that it is effective or necessary. The crosscultural method merely tells us what the
customs are, not the costs, For example, at
the present time there is much discussion

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

about schools. For millions of people to
spend a quarter of their lives in school is a
new social situation.

It might be supposed that the study of
the evolution of behavior would have little
to contribute to understanding new social
institutions, but the study of evolution tells
a great deal about how animals learn. The
points have been considered in more detail
elsewhere (Washburn, 1971), but the following are the mean issues. Early experience is tremendously important, particularly so in the case of slowly maturing
man. Learning first takes place in emotional, close interpersonal situations and is
later motivated by clearly defined objectives. Repetition is guaranteed by pleasurable activity until skills are mastered. Peers
are important in transmitting education.
Rewards are highly specific. The traditional
American educational system has not been
operated in accord with what we know about
how primates learn. It starts too late, relies
on words rather than actions and on discipline rather than play. The goals are not
clear to either teacher or student, and peers
are excluded from the role of teacher. It

Evolution of Human Behavior

169

would be hard to devise a worse system for
educating human beings. The study of how
humans learn and of the evolution of learning is very different from the study of
schools. The study of the schools cannot
possibly tell us how humans learn because
natural learning situations have been excluded from the activities in the schools.

There are many other consequences of
continuing to live in the primitive world.
They relate to the political process, the
nature of leadership, law, our view of
causes, socialization, and the whole realm
of creative activity. One of the purposes of
the study of evolution is to see man in a
new perspective. Whatever future there
may be, the actors in the new social systems will be human beings with the profound consequences this has for any society. The physical sciences have created a
new world of technical possibilities far
beyond the dreams of our ancestors. Biology and the study of evolution can help to
free man from the limitations of the primitive world so that he may live with fewer
constraints in this new world.

REFERENCES

CLARK, GRAHAME. 1970. Aspects of prehistory.
University of California Press, Berkeley.

CiarK, J. Desmonp, 1970. The prehistory of
Africa. Thames and Hudson, London.

Foster, Mary L. 1971. American Indian and Old
World languages: A model for reconstruction.
Paper presented at meeting of the American
Anthropological Association, New York.

FREEDMAN, DEREK. 1964. Human aggression in
anthropological perspective. Zn J. D. Carthy
and F. J. Ebling (eds.), The natural history of
aggression. Academic Press, New York.

Gazzanica, M. S. 1970. The bisected brain. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.

GoopMan, Morris. 1963. Man’s place in the phylogeny of the primates as reflected in serum
proteins, p. 204-234. In S. L. Washburn (ed.),
Classification and human evolution. Aldine,
Chicago.

GoopMAN, Morris, JOHN BARNABAS, GENJI MatsupA, and G. W. Moore. 1971. Molecular evolution in the descent of man. Nature 233:604613.

HALtoweELt, A. I. 1961. The procultural foundations of human adaptation, p. 236-255. In

 

S. L. Washburn (ed.), The social life of early
man. Aldine, Chicago.

Hamesurc, D. A. 1963. Emotions in the perspective of human evolution, p. 330-317. In P.
Knapp (ed.), Expression of the emotions in
man. International Universities Press, New
York.

. 1971. Understanding aggression. Internat.
J. Soc. Sci. 23:36-46.

Howe tt, F, C., and I. TATTERSALL. 1971. Hominidae, p. 220-221. In. McGraw-Hill Yearbook of
Science and Technology. McGraw-Hill Book
Co., Inc., New York.

Koune, E. E. 1970. Evolution of higher-organism
DNA. Quart. Rev. Biophysics 3:327-375.

LANCASTER, J. B. 1968. On the evolution of toolusing behavior. Amer. Anthropol. 70:56-66.

Lessa, W. A., and E. Z. Vocr. 1965. Reader in
comparative religion: An anthropological approach, Harper and Row, New York.

Lewis, O. J. 1969. The hominoid wrist joint.
Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 30:251-268.

Mark, VERNON H., and F. R. Ervuy. 1970. VioIence and the brain. Harper and Row, New
York.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

170 Washburn and McCown

Marzke, M. R. W. 1971. Origin of the human
hand. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 34:61-84.

Murpock, G. P. 1945. The common denominator
of cultures, pp. 123-142. In The science of man
in the world crisis. Columbia Univ. Press, New
York.

NaPrER, J. R. 1970. The roots of mankind. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

OaxKLEY, K. P. 1954. Skill as a human possession,
p. 1-37. In Charles Singer, E. J. Holmyard,
A. R. Hall, and T. I. Williams (eds.), A history
of technology, Vol. 1. Clarendon Press, London.

. 1972, Skill as a human possession, p. 1450. In S. L. Washburn and Phyllis Dolhinow
(eds.), Perspectives on human evolution. Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, New York.

SaricH, V. M,. 1970. Primate systematics with
special reference to Old World monkeys, p. 175226. In J. R. Napier and P. H. Napier (eds.),
Old World monkeys. Academic Press, New
York.

Sutctmrre, A. J. 1970. Spotted hyaena: Crusher,
gnawer, digester, and collector of bones. Nature
227:1110-1113.

Tosras, P. V. 1971. The brain in hominid evolution. Columbia Univ. Press, New York and
London.

Turtte, R. H. 1969. Knuckle-walking and the
problem of human origins. Science 166:953-961.

Vattols, H. V. 1961. The social life of early man:
The evidence of skeletons, p. 214-235. In S. L.
Washburn (ed.), Social life of early man. Aldine, Chicago.

 

 

Social Biology

VAN LAWICK-GOODALL, JANE. 1968. The behaviour
of free-living chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream
Reserve. Animal Behaviour Monographs 1:161311.

. 1970. Tool-using in primates and other

vertebrates, p. 195-249, In R. A. Hinde and

Evelyn Shaw (eds.), Advances in the study of

behaviour, Vol. 3.

. 1971. In the shadow of man. Houghton
Mifflin, Boston.

Wasuesuryn, S. L. 1968. Speculations on the problem of man’s coming to the ground. Jn B. Rothblatt (ed.), Changing perspectives on man.
Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

. 1971. On the importance of the study of

primate behavior for anthropologists. Zn M. L.

Wax, S. Diamond, and F, O. Gearing (eds.),

Anthropological perspectives on education.

Basic Books, New York.

. 1972. Primate studies and human evolution. Jn G. Bourne (ed.), Primates in biomedical research. Academic Press, New York.

Wasxusurn, S. L., and D. A. Hampurc. 1968.
Aggressive behavior in Old World monkeys and
apes, p. 458-478. In P. C. Jay (ed.), Primates:
Studies in adaptation and variability. Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, New York.

Wrson, A. C., and V. M. Saricw. 1969. A molecular time scale for human evolution. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 63:1088—1093.

ZIHLMAN, A, L. 1971. The question of locomotor
differences in Australopithecus. Proceedings of
the 3rd International Congress of Primatology,
1970, 1:54--66.

 

 

 

 

 

 
