Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Changing patterns of caste in India

L. D. Sanghvi

To cite this article: L. D. Sanghvi (1970) Changing patterns of caste in India, Social Biology, 17:4,
299-301, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987887

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987887

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB arr | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 9
N
Q View related articles 4

wa Citing articles: 2 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Changing Patterns of Caste in India

L. D. Sanghvi

Cancer Research Institute
Bombay, India

Caste organization in India is at least
two thousand years old and perhaps much
older. The most significant feature of this
social scheme, from the point of view of a
geneticist, is the endogamous nature of
caste, Religious movements that swept the
country during the historical period—such
as Jainism, Buddhism, and Mohammedanism, and more recently Christianity,
Sikhism, and others—did not succeed in
weakening its endogamous nature. The
people who accepted the new religions retained as far as possible the prevalent social
scheme of marriages. As a result, we have
several well-defined Muslim castes and
castes such as Brahman-Christians and
Sudra-Christians.

Material on mating patterns in India is
scanty, and this seems to be primarily because so little change is taking place from
the traditional mating pattern governed by
caste and by religion. I have been able to
get limited data from Kerala (Ali, 1968) and
from West Bengal (Gangopadhya, 1964).
After reviewing this material briefly, I will
list certain factors that are influencing or
are being influenced by this caste organization.

MATING PATTERNS BY CASTE
AND BY RELIGION

The data from Kerala were collected as a
part of an anthropometric survey which
covered 155 locations all over the state.

 

Information was collected about caste and
religion of the spouses in 980 marriages
which provided the material for mating
patterns. Of these marriages, 662 were
contracted among different castes of Hindus, 254 were among Christians, and 64
were among Muslims.

Among the Christians and Muslims,
there were 5 inter-sect marriages: 3 between
different sects of Christianity and 2 between
different sects of Islam. This gives a rate
of 1.6% of the inter-sect marriages.

The 662 marriages among the Hindus
belonged to 12 different castes. There was
a total of 4 inter-caste marriages among
them. Two of these marriages were between
Brahman men and Nayar (soldiers) and
Vaniyan (oil traders) women. Two other
marriages were between Mukkuvan (sea
fishermen) and Valan (backwater fishermen)
men with Izhava (toddy tapper) women. It
may be added that traditionally Brahmans
were considered socially higher than Nayars
and Vaniyans. Mukkuvan and Valan were
considered higher than Izhava. In other
castes, which were in an intermediate
category, no mixed marriages were recorded.
The rate of inter-caste marriages was 0.6%.

In the total of 980 marriages, there were
3 inter-religious or inter-community marriages; 2 between Christian men and Hindu
women, and 1 between a Muslim man and
Christian woman, giving a rate of 0.3%.

299
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

300 Sanghvi

The only other data known to me are 9
inter-caste marriages in a sample of 3,000
in West Bengal. This gives a rate of 0.3%,
or about half of the per cent recorded for
inter-caste marriages in Kerala.

It might be added that Kerala and West
Bengal are somewhat special cases. There
is a high degree of literacy in Kerala, and
what is happening in these two states might
perhaps be an upper limit of what might be
happening in the rest of the country.

Mention might be made here about the
efforts to encourage inter-caste marriages
in some of the states, The state of Tamilnad
(Madras) has offered a gold medal for every
inter-caste marriage. There were 48 couples
in the state awarded these medals last year.
Punjab has offered a cash bonus for every
inter-caste marriage. The results of this
incentive are not yet known. Dr. S. Chandrasekhar, Union Minister of State for
Health and Family Planning, is known to
be in favor of promoting inter-caste, interprovincial, and inter-religious marriages.
However, the editorial] response in influential newspapers in India and the letters
from the public about his views indicated
that the country is not yet quite ready for
a serious move of this nature.

CHANGES IN OCCUPATIONAL PATTERNS

Rigidity in matters of marriage should
not be taken to indicate that caste is not
changing in certain other respects. It is
known that occupational patterns among
castes have been gradually changing, and
some material is available from early census
reports and recent surveys (Bose, 1967).
For instance, in the census of 1901, only
33% of the employed Brahmans of Bengal
were recorded in traditional occupations,
and this figure went down to 17% by 1931.
Corresponding figures for Vaidya (physicians) of Bengal were 36% in 1901 and 19%
in 1931.

At the village level, a survey of Jagigram
village of Birbhum District of West Bengal
carried out in 1947 revealed interesting

Social Biology

information. The village consisted of 434
families with 2,160 individuals, of which
86 (20%) belonged to upper castes of
Brahman, Vaidyas, Rajputs, and Kayasthas. Only 8 of them were engaged in traditional occupations, and the remaining
families were recorded in traditional occupations such as potters, blacksmiths, barbers,
carpenters, washermen, etc. Among them,
there were two large occupational castes,
65 families of Muchi, the shoemakers and
tanners, and 40 families of Bara with the
traditional occupation of cultivation of
betel-vine. Most of the families of Bara
were able to thrive in their traditional occupation to meet an increasing demand for
betel-vine. On the other hand, most of the
Muchis lost their traditional occupation
and eked out a difficult existence as farm
laborers like the remaining 148 (34%)
families of backward castes and tribes in
the village.

Where the high-caste Hindus went and
why the Muchis lost their traditional occupation can be understood to some extent
by a recent survey of a large leather factory near Calcutta. It was found that 43%
of the Hindu working force consisted of
upper castes of Brahmans, Vaidyas, and
Kayasthas, which together form 12~15% of
the general population of the State. Traditionally, working in leather was considered
an inferior occupation and high-caste Hindus
would be polluted by touching a man working in Jeather. But now the trade in hides,
skins, and shoes has formed an important
item of foreign export and these items have
to be processed in factories. High-caste Hindus have found gainful employment and
have ignored the question of pollution.

CHANGES IN RITUALS, FOOD TABOOS,
AND UNTOUCHABILITY

There has been a remarkable change in
recent years in the attitudes of people toward the rituals connected with birth, marriage, and death, and these practices are
modifying very rapidly. This is also true

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 4

about food taboos and transmission of
pollution between different castes, which
seem to have been weakening as a result of
education and increasing communication.
Attitudes towards the hierarchic nature of
caste among the Hindus also seem to be
changing as a result of increasing political
consciousness and the right of every adult
individual to vote. On the other hand, the
attitude of caste Hindus toward the untouchable castes has made very little progress, Sankaracharya of Puri, one of the foremost Hindu religious leaders, defended some
time ago untouchability as a custom sanctioned by the sacred law books of India.
Public opinion in the country was, however,
aroused very recently by some gruesome
murders of the untouchables, and a highlevel committee was formed to look into
the problem of untouchability. According to
Mx. L. Elayaperumal, chairman of this committee, Kerala stood first in abolishing untouchability and discrimination followed by
West Bengal and Assam. Discrimination
against Harijans (Untouchables) was worse
in Uttar Pradesh, followed by Rajasthan,
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and
Andhra Pradesh (Nargolkar, 1969).

POLITICAL AND FINANCIAL ASPECTS

I have outlined above certain aspects of
the caste organization which seem to be
weakening. I will now give evidence about
some other aspects of caste, which are
finding a renewed importance in the new
setting in India after the British left.

A sample survey carried out in 1965 by
Professor V. M. Sirsikar of Poona University revealed that caste and religion played
an important role in rural elections in the
state of Maharashtra. The survey showed
that 71% of the office bearers of rural
councils were drawn from the Maratha

Caste in India

301

caste, although they constituted only 40%
of the total population of the state. This
trend was far more evident in north and
south Maharashtra where only 4% of the
office bearers were non-Marathas. Brahmans, in contrast, who constituted about
10% of the total population of the state, held
less than 4% of the seats as office bearers.
The scheduled castes and tribes have a
proportional number of reserved seats, and
there was no competition between them
and the caste Hindus in rural elections.

A committee appointed under Dr. Hazari
to look into the industrial licensing policy
of the Government of India gave some data
about the caste and community distribution
of the parties getting the licenses. During
1959-66, the Government of India approved
a total investment of 7.8 billion rupees. The
share of approved investment of the Marwaris was 24%, followed by 15% for
Gujaratis, 8% for South Indians, 5% for
Punjabis, and 4% for Parsis. The remaining
investment was shared by the Public Sector
of the Government of India and a number
of small Private Sector groups. Marwaris
who secured the largest share in the Private
Sector belong historically to Rajasthan and
have been known to be in business and
finance for hundreds of years. Gujaratis,
who come next, have historical ties with
the Marwaris, and between these two
groups, they shared almost 40% of the new
investment,

In summary, the caste organization is
undergoing a rapid modification in its functions. Older functions are being given up to
take the place of newer ones. New methods
are coming into rapid use to help the caste
in its important function of providing a
ready framework for marriages which continue to be arranged in traditional manner
by the parents.

REFERENCES

Aur, S. G. M. 1968. Inbreeding and endogamy in
Kerala (India). Acta Gent. (Basel) 18:369-379.

Bosr, N. K. 1967. Culture and society in India.
Asia Publishing House, Bombay, India.

GANGoPpaADHYA, B. 1964. Marriage regulations

among certain castes of Bengal. Monograph.
Deccan College, Poona, India.

NARGOLKAR, V. S. 1969. Removal of untouchability: Goals and attainments. Ind. J. Soc. Work
30:189-201.
