Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Attitudes toward control and elimination of
genetic defects

C. R. Margolin

To cite this article: C. R. Margolin (1978) Attitudes toward control and elimination of genetic
defects, Social Biology, 25:1, 33-37, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988316

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988316

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3

»
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 3 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Attitudes Toward Control and Elimination of

Genetic Defects

C. R. Margolin

New College
San Jose State University
San Jose, California

 

 

ABSTRACT: Ina series of realistic examples, university students displayed support for interference
with natural processes to prevent the births of defective children. The majority felt that an
organism became a person before birth, yet that it was not murder to end such a life under specific
circumstances. Women, older respondents, and students not currently enrolled in genetics classes
showed more willingness to interfere more drastically in selected situations than men, younger
respondents, and genetics students. However, the majority of the sample consistently opposed
taking chances on producing children with genetic or birth defects.

Concern is mounting over the role of
public opinion and governmental control
in the manipulation of genetic characteristics. Sophisticated laboratory techniques like amniocentesis and biochemical
tests now permit the detection of abnormalities in unborn fetuses. Coupled with

these new diagnostic tools, methods for:

avoiding the births of children with possible genetic defects are becoming more
reliable and accessible: birth control,
sterilization, abortion, artificial insemination, implantation of eggs fertilized outside the womb.

While some researchers stress the value
of genetic and environmental diversity
(White, 1972; Davis, 1970), the scientific
community continues to study the elimination of defects through genetic manipulation with the “humane goal of... relieving human misery” (Kass, 1971, p.
784).

Weekly news magazines publish reports
of current scientific discoveries, Congressional committees hold hearings to ascertain professional opinions, and scientific groups meet to set guidelines. But the

opinions of the lay public are largely unknown, even while Congressional leaders
like Senator Kennedy and radical groups,
such as Science for the People, are calling
for increased public involvement in the
determination of needs and policies of future research (Maugh, 1976; Walsh, 1976;
Culliton, 1976; Newsweek, Jan. 12, 1976).

How do people feel about the uses of the
new technology in manipulating the genetic make-up of the population? A Harris
poll in 1969 found that a majority of the
public (58 per cent) favored using genetic
engineering to correct defects in a particular fetus, but only 21 per cent wanted to
use it to improve the race. Women favored
the use of the new technology more than
did men (Fletcher, 1974). In 1971, a Gallup poll showed that 69 per cent of the
public felt that a young couple should obtain “professional information and guidance” before having children (Gallup,
1972).

If faced with crucial situations in which
the techniques of genetic control presented
realistic alternatives, how would a wellinformed person respond? How do people

33
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

34 Margolin

feel about making decisions about their
own reproductive lives and those of others? What about the possibilities of government involvement in these decisions?
The answers to these questions are important to scientific researchers and legislators
who will determine the applications of
current and future discoveries.

The current study utilized a role-playing
model for a questionnaire to ascertain attitudes about difficult decisions concerning
the control and elimination of genetic defects. Upper-division liberal arts university students, who represent a generally
well-informed segment of the lay population likely to become future policy makers,
were given the questionnaire and asked to
place themselves in situations which called
for decisions about reproduction. In addition, students enrolled in genetics classes
were surveyed to determine if current involvement in the area was associated with
different opinions.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

SAMPLE

Approximately 550 questionnaires were
distributed in upper-division science
(nongenetics), social science, humanities,
and genetics classes at San Jose State University. The final sample consisted of 291
respondents who voluntarily returned the
questionnaire: 74 in science, 70 in social
science, 64 in humanities, and 83 in genetics. There were 141 males and 150 females, ranging in age from 18 to 66 (median, 23). Responses were analyzed in
terms of the entire sample and the following subgroups: male/female, older (over
23)/younger (18 to 23), and _ genetics/
general (science, social science, humanities).! The median age of each subgroup was the same.

1 The various school groups were included to assure a good sampling of a well-informed lay popula
Social Biology

QUESTIONNAIRE

Fourteen situations involving the definition of life and the control and elimination of genetic defects were proposed.
The respondent was asked to choose one
of the various alternative actions as if
he/she were a specific person involved in
the situation. The problems revolved
around feelings about ending life under
various circumstances, interfering with
“natural” processes, limiting births by
applying current technologies, and making decisions on the individual and governmental level. The rights of parents and
their offspring and those of the government, researchers, and medical authorities
were questioned. For example, Question 4
read as follows:

Through blood tests, you have discovered
that you and your mate both carry the recessive gene for Tay-Sachs disease. This disease
results in complete deterioration of the nervous system, and the victims (who have a
double recessive) do not survive infancy. If
you have a child, there is a 25% chance that
it will have Tay-Sachs, 50% that it will be a
carrier of one recessive gene (like you and
your mate) and 25% that it will be normal.
You should:

a. not have any children and have yourself
sterilized.

6b. not have any children, use birth control,
and abort all conceptuses.

c. choose artificial insemination by sperm
from a noncarrier (the probability is 50%
that an offspring will carry the deleterious
recessive gene).

d. have amniocentesis done after 4 months
of pregnancy and abort any with the disease.

e. take chances, have children, and hope for
the best.

In every question, there was at least one
alternative solution which interfered with

tion rather than to assess differences. Many of the
respondents in each group were majors in another
group, so that the entire sample could be characterized as liberal arts. The genetics/general dichotomy refers only to the specialized emphasis of one of
the classes in which one of the groups was currently
enrolled.

2 A complete questionnaire is available on request.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Genetic

Vol. 25, No. 1

natural processes by eliminating the possibility of ever bearing biological children
or by allowing some flexibility (amniocentesis, abortion, artificial insemination,
birth control, infanticide). There was also
one alternative which rejected controls
completely. Respondents were asked to
choose only one alternative in each case.
Technical terms were defined in a glossary
at the end of the questionnaire.

ANALYSIS

To analyze differences between groups
on the questionnaire as a whole, the alternative actions in each situation were
ranked and assigned a score. The lowest
score represented having one’s own biological children with a minimum of control
(“e” in the above example). The highest
score called for irreversible action determined by an outsider (e.g., “your mate
should be sterilized” or “let it (a seriously
deformed newborn] die”). In this framework, amniocentesis ranks lower than
birth control with abortion of all conceptuses because the former still allows affected individuals to have their own biological children, even though the technique seems to involve more interference
with natural processes. This rank score
was used in order to compute a total score
for each respondent and the questionnaire
as a whole and for certain groups of items.
T-tests on mean scores were used to analyze group differences on rankings. The
bulk of the data (individual questions),
however, were analyzed by chi-squares for
frequency distributions.

The study has been summarized by
grouping questions and reporting the significant results of these groupings in the
following section. All reported differences
based on sex, age, or current class enrollment (genetics/general) are statistically
significant, with a probability of less than
0.05 of occurring by chance.

 

Defects 35

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The overriding result of this study was
that a majority of a generally welleducated informed sample of the lay population favors using the techniques of genetic and population control to prevent the
births of defective persons, but feels that
specific decisions should be made by individual prospective parents rather than
government officials. Four groups of
questions dealt with different aspects of
these perceptions and attitudes: definitions
of life and murder, role of prospective parents, role of professionals, and role of the
government.

In response to three questions about
the beginning of personhood and the
definition of murder, the most frequent
choice (37 per cent) was that the respondent began to exist as a person at birth.
The majority (56 per cent) felt that ending
the life of this “person” would be murder
at birth (but not earlier), even though
many of them had chosen earlier times for
the beginning of personhood (23 per cent
choosing time of fertilization). For a severely deformed organism, however, the
majority (51 per cent) felt that at xo point
up through birth was one guilty of murder. Overall, women and older students
chose significantly later times than men
and younger students. Genetics students
chose later times for the deformed organism.

Six questions asked people to make decisions about reproduction if they were
victims or carriers of serious genetic or
birth defects (Tay-Sachs disease, thalassemia major, hemophilia, Down’s syndrome, and multiple birth defects). Table
1 summarizes the main responses to these
questions. A majority of the respondents
chose alternatives to simply taking a
chance on having a defective child (62 per
cent for hemophilia to 93 per cent for
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

36 Margolin

Social Biology

TABLE 1

PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS FAVORING VARIOUS ALTERNATIVES IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION OF
SPECIFIC GENETIC OR CONGENITAL DEFECTS

ALTERNATIVES
Abort

DEFECTS AND Abort All Affected Artificially Do Not

PERSON INVOLVED Sterilize Conceptuses Conceptuses Inseminate Interfere
Tay-Sachs carriers*t ............. 3 6 54 2 6

Thalassemia major

CarrierS*£ .. 0... ccc ee ee eee eee 25 7 52 2 9
Hemophilia female carriert ....... 37 12 24 4 20
Hemophilia male victim*f ........ 27 7 14 12 36
Birth defects victimt ............. 54 15 N.A. 13 14
Down’s syndrome fetus*.......... N.A. N.A. 81 N.A, 18

* Older students favored the stronger interventions
t General (nongenetics) students favored the stronger interventions
+ Women favored the stronger interventions

Tay-Sachs), but they favored different
specific actions depending on the possible
amelioration of the condition by modern
medicine and whether the potential child
would be a victim or carrier. Unknown
causes of birth defects seemed to motivate
the most drastic intervention showing the
only majority response for sterilization.
The “take chances” alternative received a
minority response in every case. However,
36 per cent did choose it when only
hemophilia carriers could be produced.
When differences did occur between
groups, women, older respondents, and
nongenetics students chose more drastic
interventions significantly more often.
Four questions asked respondents to
identify with professionals, i.e., doctors
and social workers, who might be involved in making decisions about people
with genetic defects. The majority (52 per
cent) felt that doctors should directly
counsel potential victims of Huntington’s
chorea, rather than leaving it to the affected parent. However, an even larger
percentage (63 per cent) felt that a doctor
should consult the parents of a severely
deformed newborn rather than acting unilaterally to let it live or die. Younger students favored this consultation process
even more strongly. Respondents felt that

social workers should recommend (43 per
cent) or require (25 per cent) genetic counseling but not specific actions for their
clients. Preference was shown for having
professionals donate time to a free clinic
for abortions and genetic counseling (76
per cent) rather than to one treating victims of defects, with the genetics students
expressing an even stronger preference (83
per cent).

The situation posed by the last question
placed the respondent on a Presidential
advisory panel “making recommendations
for alleviating a disastrous overpopulation
problem.” Table 2 summarizes the seven
areas in which the sample had to favor or
oppose legislation. A majority of the sam
TABLE 2

PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS FAVORING AND
OPPOSING LEGISLATION ON VARIOUS AREAS
OF POPULATION CONTROL

No

Areas Favor Oppose Response

Requirements for

conceptions ............. 44.0 54.6 1.4
Limits on

conceptions ............. 53.6 44.7 1.7
Amniocentesis............. 79.0 19.9 1.0
Abortion ................. 77.0 22.3 0.7
Birth control.............. 61.9 37.5 0.7
Sterilization ............... 52.2 47.1 0.7
Information

dissemination ........... 88.3 8.9 2.7

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 1 Genetic
ple did favor legislation in all areas except
that of setting requirements for conception. Specific proposals, however, were
only favored if they increased rather than
decreased options for individuals, for example, if they provided free services
rather than required controls. Genetics
students were more hesitant than the rest
of the sample about favoring the dissemination of information by holding public
meetings or requiring counseling for prospective parents.

Comparing the various groups on their
total scores for the whole questionnaire,
women, older respondents, and students
not currently enrolled in genetics classes
scored significantly higher, favoring
stronger interventions overall. Men made
significantly more choices which rejected
interference or “took chances” than women, although the mean number of times
such a choice was made (2.5 out of a possible 21 times for the entire sample) was
extremely low and the difference small

Defects 37

(2.8 men to 2.2 women). There were no
significant differences among the three
schools where students were not enrolled
in genetics classes. Where significant differences did occur between groups,
women and older respondents were consistently more in favor of drastic irreversible
actions (like sterilization). Genetics students, on the other hand, with their current involvement in the field were more
hesitant than the rest of the sample to use
these irreversible techniques.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author wishes to thank the following
San Jose State University faculty for their help
on the questionnaire, the participation of their
students, and the critical reading of the manuscript: Jean Beard, Eugene Bernardini,
Catharine Blecki, Terry Christiansen, Peter
Collins, Harold DeBey, Nancy Geilhufe,
Robert Gliner, Richard Ingraham, Kenneth
MacKay, Marshall Maddock, Paul Oler,
Beata Panagopoulos, Richard Smith, Robert
Thamm, and Robert Wilson.

REFERENCES

CULLITON, BARBARA J. 1976. Genetic screening:
States may be writing the wrong kind of laws.
Science 191:926-929.

DAVIS, BERNARD D. 1970. Prospects for genetic intervention in man. Science 170:1279-1283.

FLETCHER, JOSEPH. 1974. The ethics of genetic control. Anchor Press, Garden City, New York.

GALLUP, GEORGE H. 1972. The Gallup Poll. Vol. 3.
1959-1971. Random House, New York.

Kass, LEON R. 1971. The new biology: What price
for relieving man’s estate? Science 174:779—788.

MauGu, Tuomas H., II. 1976. NSF: Trying to cope
with Congressional pressure for public participation. Science 191:274.

NEWSWEEK. Politics and genes. Jan. 12, 1976.
Newsweek 88(2):50—52.

WALSH, JOHN. 1976. Science for the people: Comes
the evolution. Science 191:1033-1035.

WHITE, ELLIoTT S. 1972. Genetic diversity and
political life: Towards a population-interaction
paradigm. J. Polit. 34(4):1203-1242.
