Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Testing and clarifying a macro model of socioeconomic change and fertility
H. C. Chang , Richard D. Warren & Brian F. Pendleton
To cite this article: H. C. Chang , Richard D. Warren & Brian F. Pendleton (1979) Testing and clarifying a macro model of socioeconomic change and fertility, Social Biology, 26:1, 30-50, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988359 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988359
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 7 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Testing and Clarifying a Macro Model of Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

*H. C. Chang, Richard D. Warren, and Brian F. Pendleton
*Department of Sociology, and Departments of Sociology and Statistics, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa; and Department of Sociology, University of Akron, Akron, Ohio
ABSTRACT: This study examines human reproduction and its causal links to the socioeconomic conditions of society within the framework of the demographic transition. A theoretical fertility model for one hundred countries (28 more developed countries [MDC's] and 12 less developed countries [LDC's]) is subjected to path analysis. Findings for the hundred countries were mainly a function of the LDC's. Stronger support was found in the LDC's for the indirect fertilityinhibiting effect of economic development than for its fertility-promoting effect. This indirect effect was exerted on fertility through education-literacy and nutrition-diet. Education-literacy was by far the most important cause of fertility decline, although there were smaller positive direct effects of economic development and governmental attitudes toward family planning on fertility. When education-literacy was controlled, economic development became a negative, but insignificant, influence on fertility, and the effect of governmental attitudes toward family planning exhibited no effect on fertility. These findings suggest strongly that the improvement of education and literacy may be an answer to fertility control. Changes in health service and infant mortality seem natural results of the betterment of education and literacy. This study reconciles the two distinct views as to whether fertility increases or remains stable and high while mortality declines during early demographic transition. Both offer valid explanations for the transition in the LDC's. Results for the LDC's are compared with those for the MDC's, and policy implications are discussed.

Although human reproduction is social behavior subject to social, cultural, and economic parameters, scientists have found that some socioeconomic indicators are more consistently related to fertility behavior than others. However, a lack of consensus among researchers seems to characterize the literature in this area of demography (Namboodiri, 1975; Mason et al., 1971; Loewenthal and David, 1972). A better understanding of the complex nature of reproduction is essential because of the current rapid population growth in less-developed areas and the multitude of social and economic consequences of human reproduction both in developed and less-developed nations. This study is an effort to examine the complexity of socioeconomic conditions of a society and their causal links to human reproduction.

Specification of this study's fertility model draws primarily on demographic transition theory. More specifically, variables related to all-encompassing terms like "modernization" and "development" are aligned in a temporal framework in an attempt to rectify major questions remaining in the explication of demographic transition theory. The model attempts to synthesize major macro-level variables into a logical complex of variables antecedent to fertility. Three major theoretical questions direct this investigation. The first deals with Heer's (1966) statement that the direct effect of economic development actually is to increase fertility while the indirect effect, operating through various intermediary variables, is to decrease fertility. The implications, both in terms of better understanding

30

Vol. 26, No. 1

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

macro-level causal linkages within the framework of transition theory and population-relevant policies made by governments attempting to lower fertility, are staggering.
Secondly, demographic transition theory is vague in its description of the relationship between fertility and mortality at the beginning of the transition. Demographers have debated whether economic development stimulates fertility before fertility declines (Teitelbaum, 1974, p. 745). Some (e.g., Petersen, 1975, 462463) argue that demographic history clearly indicates that a rise in fertility, together with a decline in mortality (mostly a decline in infant mortality) is responsible for rapid population growth. An upsurge in fertility has been observed at the beginning of economic development (e.g., Adelman, 1963; Heer, 1966; Weintraub, 1962). Some (e.g., Kammeyer, 197S) believe that mortality decline alone is the cause of such growth during socioeconomic development. Yet others (most notably Preston, 1978) report conclusively that infant mortality does not explain fertility. This study attempts to clarify this stage of the transition.
Third, Holsinger and Kasarda (1976) argue that governments of high-fertility nations should make special efforts to increase general educational levels if fertility reduction is to occur. The linkages between education and other major societal institutions (e.g., those relating to health, communications, development, nutrition) are not understood, and the fertility-related policy implications for governments down-playing the importance of general education and literacy, within the total context of major macro-level variables, has not been clearly delineated. Would other societal institutions serve as fertility-inhibiting surrogates when education is not emphasized? Are the educational components of family planning pro-

grams and mass media communications alone sufficient to support fertility reductions? This study attempts to provide some direction in understanding the degree to which overall education or literacy is important within the larger context of transition theory.
The purpose of the following review is to demonstrate briefly the complexity of human reproductive behavior and to identify those variables most important for constructing a model of human reproduction.
A THEORETICAL MODEL OF HUMAN REPRODUCTION
Past research has turned up some causal links between socioeconomic variables and fertility. Major variables and associated research are discussed below.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Of all the antecedents to fertility, economic development is among the most discussed in demography. Weintraub (1962) reported that income increments tended to generate increases in birth rates and that birth rates were negatively related to urbanization and positively related to infant mortality. A study by Adelman (1963) presented results similar to those of Weintraub. Per-capita income was positively related to the age-specific birth rates; the index of education, the percentage of labor force employed outside agriculture, and population density all were negatively related to the fertility of each age group. Heer (1966), following up on Adelman's study, found the index of education correlated most strongly with fertility, followed by population density. Per-capita income and percentage of the labor force outside agriculture were the least important.
These studies seem to corroborate, albeit only partly and perhaps weakly, earlier studies reporting positive correlations between indicators of income and fertility.

32

Chang et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

For example, Yule (1906) and Ogburn and ment led to an increase in educational

Thomas (1922) reported a positive associa- level and a decline in infant mortality,

tion between the business cycle and fertil- which is an optimal condition for low fer-

ity in Great Britain during the nineteenth tility (Ekanem, 1972). Ekanem attrib-

century and in the United States between uted the lack of full support for Heer's

1870 and 1920, respectively. Galbraith conclusion to poor quality data from the

and Thomas (1941) and Kirk (1942) also underdeveloped countries.

reported that an increase in fertility was positively related to prosperity. More recently, Becker's (1960) provocative economic theory of fertility has stimulated a sudden interest in the positive incomefertility hypothesis, resulting in a rapid proliferation of the literature. Easterlin

These two views concerning the effect of economic development on fertility, both of which are affirmatively supported by researchers, need be reconciled to increase the predictive power of demographic transition theory.

(1962) found that economic development

EDUCATION

promotes fertility. One of the important causes to which the American baby boom after World War II is attributed was the high income of persons 20-29 years old, the potential parents.

Besides recognizing an inverse relationship between per-capita income and fertility, Heer (1966) joined Adelman (1963) in reporting a positive relationship between income and fertility and an inverse rela-

While these studies found that economic tionship between level of education and

development promotes fertility, the oppo- fertility. According to Bogue (1969, p.

site view, predicting an inhibiting effect 677), these findings seem very surprising

of economic development on fertility, al- because "educational attainment and per-

so prevails. This effect is described by capita income are positively correlated

the theory of demographic transition with each other."

(Thompson, 1929, 1944; Blacker, 1947; Empirical evidence on the inverse rela-

Davis, 1949; Notestein, 1945; Coale and tionship between educational level and

Hoover, 19S8). It is an effect which essen- fertility has been overwhelming, both in

tially is a demographic-change version of intercountry and intracountry analyses.

the theory of culture lag (Ogburn, 1927). For example, it has been found in Puerto

Heer (1966, p. 430) tested transition Rico that advancement in the number of

theory in a study of 41 developed and de- years of schooling for women is associated

veloping nations and found a direct posi- with a significant decline in birth rates

tive effect of economic development on (Jaffe, 1959; Stycos, 1967). This relation-

fertility but stronger indirect effects, pro- ship also has been reported for various

moted by development, that had the ac- societies such as Greece, Portugal, Hun-

tual effect of decreasing fertility.

gary, Brazil, Iran, Taiwan, and others

Friedlander and Silver (1967) classified (see Loewenthal and David, 1972; the

85 countries by their level of development. American Universities Field Staff, 1972). They discovered that the relationship be- There is, however, conflicting evidence.

tween income and fertility varied with Adelman's study (see Heer, 1966, p. 427)

levels of development of countries: posi- shows that the index of education is the

tive for developed countries and negative variable most strongly associated with fer-

for underdeveloped countries. A chro- tility at each age while Janowitz (1971) nological study designed to test Heer's reports a weak inverse relationship be-

findings reported that economic develop- tween fertility and literacy. Extremely

Vol. 2 6 , No. 1

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

33

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

weak relationships also have been found by others (Freedman et al., 1959; Yaukey, 1962) in different cultural settings. Another study reported that education has no bearing at all on actual fertility (Schultz, 1971).
Various explanations have been offered as to why education discourages reproduction. Heer (1966, p. 428) explained the rise in educational level as having two consequences conducive to fertility decline: an increased flow of communication of all types and a rise in the proportion of adolescents and young adults attending school. The increase in communication could enhance the exchange of knowledge and ideas, including birth control information. An increase in adolescents and young adults attending school would mean an increase in the average age at marriage. Both consequences would be inimical to high fertility. Rich (1973, pp. 10-13) regarded changing values and norms accompanying educational advancement to be fertility-inhibiting. He felt that educated and literate persons were more likely to adopt innovations more quickly and to come in contact with family planners. Education leads also to a delay in marriage and provides knowledge about alternatives to childbearing (Nam, 1968, p. SIS).
INFANT MORTALITY
Infant mortality appears to be a strong stimulus for fertility change. A decline in infant mortality, which accounts for most of the decline in general mortality during the beginning of the demographic transition, was posited by Davis (1963; see also Burch, 1975; Carlsson, 1966) as the demographic stimulus for creating a situation of sustained natural increase. The population responds to the resulting pressure through a multiphasic response, drawing on rural-to-urban migration, postponement of marriage, contraceptive

usage, etc., to alter demographic behavior and lower fertility. However, before fertility is lowered, it may, in fact, rise. A number of studies have reported a strong positive causal link between infant mortality and fertility (Heer, 1966, p. 423; Weintraub, 1962, p. 816; Adelman, 1963, p. 328). Other studies, however, report that levels of infant mortality do not explain fertility (see Preston, 1978).
Heer and Smith (1968, p. 104), using simulation techniques, demonstrated a steady decline in gross reproduction rates as infant mortality decreases, under the assumption "that parents have a perfect method of birth control but also want to be highly certain that at least one son will survive to the father's 65th birthday so that he can support his parents in their old age." Heer (1966), in another study, maintained that to reduce fertility, mortality might have to be decreased by public health programs, even at the cost of a temporary increase in the rate of population growth. The argument is basically one of interplay between child and parental security. Where infant and child mortality is high, parents are unlikely to limit childbearing. Parents want to be sure that a certain number of their offspring survive to adulthood. When parents are convinced that they will be cared for in their old age, the family size may be reduced. Harrington (1971, pp. 30-32) examined infant and child mortality for Ghana, Niger, and Upper Volta and identified two interactive effects between infant and child mortality and childbearing:
1. The early experience of child death spurs women to have a large number of births.
2. The breakdown of certain traditional practices leads to the shortening of birth spacing. A child's death may be caused indirectly by the birth of a subsequent child because of abrupt weaning.
She maintained that efforts should be made to promote maternal and child

34

Chang et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

health before family planning and that family planning can play an undeniably important role in improving birth spacing.
Chandrasekhar (1972), after a detailed discussion of the situation in India, concluded that the solution to India's rapid population growth lies in the reduction of both infant mortality and fertility at the same time. This view emphasizes the role of family planning that is dedicated to bringing fertility under control, although the objectives of family planning also can be achieved by controlling infant mortality. A positive relationship between infant mortality and fertility is posited.
NUTRITION-DIET
The relationship between nutrition and development is ambiguous. As a country develops, the purchasing power of the population will rise. Consequently, more money will be used to buy food, and thus nutrition is improved (Berg, 1973). In international studies, this view seems to have received support (e.g., Turnham, 1971, p. 89). Mclntosh (197S) provides a summary of similar and contradictory findings. Nutrition and diet are here regarded as an indicator of development because malnutrition is largely a phenomenon of underdevelopment.
On the other hand, education-literacy has been shown to bear upon nutrition and diet, which, in turn, affects infant and child mortality (Mclntosh, 1975, p. 8183). For instance, maternal literacy rates have been found to be a strong determinant of the level of undernourishment and the growth rate of children. In the meantime, malnutrition has been found to account for S3 per cent of all deaths of children 0-4 years of age in certain Latin American countries (Bengoa, 1974).
POPULATION PER PHYSICIAN
Previous studies have used population per hospital bed as a health-service indi-

cator to study fertility and mortality changes (United Nations, 196S). The present study uses "population per physician" as a health-service indicator on the assumption that availability of physicians is a prerequisite to medical and health services. Kusukawa (1967) reported that about one-third of the variance in life expectancy at birth might be explained by health services alone. The decline of mortality in the world has been attributed to the progress in economic and social development and to efforts made in improving health and preventing diseases and deaths (United Nations, 1963, p. 15). Nonetheless, the complexity of the causes of mortality change can be seen in Eldridge's (1952, p. 1) summary that, "gains in health and longevity through improved nutrition, personal hygiene, public sanitation, and availability of medical services and facilities have resulted from pervasive social changes associated with improved agricultural methods, the spread of education, and technological progress."
The theoretical model, therefore, predicts that health service, represented by the population-physician ratio, is a result of development and the improvement of education and that the availability of physicians or health care in a society helps reduce infant mortality. Of course, the population-physician ratio tells little about the actual accessibility of physicians for all sectors of society. A negative relation of education-literacy to population per physician is hypothesized because the training of highly skilled professionals, such as medical doctors, requires a society's dedication to the improvement of education.
USE OF MASS MEDIA
The possession and use of mass communication media, such as TV and radio, as a result of development (Shannon, 1957, p. 97; United Nations, 1967, p.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

35

770-772) is indicative of broadened sources of information and communication, including birth-control information. Adelman and Morris (1966), using number of radios and newspaper circulation to indicate the prevalence of mass media communication in 55 less-developed countries, reported that mass media communication explained more than 46 per cent of the variance in the crude birthrate. Our model regards mass media as among several variables intermediate between development and fertility. Since radio and TV rely mostly on verbal communication, no relation is assumed between educationliteracy and the use of mass media.
GOVERNMENTAL ATTITUDE TOWARD FAMILY PLANNING
The relationship between governmental attitude or influence and fertility change is very ambiguous and has not been the subject of many investigations (Spengler, 1938; National Academy of Sciences, 1971). Pendleton (1976) attempted to

quantify Puerto Rican policies and programs, both governmental and nongovernmental, and was able to identify those that seemed to have had the greatest impact both on birth and fertility rates. Another study investigates governmental pronatalist influences for pre-World War II Italy, Germany, and Sweden (Pendleton, 1978) and attempts to dichotomize governmental decrees and anti-familyplanning programs into coercive and noncoercive categories. Despite ambiguities regarding the link between governmental attitudes toward family planning and fertility, it seems that the overt recognition of, and support for, family planning programs by governments may assist in fertility reduction.
Figure 1 illustrates a theoretical model of causal relationships between socioeconomic development and fertility. No assumptions are made concerning causal relations among economic development, urbanization, and per-capita GNP growth; these relations may very well be interac-

FlG. 1.--The theoretical model:X,, Fertility; X2, Infant mortality; X3, Use of mass media; X,, Governmental attitude toward family planning; Xs, Population per physician; Xe< Nutrition-diet; X7, Education-literacy; X%, Economic development; Xs, Urbanization; X]o, Per-capita GNP growth.

36

Chang et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

tive (Sjoberg and Sjoberg, 1960). Economic development and urbanization also may evolve independent of each other and may be mutually irreducible (Smelser, 1973). Because of this, economic development, urbanization, and per-capita GNP growth are considered to be exogenous variables and are juxtaposed to examine the effects they may have upon the other socioeconomic and demographic conditions that, in turn, affect fertility.
On the basis of past research, this model assumes a direct relation between economic development (X8) and fertility (Xi). There also are the direct influences of economic development, urbanization QC9), and per-capita GNP growth (X10) on education-literacy (X7), the use of mass media (X3), nutrition-diet (AT6), and population per physician (X5)? In accordance with past findings, education-literacy is given a central location from which it causes changes in fertility both directly and indirectly. The indirect effect passes on to fertility through infant mortality (X"2), which is determined by population per physician and nutrition-diet. Infant mortality is assumed to have a positive effect upon fertility as shown in past research. Nutrition-diet, population per physician, and use of mass media are introduced as intermediary variables in the model. All three are assumed to be determined by economic development, urbanization, and per-capita GNP growth. The direction of relationships is indicated by plus (positive) and minus (negative) signs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SELECTION OF COUNTRIES
This study investigates countries of varying degrees of development. As with any cross-cultural comparison, demographic and socioeconomic secondary data of various degrees of accuracy and adequacy

must be dealt with (Taylor and Hudson, 1972, pp. 7-8; Riley, 1965; Gaete-Darbo, 1964). The problem, more specifically, is one of data deficiencies in quantity and quality for the less-developed countries.
Through a lengthy process of search, one hundred countries were selected for which 28 socioeconomic and demographic variables seemed most usable. These variables seem to provide the best balance between variable needs of this study and requirements for accurate and valid data (i.e., variables with few missing data). Of the one hundred countries or territories (Table 1), 28 are more developed (MDC's) and 72 are less developed (LDC's), representing a total population of 1,643,800,000 in 1973. The range is from a low of 300,000 inhabitants to a high of 600,000,000 inhabitants. This is not a random sample of countries because their selection was predicated upon the availability of needed data. The classification of countries is based on Kuznets (1969, p. 157). The more developed countries include Japan, all countries in Europe (except Albania, because of her high population growth rate, and the Democratic Republic of Germany, because of missing observations), Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. Developed countries excluded are the United States, as an extreme case of development; South Africa, which consists virtually of two distinct societies; and Puerto Rico and the USSR because of missing data. Argentina, Venezuela, and Israel have very high birth rates (much higher than the countries of Europe) resulting in their classification as LDC's. Uruguay's exclusion from the MDC's is due to its relatively low GNP per capita. The LDC's are found exclusively in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Twenty-six of an original 28 variables were grouped into eight small clusters on the basis of variable similarity, relevancy to the composite, and intercorrelations

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

37

TABLE 1
LIST OF ONE HUNDRED LESS DEVELOPED (LDC'S) AND MORE DEVELOPED (MDC'S) COUNTRIES IN THEORETICAL FERTILITY MODEL

Less Developed Countries

Africa Algeria Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Congo (Brazzaville) Dahomey Egypt Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Ivory Coast Kenya Liberia Libya Malagasy Republic Mali Mauritania Morocco Niger Nigeria Senegal Sierra Leone Somalia Sudan Tunisia Uganda Upper Volta Zaire Zambia
Central America Barbados Costa Rica Dominican Republic El Salvadore Guatemala Haiti

Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama
South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela
Asia Afghanistan Burma Taiwan Cyprus Hong Kong India Indonesia Iraq Israel Jordan Korea, Rep. of Kuwait Lebanon Pakistan Philippines Singapore Syria Thailand Turkey

More Developed
Countries
Asia Japan
Europe Austria Belgium Bulgaria Czechoslovakia Denmark Federal Republic of
Germany Finland France Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Luxemburg Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Yugoslavia
Oceania Australia New Zealand
North America Canada

among individual variables within an intended composite.
COMPOSITE CONSTRUCTION
To allow approximately equal weighting of the individual variables in the composite, Z-scores (or standard scores) were computed for all variables within the composite:
Z = Xl ~ * s
where Б represents the mean of a particu-

lar variable for all countries, x{ is the value of that variable for country i, and 5 is the standard deviation. The sum of the standard scores was divided by the number of variables in the composite to form the index. Missing values for each variable were estimated by the average of the calculated Z-scores. In all instances, the representativeness of the composite for individual variables seemed adequate; the composites showed high correlations with their constituent variables. This procedure minimizes the "statistical incest" problem

38

Chang et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

found when any statistical routine is adopted to estimate missing data (Taylor and Hudson, 1972, p. 13).
COMPOSITE/VARIABLE DESCRIPTION AND DEFINITION
Below is a detailed description of each composite and the two single variables.

Table 2 provides a summary of variables and dates of the data,
Fertility (Ki) is a composite built from the most recent crude birth rate for each country (around 1970-72 for LDC's and 1973-74 for MDC's) and the gross reproduction rate between 1965 and 1970.
Infant mortality (X2) consists of infant

TABLE 2

COMPOSITES AND SINGLE VARIABLES

Variable No.
Composite variables X, Xz X3 X9 X7
Xt
ATj Xv, Single variables Xt Xt

Variable Description
Fertility Crude birth rate, 1974 Gross reproduction rate, 1965-1970 Infant Mortality Infant mortality rate, 1972 or latest Life expectancy at birth ( - ) , 1972 or latest Use of Mass Media T.V. receivers per 1,000 population, 1971 Radio receivers per 1,000 population, 1970 Diet and Nutrition Per-capita calorie intake, per day, latest Per-capita grams of protein, per day, latest Per-capita % animal protein, per day, latest Education and Literacy Primary school enrollment ratio, 1968-1970 Secondary school enrollment ratio, 1968-1970 Pupil-teacher ratio for primary ed. ( - ) , 1968-1970 Vocational enrollment as a % of secondary education enrollment,
1967-1970 Adult literacy rate, latest Females as a % of total secondary ed., 1968-1970 Students as a % of 5-19 age group, latest Daily newspapers per 1,000 population, 1970 Economic Development Per-capita energy consumption, 1971 Electric power consumption, 1971 Newsprint consumption per capita, 1971 % of income from agriculture ( - ) , 1970-1971 Per-capita GNP, 1971 Urbanization % population urban, 1972 or latest % population in cities of 100,000; 1972 or latest Per-capita GNP Growth Growth of per-capita GNP, 1960-1971 Growth of per-capita GNP, 1965-1971
Government Attitude Toward Family Planning, 1969 Population per Physician, latest

SOURCES AND NOTES:
Fertility: United Nations (1971, pp. xxx-xxxiv; 1974, pp. 244-248). Crude birth rates are for 1970 for 41 LDC's; the remaining LDC crude birth rates are for 1972 or 1973. Rates for 23 MDC's are for 1974; five are for 1973. Gross reproduction rates are taken from Monthly Bulletin of Statistics, United Nations, April, 1971, Vol. XXV, No. 4, pp. xxx-xxxiv.
Infant Mortality: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1974).
Use of Man Media: United Nations (1967; 19726, pp. 832-840), Europa (1973), Instituto InterAraericana de Estadistica (1972). Diet and Sutrition: Agency for International Development (1973a), United Nations (19726, pp. 524-530), World Bank (n.d.). Education and Literacy: Agency for International Development (1973a, 1973c), United Nations (1972b), U.S. Department of Commerce, 1973,
World Bank (n.d.), Europa (1973). Economic Development: United Nations (19726, 1972c, 1972a1), Agency for International Development (1973d, 1973c). Urbanization: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1974), Agency for International Development (1973a), Population Reference Bureau (1973). Pertapita GXP Growth: World Bank (1973).
Governmental Altitude Toward Family Planning: United Nations (1972a). Population per physician: Agency for International Development (1973fl, 19736), United Nations (19726).

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

39

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

mortality rates and life expectancy at birth. Life expectancy at birth is a superior measure of mortality because it is free from the influence of the age structure. It refers to the average number of years a cohort of newly born could expect to live according to prevailing mortality rates. Infant mortality rates and life expectancy at birth are of opposing signs, and the composite was built with consideration of that fact.
Use of mass media (X3) is a composite where the number of TV receivers and radio receivers per thousand population is assumed to reflect the scope of exposure to mass communications messages, including birth control information.
Governmental attitudes toward family planning programs (X4) is based on a United Nations (1972a) publication that classifies high-fertility nations in terms of governmental policies toward family planning. A first group of thirty countries had, by mid-1969, incorporated family planning into their plans for economic development, a responsible government official had proclaimed such a policy, and activities had clearly indicated the presence of such a policy. A second group consisted of twelve countries where governments had supported and assisted familyplanning activities but had adopted no official policy. A third group included five countries where policies were still evolving, and a residual group contained countries where neither an official nor a private movement had yet occurred by mid-1969. Countries in Group 1 were assigned a score of 4 to reflect governmental favorability toward family planning; those in groups 2,3, and 4 were assigned scores 3, 2, 1, respectively. Recognizing the crude nature of this measurement and the lack of a better indicator, we shall test the relationship of governmental attitude to fertility changes. This composite applies only to the 72 LDC's because it would be mean-

ingless and perhaps impossible to assign scores to countries where fertility already is at a low level.
Population per physician (X5) is a single variable to be used as an indicator of the availability of health services because effective health services depend largely upon the number of medical doctors. This variable should be interpreted as the larger the ratio, the less available are the health services.
The nutrition and diet (Xs) composite involves three variables, per-capita calorie intake per day, per-capita grams of protein per day, and per-capita percentage of animal protein per day.
Education and literacy (X7) contains individual variables reflecting education at primary and secondary levels and adult literacy. The United Nations recommended the investigation of educational attainment as basic to a census, and consequently, at least seventy countries obtained answers to the question of educational attainment of their populations in a census or a national sample survey in the 19SS-63 period (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1971:328). Because the efforts of the United Nations can assume a reasonable degree of accuracy in the variables on education and literacy, we constructed a composite on education and literacy by using all eight variables. All vary positively with education and literacy except the pupilteacher ratio for primary education, which varies negatively with level of education and literacy. This fact was accounted for in the composite. This composite reflects the dedication of a country to the improvement of education and is, therefore, an indirect measure of the educational level achieved by that country.
Economic development (AT8), as a general economic composite, takes into consideration industrialization as reflected by such variables as per-capita energy consumption per year, per-capita electric

40

Chang et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

power consumption per year, and percapita newsprint consumption per year, and income represented by the percentage of income from agriculture (a negative variable) and per-capita GNP. Economic development should be interpreted differently from general development, which refers to economic development, urbanization, and per-capita GNP growth.
An urbanization (X9) index was computed from the percentage of population defined as urban and percentage of population in cities with one hundred thousand or more inhabitants. The definition of urban population varies considerably from country to country, and about thirty definitions of urban population are currently in use (Macura, 1961; Petersen, 1975, pp. 467-476; United Nations, 1973, pp. S--12). Because we had only limited choice of data, we decided to use percentage of population urban as one of the variables for indexing in spite of differences in the definition of urban population from country to country. This was done under the assumption that when "countries tend to exercise some common sense in their statistical services, their own mode of classifying their people deserves respect" (Davis, 1969, pp. 11-12). But, to provide a double-check, we chose also to use percentage of population in cities of one hundred thousand or more population as a supplementary variable in the index. The composite should reflect urbanization more accurately than either variable individually.
Per-capita GNP growth (X"10) for two periods, 1960-70 and 1965-71, was combined to obtain this composite. Because it does not reflect the size of per-capita GNP, it differs from XB, which, only in part, indicates per-capita GNP.
RESULTS Path analysis was used to test the causal links presented in Figure 1. First, all paths

in the theoretical model were tested. Then, following Duncan's (1966) suggestion, we dropped the paths that were both statistically and substantively insignificant from further analysis. The theoretical model then was revised and tested. After the insignificant paths were dropped, identical analyses were done separately for the LDC's (N = 72), the MDC's (N = 28), and the total sample (iV = 100).
For the MDC's, the theoretical model fell far short in predicting causal links. Of the 22 causal paths predicted, only four were supported, two strongly. For this reason, MDC's paths are only discussed and not tabularly or graphically displayed. Economic development was found to be the positive determinant of the use of mass media (moderately strong effect) and education-literacy (strong effect); education-literacy negatively determines infant mortality (strong). Fertility in the MDC's was related only to educationliteracy, and this relationship was extremely weak.
Findings for the one hundred countries reflect those of the 72 LDC's rather than of the 28 MDC's. With only minor exceptions, all causal links for the hundred countries are in the same direction and are approximately of the same magnitude as the LDC's. For this reason, we believe it more meaningful to report findings for the LDC only, with mentions of the total sample wherever findings for the two samples are different. Table 3 presents results for the LDC's; Figure 2 graphically displays the causal links. Table 4 and Figure 3 display comparable results for the total sample.
With one exception, the same variables were used to analyze both samples. The measure of governmental position on family planning in LDC's increased the causal links predicted from the 22 for the total sample to 27 in the model for the LDC's. Of these 2 7 causal paths in the theoretical

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

41

TABLE 3
PARTIAL REGRESSION ANALYSIS: PATH MODELS 1 AND 2 (LDC's)

Dependent and Independent Variables

F*

Standardized Partials

% Variance Explained

X7-Education-Literacy AT8-Economic Development . . AV-Urbanization

9.24 33.48

. . . 0.69
0.31 0.58

X4-Governmental Attitude Toward Family Planning
X7-Education-Literacy Xg-Economic Development ..

... 15.65 6.49

... 0.64 --0.41

0.19

X5-Population per Physician . . . . X7-Education-Literacy
X6-Nutrition-Diet X8-Economic Development .. Xg-Urbanization

... 51.13
... 6.76 6.66

... -0.65
... 0.36 0.35

0.43 0.44

X2-Infant Mortality
X5-Population per Physician . X6-Nutrition-Diet
Xj-Education-Literacy

3.18Д (37.12)* O.77Д (14.43)* 106.90

... 0.12Д (O.54)t -0.05Д (-O.33)t -0.79

0.82 (0.53)t

X^Fertilityt
X7-Education-Literacy X4-Governmental Attitudes
Toward Family Planning .
X6-Nutrition-Diet X6-Economic Development ..

47.77
5.46 (O.28)tД 19.69 (17.23)* 7.19 (3.23)tД

... -0.82
0.19 (-0.05)tД -0.41 (-0.50)*
0.32 (-0.21)tД

0.67 (0.43)t ._^

* Significant at p < 0.001 unless specified not significant. t A^-Fertility was constructed from crude birth rates and gross reproduction rates (GRR's). Since GRR's for the LDC's were probably estimates rather than calculations from age-specific birth rates, the authors therefore recalculated the partial regressions by eliminating GRR's fromX,. This was done to test if the results would be sufficiently different from the original to warrant changes in the content of analysis. Because the original relationships were not affected by this procedure, no changes in the analysis were made.
t Figures and remarks in parentheses indicate new values and situations resulting when education-literacy (Xj) is removed as an independent variable.
Д Not significant.

FIG. 2.--Standardized partials for Model 1 using the LDC's (72 countries). '32

*Not significant. *Xui is retained in the model to facilitate comparison with findings for the hundred country sample (Model 3 in Figure 3).

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

42

Chang et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 4
PARTIAL REGRESSION ANALYSIS: PATH MODELS 3 AND 4 (TOTAL SAMPLE)

Dependent and Independent Variables

F*

Standardized Partials

% Variance Explained

ATr-Education-Literacy Xg-Economic Development ^-Urbanization X,o-Per-Capita GNP Growth

... 70.58 24.22 11.52

. . . 0.79 0.55 0.33 0.17

X5-Population per Physician . . . . . .

A'7-Education-Literacy

68.07

AVNutrition-Diet AV-Education-Literacy Xg-Economic Development

... 18.78 31.64

... -0.64
... 0.39 0.51

0.41 0.75

X2-Infant Mortality XT-Education-Literacy
X5-Population per Physician X6-Nutrition-Diet

... 112.76
8.90 (52.88)* 0.32Д (92.46)*

... -0.81
0.14 (0.43)* -0.04Д (-0.57)*

0.87 (0.72)$

X,-Fertilityt
X6-Nutrition-Diet . . . . X8-Economic Development XT-Education-Literacy

34.88 (60.81)* 1.37Д (3.5)*Д
50.69

иии -0.48 (-0.72)*
0.10Д (-0.17)*Д -0.57

0.84 (0.75)*

* Significant at p < 0.001 unless specified not significant. + A'^Fertility was constructed from crude birth rates and gross reproduction rates (GRR's). Since GRR's for the LDC's were probably estimates rather than calculations from age-specific birth rates, the authors therefore recalculated the partial repressions by eliminating GRR's from-V,. This was done to test if the results would be sufficiently different from the original to warrant changes in the content of analysis. Because the original relationships were not affected by this procedure, no changes in the analysis were made.
% Figures and remarks in parentheses indicate new values and situations resulting when education-literacy iX7) is removed as an independent variable.
8 Not significant.

model, 14 were significant and used in the revised model.
Economic development (Xs), reflecting level of industrialization and per-capita income, and urbanization (X"9) play a major role in affecting education-literacy

(XV). Per-capita GNP growth (AT10) dropped out completely from the analysis. In the total sample, however, (see Table 4) per-capita GNP growth (X10) did exert some influence (B = 0.17). Governmental attitudes towards family planning {X4) are

FIG. 3.--Standardized partials for Model 3 using the total sample of one hundred countries.

иNot significant. These paths are left in to compare with models for LDC's.

Vol. 26, No. 1

Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

43

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

determined by a moderately strong inverse influence from economic development and a strong positive impact from educationliteracy.
A high level of education-literacy (X7) functions to reduce the populationphysician ratio (X5) and, therefore, to increase the availability of health services. Population per physician, however, has no significant effect on infant mortality (X2). The direct effect of education-literacy on infant mortality is strongly negative.
Economic development (X8) and urbanization (X9), rather than educationliteracy (X7), determine nutrition-diet (X6). Improved nutrition and diet, however, does not influence infant mortality (X2).
Fertility in the LDC's is directly affected by a moderately strong, positive impact by economic development (X8). Economic development also is negatively related to governmental attitudes (Xj) and positively related to education-literacy (X7). The causal influence of economic development and urbanization (X9) over reproductive behavior (Xi) is exerted through education-literacy, the effect of which is negative on fertility, and governmental attitudes toward family planning (X4), the result of which, surprisingly, is a very small positive effect on fertility. Fertility (Xj) is strongly affected negatively by nutrition-diet (X6) and education-literacy (X7). In the total sample, however, the influence of economic development on fertility is negligible. Instead, its effect operates through education-literacy (X7). Infant mortality, although highly correlated with fertility (r = 0.68), is not a causal factor of fertility levels.
In summary, strong support was found for the hypothesis predicting the indirect fertility-inhibiting effect of economic development. This indirect effect is exerted through education-literacy and nutritiondiet. Infant mortality, surprisingly, has no causal effect on fertility. The direct effect

of economic development encouraging fertility cannot be discounted for the LDC's. This positive effect may reflect the hypothesized fertility increase discussed by Habakkuk (1965), Krause (1958), Petersen (1975), Kirk and Nortman (1973), and Easterlin (1962), which occurs near the beginning of the demographic transition as more women survive through their reproductive years, bearing more children.
These findings show the differential influence of education-literacy over fertility. Given the importance of educationliteracy in determining fertility, another model was tested to explore more fully the policy effect of education-literacy. The link between education-literacy and fertility was dropped from the model. The reconstructed fertility model is displayed in Figure 4. Figure 5 displays comparable results for the total sample.
Without education-literacy the influence both of economic development (X8) and governmental attitudes toward family planning (X4) on fertility become insignificant. The only causal effect on fertility is a strong negative influence from nutrition-diet (X6). Also, nutrition-diet becomes a moderately strong causal agent to infant mortality (X2), and the effect of the population-per-physician ratio (X5) on infant mortality is strengthened greatly. Again, infant mortality fails to be a determining factor of fertility. Thus, nutrition-diet in the LDC's becomes the surrogate influence for education-literacy when the latter's influence is removed.
In agreement with past research, these findings assign considerable importance to education-literacy as a variable affecting reproductive behavior, both directly and indirectly.
DISCUSSION
This study assumes that socioeconomic and demographic changes create condi-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

44

Chang et al.

Social Biology

FIG. 4.--Standardized partials for Model 2 (alternative) with the LDC's (72 countries).

.68

*Not significant. *Xl0 is retained in the model to facilitate comparison with findings for the hundred country sample (Model 4 in Figure 41.

tions affecting the decision-making process, which, in turn, lead to changes in fertility. The findings need careful scrutiny to gain insight into human reproduction and how it is determined by socioeconomic and demographic factors.
Ignorance seems to be the worst enemy of reproduction control. The lower the education-literacy level of a population, the higher is its fertility. This finding is true especially for the LDC's. This study has demonstrated that education-literacy is very effective in bringing fertility under control in the LDC's. It has demonstrated also that the benefits of this effect are not without cost. Moderately strong and weak

positive influences on fertility from economic development and governmental attitudes toward family planning, respectively, occur in conjunction with the extremely strong and moderately strong negative influence that education-literacy and nutrition-diet have on fertility. It is not clear, however, how the level of education-literacy is related to, say, age at marriage and participation of women in the labor force, both of which may have an inverse effect on fertility. Many studies report that education determines the use of birth- or conception-control devices, i.e., the higher the educational attainment of husband and wife, the greater is the use of

FIG. 5.--Standardized partials for Model 4 (alternative) using the total sample of one hundred countries. ~~ ~ - ~ - - _ - - 1 7 *

*Not significant. This path is left in to compare with models for LDC's.

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

45

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

contraceptive methods. Freedman and Takeshita (1969, pp. 340-41) found in Taiwan, for example, that "the bettereducated women wanted and had fewer children and began to use contraception earlier than the less-educated women
Bogue (1969, p. 676) believed that a major driving force behind fertility control is education. He suggested that "if this is the case, it should be comparatively easy to discover what aspect of rising literacy and educational attainment is most intimately related to lower fertility and then to 'mass-produce' i t . . . to hasten fertility decline in advance of other aspects of educational attainment." Bogue (1969) found also that educational level accounted for 56 per cent of the total variance in the demographic transition measured by fertility changes. Studies to identify the particular aspect of education and literacy that triggers a fertility decline have shown that high school education tends to be more fertility-depressing than vocational education (Safilios-Rothschild, 1969) and that informal education, through mass media, could be influential on fertility (Concepcion and Hendershot, 1969). Although these studies have largely been inconsequential, improvement of the general education and literacy level still seems the correct approach when combating high population growth in LDC's.
The level of calorie and protein content has a fertility-inhibiting effect (this should not be taken to mean the direct effect of food on reproduction). The effect is not due primarily to fecundity changes (as argued by de Castro, 1952, pp. 71-72, and countered by Sax, 1955, pp. 166-67) but to decisions made by individuals or couples to curtail births. The causal relation of nutrition and diet to fertility must be viewed in this context. In essence, nutrition-diet is merely an indicator of the level of economic development. A high

level of economic development tends, indirectly through nutrition-diet, to induce fertility restriction.
It has been said that to replenish the large number of infant deaths, or to merely survive, a population faced with high infant mortality would require a high fertility (United Nations, 1965, p. 6; Notestein, 1945, pp. 39-40, 1950, p. 342). Our study identifies such a relationship, i.e., high infant mortality is strongly associated with, but not causally linked to, high fertility both in LDC's and the total sample. This finding supports Preston's (1978) contention that infant mortality cannot "explain" fertility; the relationship is correlational, not causal. We found also that the availability of health services and calorie and protein content in LDC's do not affect infant mortality when education-literacy remains in the model. When, however, education is removed as a causal agent affecting infant mortality, both population per physician and nutrition-diet become strong determinants of infant mortality. Less population per physician (i.e., better health care) and better nutrition-diet cause declines in infant mortality. This is in consonance with education-literacy being the common denominator affecting fertility and seems to underscore Davis' (1963) concept of a multiphasic response to population change.
Education-literacy, governmental attitudes toward family planning, population per physician, and nutrition-diet intermediate between economic development and urbanization, and fertility. Economic development and urbanization create changes in these intermediary social variables, which in turn, reduce fertility. Without education, the attitudes of governments toward family planning become insignificant in determining fertility. The direct effect of economic development on fertility also becomes insignificant, but its indirect effect, along with urbanization,

46

Chang et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

passes through nutrition-diet, stimulating a fertility decline. This supports the theory of demographic transition, which predicts that fertility changes in response to changes in socioeconomic conditions.
Since the indirect effect of economic development on fertility is clearly negative, is it true also that the direct influence of economic development stimulates reproduction? Our analysis, consistent with past findings, shows that economic development does indeed cause fertility to increase, although the magnitude of influence is small (insignificant in the total sample). When education is dropped, the direct effect becomes negative, but insignificant. This suggests that some LDC's that have recently made progress in economic development have shown a high level of reproduction. This finding strongly supports the observation that most countries beginning economic development experience an upsurge in fertility (Adelman, 1963; Heer, 1966; Weintraub, 1962; see also Habakkuk, 1965; Krause, 1958; Goldscheider, 1971).
This study tested and found support for the general theory advanced by Heer (1966, p. 423) that the direct effect of economic development is to increase fertility, while the indirect effect of economic development is to create changes in intermediary variables, which, in turn, are conducive to fertility control. We have found that the indirect effect of economic development is a much greater influence than the direct effect over population change. This finding provides empirical support for the hypothesis that the indirect effect of economic development can brake rapid population growth in the world today.
According to our analysis, attitudes of governments toward population programs are directly determined by the level of economic development and educationliteracy. However, economic development

directly creates a negative attitude toward family planning while education-literacy, reflecting positive influence of economic development, creates a much stronger positive attitude by governments toward family planning. But our study fails to show that governmental attitudes toward family planning reduce the fertility level. In fact, the influence is weakly positive. Hauser (1962, pp. 464-65) argues that changes in fertility behavior must be carried out in the context of change in the social order rather than through merely changing attitudes, values, or motivations. This same idea is borne out in the statement that "measurable progress (of family planning) so far relates more to attitude and policy than to action and achievement" (Kirk and Nortman, 1973, p. 254). From a social change viewpoint, Davis (1973) has maintained that change in reproductive behavior must be preceded by social change. The failure of the LDC's to lower their fertility quickly has been one of slow social change, in which case family planning helps little. Although our findings are consistent with those reported by other researchers, we feel that crude definition of governmental attitude allows us to treat the results only as very tentative.
The failure of this study to arrive at a causal model for the MDC's is somewhat expected. Some historical studies of the European experience have used variables such as proportion married, total fertility, infant mortality, urbanization, industrialization, and literacy and could not supply evidence to support the transition theory and its implied threshold hypothesis (Van de Walle and Knodel, 1967, pp. 52-53). Coale (1969, p. 18), in explaining his results from the study of European societies, pointed out that, even with such well-reported factors as the decline in mortality, the rising cost and diminished advantages of children, higher status of

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

women, religious changes and differences, and the development of a secular attitude, no consistent patterns of variations were found. More recently, Beaver (1975, p. 145), in his well-designed study, suggests that the theory of the demographic transition is not synonymous with the European experience, and that the European evidence suggests that other variables, not part of transition theory, were at work. More research obviously is needed to examine the effect of socioeconomic changes on fertility in order to strengthen and modify the theory of demographic transition.
CONCLUSIONS

and Kasarda (1976) urge that governments of those LDC's wishing lower fertility rates should make a special effort, along with other measures, to provide opportunities for women to attend school. Our study seems to have reinforced both contentions in that our composite index of education and literacy takes into account not only literacy in general, but also primary school education and female enrollment in secondary education. Economic development is directly related to an increase in fertility, but indirectly promotes fertility decline. Infant mortality does not bear a causal effect on fertility, but displays a strong association with fertility.

The theory of the demographic transition provides a useful framework within which to examine the cause and effect relationships of socioeconomic and demographic changes to human reproduction. Because the study concentrates on a short span of time, it does not attempt to examine the stages of change specified by the theory. On the basis of current world conditions, we proceeded to analyze how socioeconomic changes at one point in time brought about changes in reproductive behavior several years later. This study's findings have theoretical implications for scholars and researchers and policy implications for decision-makers. We agree with Burch (1975) and Goldberg (1975) that theories of fertility should offer insight and guidance to fertility control.
The improvement of education-literacy as a result of development is the most effective factor in changing the demographic processes of fertility and infant mortality. This means that, during a country's development, improvement in the educational and literacy levels should be given early and special emphasis if fertility is to be controlled. Miro and Mertens (1968) found evidence suggesting that the completed primary level of schooling creates the largest decline in fertility, while Holsinger

Empirically, the LDC's strongly support the theory of the demographic transition, in which the basic tenets state that socioeconomic development and improved survivorship of infants and children leads, after a time lag, to a fertility decline (Beaver, 1975, p. 147). A theoretical question, however, must be asked as to how inclusive the theory is. In this respect we agree with Beaver (1975, p. 16) that the theory of demographic transition is not a global theory of human fertility. The conflicting and inconsistent findings of past research seem to mean that the theory itself is not meant to predict similar fertility trends for all regions of the world, but only that the predicted relationships between the independent variables in the theory (urbanization, the rising level of education, and the improved level of living) and the dependent variable (fertility), will hold true (Beaver, 1975, p. 12). Even as Beaver (1975, p. 151) notes, this does not refute the theory itself but emphasizes the need to constantly expand and modify the theory to include regions and phenomena which themselves change over time. The problem, therefore, is one of theoretical inadequacies rather than the empirical refutation of the theory.
Beaver himself implies major differ-

48

Chang et al.

Social Biology

ences in causes of fertility given various cultural contexts; contexts measurable, for example, in terms of geographic continents. An analysis is now underway to test

these implications and investigate the stability of this study's fertility model under varying cultural contexts. The results will be presented in a future paper.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ADELMAN, IRMA. 1963. An econometric analysis of planning. University of the Phillipines, Population population growth. Amer. Econ. Rev. 53:314- Institute, Quezon. 339. DAVIS, KINGSLEY. 1949. Human society. Macmil-

ADELMAN, IRMA, and CYNTHIA TAFT MORRIS.
1966. A quantitative study of social and political determinants of fertility. Econ. Develop. Cult. Chg. 14:129-157.

lan, New York. . 1963. The theory of change and response in
modern demographic history. Pop. Index 29:345-366.

AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT.

. 1969. World urbanization 1950-1970. Vol-

1973a. Economic growth trends. July and August. ume 1: Basic data for cities, countries andregions.

Statistics and Reports Division. A.I.D., Washing- Population Monograph Series, No. 4. University

ton, D.C.

of California, Berkeley.

. 1973b. Selected economic data for the less

. 1973. Population policy: Will current pro-

developed countries. Statistics and Reports Divi- grams succeed? Pp. 352-376. In Michael Micklin

sion. A.I.D., Washington, D.C.

(ed.), Population, environment, and social organi-

. 1973c. Economic data books. December. zation: Current issues in human ecology. The Dry-

A.I.D., Washington, D.C.

den Press, Hinsdale, Ill.

AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES FIELD STAFF. 1972. Pop- DECASTRO, JOSE. 1952. The geography of hunger.

ulation perspective: 1971. Freeman, Cooper, & Little Brown, Boston.

Co., San Francisco.

DUNCAN, OTIS DUDLEY. 1966. Path analysis: Socio-

BEAVER, STEVEN E. 1975. Demographic transition logical examples. Amer. J. Sociol. 72:1-16.

theory reinterpreted. D.C. Heath and Co., EASTERLIN, RICHARD. 1962. The American baby

Lexington, Mass.

boom in historical perspective. Occasional Paper

BECKER, GARY S. 1960. An economic analysis of 79, National Bureau of Economic Research.

fertility, pp. 209-231. In Demographic and eco- EKANEM, ITA I. 1972. Afurther note on the relation

nomic change in developing countries. A Confer- between economic development and fertility. De-

ence of the Universities--National Bureau Com- mography 9:383-398.

mittee for Economic Research. Princeton Univ. ELDRIDGE, HOPE T. 1952. Population growth and

Press, Princeton, N.J.

economic development. Land Econ. 28:1-9.

BENGOA, J. M. 1974. The problem of malnutrition. EUROPA. 1973. The Europa yearbook: A world sur-

WHO Chronicle 28:3-7.

vey. New York.

BERG, BENJAMIN. 1973. Nutrition and national de- FREEDMAN, RONALD, GERHARD BAUMERT, and

velopment, pp. 49-69. In Alan Berg, Nevin S. MARTIN BOLTE. 1959. Expected family size and

Scrimshaw, and David L. Call (eds.), Nutrition, family size values in West Germany. Pop. Stud.

national development and planning. The MIT 13:136-150.

Press, Cambridge, Mass.

FREEDMAN, RONALD, and JOHN TAKESHITA. 1969.

BLACKER, C. P. 1947.Stages in population growth. Family planning in Taiwan. Princeton Univ.

Eugen. Rev. 39:88-102.

Press, Princeton, N.J.

BOGUE, DONALD. 1969. Principles of demography. FRIEDLANDER, STANLEY, and MORRIS SILVER.

Wiley, New York.

1967. A quantitative study of the determinants of

BURCH, THOMAS. 1975. Theories of fertility as fertility behavior. Demography 4:30-70.

guides to population policy. Soc. Forc. 54:126- GAETE-DARBO, ADOLFO. 1964. Appraisal of vital

143. statistics in Latin America. Milbank Mem. Fund

CARLSSON, GOSTA. 1966. The decline of fertility: Quart. 42:86-103.

Innovations or adjustment process. Pop. Stud. GALBRAITH, VIRGINIA L., and DOROTHY S.

20(2):149-174.

THOMAS. 1941. Birth rates and the interwar busi-

CHANDRASEKHAR, S. 1972.Infant mortality, popu- ness cycles. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 36:84-106.

lation growth andfamily planning. Univ. of North GOLDBERG, DAVID. 1975. Socioeconomic theory and

Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

differential fertility: Thecase of LDC's. Soc. Forc.

COALE, ANSLEY. 1969. The decline of fertility in 54:84-106.

Europe from the French Revolution to World GOLDSCHEIDER, CALVIN. 1971. Population, modern-

War II, pp. 3-19. In S. J. Behrman, Leslie Corsa, ization, and social structure. Little, Brown and

Jr., and Ronald Freedman (eds.), Fertility and Co., Boston.

family planning: Aworld view. Univ. of Michigan HABAKKUK, H. J. 1965. English population in the

Press, Ann Arbor.

eighteenth century, pp. 269-284. In D. V. Glass

COALE, ANSLEY, and EDGAR M. HOOVER. 1958. and D. Eversley (eds.), Population in history.

Population growth and economic development in Aldine-Atherton, Chicago.

low income countries. Princeton Univ. Press, HARRINGTON, JUDITH. 1971. The effect of high in-

Princeton, N.J.

fant andchildhood mortality onfertility: TheWest

CONCEPCION, MERCEDES B., and GERRY E. HEN- African case. Conc. Demog. 3:22-35.

DERSHOT. 1969. Factors associated with married HAUSER, PHILIP M. 1962. On design for experiment

women's ideal family size and approval of family and research in fertility control, pp. 463-474. In

Vol. 26, No. 1 Socioeconomic Change and Fertility

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Clyde Kiser (eds.), Research in family planning. Influences affecting fertility in urban and rural

Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

Latin America. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart.

HEER, DAVID M. 1966. Economic development and 46:89-117.

fertility. Demography 3:423-444.

NAM, CHARLES B. (ed.). 1968. Population and soci-

HEER, DAVID M., and DEAN O. SMITH. 1968. Mor- ety. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.

tality level, desired family size and population in- NAMBOODIRI, N. KRISHNAN. 1975. Prologue. Soc.

crease. Demography 5:104-121.

Forc. 54:2-6.

HOLSINGER, DONALD B., and JOHN D. KASARDA. NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. STUDYCOM-

1976. Education and human fertility: Sociological MITTEE OF THE OFFICE OF THE FOREIGN SECRE-

perspectives, pp. 154-181. In Ronald G. Ridker TARY. 1971. Rapid population growth: Conse-

(eds.), Population and development: Thesearch quences and policy implications. Johns Hopkins

for selective interventions. The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

Univ. Press, Baltimore.

NOTESTEIN, FRANK. 1945. Population--The long

INSTITUTO INTERAMERICANO DE ESTADISTICA. view, pp. 36-57. In Theodore W. Schultz (ed.),

1972. America en cifras, 1972. Organization De Food for the world. Univ. of Chicago Press,

Los Estados Americanos, Washington, D.C.

Chicago.

JAFFE, A. J. 1959. People, jobs and economic devel-

. 1950. Thepopulation of the world in the

opment. The Free Press of Glencoe, Glencoe, Ill. year 2,000. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 45:335-345.

JANOWITZ, BARBARA S. 1971. Anempirical study of OGBURN, W. F. 1927. Social change with respectto

the effects ofsocioeconomic development on fertil- culture andoriginal nature. Viking, New York.

ity rates. Demography 8:319-329.

OGBUSN, W. F., and DOROTHY S. THOMAS. 1922.

KAMMEYER, KENNETH C. W. 1975. A re- The influence of the business cycle on certain social

examination ofsome recent criticisms oftransition conditions. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 18:324-340.

theory, pp. 156-168. In Kenneth C. W. Kam- PENDLETON, BRIAN F. 1976. Aconceptual modelfor

meyer (ed.), Population studies: Selected essays the identification, organization, and measure of

and research. 2nded. Rand McNally College Pub- influence of fertility policies andprograms. Soc.

lishing Co., Chicago.

Biol. 23:326-340.

KIRK, DUDLEY. 1942.The relation of employment

. 1978. An historical description and analysis

levels to births in Germany. Milbank Mem. Fund of pronatalist policies in Italy, Germany andSwe-

Quart. 28:126-138.

den. Policy Sci. 9:45-70.

KIRK, DUDLEY, and DOROTHY NORTMAN. 1973. PETERSEN, WILLIAM. 1975. Population. Macmillan, Population policies in developing countries, pp. New York.

240-258. In Michael Micklin (ed.), Population, POPULATION REFERENCE BUREAU. 1973. World environment, and social organization: Current is- population datasheet: 1973. Population Reference sues in human ecology. The Dryden Press, Bureau, New York.

Hinsdale, Ill.

PRESTON, SAMUEL H. (Ed.). 1978. The effects of

KRAUSE, J. T. 1958. Changes inEnglish fertility and infant andchild mortality on fertility. Academic

mortality, 1781-1850. Econ. Hist. Rev. 11:52-70. Press, New York.

KUSUKAWA, AKIRA. 1967. Social and economic fac- RICH, WILLIAM. 1973. Smaller families through so-

tors in mortality in developing countries, pp. cial and economic progress. Monograph No. 7.

337-341. In Proceedings ofthe World Population Overseas Development Council, Washington,

Conference, Belgrade, August 30-Sept. 10, 1965. D.C.

Volume II: Selected Papers and Summaries. RILEY, JEANNE C. 1965.Recent natality trends in

United Nations, New York.

underdeveloped countries, pp. 143-173. In Min-

KUZNETS, SIMON. 1969.Economic aspects of fertil- del C. Sheps and Jeanne C. Riley (eds.), Public

ity trends in the less developed countries, pp. health andpopulation change: Current research

157-179. In S. J. Behrman, Leslie Corsa, Jr.,and issues. Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh.

Ronald Freedman (eds.), Fertility and family planning: A world view. Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
LOWENTHAL, NORMAN H., and ABRAHAM S.
DAVID. 1972. Social and economic correlates of

RYDER, NORMAN R. 1957. The conceptualization of
the transition in fertility, pp. 91-96. In Cold Spring Harbor symposia onquantitative biology. Long Island Biological Association, Cold Spring Harbor, New York.

family fertility: Anupdated survey of the evidence. Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle Park, N.C. MACURA, MILOS. 1961. The influence of the definition of urban place onthesize of urban population, pp. 21-31. In Jack P. Gibbs (ed.), Urban research methods. Van Nostrand, New York.
MASON, KAREN O., ABRAHAM S. DAVID, EVAK.
GERSTEL, QUENTIN W. LINDSEY, and MICHAEL
V. E. RULISON. 1971. Social and economic corre-

SAFILIOS-ROTHSCHILD, CONSTANTINA. 1969. So-
ciopsychological factors affecting fertility in urban Greece: A preliminary report. J. Marr. Fam. 31:595-600. SAX, KARL. 1955. Standing room only. Beacon Press, Boston.
SCHULTZ, T. PAUL. 1971. Evaluation of population policies: Aframework foranalysis and its application to Taiwan's family planning program. Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, Calif.

lates of family fertility: Asurvey of the evidence. SHANNON, LYLE W. 1957. Underdeveloped areas.

Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle Harper and Row, New York.

Park, N.C.

SJOBERG, GIDEON, and ANDRE F. SJOBERG. 1960.

MCINTOSH, WILLIAM ALEXANDER. 1975. Social in- Why cities have developed spread, anddeclined,

dicators for themonitoring of the nutritional as- pp. 34-43. In Sandor Halebsky (ed.), The sociol-

pects of societal well-being. Unpublished Ph.D. ogy of the city. Charles Scribner's Sons,New

dissertation. Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa. York.

MIRO, CARMEN A., and WALTER MERTENS. 1968. SMELSER, NEIL J. 1973. Toward a theory of mod-

50

Chang et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

ernization, pp. 268-284. In Amitai Etzioni and

. 19726. Statistical yearbook. 1971. United

Eva Etzioni-Halevy, Social change. 2nd ed. Basic Nations, New York.

Books, NewYork.

. 1972c. World energy supplies, 1968-1971.

SPENGLER, JOSEPH J. 1938. France faces depopula- Statistical Papers, Series J, No. 16. United Na-

tion. Duke Univ. Press, Durham, N.C.

tions, New York.

STYCOS, J. MAYONE. 1967. Education and fertility in

. 1972d. Yearbook of international labor

Puerto Rico. Proceedings of the World Population statistics: 1971. United Nations, New York.

Conference, 1965. United Nations, New York.

. 1973.Demographic yearbook: 1972. United

TAYLOR, CHARLES L., and MICHAEL C. HUDSON.

Nations, New York.

1972. World handbook of political and social indi-

. 1974. Demographic yearbook: 1973. United

cators. 2nded. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

Nations, New York.

TEITELBAUM, MICHAEL S. 1974. Population and U.S. BUREAU OF THECENSUS. 1971. The methods

development: Is a consensus possible. For. Affairs and materials of demography. By Henry S.

(July):742-760.

Shryock, Jacob S. Siegel, and Associates. Gov-

THOMPSON, WARREN S. 1929. Population. Amer. J.

ernment Printing Office, Washington,D.C.

Social. 34:959-975.

. 1974. Research Document Number 6, Pre-

. 1944. Plenty of People. The Jacques Cattell liminary Draft (January), Bureau of the Census.

Press, Lancaster, Pa.

Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

TURNHAM, DAVID. 1971. The employment problem U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE. 1973. Overseas in less developed countries: A review of the evi- business reports. Government Printing Office, dence. Development Center Studies, Employment Washington,D.C.

Series No. 1. Development Center of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
UNITED NATIONS. 1963. Population bulletin of the United Nations. No. 6, 1962 (with special reference tothe situation and recent trends of mortality in the world). United Nations, New York.
. 1965.Population bulletin of the United Nations. No. 7, 1963(with special reference to conditions andtrends of fertility in the world). United Nations, New York.
. 1967.Statistical yearbook. 1966.United Nations, New York.
. 1971.Monthly bulletin of statistics (April).

VAN D E WALLE, E. and J. KNODEL. 1967. Demo-
graphic transition andfertility decline: The European case, pp. 47-55. In The international union for the scientific study of population. Contributed papers. Sydney, Australia.
WEINTRAUB, ROBERT. 1962. The birth rate and economic development: An empirical study. Econometrica 40:812-817.
WORLD BANK. 1973. World Bank atlas. World Bank, New York. . n.d. Country data. Mimeograph. World Bank, New York.
YAUKEY, DAVID. 1962.Differential fertility in Lebanon, pp. 125-139. In Clyde V. Kiser (ed.), Research in family planning. Princeton Univ. Press,

Vol. 25:xxx-xxxiv.

Princeton, N.J.

. 1972a. Measures, policies and programmes YULE, G. U. 1906. On thechanges in the marriage

affecting fertility, with particular reference to na- and birth rates in England andWales during the

tional family planning programmes. Population past half century with an inquiry as totheir proba-

Studies No. 51. United Nations, NewYork.

ble causes. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. 69:88-132.

