Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Changing patterns of caste in India
L. D. Sanghvi
To cite this article: L. D. Sanghvi (1970) Changing patterns of caste in India, Social Biology, 17:4, 299-301, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987887 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987887
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 9 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

Changing Patterns of Caste in India

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

L. D.Sanghvi
Cancer Research Institute Bombay, India

Caste organization in India is at least Information was collected about casteand

two thousand years oldand perhaps much religion of the spouses in 980 marriages

older. Themost significant feature of this which provided the material for mating

social scheme, from thepoint of view of a patterns. Of these marriages, 662 were

geneticist, is the endogamous nature of contracted among different castes of Hin-

caste. Religious movements that swept the dus, 254were among Christians, and64

country during thehistorical period--such were among Muslims.

as Jainism, Buddhism, and Mohammedanism, and more recently Christianity, Sikhism, and others--did not succeed in weakening its endogamous nature. The people who accepted the new religions retained as faras possible the prevalent social scheme of marriages. As a result, we have several well-defined Muslim castes and castes such as Brahman-Christians and Sudra-Christians.

Among the Christians and Muslims, there were 5inter-sect marriages: 3 between different sects of Christianity and 2 between different sects of Islam. This gives a rate of 1.6% of the inter-sect marriages.
The 662 marriages among the Hindus belonged to 12 different castes. There was a total of 4 inter-caste marriages among them. Two of these marriages were between Brahman men and Nayar (soldiers) and

Material on mating patterns in India is Vaniyan (oil traders) women. Two other

scanty, andthis seems to beprimarily be- marriages were between Mukkuvan (sea

cause so little change is taking place from fishermen) and Valan (backwater fishermen)

the traditional mating pattern governed by men with Izhava (toddy tapper) women. I t

caste andby religion. I have been able to may be added that traditionally Brahmans

get limited data from Kerala (Ali, 1968) and were considered socially higher than Nayars

from West Bengal (Gangopadhya, 1964). After reviewing this material briefly, I will list certain factors that are influencing or are being influenced by this caste organization.

and Vaniyans. Mukkuvan andValan were considered higher than Izhava. In other castes, which were in an intermediate category, no mixed marriages were recorded. The rate of inter-caste marriages was 0.6%.

MATING PATTERNS BY CASTE

In thetotal of 980 marriages, there were

AND BY RELIGION

3 inter-religious or inter-community mar-

The data from Kerala were collected as a riages; 2between Christian men and Hindu

part of an anthropometric survey which women, and1 between a Muslim manand

covered 155 locations all over the state. Christian woman, giving a rate of0.3%.

299

300

Sanghvi

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

The only other data known to me are 9 information. The village consisted of 434

inter-caste marriages in a sample of 3,000 families with 2,160 individuals, of which

in West Bengal. This gives a rate of 0.3%, 86 (20%) belonged to upper castes of

or about half of the per cent recorded for Brahman, Vaidyas, Rajputs, and Kay-

inter-caste marriages in Kerala.

asthas. Only 8 of them were engaged in tra-

It might be added that Kerala and West ditional occupations, and the remaining

Bengal are somewhat special cases. There families were recorded in traditional occupa-

is a high degree of literacy in Kerala, and tions such as potters, blacksmiths, barbers,

what is happening in these two states might carpenters, washermen, etc. Among them,

perhaps be an upper limit of what might be there were two large occupational castes,

happening in the rest of the country.

65 families of Muchi, the shoemakers and

Mention might be made here about the tanners, and 40 families of Bara with the

efforts to encourage inter-caste marriages traditional occupation of cultivation of

in some of the states. The state of Tamilnad betel-vine. Most of the families of Bara

(Madras) has offered a gold medal for every were able to thrive in their traditional oc-

inter-caste marriage. There were 48 couples cupation to meet an increasing demand for

in the state awarded these medals last year. betel-vine. On the other hand, most of the

Punjab has offered a cash bonus for every Muchis lost their traditional occupation

inter-caste marriage. The results of this and eked out a difficult existence as farm

incentive are not yet known. Dr. S. Chan- laborers like the remaining 148 (34%)

drasekhar, Union Minister of State for families of backward castes and tribes in

Health and Family Planning, is known to the village.

be in favor of promoting inter-caste, inter- Where the high-caste Hindus went and

provincial, and inter-religious marriages. why the Muchis lost their traditional oc-

However, the editorial response in influen- cupation can be understood to some extent

tial newspapers in India and the letters by a recent survey of a large leather fac-

from the public about his views indicated tory near Calcutta. It was found that 43%

that the country is not yet quite ready for of the Hindu working force consisted of

a serious move of this nature.

upper castes of Brahmans, Vaidyas, and

CHANGES IN OCCUPATIONAL PATTERNS

Kayasthas, which together form 12-15% of the general population of the State. Tradi-

Rigidity in matters of marriage should not be taken to indicate that caste is not changing in certain other respects. It is known that occupational patterns among castes have been gradually changing, and some material is available from early census reports and recent surveys (Bose, 1967). For instance, in the census of 1901, only 33% of the employed Brahmans of Bengal were recorded in traditional occupations,

tionally, working in leather was considered an inferior occupation and high-caste Hindus would be polluted by touching a man working in leather. But now the trade in hides, skins, and shoes has formed an important item of foreign export and these items have to be processed in factories. High-caste Hindus have found gainful employment and have ignored the question of pollution.

and this figure went down to 17% by 1931. CHANGES IN RITUALS, FOOD TABOOS,

Corresponding figures for Vaidya (physi-

AND UNTOUCHABILITY

cians) of Bengal were 36% in 1901 and 19% There has been a remarkable change in

in 1931.

recent years in the attitudes of people to-

At the village level, a survey of Jagigram ward the rituals connected with birth, mar-

village of Birbhum District of West Bengal riage, and death, and these practices are

carried out in 1947 revealed interesting modifying very rapidly. This is also true

Vol. 17, No. 4

Caste in India

301

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

about food taboos and transmission of pollution between different castes, which seem to have been weakening as a result of education and increasing communication. Attitudes towards the hierarchic nature of caste among the Hindus also seem to be changing as a result of increasing political consciousness and the right of every adult individual to vote. On the other hand, the attitude of caste Hindus toward the untouchable castes has made very little progress. Sankaracharya of Puri, one of the foremost Hindu religious leaders, defended some time ago untouchability as a custom sanctioned by the sacred law books of India. Public opinion in the country was, however, aroused very recently by some gruesome murders of the untouchables, and a highlevel committee was formed to look into the problem of untouchability. According to Mr. L. Elayaperumal, chairman of this committee, Kerala stood first in abolishing untouchability and discrimination followed by West Bengal and Assam. Discrimination against Harijans (Untouchables) was worse in Uttar Pradesh,^followed by Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and Andhra Pradesh (Nargolkar, 1969).
POLITICAL AND FINANCIAL ASPECTS
I have outlined above certain aspects of the caste organization which seem to be weakening. I will now give evidence about some other aspects of caste, which are finding a renewed importance in the new setting in India after the British left.
A sample survey carried out in 1965 by Professor V. M. Sirsikar of Poona University revealed that caste and religion played an important role in rural elections in the state of Maharashtra. The survey showed that 71% of the office bearers of rural councils were drawn from the Maratha

caste, although they constituted only 40% of the total population of the state. This trend was far more evident in north and south Maharashtra where only 4% of the office bearers were non-Marathas. Brahmans, in contrast, who constituted about 10% of the total population of the state, held less than 4% of the seats as office bearers. The scheduled castes and tribes have a proportional number of reserved seats, and there was no competition between them and the caste Hindus in rural elections.
A committee appointed under Dr. Hazari to look into the industrial licensing policy of the Government of India gave some data about the caste and community distribution of the parties getting the licenses. During 1959-66, the Government of India approved a total investment of 7.8 billion rupees. The share of approved investment of the Marwaris was 24%, followed by 15% for Gujaratis, 8% for South Indians, 5% for Punjabis, and 4% for Parsis. The remaining investment was shared by the Public Sector of the Government of India and a number of small Private Sector groups. Marwaris who secured the largest share in the Private Sector belong historically to Rajasthan and have been known to be in business and finance for hundreds of years. Gujaratis, who come next, have historical ties with the Marwaris, and between these two groups, they shared almost 40% of the new investment.
In summary, the caste organization is undergoing a rapid modification in its functions. Older functions are being given up to take the place of newer ones. New methods are coming into rapid use to help the caste in its important function of providing a ready framework for marriages which continue to be arranged in traditional manner by the parents.

REFERENCES

Ali, S. G. M. 1968. Inbreeding and endogamy in Kerala (India). Acta Gent. (Basel) 18:369-379.
BOSE, N. K. 1967. Culture and society in India. Asia Publishing House, Bombay, India.
GANGOPADHYA, B. 1964. Marriage regulations

among certain castes of Bengal. Monograph. Deccan College, Poona, India. NARGOLKAR, V. S. 1969. Removal of untouchability: Goals and attainments. Ind. J. Soc. Work 30:189-201.

