Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Vasectomy: A study of psychosexual and general reactions
K. L. Kohli & A. J. Sobrero
To cite this article: K. L. Kohli & A. J. Sobrero (1973) Vasectomy: A study of psychosexual and general reactions, Social Biology, 20:3, 298-302, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988057 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988057
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Vasectomy: A Study of Psychosexual and General Reactions

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

K. L. Kohli and A. J. Sobrero
Margaret Sanger Research Bureau New York, New York

Voluntary sterilization has grown immensely in popularity over the last few years as a preferred method of contraception for couples who have their desired number of children. As Presser and Bumpass (1972) have pointed out, by 1970 more than one in six of such couples had already been sterilized, and nearly 50% more indicated that they would "seriously consider" a sterilization operation to prevent future unwanted pregnancies. Data from National Fertility Studies of 1965 and 1970 reveal that the percent of couples at risk1 who had been sterilized for contraceptive reasons increased from 12% to 18% during the five-year period. Westoff (1972) has pointed out that by 1970 sterilization was the first choice of contracepting couples where the wife was 30-44 years old (25% as against 2 1 % for the pill); and among couples of all ages intending no more children sterilization was second only to the pill.
Presser and Bumpass (1972) estimated that over 2.75 million married couples of reproductive age had been sterilized for contraceptive reasons as of 1970. According to a recent estimate made by the Associa-

tion for Voluntary Sterilization (1972), this total may be as high as four million by now. Whatever the actual number of sterilization operations happens to be, there is clear indication that the increase in contraceptive sterilization is accelerating.
Presser and Bumpass (1972) have indicated that despite significant progress in recent years toward easier availability and acceptance of voluntary sterilization, a small but substantial minority of the population still have serious misconceptions about it, specifically the erroneous view that it interferes with a man's physical ability to have sexual intercourse. Although there is no biological reason why the sterilization operation should adversely affect sexual life, psychological fear of a change in sexual life is a strong barrier in the motivation for sterilization. Information on changes in sexual life, therefore, will be helpful for men who consider vasectomy.
This paper aims at studying the psychosexual changes and reactions of the vasectomized males at the Margaret Sanger Research Bureau.
MATERIAL AND METHODS

1 Couples who intend no more children and who are not sterile for noncontraceptive reasons.

In November, 1971, a questionnaire was mailed to the first 236 consecutive clients

298

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 3

Psycliosexual Reactions to Vasectomy

299

who had had the operation during the period October, 1969, to September, 1970. Thus, the vasectomized men reported their experiences within the range of one to two years after surgery. The men were assured that all information would be held with the same confidentiality that is maintained for the medical record.
Of the 236 men followed up, 189 responded, giving a response rate of 80%. Nonrespondents were sent one or two followup versions of the questionnaire and when no response was received after two reminders they were listed as nonrespondents. Among the total of about 20% nonrespondents, 5% was attributable to bounces (in 10 cases, addresses were not current, and one had died).
FINDINGS
Table 1 shows the changes in sexual life following the operation. It was encouraging

reported a decrease. On further analysis, it was observed that the patient who reported less sexual enjoyment was 60 years old, and this could be a factor in his decreasing enjoyment. The reason for an increase in libido and/or coital enjoyment was attributed to freedom from anxiety of pregnancy. Further, more than one-third of the men (nearly 36%) reported that they had an increase, as against 6 men who reported a decrease in their sexual frequency following the operation. The remaining 116 men (61%) reported no change in sexual frequency. It was also observed that those who had reported a decrease in desire also reported less frequency after the vasectomy. The chi-square test revealed a high degree of association between sexual desire and frequency (p < 0 . 0 5 ) .
With regard to men's self-evaluation of ejaculation (volume), three-fourths of the men reported no change, while about one-

TABLE 1
CHANGES IN SEXUAL LIFE BY FACTORS AFTER VASECTOMY

Factors
Desire Enjoyment Frequency Ejaculation (volume)

More
S3 (28.2%) 121(64.4%) 67(35.6%) 30(16.2%)

About the Same
133(70.7%) 66(35.1%) 115(61.2%) 139(75.1%)

Less
2(1%) 1 (0.0S%) 6(3.2%) 16(8.6%)

Total
188(100%) 188(100%) 188(100%) 185(100%)

to note that all patients except two had reported their sexual desire was the same as or greater than before the operation. The two men who reported less sexual desire also complained of physical discomfort or pain during intercourse, and one of them reported discomfort during intercourse as long as two years after the operation. It is possible that physical discomfort or pain during intercourse may be the reason for a decrease in desire.
Regarding enjoyment, nearly two-thirds of the total cases reported an increase in sexual enjoyment, whereas only one person

sixth reported more, and the remainder, onetwelfth, less. Since vasectomy does not interfere with orgasm or with the function of the sexual accessory glands, the changes perceived by the respondents were interpreted as psychological.
The respondents were asked to evaluate their wives' sexual desire and enjoyment, which may or may not differ from the wives' own evaluation. The sexual desire or enjoyment of wives as perceived by their husbands seemed to have been reduced in four cases, while in the remaining cases it had either increased or remained the same as

300

Kohli and Sobrero

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

before the operation. The wives with reduced desire were not all the partners of men whose own pleasure had lessened.
The above findings show that vasectomy generally had no deleterious effect on man's potency, sexual performance, or pleasure. In fact, in many cases by removing the anxiety of impregnation it may have helped to revitalize sexual enthusiasm.
MARITAL HARMONY
In order to determine whether vasectomy had any effect on the marital relationship, the respondents were asked to report any change in marital harmony following the operation. Five men did not respond to this question. Of the remaining 184 men, 114 (about 62%) had no change, 66 (about 36%) improved, and 4 reported a decrease in marital harmony following the vasectomy. Further, one of these four men frankly stated that the worsened relationship was not due to the operation, and another reported separation after the operation. On further analysis, it was observed that the person reporting separation had obtained full consent of his wife at the time of operation and he reported no postoperative complication or change in sexual life following the operation. Therefore, in the absence of any supporting evidence, the separation in this case was difficult to attribute to vasectomy. Since they had both agreed about vasectomy, it must have been another area where they disagreed which led to the separation.
The other two men who reported a decline in marital harmony also reported less sexual frequency and desire. It is possible that the change in their sexual activity might have made them feel that vasectomy had affected their marital harmony. Those who reported improved marital harmony stated that it was due to relaxation of fears about unwanted pregnancy or the effects of the pill.

In sum, vasectomy generally had no negative effect, and in many cases it improved the marriages because of less tension about conception during sex.
ATTITUDES OF FRIENDS AND RELATIONS
Nearly 86% of the men discussed their operations frequently or occasionally with their friends, while 14% did not. Among those who had never discussed it, most were Catholics. Thus, religion or shyness may have been the reasons for never discussing the operation.
Among those who had talked about the operation, around one-third (56 men) had adverse comments from their friends. The nature of the adverse comments (and number of men receiving them) is summarized as follows: threat to manhood, 30; misconception about health or sexual life, IS; religious disapproval, 6; other, 5.
RECOMMENDATIONS TO OTHERS
It is interesting to find that over 98% of the patients expressed satisfaction and were quite willing to recommend the operation to others. None of the three men who would not recommend the operation to others regretted or disapproved of vasectomy in general. Further, all of the patients who responded said that they would still make the same decision again, and one respondent believed that vasectomy was a personal matter and should be treated as such, while another stated that single men should think carefully before having a vasectomy.
Husbands were also asked to report whether their wives would agree to the operation again. All but four men stated that their wives were still in favor of the operation. Of the four who did not indicate their wives' willingness, two said that their wives would prefer to have their own operation, and in the other two cases it was

Vol. 20, No. 3

Psychoscxual Reactions to Vasectomy

301

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

observed that the wives wanted to have more children than they had had at the time of operation. This may be a factor in their reluctance about vasectomy.
Thus, it can be said that both husbands and wives were generally satisfied with the operation and did not express any regret.
REACTION TO POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
More than two-thirds (69%) reported that the postoperative period was as expected, while about 21% indicated that it was more uncomfortable due to pain or swelling, and about 8% indicated that it took longer to heal than expected. In the remaining 2%, either there was no response to the question or no specific reason was given why the postoperative period differed from expectations.
On the basis of their personal experience, one-third of the respondents recommended a modification of the presentation of the facts by the Margaret Sanger Research Bureau staff. Most of these men recommended that more facts and/or more caution about pain or discomfort after the operation should be given.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The findings of general improvement or no change in sexual desire, enjoyment, or frequency after vasectomy fall into line with the findings of several other researchers (Landis and Poffenberger, 1963; Poffenberger and Poffenberger, 1963; Truesdale, 1965; Ziegler, Rodgers, and Kriegsman, 1964; Ferber, Tietze, and Lewit, 1967). Except for a study reported by Johnson (1964), all studies done in the United States have reported that declines in sexual desire or activity tended to be below 5%. Such declines could probably be partly explained as associated with aging or other personal factors and not solely to the vasectomy. The high rate of decline in sexual desire or

activity reported by Johnson is attributed largely to the reasons that persons were sterilized for psychiatric reasons. Thus, fears of impotence and negative reactions to barrenness might be the reasons for reducing their interest in sex.
From these studies, one can probably conclude that vasectomy generally had no deleterious effect on men's sexual performance or pleasure. In many cases, it stimulates sexual enthusiasm by removing the anxiety of causing impregnation. However, in order to remove the misinformation and misconception of patients regarding deleterious effects of vasectomy on sexual behavior, more rigorously designed followup studies including control groups of nonsterilized men for comparison are needed. Such research would also throw light on the extent to which other factors unrelated to vasectomy are responsible for the effects reported.
The large majority of vasectomized males expressed general satisfaction with vasectomy and were willing to recommend it to others. These feelings of satisfaction have been found quite consistently in surveys of vasectomized men. The range of satisfaction with the after-effects in terms of general health, sexual satisfaction, or marital harmony was from 80% in Johnson's study of men under psychiatric care to 100% in Poffenberger and Poffenberger's study. In spite of the high rate of general satisfaction among the vasectomized males with the operation, we agree with Presser and Bumpass' conclusion (1972) that a small but substantial minority of the population still have serious misconceptions about vasectomy, specifically the erroneous view held by some of the people that it interferes with a man's physical ability to have sexual intercourse. This view is supported by our data on attitudes of friends and relatives about the operation. Since the attitudes and reactions of friends are important fac-

302

Kohli and Sobrero

Social Biology

tors in motivation, it is essential to have a strong and incisive educational activity to supplant misinformation and rumor about vasectomy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Vasectomy Service at the Margaret Sanger Research Bureau, Inc., was established

through a grant-in-aid from the Association for Voluntary Sterilization, Inc. Dr. LeeL. Bean of The Population Council greatly assisted in the preparation of the questionnaire and its coding. The Population Council also provided the help of its computer facility and staff. Dr. Christopher Tietze and Dr. Joseph E. Davis provided valuable criticism and suggestions on an earlier draft of the manuscript.

REFERENCES

ASSOCIATION FOR VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION, INC. PRESSER, H. B., and L. BUMPASS. 1972. Demo-

1972. A mimeographed note on sterilization. graphic and social aspects of contraceptive

New York.

sterilization in the United States: 1965-70. In

FERBER, A. S., C. TIETZE, and S. LEWIT. 1967. Commission on Population Growth andthe

Men with vasectomies: A study of medical, sexual, and psychological changes. Psychosom.

American Future Research Report entitled Demographic and Social Aspects of Population

Med. 29:354-366.

Growth. Government Printing Office, Washing-

JOHNSON, M. H. 1964. Social and psychological ton, D.C.

effects of vasectomy. Amer. J. Psychiat. 121: TRUESDALE, C. W. 1965. Assessment of vasectomy

481-486.

as a means of voluntary sterilization. Lancet

LANDIS, J. T., and T. POFFENBERGER. 1963. Popu-

85:155-156.

lation control: Vasectomy. Paper presented at WESTOFF, C. F. 1972. The modernization of United

the annual Meeting of American Sociological States contraceptive practice. Fam. Plan. Persp.

Association, Los Angeles, California.

4:9.

POFFENBERGER, T., and S. B. POFFENBERGER. 1963. ZIEGLER, F. J., D. A. RODGERS, and S. A. KRTEGS-

Vasectomy as a preferred method of birth MAN. 1964. Psychological aspects of male

control: A preliminary investigation. Marr. sterilization. Paper read at the First Interna-

Fam. Liv. 25:326-330.

tional Congress of Social Psychiatry, London.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

