Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Why not use contraception? Economics of fertility regulation among rural Egyptian women
Wayne A. Schutjer , C. Shannon Stokes & John R. Poindexter
To cite this article: Wayne A. Schutjer , C. Shannon Stokes & John R. Poindexter (1986) Why not use contraception? Economics of fertility regulation among rural Egyptian women, Social Biology, 33:3-4, 214-228, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988640 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988640
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

Why Not Use Contraception? Economics of Fertility Regulation Among Rural Egyptian Women

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Wayne A. Schutjer, C. Shannon Stokes, and John R. Poindexter
Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology, and Population Issues Research Center, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania

ABSTRACT: Use of contraception by rural Egyptian women who desire no more children is examined within a modified microeconomic framework. Four sets of factors are hypothesized to influence current use of contraception: (1) costs of contraception, '(2) factors influencing the slope of the desired family size function, (3) anticipated costs of child rearing and (4) strength of motivation for fertility regulation. Women's education and two measures of psychic costs were found to be important predictors of contraceptive use. Factors affecting the demand for children and thus indirectly influencing the motivation for fertility regulation were also important. Land ownership, cultivating status of the household, and educational expectations for children were significantly related to current use. Strength of motivation, although significant, was less strongly related to use of contraception. The findings suggest women who want no more children, but who are not practicing contraception, are affected by factors influencing both the costs of contraception and the costs of an unwanted child.

An important question facing policy makers and population planners in less developed nations is: Why do many women who want no additional children fail to practice contraception? A recent analysis of 11less developed nations revealed that less than 10 per cent of currently married women in Nepal and Pakistan who wanted no more children were practicing contraception (Palmore and Concepcion, 1981). The proportion was considerably higher in Panama, Peru, and the Philippines, where over half of the women desiring no additional children were using contraception to prevent additional births. In all cases, however, women who wanted no additional children yet were not practicing contraception represented a significant potential clientele for family planning programs.

The behavior of women who want no more children, but who do not use contraception, is often viewed as irrational in that these women are not using available means to attain their goal of no additional children (Chang et al., 1981). The microeconomic approach to fertility behavior, however, suggests that judgements about the "irrationality" of such behavior may be too facile (Easterlin, 1975, 1978). Under conditions in which^ contraception is neither costless nor per-* fectly effective, the costs of practicing contraception may exceed the costs of an unwanted child. While this situation may be difficult to visualize in more developed countries, it may be likely to occur in less developed nations. In nations where contraception may be frowned upon for religious or cultural reasons, and where the means of contraception

214

Vol. 33,No. 3-4

Rural EgyptianWomen

215

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

are difficult or costly to obtain, costs of elimination of polygamous households,

contraception may exceed the costs of and, most importantly, limiting the fo-

an additional child.

cus to those in which the wife desired no

This paper presents an analysis of the more children, yielded 440 cases for

contraceptive behavior of rural Egypt- analysis.

ian women who desire no additional

children. Earlier work in rural Egypt found that only 31 per cent of women

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

who desired no additional children were Easterlin (1978) has demonstrated

practicing contraception. Moreover, as that a demand curve exists for fertility

the authors note: "there is no adequate regulation that relates the price and mo-

explanation of why the two-thirds of ru- tivation for fertility regulation. In that

ral Egyptian women who do not want model, the motivation for fertility regu-

more children, are not practicing con- lation is approximated by the number of

traception" (Stokes et al., 1983, pp. 64- unwanted children the household would

65). have if fertility were unregulated. The

The theoretical framework underlying the analysis draws heavily upon the socioeconomic model developed by Easterlin. That model incorporates both demand factors and biological factors as determinants of family size. The empiri-

cost of fertility regulation includes both economic and psychic costs of limiting births. A comparison of these costs, and the strength of motivation of fertility regulation underlie the decision to limit births.

cal approach is similar to that used by Following Easterlin's notation, Co

Easterlin and Crimmins (1981) in their equals the desired family size in a per-

analysis of World Fertility Survey data. fect contraceptive society, i.e., a society

Both the theoretical framework and em- in which contraception has no cost and is

pirical procedures have been modified, perfectly effective. CN equals natural

however, to reflect the rural nature of fertility, the number of children that

the sample, the limitation to women de- would be born to a family in the absence

siring no additional children, and the de- of any voluntary control of fertility, ad-

tailed data available from the survey re- justed by the probability that a child will

garding each of the major variables. survive to age 20. Co is determined at a

The empirical analysis is based upon given child price by the tangency of the

data collected from 1,200 rural women family income constraint and the indif-

in Lower Egypt in the summer of 1978. ference curve for children and other

To assure a range of socioeconomic and goods consumed by parents. The differ-

agricultural conditions, 12 villages were ence between CN and Co is Easterlin's

randomly drawn from three strata measure of motivation to regulate fertil-

reflecting variation in both sets of char- ity, that is, the number of children that

acteristics. From each village a random would survive to adulthood in the ab-

sample of households was drawn. The sence of voluntary fertility control, and

desired sample size was 1,200 ever- the number that would be desired if fer-

married women less than age 50. The tility regulation were costless and per-

1,200 interviews were obtained from 685 fectly effective.

households. Restrictions of the sample In Figure 1, the function C ' D - C ' D to households with male heads, the relates CD and the price of children. The

216

Schurjer etal.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

N Children FIG. 1.--Utility loss as a measure of motivation to regulate fertility

price of children (Pc) includes both actual and anticipated monetary outlays and foregone parental earnings associated with bearing and rearing children. Thus, at (Pc) the desired family size is CD, while CN represents natural fertility adjusted for survival rates. CN-CD is Easterlin's measure of the strength of motivation to regulate fertility which is compared to the costs of contraception in making a decision regarding fertility regulation. CA is current actual family size. Figure 1 also suggests a second measure of the strength of motivation to regulate fertility, that is, the loss in utility associated with the failure to use contraception. Clearly, the number of children that would occur in the absence of regulation, over and above those desired, is an important determinant of motivation to regulate fertility. However, not all unwanted children reduce family utility by an equal amount. Thus, an alternative to CN- CD is to consider not only the number of children that

would occur in the absence of regulation, but also the loss of utility their birth would engender. Hicks et al., (1981) make a similar argument when they suggest that the strength of motivation for contraception is captured by the net benefits of an additional child (in their case negative), which, after an adjustment for the probability of having a child in the absence of fertility regulation, can be compared to the costs of contraception.
In Figure 1 the loss of utility associated with unwanted children is represented by the cross-hatched area. Conceptually, that area represents ait negative consumer surplus that would be associated with required consumption of a good (at a fixed price) beyond the quantity desired. Thus, it is anticipated loss of utility that families compare to the costs of contraception in making a decision regarding fertility regulation.
To this point the strength of motiva-

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Rural Egyptian Women

217

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

tion for fertility regulation hasbeencal- work, children provide families three

culated under the assumption of aper- types of utility: income utility (additions

fect contraceptive world, i.e., to family income), security utility (finan-

contraception isfree andperfectly effec- cial and emotional security in parents'

tive. In a world where contraception is later years), and consumption or

not free, a family would have children consumer-good utility.

beyond CD. That is, a couple would not The weights assigned to each utility

use contraceptives until the disutility of will vary among societies andamongin-

an additional child exceeds the cost of dividual families within a society. In

contraception. Thus, either actual fam- Western nations, consumption utilities

ily size (CA), or anticipated completed prevail andfamilies experience negative

family size at theendof the childbearing family income effects, since the oppor-

period, will exceed CD aslong ascontra- tunity cost of parental time is greater ception is not completely free and100 than the income children generate dur-

per cent effective. Similarly, for a sam- ing theperiod of time they live at home.

ple of women desiring no additional Similarly, institutional mechanisms in

children Q>has already been equaled or most Western nations provide a degree

exceeded. As a result, the strength of motivation for fertility regulation must be adjusted for the actual fertility position of the family in question. Families with CA less than CD will find nomotivation for contraception other than spacing of children. Families living in aperfect contraceptive world would haveCA

of security to elderly people in theabsence of support from children. Within more traditional systems, the range of utilities generated by children is wider than intheWestern system. Children do in fact generate income, provide old-age security, and generate consumption utility.

equal to CD.Families for whom contra- A second dimension of the demand

ception is not costless nor perfectly ef- for children relates to the attributes of

fective would often find CA> CD- For children that parents value. Following this group, the strength of motivation is the approach suggested by Becker

best captured by the loss of consumer (1960) and elaborated by Willis (1974),

surplus that would result from CN- CA Becker and Lewis (1974), and Roadditional children that would occur in senzweig and Wolpin (1978), parents

the absence of contraception (Figure are assumed to derive utility from both

I)-1 The size of the cross-hatched area in
Figure 1 depends not only upon Q r CA, but also upon the price of children (Pc) and the slope of the demand for children function C'D-C'D- Following Leinbenstein (1974), the demand for

the number of children and the average quality or resource intensity of those children. Thus, CD includes parental consideration ofthe utility that wouldbe derived from varying numbers of children given a level of resource intensity.
Figure 2, Panel A, demonstrates the

children reflects the utility a child pro- impact ofvariation intheslope ofthe CD

vides a family. In Leibenstein's frame- function on the motivation to use con-

traception. For a family with the child

1Spacing of children may,however, be impor-
tant if CD-CA is small and CN- CD is large, e.g., young couples already close toCD.

demand function C'D-C'D the crosshatched area represents the loss in consumer surplus that would result from

218

Schutjer et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Children

Children

Fie. 2.--Price and demand variation effects on motivation for fertility regulation

CN~CA additional children. A family with the child demand function C"DC"D would experience a greater loss of consumer surplus with CN-CA additional children. Specifically, the loss would equal the cross-hatched area plus the solid area.
Figure 2 also demonstrates the impact on the motivation to regulate fertility when the price of children beyond CA is positively related to the number of children. In Panel B of Figure 2 the solid area represents the additionalconsumer utility that would be lost with the rising price. Clearly, the price of childrenneed not be a positive function of number; it may be constant or negative. Similarly, as with the utilities that underlie the demand for children function, the price relationship with number of children will vary between cultures and between families within a culture.
The price of fertility regulation includes three elements: (1) fixed monetary costs, (2) variable monetary costs, and (3) psychic costs. Fixed costs associated with fertility regulation are costs

which do not vary with the number of births averted. Fixed costs include the cost of acquiring information regarding contraceptive techniques and of making a decision regarding the technique appropriate to household circumstances. Variable monetary costs relate to the cost of averting each birth, specifically, those costs required to maintain a pattern of contraceptive behavior. Examples of variable costs are the money cost of regulation devices, travel costs involved in their acquisition, as well as travel and medical costs associated with continued use. Psychic costs are the disutility associated with contraceptive behavior growing primarily out of familial or community disapproval or religious m taboos against particular forms of fertility regulation.2 Thus, it is these three costs which families must weigh in making a decision regarding contraception.
2Psychic costs enter the Easterlin formulation as an element (a) in the general utility function where U = f(, GP, C). Thus,  is a measure of disutility associated with fertility regulation that is equal to unity if fertility regulation generates no personal disutility.

Vol. 33, No.

Rural Egyptian Women

219

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

MATERIALS AND METHODS

COSTS OF CONTRACEPTION

EMPIRICAL MODEL
On the basis of the theoretical frame· w o r k , four sets of variables were ex-
pected to influence current use of contraceptives by women who desired no additional children. The sets of variables are: (1) the cost of fertility regulation, including both monetary and psychic costs; (2) factors which influence the slope of the desired family size function; (3) the anticipated costs of rearing an additional child; and (4) the number of additional children that would result in the absence of fertility regulation. Table 1 provides the definitions and measurement of variables used in the analysis to represent the four sets of factors. Also included is the hypothesized effect of each variable on contraceptive behavior.
Conceptually, the calculation that would determine contraceptive use among women who desire no additional children is a comparison of the costs of contraception and the loss of consumer surplus associated with the number of additional children that would likely be born in the absence of contraception. For the empirical analysis it was not possible to obtain a measure of the quantity of children that would be desired in a perfect contraceptive world, nor to obtain monetary estimates of contracept i v e costs and the price of children. As a result, the empirical analysis does not provide a comparison of the loss of consumer surplus and contraceptive costs. Rather, the analysis differentiates between contraceptors and noncontraceptors using the sets of variables noted above that are thought to underlie the determinants of the consumer surplus loss and the price of contraception.

Indirect measures of each of the three costs of contraception were included. Husbands' and wives' educational attainments (HBEDC and WFEDC) provide measures of the fixed cost of adopting contraception. The cost of acquiring information is lower for families of higher educational attainment, but once acquired, contraceptive knowledge can be used to prevent a number of unwanted births.
The availability of a center that provides family planning services to village residents was included as an indicator of the variable costs associated with the adoption and maintenance of birth control. Thus, the 42 per cent of the sample women who have to travel to a neighboring village for contraceptive services would have higher time and monetary costs.
Two measures of psychic costs were used in the analysis. The first measure (HWTALK) was designed to capture the degree of communication between the partners regarding family planning. The second indicator of psychic costs was the extent to which the sample women perceived relatives to be using contraception (RELUSE). Those women who discussed family planning with their husband and whose relatives were perceived to be using contraceptives were judged to have lower psychic contraceptive costs. In each case the contraception variables were coded so that lower costs have a higher numerical value, and hence, were expected to have a positive impact on contraception use.
DEMAND FACTORS
In agricultural societies a household's relationship to land is a major factor influencing both social status and eco-

220

Schutjeretal.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES, CURRENT USE OF CONTRACEPTION, RURAL EGYPT, 1978

Category and Variable
Costs of contraception Fixed costs Female education
Husband's education
Variable costs Distance to f.p. center Psychic costs Husband/wife communication
Perceived use of f.p. by relatives
Demand for children Security utility
Income utility
Consumption utility
Landless laborers
Child quality

Definition
Years of formal schooling
Years of formal schooling
Location of f.p. center in village
Have husband/wife ever discussed family planning?
Does wife perceive use of f.p. among relatives?
Land ownership
Size of cultivated area Income
Noncultivators/ cultivators
Average education expected for children

Price of children Accessibility of secondary school
Strength of motivation to contracept
Potential family size minus actual family size

Distance to secondary school
Difference between potential supply of children (natural fertility) and actual family size

Measure

Hypothesized Direction of
Effect

0 = None 1 = 1 or more years 0 = None 1 = 1 or more years
0 = Not in village 1 = In village
0 = Never discussed 1 = Have discussed
1 = Don't know @ use 2 = None use f.p. 3 = Some use f.p. 4 = Many use f.p.
0 = Owns no land 1 = Owns some land Size of cultivated area in feddans Per capita family income in pounds 0 = Noncultivator 1 = Cultivator (owner or
tenant"! 0 = None 1 = Primary 2 = Junior high 3 = Senior high 4 = Post secondary
Miles

+ + + + +
+ -- _ +
+

CN-CA (see text for explanation)

Use of contraception Use of family planning

Current use of
efficient family planning method

0 = Not currently using 1 = Currently using

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Rural Egyptian Women

221

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

nomic wellbeing (Schutjer and Stokes, versely, suffer a smaller loss of utility

1982; Stokes and Schutjer, 1984). As a with an unwanted child, than would

result, major emphasis was placed upon lower income families. Hence, a nega-

land availability and the conditions gov- tive relationship between HHINC and

erning access to land as determinants of contraceptive use was expected.

* the families' demand for children. Land The final factor included in the em-

ownership provides a hedge against eco- pirical model to reflect variation in the

nomic deprivation for individuals un- demand for children was a measure of

able to secure either a labor or a man- child quality or resource intensity. Thus,

agement return from the agriculture to determine the impact of anticipated

production process (Schutjer et al., discretionary expenditures on the con-

1983). A dummy variable separating traceptive decision, the model included

landowners from tenants and landless the education that would likely be pro-

laborers was included. The hypothesis vided by the family to future children.

was that land ownership (OWNLAND) The argument was that educational ex-

provides a supplement to children as a pectations for existing children (EX-

source of security, particularly old-age PEDC) provide an indication of the ed-

economic security, and thus would be ucation future children would receive

positively related to contraceptive use. and serves as a measure of child quality.

The size of area cultivated by the The quantity of children that parents

family (CULTVA) and a dummy varia- desire is likely to be jointly determined

ble that distinguishes landless agricul- with expected resource intensity or child

tural laborers from the cultivators quality. Thus, it was necessary to treat

(FARMER) were both included to pro- child quality (EXPEDC) as an instru-

vide an indication of the potential eco- mental variable. Thus, an expected edu-

nomic contribution of children to family cation equation was estimated for the

economic activity. The argument for in- sample as a whole, and EDHAT was

cluding these variables was that farm calculated for each female using the

families with access to more land for cul- coefficients obtained. The calculated

tivation would be able to incorporate variable (EDHAT) was then entered

child labor into the family income- into the contraception equation with the

generating mechanism more effectively expectation it would be positively re-

than would either landless laborers or lated to contraceptive use.

families with less land available for culti- The expected education equation re-

vation. The expectation was that both gressed the categorical value of ex-

CULTVA and FARMER would be pected education on five independent

*0- negatively associated with the adoption variables. Four of the variables were

of contraceptive practices.

those thought to underlie the quantity of

A fourth factor hypothesized to in- children desired: (1) area cultivated

fluence contraceptive behavior through (CULTVA); (2) the dummy variable

an impact on the demand for children FARMER that distinguishes landless la-

was household per capita income borers from cultivators; (3) land owner-

(HHINC). The expectation was that ship (OWNLAND); and (4) household

families with higher levels of income income (HHINC). The fifth indepen-

would desire more children, or con- dent variable, designed to reflect com-

222

Schutjer et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

munity educational norms, was the proportion of school-aged boys in the village of residence that were enrolled in school (PROBOY). The estimated equation, with t values in parentheses, was as follows:

EXPEDC =

0.7671 - 0.1673 OWN - 0.0106 CULT

(-1.15)

(-0.67)

+ 0.0018 HHINC-0.0729 FARM

(2.93)

(-0.43)

+ 0.2092 PROBOY

(2.86) R2 = 0.05 F = 4.65

PRICE OFCHILDREN
In order to estimate the impact of variation in child price on the contraceptive decision, a variable that measured the distance to a secondary school (DSTSNS) was included in the empirical model. The argument is that much of the difference in child price between rural families would be captured by variation in distance to school facilities. The expectation was that DSTSNS would be positively related to contraceptive use. It is important to note, however, that it would have been much preferable to have an actual measure of the prices associated with raising children.
POTENTIAL ADDITIONAL CHILDREN
The number of children that would likely result in the absence of contraception is shown in Figure 1 as CN- CA- To estimate the potential additional children, we calculated the natural fertility level (CN) for each woman in the sample using a modified Easterlin-Crimmins procedure. The number of living children (CA) of each woman was then subtracted from her estimated CN. The re-

sulting variable, labeled STRGTH, had a mean value of 1.76, indicating that in the absence of contraception the women would bear an average of 1.76 additional children by the end of their childbearing years. The variable was entered into the contraceptive model with the expectation that it would be positively related to current use of contraceptives.
The Easterlin-Crimmins procedure for estimating natural fertility (CN) involves estimating a fertility equation for the sample women which includes a fertility control or contraceptive use variable. Using the coefficients obtained from the fertility equation, we can calculate an individual woman's estimated completed natural fertility by deleting the fertility control variable and substituting her individual values for the other independent variables. This procedure was modified in the current analysis. Current marriage duration was expanded to include the years remaining between current age and age 45, taken to be the end of the childbearing period.
The fertility equation used in the present study regressed the number of children ever born (NCEB) on eight independent variables:

*

(1) Fertility control (FERCON)-- number of years since beginning use of a modern contraceptive method. This was calculated as current ageminus age at first use, plus one year.
(2) Marriage duration (DURMAR)-- years since first marriage.
(3) First birth interval (BRINT1)-- "W number of months between marriage and the first live birth.
(4) Second birth interval (BRINT2)-- number of months between the first live birth and the second live birth.
(5) Secondary sterility (NOTSTR)--a dummy variable valued at zero if the woman had not given birth in the past five years, was not pregnant, and did not use contraception during the interval.

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Rural Egyptian Women

223

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

(6) Breast-feeding (BFEED)--number of months the nest-to-last child was breast-fed.
(7) Pregnancy wastage (PREGWS)-- proportion of all pregnancies not ending in a live birth.
(8) Child mortality (CHMORT)-- proportion of all live births resulting in child deaths.
The regression procedure produced the following estimated fertility equation:

NCEB = 1.7159 +0.0034 FERCON

(4.02) (0.23)

+ 0.2518 DURMAR - 0.0161 BRINT1

(18.52)

(-3.17)

- 0.0265 BRINT2 + 1.2208 NOTSTR

(-4.79)

(5.38)

- 0.0117 BFEED-2.4187 PREGWS

(-0.99)

(-4.20)

+ 4.1386 CHMORT (8.51)

R2 = 0.62 F = 88.77

RESULTS
The empirical model was estimated using both OLS and logit procedures. The results obtained from both estimation procedures are presented in Table 2. The similarity of results in terms of both the significance of coefficients and overall variance explained suggested considerable stability in the relation"ships. The OLS R2 of 0.25 and the logit D value of 0.24 obtained in the analysis seem reasonable given the use of crosssectional data and are comparable to the 0.22 R2 and 0.23 D values obtained for a sample of rural Mexican women (Hicks etal.,1981).
The results support the importance of contraceptive costs as determinants of contraceptive behavior. Both measures

of the psychic costs were significant and in the hypothesized direction. Couples in which the husband and wife had talked about family planning and those in which the wife perceived other relatives to be using contraceptives were more likely to be current users than other couples.3 The social and cultural acceptability of contraception, reflected in the perceptions of respondents about the use of contraceptives by (1) friends and (2) others in the community were used in preliminary analyses, in addition to the perception of use by relatives. Collinearity among the three measures prevented the simultaneous use of all three. However, it is worth noting that the influence of perceived use varied directly with the degree of social closeness. That is, perceived use by relatives, friends, and others in the community all exerted significant impacts and their relative influence was as expected. One measure of fixed contraceptive costs, female education, was significant with the anticipated sign. Husband's education was not significant in either model. The fact that the availability of a family planning facility in the village (DSTSNS) was not significant was somewhat surprising. Among the sample women, 42
3The exogeneity of the husband-wife communication variable may be questioned. It may be argued that those who practice contraception perforce must discuss it. However, in rural Egypt we would argue that the husband's approval (and perhaps that of the mother-in-law) is critical to the adoption of family limitation practices. Consequently, we retained this variable although its theoretical interpretation remains open to question. In order to insure that this variable was not unduly influencing the overall results, we also estimated the model deleting husband-wife communication. Other than a small decrease in the R2 value and slight changes in the significance levels of some coefficients, the results were quite similar to those reported here. Because of the importance of these psychic costs, and their relative neglect in most models, we retained this variable.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

224

Schutjer et al.

Social Biology

TABLE2
OLS REGRESSION ANDLOGISTIC ESTIMATES OF THE CONTRACEPTIVE USE MODEL, RURAL EGYPT, 1978 (N = 440)

Variable
Costs of contraception
Fixed Costs HBEDC WFEDC
Variable costs DISTCN
Psychic costs HWTALK RELUSE
Demand Factors HHINC CULTVA OWNLAND FARMER EDHAT
Price DSTSNS
Supply STRGTH
Intercept

OLS Parameter
Estimates

Standard Error

Significance Probability

Logit Parameter
Estimates"

Standard Error

Significance^* Probability ^ r

-0.05272 0.17559
-0.01287
0.22232 0.12576
-0.00163 0.02059 0.29129
-0.12054 0.67031
-0.00396
0.01760 -0.99295

0.04856 0.08242
0.04277
0.04628 0.02239
0.00034 0.00597 0.06282 0.06322 0.13977
0.00405
0.00837 0.16744

'0.2783 -0.42341 0.0337 1.08203

0.7636 -0.01696

0.0001 0.0001

2.15982 0.75423

0.0001 0.0006 0.0001 0.0572 0.0001

-0.01079 0.13068 1.82789
-0.72682 4.24479

0.3285 -0.02049

0.0362 0.11050 0.0001 -10.00984

0.31649 0.49616
0.28399
0.46914 0.15361
0.00239 0.03975 0.43989 0.41890 0.97297
0.02567
0.05846 1.33687

0.1809 0.0292
0.9524
0.0000 0.0000
0.0000 0.0010 0.0000 0.0827 0.0000
0.4247
0.0587 0.0000

"Logit estimates obtained through use of SAS Logit procedures. Theestimated coefficient is the elasticity of odds ratio with respect to the parameter.

per cent lived in villages lacking a family planning center and thus would be expected to incur additional time and monetary costs to maintain contraceptive behavior. The lack of significance may well indicate the success of the Egyptian family planning effort exemplified by a 1980 survey suggesting that "almost 98 per cent of the rural population live within 15minutes travel time of a family planning center" (Khalifa et al., 1982, p. 130).
The demand factors measuring household per capita income, educational expectations, land ownership, and the distinction between landless and

cultivating families (FARMER), were all significant and in the hypothesized direction. The negative sign on the income coefficient suggests that with the price of children (DSTSNS) controlled, higher income families are less willing to suffer the loss of utility associated with contraception. It also appears that landowners and landless families perceive less utility from additional children and hence are more likely to bear the costs of contraception. In the case of landowners, the theoretical explanation is related to a reduced dependence on children for security. Among the landless, the economic contribution of children would be po-

Vol. 33, No.

Rural EgyptianWomen

225

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

tentially smaller. Thus, as with landowners, landless couples more readily accept the costs associated with preventing the birth of an additional child than do cultivating families (FARMER). * The child-quality instrumental variable (EDHAT) had a significant positive impact on contraceptive behavior. Thus, as hypothesized, among the rural Egyptian women desiring no additional children, those who anticipated greater investments in education of their children were more likely to adopt contraception.
Among the demand factors, the area cultivated variable (CULTVA) exhibited a sign contrary to expectations. It is likely that the positive sign on CULTVA resulted from the fact that the economic contribution of children to the agricultural production process was captured by the variable FARMER which distinguishes between landless families and those with access to land for cultivation purposes.
The impact of the child price variable (DSTSNS) was not significant in either the OLS or logit model. Thus, the results did not support the hypothesis that families who perceived a higher cost for an additional child were more likely to adopt contraceptive practices. Interpretation of this finding must be viewed as tentative, given the problems associated with measuring the price variable.
The hypothesis that the number of fe- additional children that would likely
result from a failure to regulate fertility (STRGTH) is an important determinant of a family's motivation to use contraception was supported by the OLS and logit results. This finding is significant because the calculated variable CN-CA incorporates supply factors such as infant mortality, breast-feeding, and marriage duration, and because it

demonstrates the usefulness of a modified Easterlin-Crimmins approach to estimating natural fertility (Qv).4
THE MARGINAL COEFFICIENTS
In order to examine the impact of marginal changes in the determinants of contraceptive use, we calculated the partial derivatives and elasticity coefficients from the logit estimates. The results of both calculations are presented in Table 3.
The instrumental variable (EDHAT), that was included as a measure of child quality or resource intensity, was the variable with the greatest marginal impact on the probability of contraception among the women in the sample. From a public policy perspective, this finding is encouraging because it provides support for the notion that increasing the availability of educational opportunities for rural children may have a positive impact on the adoption of contraception, if we assume that increased educational opportunities result in greater educational expectations.
Among the variables that were significant in the OLS and logit models, contraceptive behavior was also clearly re-
4Although this procedure provided a partial control for the biological determinants of fertility, the question may be raised as to how differences in the ability to conceive and successfully bear a child to term are perceived by the women themselves. It is not necessary to subscribe to a highly rationalized view of these perceptions to visualize how they might influence fertility expectations. Women who have had difficulty conceiving and/or carrying a child to term (long birth intervals and repeated fetal deaths), would be expected to anticipate fewer additional births than women whose childbearing history is uncomplicated by such events. CN- CA was thought to measure women's additional potential childbearing, and hopefully, should correspond roughly to the women's perceptions. It should be noted that in a preliminary analysis, the Easterlin-Crimmins procedure was used without modification. The unmodified procedure resulted in an estimated CN - CA that wasnegative.

226

Schutjer et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

TABLE3
IMPACT OF MARGINAL CHANGES INTHE INDEPENDENT VARIABLES ON CONTRACEPTIVE
USE, RURAL EGYPT, 1978

Variable
Fixed costs HBEDC WFEDC
Variable cost DISTCN
Psychic costs HWTALK . . . . RELUSE
Demand factors HHINC CULTVA OWNLAND .. FARMER . . . . EDHAT
Price DISTSNS
Supply STRGTH

Partial Derivative*
dP,
HXii
-0.08345 0.21326
0.00334
0.42570 0.14866
-0.00213 0.02576 0.36028
-0.14326 0.83665
-0.00404
0.02178

Elasticity Coefficient* dP: _ Xii dXii Pi
-0.83568 2.13560
-0.03347
4.26384 1.48862
-0.02129 0.25792 3.60771
-1.43452 8.37794
-0.04044
0.21809

"The partial derivative 1_ was calculated as

P,(lb-TPh,)cpe;.lasticity

was

dXa calculated as

a -

1 - Pi

sponsive to contraceptive costs. The measure of psychic costs (HWTALK) had a partial equal to 0.43, and an estimated elasticity of 4.3. In addition, both women's education and the use of contraceptives by relatives were important at the margin.
Land ownership and the distinction between the landless and cultivating families were also important, exhibiting elasticities greater than unity and partials of 0.36 and -0.14, respectively. Per capita household income appeared to have only a modest potential for influencing the motivation to regulate fertility at the margin. However, income was a major determinant of expected education, and as noted earlier, contra-

ceptive behavior was responsive to educational expectations.
Of the determinants of contraceptive use examined here, the number of additional children that would be expected to result from a failure to use contraceptives was the least critical at the margin. That result likely reflects the relative difficulty families face in estimating potential births averted, compared to estimating the costs associated with contraception and the demand-price variables.
CONCLUSIONS
Women who desire no more children represent a potentially important clientele for family planning programs in less developed countries. This study employed a modified microeconomic framework to explain the use of contraception among rural Egyptian women who wanted no more children. The findings suggest that contraceptive behavior was influenced by factors affecting the demand and supply of children and by the costs of contraception.
Female education was significantly related to contraceptive usage, a finding consistent with contraceptive prevalence surveys. However, it is worth noting that less than 7 per cent of these women had any formal education and those who had attended had done so for a relatively short period of time. Consequently, efforts directed at improving basic literacy appear to have potential for increasing the ease of acquiring information about contraception, and hence, for increasing contraceptive use.
The inclusion of two variables aimed at measuring psychic costs (or, alternatively, social and cultural acceptability) of contraception represented a departure from standard microeconomic formulations. More importantly, both of

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33,No. 3-4

Rural Egyptian Women

227

these factors were clearly related tocon- of children. Undoubtedly, the factors

traceptive use. Women who perceived that influence thecontraceptive decision

relatives to beusing contraception were vary between cultures and institutional

more likely to use contraception them- settings. It would be inappropriate then

selves. Similarly, women who reported to generalize these results to other de-

ever discussing family planning with veloping nations. However, thetheoret-

their husbands were more likely to be ical approach and empirical procedures

current users. Although these findings used in this study would appear to have

should be interpreted cautiously, the considerable potential for disentangling

magnitude and consistency of their ef- the factors that influence contraceptive

fects suggest that further research be di- use among women who want no more

rected to the importance of social net- children.

works involving kin, friends, and other

community members in legitimizing the

use of contraception. Such work would

seem particularly important in cultural

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

and institutional settings where religious This research constitutes part of the taboos or the normative system have Agricultural-Demographic Project of The

proscribed contraception.

Pennsylvania State University. Support for

Identification of factors affecting the demand for children and thus indirectly influencing the motivation for family limitation represented an extension of

the research was obtained from the joint Ford and Rockefeller Foundations' program in Population andDevelopment Policy,and from Project 2665 ofThe Pennsylvania State University Agricultural Experiment Station.

the Easterlin approach. Land ownership, cultivating status ofthe household, educational expectations for children, and household income were all signi-

Useful comments on an earlier draft of the paper were obtained from T. Paul Schultz, Richard Easterlin, David Shapiro, and Whitney Hicks. Apreliminary version ofthe paper waspresented at the annual meeting

ficantly related to contraceptive use, as of the Population Association of America,

was themeasure of the potential supply Minneapolis, Minnesota, May, 1984.

REFERENCES

BECKER, G. 1960. An economic analysis offertility. In Universities National Bureau Committee for Economic Research, Demographic and economic change in developed countries. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
BECKER, G.S.,and H. G . LEWIS. 1974. Interaction between quantity and quality of children. In T. W. Schultz (ed.), Economics of the family. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
CHANG, M. C., R. FREEDMAN, and T. H. SUN.
1981. Trends in fertility, family size preferences, and family planning practice: Taiwan, 1961-80. Stud. Fam. Plan. 12:211228.

EASTERLIN, R. A. 1975. An economic framework for fertility analysis. Stud. Fam.Plan. 6:54-63. . 1978. The economics and sociology of fertility: A synthesis. In C. Tilly (ed.),Historical studies of changing fertility. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
EASTERLIN, R. A., and E. M. CRIMMNS. 1981.
An exploratory study of the synthesis framework of fertility determination with WFS core questionnaire data. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Washington, D.C.
HICKS, W., I. GUTIERREZ, R. MADRIGAL, and R.
RODRIGUEZ. 1981. Contraceptive use in

228

Schurjer etal.

Social Biology

Mexico: An analysis of World FertilitySurvey data. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Washington, D.C.
KHALIFA, A.M., H. A. A. H. SAYED, M. N.
EL-KHORAZATY, and A. A. WAY. 1982.
Family planning in rural Egypt, 1980: A report on the results of the Egypt Contraceptive Prevalence Survey. Westinghouse Health Systems, Colombia,MD.
LEIBENSTEIN, H. 1974. An interpretation of the economic theory of fertility: Promising path or blind alley? J. Econ. Lit. 12:457-479.
PALMORE, J. P., and M. B. CONCEPCION. 1981.
Desired family size and contraceptive use: An 11-country comparison. International Family Planning Perspectives 7:37-40.
ROSENZWEIG, M. R., and K. I. WOLPIN. 1978.
Testing the quantity-quality fertility model: Results from a natural experiment. Discussion paper 228, Yale University Econ. Growth Center, New Haven.

SCHUTJER, W. A., and C. S. STOKES. 1982. Ag-
ricultural policies andhuman fertility: Some emerging connections. Pop.Res.Pol. Rev. 1:225-244.
SCHUTJER, W. A., C. S. STOKES, and J. R.
POINDEXTER. 1983. Farm size, land ownership, and fertility in rural Egypt. Land Econ. 59:393-403.
STOKES, C. S., W. A. SCHUTJER, and J. R.
POINDEXTER. 1983.A note ondesired family size andcontraceptive usein rural Egypt. J. Biosoc. Sci. 15:59-65.
STOKES, C. S., and W. A. SCHUTJER. 1984. Ac-
cess to land andfertility in developing countries. In W. A. Schutjer and C. S. Stokes (eds.), Rural development and human fertility. Macmillan, New York.
WILLIS, R. J. 1974. Economic theory of fertility behavior. In T. W. Schultz (ed.), Economics of the family. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

