Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Selection intensities in mothers of twins and in mothers of singletons
P. Philippe
To cite this article: P. Philippe (1988) Selection intensities in mothers of twins and in mothers of singletons, Social Biology, 35:3-4, 285-292, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988707 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988707
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

Selection Intensities in Mothers of Twins and in Mothers of Singletons

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

P. Philippe
Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

ABSTRACT: Opportunity for selection was assessed in a group of mothers with twins and was compared with estimates obtained in mothers who gave birth to singletons only from the same population. Both groups were matched on a number of confounding variables in the framework of a case/control methodology. Two time periods involving demographic changes were studied separately. After appropriate adjustment for the increased family size of mothers of twins, results show that selection intensities are greater in twin-bearing mothers than in controls. The fertility component of the selection index is lower than that of mortality if childless women are taken into account. However, the index of opportunity for selection is rather low by current standards but, given the methodology used, should reflect genetic rather than environmental selection. Notwithstanding, it would be difficult to explain the recent change in the twinning rates in the population by the actual level of selection indices.

Any character is transmitted from a Therefore, mothers of twins as a group

generation to the next by way of "suc- might experience different selective val-

cessful" offspring, that is, the breeding ues in comparison with mothers of sin-

progeny. For any given population, the gletons from the same population that

number of "successful" offspring is a could be of relevance to explain tempo-

function of pre-reproductive mortality, ral variations in the twinning rates.

celibacy, migration, and, of course, The current study on selection inten-

family size.

sities was stimulated by a secular in-

The putative twin gene(s) is also ame- crease of twin births (presumably mono-

nable to this mechanism and should be zygotic according to Weinberg's bio-

all the more prevalent in a population metric method) in the population of

that it was selected for in the past. Moth- Isle-aux-Coudres (Philippe, 1981). Al-

ers of twins are suspected of being more though the data are population-based,

fecund than mothers of singletons (Al- the objective of the present study is to

len, 1981; Record et al., 1978) and, inas- compare opportunities for selection in

much as this advantage is genetically de- two matched groups of women, one

termined, it could have a bearing on the with at least one twin birth and the other

twin gene frequency. As a matter of with singletons only. Accordingly,

fact, fertility is genetic to a minimal ex- results will not point to the opportuni-

tent (Imaizumi et al., 1970; Neel and ties for selection prevailing in the popu-

Schull, 1972; Philippe and Yelle, 1978). lation but rather in subsets of it.

285

286

Philippe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The population and the data base of the present study have previously been described at length by the author (Philippe, 1981; Philippe, 1985; Philippe, 1986). The data base is composed of 77 twin pairs born in the isolated population of Isle-aux-Coudres (Quebec). Because of the sampling frame (to be discussed later), and in order to obtain valid estimates of selection components, we have truncated the sample so that only twins born before 1921 are included. The number thus retrieved represents 59 twin pairs. Because the population fertility and infant mortality have changed substantially since 1871 (Philippe, 1973) due to a relative abandonment of the practice of breastfeeding (Philippe, 1979), twins born before and after the cut-off point were considered separately. The first time period is a rather stable one in comparison with the demographic changes that occurred after 1870. Contraception has not occurred in the population for the whole time span covered by this study.

family size was estimated. This represents the sibship sizeof childbearing mothers. The mean (XSf) and the variance (Vsf) of family size had been computed. From the number of deaths prior to age 16years and that of single women pertaining to the above sibships, the proportion of deaths (PS) and the proportion of unmarried women (Pso) were also estimated. The proportion of surviving offspring (Ps) and that of childbearing mothers (Psf) were derived easily from the complement to one of the previous proportions. This made it possible to compute the total index (/,) of opportunity for selection as well as its components, that is Im, Iso, Isf, and If, such that:
It -- Iso + hf +
where
If = lso + Isf
Iso = Pso I (Psf
and

In order to allow comparison of selective values found in the group of twinbearing mothers, a control group of women who had singletons only was formed. Both groups were matched for variables known to act as cofounders. These are the birth order of the twin pair, the maternal cohort (+ --3 years), and the residence of parents of mothers. The number of control mothers thus available is equal to 58.
Crow's index of intensity for selection (Jacquard, 1974) was computed according to the method advocated by Hed (1984, 1986), account being taken of the modification suggested by Neel and Schull (1972). For both mothers of twins and mothers of singletons, the

Thus, the two groups of mothers considered here belong to generation g while the sibship size, the proportion of pre-reproductive deaths and that of unmarried women rather belong to generation g + 1. This sampling scheme is unusual (Jacquard, 1974) and may impose limits on the interpretation of our results.
Working with mothers of twins and mothers of singletons allows us to estimate sibship size of childbearing mothers. Therefore, married women with no offspring are excluded from the computation of the mean and variance of family size. Further, these women could not be grouped with single women. Thus

Vol. 35, No.

Selection Intensities

287

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

our data leave out a group of women that, had it been available, could have inflated //and Iso. However, the proportion of childless married women in comparison with that of single women is generally low in the population so that the bias will remain small. Without knowledge of the true "successful" family size, // cannot be estimated directly. However, since // is the sum of Iso and Isf which can be estimated from the components of family size of childbearing mothers, this poses no special difficulty. Finally, mothers of twins and their matched controls are selected for large family size and high parity. Thus, family size must be considered as complete, and the estimation of // is relatively devoid of the mortality component pertaining to childbearing ages.
RESULTS
Table 1 presents the estimates of the fertility parameters needed to compute the index of opportunity for selection in cases and controls for the two time periods. In order to ensure the validity of the comparison between cases and controls, the mean number of offspring and the percentages of deaths and single women were standardized, as the family size of mothers of twins has one offspring in excess. Accordingly, we counted confinements instead of offspring. Percentages were adjusted similarly (see Footnote 2 in Table 1).
Statistics were computed. As confinements in case and control mothers followed a normal distribution according to the generalized normality test (with 2 degrees of freedom), we felt justified to undertake F testing of the observed variances which proved highly statistically different, at least in thefirst

time period. As to percentages, they were submitted to a likelihood-ratio test. Results are presented in Table 1.
Table 2 yields the various components of selection for both the groups and time periods, as well as for the total. First, at any one time period the total opportunity for selection is higher in the group of mothers with twins than in matched controls. The ratio is about three to two. /, also increased over time in both groups. Second, the overall fertility component, If, is somewhat higher than the mortality component (7m), and both increased over time. However, when the sterility component, Iso, is added to that of mortality, the trend is reversed with fertility having a lower impact. Third, the sterility component is similar in cases and controls with a small jump across time periods. Last, the greatest contribution to // is due to the fertility component (ISf) of reproducing mothers.
DISCUSSION
This study shows that the index of opportunity for selection is higher in mothers of twins than in a group of matched controls from the same population. This conclusion has been reached on the basis of a comparative approach, that is, selection indices of the study group were compared with those of a control group closely matched for variables able to elicit confounding and to introduce biases. The potential biases have been controlled and the results, as far as we are aware, are free from confounding. This approach must clearly be favored in studies where the objective is to test the hypothesis of actual selection differentials in groups thought to be subjected to different selective values such as those

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
STATISTICS OF FERTILITY IN MOTHERS OF TWINS AND MOTHERS OF SINGLETONS

FROM COLONIZATION TO 1870

COMPONENTS OF FERTILITY

Case Mothers Control Mothers

(N - 31)

(N = 29)

Statistics

Confinements per childbearing mother"

Mean(*w)

8.9

Variance (VSF)

12.10

8.9 n.s. 3.91 F =3.1(<0.005)

Case Mothers (N =· 28)

FROM 1871 TO 1920
Control Mothers (N = 29)

10.3 15.93

9.9 11.18

Statistics
n.s. n.s.

Proportion of single women (PSo)

(16years and over)*

7%

8%

n.s.

7% 14% A"2 = 9.5( = 0.002)

Porportion of deaths (PD) (Oto 15years)

20%

14% A'2=3.2(=0.075) 28%

14% Z2=15.2(=0.000)

"One was subtracted from the overall number of offspring in sibships of twins in order to allow comparisonwith sibships of singletons. This correction applies only to the mean, the variance remaining unaffected by the procedure.
*Adjustment was carried out by deleting from the case proportion the per cent ratio of the mean of the corresponding component to the overall mean number of offspring in controls.

n
S'

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

Selection Intensities

289

TABLE 2
OPPORTUNITIES FOR SELECTION IN MOTHERS OF TWINS AND MOTHERS OF SINGLETONS

COMPONENTS OF SELECTION
Mortality (/,,) Sterility (/xo) Fertility (/if) Overall
fertility (IT) Total
selection (/r)

COLONIZATION TO 1870

Twins

Singletons

O25 016 0.09 0.10 0.21 0.06

0.30 0.16

0.55 0.32

1871TO 1920

Twins

Singletons

039 016 0.10 0.19 0.24 0.15

0.34 0.34

0.73 0.50

Twins
032 0.11 0.22
0.33
0.65

Singletons
0.16 0.14 0.11
0.25
0.41

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

characterized by genetic diseases. Further, the case/control approach, because of its reduced confounding, may be amenable to more straightforward interpretations when the time comes to assess the basis, genetic or environmental, of the variations in the observed selection indices. But this remains to be ascertained by future comparative analyses.
Though our groups are highly comparable, the results also reflect in some way the limits of the methodological case/control approach. For example, matching for birth order, and indirectly for advanced maternal age at birth, has imposed constraints on the mean and variance of family size. It is surmised that the current statistical estimates of family size in both cases and controls ought to be at variance with those from the population as a whole. However, we believe that this feature of the case/ control study which obviously limits comparisons with other population groups, offers a better opportunity to address our problem in a more straightforward manner.
More specifically, mothers of twins who are, for multiple reasons, a selected group must be compared with another similarly selected group with the same

features if we are to pinpoint the selective pressures that can explain the particular genetic makeup of any one group. Addressed in this way, the problem cannot be answered from population data, as the various sociodemographic features of a whole population will interfere with the validity of the resulting comparisons. This poses the problem of the comparability of groups when one attempts to compare the selection parameters of a group of diseased people to those of the population from which they were retrieved. A choice has to be made; the best choice is that which favors the objectives of the study. Be this as it may, in spite of the control imposed on the mean and variance of family size, and after appropriate adjustment, we were able to show that both mothers of twins and mothers of singletons are subjected to selection due to fertility differences; yet, //proved to be greatest in mothers of twins.
Though the index is not amenable to straightforward statistical testing, it nevertheless involves statistically different demographic trends. As a matter of fact, Iso (a component of //) is based on prereproductive mortality which proved to be statistically different between cases and controls. Further, the proportion of

290

Philippe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

single women (Pso) is statistically increased (X2 = 7.8 with P = 0.005) in controls in comparison to cases when periods are combined. Part of these differences might be related to the heterogeneity of the group of twin-bearing mothers that comprises both like- and unlike-sex twins. Furthermore, the possibility of differences in the fecundity potentials of mothers of twins was addressed in a recent study that suggested differences ascribable to mothers of like-sex twins (Philippe, ms.).
Similarly, selection by way of pre-reproductive mortality was largest in mothers of twins even after standardization for increased family size. This is due to the higher mortality of the group. This difference is clearly statistically significant in each time period as well as for the total (X2 = 16.4 with P = 0.000). This is not unexpected as twin births have been related to malformations (e.g., Down's syndrome) within sibships (Allen, 1984). Again, this is possibly due to the subgroup of mothers with like-sex twins (Philippe, 1986).
The validity of our results is further strengthened by the similarity of the selection component of sterility in cases and controls. This ought not to differ between the groups unless it is biologically grounded. It rather seems that selection in cases acts before reproductive age, which is compatible with most hereditary and congenital diseases that take their toll rather early in life. Once prereproductive selection has acted upon mortality, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that sterility due to celibacy might rather be social in origin. Nonetheless, a between-group statistical difference showed up which might reflect social influence as the economic status

of the population improved (time period 1870 to 1920).
Sterility of married women is a different problem and cannot be assessed with the present data. Because of its minimal role, at least in this population, the bias remains small in comparison with other sources of selection due to mortality.
The between-periods change in selective intensities undoubtedly reflects the demographic transformation of the population. As a matter of fact, the relative abandonment of the practice of breastfeeding after 1870turned out to increase the fertility and infant mortality of the population (Philippe, 1973; Philippe, 1979). Further, it has been suggested that the causes of death also shifted from a period of declining deaths to one with higher death rates of infectious origin (Philippe, 1979). Only twin-bearing mothers seem to be affected by the trend. This may be due to the relationship between breastfeeding and monozygotic twinning (Philippe, 1981). As to mortality due to childless women, the increase may partly be the result of an artifact: better state of the information in the more recent time period allowed for a more complete identification of single women. The between-time periods increase in the fertility component of both groups is related to a higher mean family size after 1870 due to a reduced postpartum period of sterility and to a correspondingly increased variance. Because they reflect the impact of behavioral factors, all of these changes in the vital rates have no relevance for genotypic selection. It is thus surmised that selection intensities prior to the demographic change are the most reliable. Applying the Adams and Smouse (1985) criteria for separating the demo-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

Selection Intensities

291

graphic (7r < 0.5) from the genetic com- these genes, thus yielding stable gene

ponent, we find that mothers of twins frequencies. Anyhow, the opportunities

only aresubjected to, admittedly low, for selection are rather lowfor both

genetic selection.

groups and comparable to those found

To sum up, the opportunities for se- in the Hutterite population (Jacquard,

lection are definitely higher in mothers 1974). Because ofthe sampling scheme

of twins than in mothers who gave birth used here, the reported selection indices

to singletons only. It is notimpossible should reflect the genetic background of

that some components of selectionare the groups more closely, at least prior to

statistically different between the two the demographic transition, than those

groups. Mortality has the largest roleto usually computed in descriptive studies

play, the more so if the sterility compo- of populations. Thecomparison with

nent is left out from the computations. Hutterites may therefore be questioned.

Fertility differentials, however, exist At face value andwithout a specific

and are ascribed to the heterogeneity of study of like-sex twins, it appearsun-

the group of mothers of twins. Unfortunately, itis not possible to further break down the data base to carry out separate studies of like- and unlike-sex twins. Acting mainly through mortality, the selection pressures against the twin

likely that the recently increased frequency of twin births inthe population can be ascribed tothe greater selection pressure prevailing in the group of twinbearing mothers.

gene(s) and associated genotypes are

probably higher in twin-prone mothers;

but the fertility component of selection

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

of nearly equal strength happens to compensate the rate of elimination of

I amgrateful to Esther Letourneau for the suggestion of the present study.

REFERENCES

ADAMS, J., and P. SMOUSE. 1985. Genetic con-

. 1986. Selection opportunities in seven

sequences of demographic changes in hu- Swedish nineteenth century populations.

man populations, p. 283-299. In R. Chak-

Hum. Biol. 58:919-932.

raborty and E. J. E. Szathmary (eds.), Dis- IMAIZUMI, Y., M. NEI, and T. FURUSHO. 1970.

eases of complex etiology in small popula-

Variability and heritability of human fertil-

tions: Ethnic differences andresearch ap-

ity. Ann. Hum. Genet. 33:251-259.

proaches. Alan R. Liss, New York.

JACQUARD, A. 1974. The genetic structure of

ALLEN, G. 1981.The twinning and fertility par-

populations. Biomathematics, Volume 5, p.

adox, p. 1-13. In L. Gedda, P. Parisi, and

321-330. Springer-Verlag, New York.

W. E.Nance (eds.), Twin research 3: Twin NEEL, J. V., and W. J. SCHULL. 1972. Differen-

biology andmultiple pregnancy. Alan R.

tial fertility and human evolution, p. 363-

Liss, New York.

378. In T. Dobzhansky, M. K. Hecht, and

. 1984. Multiple births, p. 152-189. In W. C. Steere (eds.), Evolutionary biology,

M. B. Bracken (ed.), Perinatal epidemiol-

Vol. 6. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New

ogy. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

York.

HED, H. 1984. Opportunity for selection during PHILIPPE, P. 1973. Analyse statistique des inter-

the 17th-19th centuries in the diocese of

valles protogenesiques et intergenesiques a

Linkoping as estimated with Crow's index in

l'Isle-aux-Coudres. Etude de demographie

a population of clergymen's wives. Hum.

historique. Population 28:81-93.

Hered. 34:378-387.

. 1979. Community health aspects of the

292

Philippe

Social Biology

natural control of fertility in aFrench Canadian rural population. Canad. J.Publ. Hlth. 70:171-178.
. 1981. Twinning and the changing pattern of breastfeeding: A possible relationship in a small rural population. Soc. Biol. 28:167-175.
. 1985. Genetic epidemiology of twinning: A population-based study. Amer. J. Med. Genet. 19:97-105.
. 1986. Termination of menstrual lifein mothers of twins. Hum. Biol. 58:239-250.

. Conceptive delays inmothers oftwins and mothers of singletons: A demographic epidemiologic approach. Ms.
PHILIPPE, P., and L. YELLE. 1978. Heritability
of fecundity and post-partum sterility:An isolate-based study. Hum. Biol. 50:1-14.
RECORD, R. G., E. ARMSTRONG, and R. J. LAN-
CASHIRE. 1978. A study of the fertility of mothers of twins. J. Epidem. Commun. Hlth. 32:183-189.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

