Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Biosocial models of adolescent problem behaviors
J. Richard Udry
To cite this article: J. Richard Udry (1990) Biosocial models of adolescent problem behaviors, Social Biology, 37:1-2, 1-10, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988742 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988742
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 20 View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

Biosocial Models of Adolescent Problem Behaviors

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

J. Richard Udry
Carolina Population Center University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, North Carolina

ABSTRACT: This paper develops a biosocial model of adolescent age-graded norm violations ("problem behaviors"), combining a traditional social control model with a biological model using steroid hormones. Subjects were 101 white boys drawn from the 8th-, 9th-, and lOth-grade rosters of selected public schools, and ranging in age from 13 to 16. Subjects completed self-administered questionnaires and provided blood samples which were assayed for the behaviorally relevant hormones. Boys' problem behavior shows strong hormone effects. Social and biological variables have both additive and indirect effects. Using a biosocial model leads to conclusions which are different from those which would have been drawn from the sociological model alone.

Social control theory is concerned with the fundamental question of how social processes control social behavior, and how institutional ties affect who abides by the rules of society and who breaks them. Liska and Reed (1985) point out that, contrary to some other theories of deviance:
Social control theories assume that norm violation can frequently be so pleasurable and profitable that many if not most people are motivated to violate them. Thus is it not necessary to study the origins and distributions of deviant motives; rather it is necessary to study what constrains or controls most people most of the time from acting on their deviant motives.
Another approach to deviant behavior, which has coexisted with social control theories, concentrates on explaining deviant behavior by characteristics of individuals that are primarily nonsocial in origin. These theories look to the physical characteristics of individuals (S. Glueck and E. Glueck, 1956), hormonal characteristics (Kreutz and Rose, 1972), or global genetic sources (Rowe and Osgood, 1984). These theories identify biological processes which predispose in-

dividuals to types of behavior which are likely to be norm violations. They are concerned with the biological origin of variance in deviant motivation, which is excluded by postulate from social control theories.
Social control theory assumes that everyone is motivated to do the deviant behaviors of interest to the theory and tries to explain what constrains those who do not. Biological theory assumes that motivation to do the deviant behavior is what is problematic and needs to be explained. On the face of these statements, it would seem that since each theory tries to explain what the other leaves out, the two theories should be complementary rather than opposing. The purpose of this paper is to show how these two theories are not only not contradictory, but actually illuminate one another.
The behaviors I choose to explain are the age-graded norm violations of adolescence. These behaviors are in general not norm violations for adults, but are for various reasons not considered by adults to be appropriate for early ado-

1

Udry SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

lescents. Jessor and Jessor (1977) call them "problem behaviors." Parents, schools, and other adult institutions discourage these behaviors in young adolescents. Examples of such age-graded violations are having sex, drinking alcohol, and smoking cigarettes. These behaviors are distinguished from offenses with victims, such as vandalism and robbery, which are socially disapproved irrespective of age.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
THE SOCIOLOGICAL MODEL
My sociological model encompasses two existing theories: social control theory as represented by Hirschi's (1969) conceptualization, and "problem behavior" theory from Jessor and Jessor (1977). The problem behavior framework provides a rationale for the dependent variable and the concept of transition proneness. Jessor and Jessor document that during the high-school years adolescents experience the following changes. They complete puberty, lower academic achievement values, increase values of independence, increase tolerance for violation of adult standards, decrease religiosity, decline in church attendance, increase reported alcohol and drug use, and increase sexual activity. All these changes are thought of as normal transitions. The problem behaviors are represented by the last changes and are predicted by the presence of the other things. These transitions are expected age-graded changes and are only defined as problem behaviors when they occur too early.
Hirschi's framework is based on the proposition that norm violations are inhibited by emotional attachment to conventional people and institutions, com-

mitment to conventional means of achievement, and holding conventional beliefs. It is easy to see the substantial overlap of problem behavior theory with Hirschi's theory when applied to adolescents. Moreover, Hirschi (1969, p. 34) explicitly rejects a motivational component:
The question, "Why do they do it?" is simply not the question the theory is designed to answer. The question is, "Why don't we do it?" There is much evidence that wewould if we dared.
THE BIOLOGICAL MODEL
My biological theory seeks to identify biological factors which predispose adolescents to violate age-graded behavior norms, that is, to engage in the behaviors before others of the same age cohort, and before they are supposed to. Rowe and Osgood (1984) have demonstrated that the bulk of variance in adolescent deviance (using somewhat more serious violations than problem behaviors) is attributable to genetic factors.
Through what biological processes do these behavior predispositions come about? I have chosen to examine steroid hormones, and specifically, testosterone, the most behaviorally potent male hormone. Testosterone has been the focus of attention of much behavioral endocrinology. It has been complicated in aggression, dominance, sexual behavior, and anti-social behavior (Olweus et al., 1980; Monti et al., 1977; Kreutz and Rose, 1972; Ehrenkrantz et al., 1974).
Zuckerman (1984) has developed a theory of sensation-seeking behavior which is biologically based in the concept of optimum arousal, mediated by central nervous system neurotransmitters of the catecholamine group. Daitzman and Zuckerman (1980) have shown that testosterone is related to measures

Vol. 37,No. 1-2

Adolescent Problem Behavior

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

of sensation-seeking in college males. Their sensation-seeking scale taps predispositions for behavior which substantially overlap the concept of problem behavior.
Steroid hormones are known to function in the brain as regulators of the genes that control the production of neurotransmitters. Since sensationseeking has been shown to be correlated with most of the items identified by Jessor and Jessor as problem behaviors, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the increase in problem behaviors in early adolescence may be a function of increases in testosterone. Males experience a tento twenty-fold increase in testosterone during adolescence. Twin studies have shown that both testosterone and sensation-seeking have surprisingly high heritability, with genetic factors accounting for half or more of the variance for each (Meikle et al., 1988; Fulker et al., 1980).
Testosterone is also the hormone responsible for all aspects of pubertal development in males, including hair growth and musculature. The Gluecks may have been indexing testosterone in their body typology.
Gove (1985) faults the main sociological theories of deviance for their inability to explain the sharp rise of deviant behavior in adolescence. Hirschi and Gottfriedson (1985, p. 567) argue that "efforts to explain the age effect with the theoretical and empirical variables currently available to criminology are doomed to failure." Gove proposes testosterone (and its sharp rise in adolescent boys) as an explanation which merits examination. Perhaps it is the testosterone (T) through which the genetic variance found by Rowe and Osgood (1984) is expressed. Furthermore, age at onset of puberty has a strong ge-

netic component (Fischbein, 1977), which means that the age at which T begins to increase is genetically controlled. This observation is particularly important when studying age-graded behaviors.
It is generally agreed that the only T that is available for biologic activity at the cellular level is that which is not bound to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), a large protein molecule incapable of passing through cell membranes. Nine-tenths or more of T is so bound. Therefore in all models containing T, SHBG must simultaneously be taken into account when assessing the physical and behavioral effects of T.
A simple biosocial model is presented in Figure 1. Path A indicates that hormones increase with age. Path B states that hormones are the proximate cause for pubertal development. Pubertal development may work as a socialpsychological variable. Boys vary by as much as four or five years in the timing of puberty. If behavioral expectations are tied to the appearance of maturity, then those maturing earlier may experience pressures, motivations, and opportunity for problem behaviors at earlier ages. On the other hand, pubertal development may only be a consequence of testosterone with no direct effect on behavior. Path C represents the lag in the effect of hormones on pubertal development. Path D stands for the direct effect of hormones on problem behavior. Path E controlled for Path D indicates the effect of pubertal development on problem behavior that is independent of the direct effect of hormones on behavior. Path F stands for the effect of any other age-graded determinants not included in the model. The concept "social controls" stands for the sociological components of the model. Path H summarizes

Udry
Hormones
B
Pubertal Development

Social Biology
. Social Controls

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Fie. 1.--Theoretical biosocial model of problem behavior.

>. Problem Behavior

the effects of the sociological components. Path G indicates that there may be hormone effects on the sociological components. Path I draws attention to the possibility that the effects of the sociological variables may be conditioned by hormone levels.
STRATEGY FOR ANALYSIS
I first construct a simple sociological model of problem behavior, representing Path H in Figure 1. Next, I construct a model excluding Paths G, H, and 1.1 then combine the models and simplify the consequent model. In this way, we can illuminate the changes which come about through combining the models.
RESEARCH METHODS
This research uses cross-sectional data from a nonclinical representative sample of white eighth-, ninth-, and

tenth-grade boys in a public school system of a medium-sized southern city. In 1982, a random sample of 101males was drawn from a list of pupils in selected schools provided by the school district. The school district was selected on the basis of availability of a list of pupils. The original purpose of the study was to determine the biological and social antecedents of sexual behavior. About 70 per cent of those eligible agreed to participate and completed the study.
Questionnaires were self-administered at home with the interviewer present. Signed informed consent was first obtained from a parent, then from the respondent. Ninth- and tenthgraders donated serum samples an average of three-and-a-half months after completing the questionnaire, while eighth graders completed the questionnaire and donated blood at approxi-

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

Adolescent Problem Behavior

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

mately the same time. Blood samples were collected in the subjects' homes between 3 and 7PM by a nurse, using a catheter which remained in place for about 30 minutes. Because there are short-term pulsatile releases of certain hormones into the blood, three 5 ml samples were collected at 15 minute intervals and pooled to provide an average hormone level over a 30-minute period. Subjects were paid $25 per session in which blood was drawn. Blood samples were allowed to clot, the clot removed, and the remainder centifuged. Serum was then stored at --20 C until assay. T and SHBG were measured by radioimmunoassay, using standard kits. For purely exploratory purposes, several other weaker androgenic hormones were measured, but no additional power in my analysis was expected from these hormones, and none was found.
Social variables.--Thereis at least one measure for each dimension of Hirschi's model. For attachment there is a measure of liking for church, homework, and household chores ("good child")- For involvement there are sports participation and church attendance. For commitment, there are importance of college and school grades. For beliefs there is importance of religion.
Concepts measured from problem behavior theory are the dependent variable (described below), age, pubertal development, grades, religiosity, church attendance, and selected theoretically relevant personality scales from the Adjective Check List (dominance, aggression, serf-control). Age and pubertal development are included to capture the age-graded nature of the controls. Also included are measures of socioeconomic status and family composition because both Hirschi and Jessor

and Jessor include such variables in their
analyses. The independent variables
used are as follows:
Age.--Agewas calculated to two decimal places by subtracting reported birth date from interview date.
Pubertal development.--Respondents rated themselves on level of pubertal development as registered through a battery of discrete items. These included a set of Tanner-type line drawings (Tanner, 1962) representing the degree of pubic hair and breast or genital development. Each person also indicated on separate items the development of body hair, facial hair, voice change, body shape change, and menarche, as appropriate by sex. These items were factor analyzed separately by sex, and a single factor was extracted. Factor scores were assigned to individuals on the basis of the factor weightings of the items. This score has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. The self-measurement of pubertal development was validated in a separate study (Morris and Udry, 1980), in which pediatricians rated adolescents on a battery of nearly identical items for which adolescents had already rated themselves. Factor scores from physicians and adolescents correlated r = 0.74 for males and 0.82 for females.
Parental marital status.--Respondent was scored 1if living with both biological parents, and 0 if not.
Mother's education.--Mother's report of her years of completed education, or if missing, adolescent's report of mother's education.
Father's occupation.--Adolescent's report of father's occupation, classified on the following metric: (4) professional/ technical, manager, official, or proprietor; (3) clerical, sales and kindred; (2) skilled workers; and (1) unskilled workers.
Grades.--Adolescent was asked, "What grades do you usually get?" Responses were coded: (1) below average; (2) average; and (3) above average.

Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Church attendance.--Adolescent was asked, "How often have you gone to church services in the last year?" Responses were coded: (1) less than once a month; (2) about once a month; (3) about once a week; and (4) more than once a week.

juana (0.67). However, a simple additive index of the items produces empirical results which are virtually identical to those using the scores resulting from the factor analysis as the dependent variable. Therefore in the interest of parsi-

Importance of religion.--Adolescent was mony, I present the results using the adasked, "How important is religion to ditive index. your daily life?" Responses were coded: (1) not important; (2) slightly important;

(3) important; and (4) very important.

RESULTS

Number of siblings.--Respondent indicated on a list, who lived in the house-

DATA ANALYSIS

hold. Number of brothers and number of sisters were summed.

All statistical models were constructed using ordinary least squares re-

Sports.--Respondent was asked, "Do gression and path analysis. The criterion

you play any sports or participate in any organized physical activities outside of gym class?" 1 = yes,0 =no.

for statistical significance was set at an alpha of 0.05, in spite of the small sam-

ple. Since all hypotheses specify the sign

Importance of college.--Respondent was asked, "How important is it to you that you go to college?" Six boxes were pro-

of the coefficient, one-tailed tests were used throughout. All R squares are ad-

vided, with (1) marked not important, justed for degrees of freedom.

and (6) marked very important.

Constructing a sociological model.--

Good child.--Respondent was asked, "How much do you like: doing chores around the house?" ". . . doing homework?" "going to church?" Responses were: (1) do not like at all to (4) like a lot. Responses were summed.

The original plan for a sociological model called for constructing one model consisting of SES and family structure variables, then adding to it another model consisting of the remaining social variables. As it turned out, no SES or

The dependent variable.--The de- family structure variables were signifi-

pendent variable, problem behaviors, was first constructed by factor analysis from a list of 14 mild to serious deviant behaviors, in which respondents were asked to indicate whether they have

cant. The sociological model was therefore constructed by identifying all the sociological variables with zero-order correlations with the dependent variable significant at the 0.10 level, and en-

ever done the behavior. Responses tering them into a backward-deletion were subjected to principal components OLS multiple regression, deleting varia-

factor analysis. Varimax rotation produced three factors with eigen-values greater than one. The first factor was selected as the problem behavior scale because of its close similarity to the con-

bles until all remaining were significant at the 0.10 level. Each deleted variable was then re-entered singly with the remaining variables to see if it met the entry criterion. Table 1shows the model so

cept of Jessor and Jessor. Items and derived.

their loadings are got drunk (0.65), None of the theoretically relevant smoked cigarettes (0.55), cut school personality variables qualifies for the (0.52), had sex (0.51), and used mari- model, and none of thè SES or family

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

Adolescent Problem Behavior

TABLE 1
OLS MODELS OF PROBLEM BEHAVIORS"

VARIABLES

Testosterone

:....

SHBG

Age

Church attend . . . . . . . . . .

Good child

Grades

R square

N ····

SOCIOLOGICAL MODEL

b' Ü

... ... 0.64 (0.29) -0.24 (-0.14) -0.23 (-0.24) -0.46 (-0.16) 0.24
101

0.20 0.16
0.09 0.26

~P
0.00 0.06 0.00 0.04

^Standardized coefficients in parentheses.

BIOSOCIAL MODEL
6* Ü
0.19 (0.28) 0.06 -0.03 (-0.26) 0.01

0.00 0.00

-0.20 (-0.21) -0.59 (-0.20)
0.30
101

0.08 0.25
.J^_

0.01 0.01

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

structure variables qualifies. Age is the most important contributor to the model, suggesting the contribution of age-graded effects on problem behavior from unavailable social variables. Good child (likes household chores, homework, and going to church) and grades are inversely related to problem behaviors. Church attendance is left in the model because of its theoretical interest and the fact that it only marginally misses the 0.05 significance level. The model explains 24 per cent of the variance in problem behaviors.
A simple biosocial model.--I next fittedthe path model of Figure 1without Paths G, H, and I. The trimmed model is displayed in Figure 2. While the zeroorder correlation of age with problem behavior is 0.32, and the correlation of pubertal development with problem behavior is 0.25, both significant at beyond the 0.01 level, in the path model neither Path E nor Path F is significant. This means that once hormones are in the model, it is shown that the effect on problem behavior of being more physically mature is a spurious consequence of the causal relationship between testosterone and pubertal development. Furthermore, the age effect on problem behavior is shown to be a spurious con-

sequence of the causal relationship between age and testosterone. This provides a nonsociological explanation of the age effect. At least with respect to the age-graded norm violations of interest here, the sociological variables that Greenberg (1985) proposes to explain the age effect are unnecessary. Testosterone (together with TEBG) emerges as the only predictor of problem behavior, with a combined R square of 0.24.
An integratedmodel.--I next combined the two models additively. By combining the two models, interesting things happen. Age drops out of the model, as expected from Figure 2, because it is only a cause of T, and has no direct effect on problem behavior after T is in the model. A separate path model (not shown) indicates that in addition to the direct effect of T on problem behaviors, T has an indirect effect through Good Child. Church attendance is further weakened because of its significant inverse relationship to T, and now must be dropped from the model. The final model contains only inverse effects of good child and grades in addition to T effects, with an R square of 0.30.
Biosocial interactions.--As a final step, Path I in Figure 1 is explored. In separate models, all interactions be-

Udry
Hormones

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

.49 T, .36 SHBG

.40 T -.20 SHBG

.29 T -.33 SHBG

Pubertal Development

Problem Behavior
FIG. 2.--Trimmed simple biosocial model of problem behavior. (All paths significant at 0.01 level. Trimmed paths notsignificant at 0.05 level. A' = 101.)

tween thesociological variables and ei- tive explanation. Thenumber of inter-

ther T or SHBG were examined, this actions examined would be expected to

time using two-tailed tests. A significant produce at least one significant by

interaction was found between SHBG chance. I follow a conservative strategy

and number of siblings. When added to and attribute the interaction to chance. I

the integrated model with number of am therefore notable to show any con-

siblings, the interaction was significant ditioning effects ofTon the sociological

with little change in theother variables variables, as represented by Path I in

(not shown). The interaction canbe in- Figure 1.

terpreted as follows. Those boys with

low unbound Tare not much affected by the number of siblings. For boys with

DISCUSSION

high unbound T, themore siblings they The sociological model in this analyhave, the fewer problem behaviors. The sis is a good explanatory model and "control" exercised by the number of would by itself have led to the conclu-

siblings hasno effect on those with low sion that wehadreached a satisfactory

unbound T, since they are not predis- understanding of the roots of the prob-

posed inany case.

lem behaviors. Since about a fourth of

I examined alarge number ofinterac- the variance inthe dependent variableis

tions and found only one significant. explained, the results compare favor-

The significant interaction isfora family ably with most similar published analy-

structure variable for which I find no ses. But the integrated model shows

previous literature and no obvious intui- how including hormone effects trans-

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

Adolescent ProblemBehavior

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

forms our understanding of the processes involved. If we treat the biological model as exogenous to the sociological model, then most of the variance in the integrated model is accounted for by T and SHBG. But no doubt other sociological variables not available here could be added to the model which would shift this balance more in favor of the sociological variables. The important point is not the relative contribution of biological and social variables, but the additional insight provided by the integration of the biological variables.
Several problems with the analysis need to be raised. Most sociologists would be loath to undertake such an analysis with so few cases. Yet the relationships are clear with this sample size.
A second issue is the causal direction of effects. Liska and Reed (1985) presented evidence for boys from panel data that there are nonrecursive relationships among delinquency, attachment to parents, and attachment to school. Involvement in deviance may loosen commitment to and involvement in conventional institutions. I do not doubt that this is the case. But suchfindings do not change the implications of the present paper in any way. If we can assume that the hormone-behavior relationship is nonrecursive and works from hormones to behavior, then we know that leaving the hormones out of the model will produce misspecification in any case.
What about the causal direction of the hormone/problem behavior relationship? Sociologists often argue that the hormone levels are a consequence rather than a cause of behavior. No doubt this is the case, using short time frames, for certain behaviors. But smoking, marijuana use, and alcohol use have all been shown to reduce T lev-

els (Barnett et al., 1983; Bertello et al., 1986). Only sexual behavior has been shown to increase T levels, and then only for periods of a few hours at most. The strong genetic determination of T undermines the attractiveness of the behavior-to-hormone hypothesis.
IMPLICATIONS
I realize that by current sociological standards, this is a very simple analysis. Liska and Reed, for example, have panel data and present three nonrecursive models with more than 1,800 cases using LISREL. This study would be much more convincing with panel measures of hormones and sociological data on a sample ten times as large. The logistics and cost of such a study are so formidable that until justification is available from small cross-sectional samples, such studies are never likely to be done. Even at the present level, this study casts a shadow of doubt over even the most methodologically sophisticated models that omit the biological variables examined here.
From a more general perspective on social control models, these analyses demonstrate four ways in which biological variables may enhance the social control paradigm. (1) Hormones may have direct, main effects beyond the social control components. (2) Hormones may have indirect effects by affecting behaviors which in turn affect normviolating behavior. (3) Hormones may identify for whom the social controls are necessary and effective. (4) Hormones may help to identify which variables in the model are truly sociological in their effects.
In this paper, I have shown that biosocial theories are not difficult to construct and that integration of wellknown and easily measurable biological

10

Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

characteristics into sociological models 1956. Physique anddelinquency. Harper,

can provide newinsights into sociologi-

New York.
GOVE, WALTER R. 1985. The effect of age and

cal processes. Other sociologists work- gender ondeviant behavior: A biopsycho-

ing in biologically-contested areas of research may find that incorporation of

social perspective, p. 115-144. In Alice S. Rossi (ed.), Gender and thelife course. Aldine Publishing Company, New York.

the biological theory into biosocialre- GREENBERG, DAVID. 1985. Age, crime, and so-

search designs may provide more con- cial explanation. Amer. J. Sociol. 91:1-21.

vincing defense against competing the-

Hirschi, TRAVIS. 1969. Causes of delinquency. Univ. ofCalifornia Press, Berkeley.

ory than mere argument against it. At HIRSCHI, TRAVIS, and MICHAEL GOTTFRIEDSON.

the same time, they may find that their 1983. Ageandthe explanation of crime.

sociological understanding is enhanced,

Amer. J. Sociol. 89:552-584.
JESSOR, RICHARD, and SHIRLEY JESSOR. 1977.

even when this means conceding vari- Problem behavior and psychosocial devel-

ance to biology.

opment. Academic Press, New York.

KREUTZ, L. E., and R. M. ROSE. 1972. Assess-

ment of aggressive behavior andplasma tes-

tosterone in a young criminal population.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Psychosom. Med. 34:321-332.
LISKA, ALLEN E., and MARK D. REED. 1985.

This research was supported under Grant No. HD12806from the National Instituteof Child Health and Human Development. Thanks to Freda Cameron for the computer analysis.

Ties to conventional institutions and delinquency: Estimating reciprocal effects. Amer. Sociol. Rev.50:547-560.
MEIKLE, A. WAYNE, JOHN D. STRINGHAM, D.
TIMOTHY BISHOP, and DEE W. WEST. 1988.
Quantitating genetic and nongenetic factors

influencing androgen production and clear-

ance rates. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabol.

67:104-109.

REFERENCES
BARNETT, G., C. W. CHUNG, and V. LICKO.
1983. Effects of marijuana on testosterone in male subjects. Theor. Biol. 104:685-692.
BERTELLO, P., L. GURIOLI, G. GATTE, G.
PINNA, and A. ANGELÍ. 1986. Short-term
ethanol ingestion can affect thetesticular response to single-dose human chorionicgonadotropin in normal subjects. J. Endocrinol. Invest. 9:249-252.
DAITZMAN, REID, and MARVIN ZUCKERMAN.
1980. Disinhibitory sensation seeking, personality and gonadal hormones. Personal. Individ. Diff. 1:103-110.
EHRENKRANTZ, J., E. BLISS, and M. H.
SCHEARD. 1974. Plasma testosterone: Correlation with aggressive behavior andsocial dominance in man. Psychosom. Med. 36:469-475. FISCHBEIN, S. 1977. Intra-pair similarity inphysical growth of monozygotic and dizygotic twins during puberty. Annals Hum. Biol. 4:417-430.
FULKER, DAVID W., SYBIL B. G. EYSENCK, and
MARVIN ZUCKERMAN. 1980. A genetic and
environmental analysis of sensation seeking. J. Res. Personal. 14:261-281.
GLUECK, SHELDON, and ELEANOR GLUECK.

MONTI, P . M . , W. A. BROWN, and D . D .
CORRIVEAU. 1977. Testosterone and components of aggressive and sexual behavior in man. Amer. J. Psychiat. 134:692-694.
MORRIS, NAOMI M., and J. RICHARD UDRY.
1980. Validation of a self-administered instrument to assess stage of adolescent development. J.Youth Adol. 9:271-280. NIESCHLAG, E. 1979. Theendocrine function of the human testes in regard to sexuality. In Sex hormones and behavior, 183. Exerpta Medica. Ciba Foundation Symposium 62, Amsterdam.
OLWEUS, DAN, AKE MATTSSON, DAILY SCHALL-
ING, and HALS LOW. 1980. Testosterone,aggression, physical, andpersonality dimensions in normal adolescent males. Psychosom. Med. 42:253-269.
ROWE, DAVID C., and D. WAYNE OSGOOD.
1984. Heredity and sociological theories of delinquency: Areconsideration. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 49:526-540. TANNER, J. M. 1962. Growth at adolescence. 2nd ed.Blackwell, Oxford, England.
UDRY, J. RICHARD, and JOHN O. G. BILLY.
1987. Initiation of coitus in early adolescence. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 52:841-855.
ZUCKERMAN, MARVIN. 1984. Sensation seeking: A comparative approach to a human trait. Behav. Brain Sci. 7:413-471.

