Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The ascent of man
Theodosius Dobzhansky
To cite this article: Theodosius Dobzhansky (1972) The ascent of man, Social Biology, 19:4, 367-378, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9988010 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9988010
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

The Ascent of Man

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Theodosius Dobzhansky
Department of Genetics University of California Davis,California

A century ago Charles Darwin published The Descent of Man. The word "descent" has at least two meanings: an act of coming down from a higher to a lower level, and a process of origination from an ancestor. It is obviously in the latter sense that Darwin used the word. Modern evolutionists stress, however, that human evolution has been-- and ought to continue being--an ascent, rising from animal to human states. The orientation of biological and anthropological research on human evolution has radically changed during the past century.
Darwin and his successors amassed conclusive evidence that mankind came into the world by evolution from ancestors who were not men. Mankind is like any other biological species in being a product of evolutionary development. The evidence of this is convincing to everybody, except those who either lack knowledge or are immovably resistant to knowledge. Modern evolutionists face a different task, which is perhaps as exciting as Darwin's. It is to discover in what ways human evolution is unlike the evolutions of other living beings. For man is, in Simpson's words, "another species of animal, but not just another animal. He is unique in peculiar and extraordinarily significant ways" (Simpson, 1967, p. 284).

MAN AND EVOLUTIONARY PROGRESS
Mankind is often alleged to be the summit and consummation of evolutionary progress. This may be true; but a satisfactory definition of evolutionary progress has thus far been elusive. In fact, one of the definitions would use the approach to man as the criterion. This makes nonsense of attempts to identify the progressive features of the human evolutionary pattern. Other definitions avoid at least this pitfall, although those proposing them probably had man consciously or unconsciously in mind. Anyway, according to all definitions, mankind is the most progressive--or at any rate one of the most progressive--creations of the evolutionary process (Simpson, 1967). This is probably as it should be, for we have an intuitive certainty that "By almost any standard, man represents a higher level than primeval mud" (Barbour, 1966, p. 391).
Increasing the biomass (the bulk of matter incorporated in the representatives of a species or a group) is a criterion of evolutionary success, and hence of progress. Lack of success may lead to extinction, which is surely the reverse of progress. Man has spread all over the world; he is a truly cosmopolitan species. During the Stone Age, mankind probably never numbered

367

368

Dobzliansky

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

more than ten million. The Neolithic revolution (introduction of agriculture) and the development of civilizations raised the number to five hundred million, estimated for 1650 A.D. By 1975, about four billion are expected. But, as almost everybody by now realizes, this kind of progress may eventually be the undoing of our species.
Growing complication of the bodily structures and functions is often taken to be another criterion of progress. Man's body is surely a superbly elaborate mechanism, though not obviously more so than in other mammals. One may not find much virtue in complication for its own sake. Some biologists stress particularly the development of sense organs and of nervous systems, which convey to the organism and then process the information about the states of its environments (Rensch, 1971). Man's sense organs are good, but not the most perfect in the living world; hawks and some other birds have keener vision, dogs and many other mammals have a far more discriminative olfaction, a snake tongue has a superior chemical sense, and some snakes ("pit vipers") have special organs to detect heat radiation from the bodies of their prey. Man does, however, have a remarkably large and complex brain for his body size. In brain power he holds the foremost place in the animal world.
Still other definitions of progress emphasize increasing independence from the environment or ability to control it. A plant has to grow or die on the spot where the seed has fallen, although within limits it can modify its development pattern to become adjusted to local conditions. Most animals are mobile and can select places that are suitable for them. Warm-blooded vertebrates maintain constant body temperatures despite variable environmental temperatures. Man is here unquestionably the acme of progress. Owing to his culture,

civilization, and technology, he can live in all climates, on land and on water, on the surface or above or below the surface of the earth. Having largely escaped from dependence on physical environments, man, to be certain, is completely at the mercy of cultural environments created by himself over centuries and millennia of his history.
Thoday (1953, p. 112) speaks of "fitness" of a species as "its probability of leaving descendants after a given long period of time. Biological progress is increase in such fitness." A species must not only be adapted to its present environment, but the adaptedness must be an open-ended one, to maximize the likelihood of its being adaptable to environments which the descendants of this species will encounter in the future. The importance of such evolutionary durability is indisputable, but it can hardly be directly selected for. Natural selection is basically opportunistic; it promotes adaptation to environments which prevail here and now and cannot anticipate future needs. One of the most striking findings of paleontology is that the organisms now living are descendants of a minority of the denizens of the past, and of a progressively smaller minority as we look further back. In other words, most of the organisms known in fossil condition have no living descendants (Simpson, 1967).
Now, what are man's chances of avoiding eventual extinction? Prophesies are risky and fallible; mankind is engaged in an evolutionary game (Slobodkin, 1964), in which the stakes are fearfully high, losses possibly meaning extinction. However, mankind has an advantage in this existential game which no other species has. It knows that it has evolved and is evolving. It can avoid extinction by taking steps to keep up its biological and cultural adaptedness. On the other hand, it has the technological means

Vol. 19, No. 4

Ascent of Man

369

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

to commit evolutionary suicide. Barring a cosmic accident, it is up to man to decide to be or not to be.
Stebbins (1969, p. 29) chooses as the criterion of progress "accumulation of new genetic information, concerned largely with the integration of development and metabolism and with regulating the translation of genetic information into form and function." Kimura (1961) uses the amount of DNA in the cell nuclei as a measure of the amount of genetic information and estimates that the evolutionary lineage leading to primates and to man has accumulated some 108 bits of information since the Cambrian period. The obvious difficulty with such calculations is that certain genetic processes, notably polyploidy, can double the amount of DNA in a single generation, but this is not manifestly a giant progressive step. The amount of DNA in a human sex cell is by no means the highest in the biological world. Amphibians and lungfishes hold the records among animals; Amphiuma has some twenty-six times as much DNA in its nuclei as man has. Too little is known about physiological and evolutionary meaning of the quantity of DNA to make it the criterion of evolutionary progress.
One of the interesting trends in evolution is increasing individuality and increasing importance of the individual in evolutionary processes. Among microorganisms, adaptation to drastic environmental changes (e.g., introduction of antibiotics or altered food media) may occur by destruction of billions of individuals and the building up of new colonies from one or several cells which happen to be genetically resistant or able to utilize the new food. In higher animals, and to a lesser extent plants, the life of an individual is hedged by a variety of physiological safeguards. Reference has been made above to increasing independence

from and control of the environment. Mobile animals actively evade danger and seek circumstances in which the probability of survival and reproduction are maximized. This is sometimes referred to by the rather misleading term "instinct" of self-preservation. As the duration of individual life increases, an individual is likely to meet and must be able to cope with a greater variety of environments. In higher animals we find more and more elaborate physiological buffering mechanisms, among them an ability to develop immunity to invading pathogens. In man, the safeguards protecting an individual's life are maximized; biological and cultural contrivances combine to prepare an individal by means of training and education to make his life as long and as useful to himself and to his society as possible. A man is entitled not only to remain alive, but also to pursue his freely chosen path to self-fulfillment.
It is evident that there is not one kind of evolutionary progress, but, rather, there are several. This does not make the concept of progress meaningless, but it makes it quite necessary to be explicit about what sort of progress one is talking about in any given case. Furthermore, the fact that man is at or near the top of all varieties of progress should not be interpreted as meaning that evolution has been somehow designed or guided to produce man.
GENETIC ADAPTATION
It is platitudinous to say that man faces the same biological necessities as do other animals. He needs food to replenish his energy store, must find a mate, and nurture, protect, and train his progeny until they are old enough to fend for themselves. Every biological species has evolved its own distinctive answers to the problems posed by the universal biological needs. Life has deployed itself in some millions of species,

370

Dobzhansky

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

instead of remaining a single one, because the diversity of environments on our planet can only be utilized by a multitude of diverse living beings.
Any species that is not on the brink of extinction manifestly has a valid set of solutions for the basic biological problems. This is what a biologist means by the statement that every species has adapted to its environment. But if so, why has evolution not come to a halt? It is going on and on, bringing forth ever new solutions of the same primordial problems. To a nonbiologist (or to an exclusively laboratory biologist) this looks like "plus ça change plus c'est la même chose." What really happens is much more interesting than endless variations on the same theme. Life tends to spread and utilize every opportunity for living, no matter how narrow and constraining it may seem to us.
Two kinds of evolutionary changes, which are not mutually exclusive and frequently occur together, can be distinguished. The first is adaptive radiation or cladogenesis. A group of animals or plants becomes diversified, so that the descendants of one ancestral form adopt different ways of living. They become morphologically, physiologically, and behaviorally adjusted to their diverse ways of gaining subsistence from their respective environments. The second is called by Simpson (1964) "relay effect". This is best explained by examples. During the "age of reptiles", the Mesozoic, a variety of ecological niches were filled by herbivorous, carnivorous, land-, water-, and air-dwelling (flying) reptiles. With the advent of the Cenozoic era, the same ecological niches were settled by correspondingly specialized mammals while most of the reptiles died out. During the Tertiary, there was always a variety of hoofed herbivorous mammals; however, there was a relay of different mammalian orders replacing each other in the various eco-

logical niches. The former occupants of these niches became rare or extinct. What is the biological meaning of the relay effect? The successors were presumably more efficient than their predecessors in the exploitation of a set of environments and ways of living.
The least frequent but perhaps most important kind of evolution is anagenesis. This has also been called phyletic or progressive evolution; the last of these designations has so many ill-defined connotations that some evolutionists (e.g., Simpson) avoid it altogether. What is involved is discovery by a species or a group of species of previously unexploited ecological opportunities and adoption of a novel way of living appropriate for these opportunities. Evidences of such evolutionary master strokes are found in the paleontological record. For something close to three billion years, life existed only in water; every living body still contains water which is essential for its remaining alive. Land seemed unpropitious as a dwelling place, since any organism venturing on land faced the problem of obtaining water from somewhere. Nevertheless, some land plants appeared in the Silurian and became widespread in the Devonian period, closely followed by the emergence of land animals. Insects became common by the end of the Paleozoic, and by the end of the Mesozoic some of them established mutualistic relationships with some plants. Flowering plants burst forth on the scene, enlisting the services of insects for transportation of their pollen, i.e., the male generative elements. The development of constant body temperature in mammals and birds made them less dependent than were their ancestors on vagaries of weather. And finally at the close of the Pliocene, or early in the Pleistocene, there appeared an extraordinary animal who began progressively to rely on learned rather than on genetically

Vol. 19, No. 4

Ascent of Man

371

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

fixed behavior for securing his livelihood. Culture became man's paramount adaptive mechanism. While other living beings achieve adaptation to their environments by changing their genes, man does so mainly, though not exclusively, by changing his environment to fit his genes.
ADAPTATION BY CULTURE
Just how and why man's ancestors of two to three million years ago embarked on so singular a method of adaptation is a matter for speculation. Some anthropologists have plausibly supposed that this may have been brought about by alterations of the diet and in the ways of securing food. Our ancestors changed from arboreal to terrestrial habitats, acquired erect posture, and shifted from a predominantly vegetarian diet to one that included meat. They became hunters who profited by cooperation with their fellows to track and overpower progressively larger and more powerful game. Hunting in groups, rather than singly, put a selective premium on the ability to act in concert and to communicate with conspecific individuals. Communication by symbolic language is by far the most versatile method, making feasible an infinite variety of messages. The prolonged helplessness of human infants compelled other changes. It necessitated a division of labor between females and males and what has been given the sobriquet "the domestication of fathers." Fathers became not only food providers, but also turned partly or exclusively to monogamy instead of fighting each other for the possession of females. Loss of estrus and the continuous sexual receptivity of the human female, contrasting with the situation in other primates and in most mammals, facilitated the "domestication".
Though very plausible, the above inferences can hardly be rigorously proven. What is incontrovertible is the remarkable

efficiency of culture as an adaptive instrument. Starting from its original home, apparently in Africa, mankind spread all over the world. Despite a long pre-reproductive period and a relatively low fecundity, human populations have grown enormously. Davis (1970) gives the following estimates (in millions):

400,000 B.C. 8000 B.C. 1 A.D. 1750 A.D. 1970 A.D.

0.05
5
300 791 3,615

It is certainly ironic that population growth now poses the greatest threat not only to the well-being but also to the very survival of mankind as a species. Expansion, geographic and numerical, is one of the criteria of the evolutionary success of a species. But as pride often goes before disaster in human affairs, so evolutionary success may be a prelude to extinction. One can only hope that man's unique ability to acquire knowledge and to translate it into action may avert this dire fate.
A key factor in the process of humanization was feedback between the gene pool of the species and its way of life; for example, tool use and tool making enhanced the adaptive value of manual dexterity. In turn, more versatile hands were able to make better tools and to use them more effectively. Language facilitated communication, and the reliance on communication made the genes that enable one to acquire and to manipulate language indispensable for living in human societies. The ability to learn and to accept instruction, particularly in childhood and youth, made possible human forms of social organization and the development of progressively more complex and powerful technologies.
Man spread from the tropics to cold countries without undergoing selection for genes that would equip him with warm fur

372

Dobzhansky

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

or ability to withstand cold. Instead, he clothed himself in warm furs and discovered fire to heat his shelter and to cook his food. The art of cooking increased greatly the range of materials on which man can subsist. Mankind was genetically selected for adaptation to social and technological environments, rather than to climate and terrain. Technology became man's servant, and sometimes turned to be his master.
HAS CULTURAL EVOLUTION EEPLACED
THE BIOLOGICAL?
It is often alleged that the biological evolution of man has come to a halt and that cultural evolution has taken over. A new word has been coined to describe human evolution--"exosomatic." Like other half-truths, this is misleading. The exosomatic has a somatic or, more precisely, genetic basis. If this basis were absolutely uniform, a kind of common denominator in all human beings, it could be taken for granted and not considered further. But it is variable from individual to individual.
Evidence is conclusive that there is a strong genetic component in the variation between individuals in their ability to learn and to make use of the information learned. Racists have misused this evidence for their nefarious purposes. However, detestation of racism should not in itself blind us to the fact that not all men are genetically as similar as monozygotic twins. Some 60 to 80fo of the variance in the intelligence quotient between individuals is genetic. This figure has been arrived at by numerous studies comparing the IQ's of monozygotic and dizygotic twins, raised together or apart, siblings who are not twins, biological and adopted children and their biological and adoptive parents.
The existence of a genetic component in the IQ variance is by now well established; and yet a painstaking review of the evidence by Jensen (1969) has raised a storm

of protests. The questionable part of Jensen's work is his contention that average IQ differences between groups of people have genetic components of about the same magnitude as do individual differences. IQ means are not alike in all social classes, castes, and races. Jensen's contention collides head-on with the perennial puzzle of what part of an average difference in a given trait in man is ascribable to genetic or to environmental heterogeneity. For example, are the environments in which white and black children are brought up in the United States really alike, if they grow up in families with similar incomes? Or is the mere fact of being black a serious handicap in a white-dominated society? Jensen grapples valiantly, but in my view not altogether successfully, with the puzzle.
Natural selection in all human societies places a premium on genotypes which enhance the educability of their carriers. An important component of the Darwinian fitness in the human species is the capacity to be trained for performance of some socially useful functions. No less important is the ability to be brought up to behave in ways that are approved, or at least tolerated, by the society of which the individual is a member. The selection for educability has operated in Homo sapiens and its incipiently human ancestors for something like two million years, or some one hundred thousand generations. This unremitting selection has forged an increasingly intelligent and educable species, whose existence eventually became entirely dependent on culture. Kroeber and Kluckhohn (1952, p. 3) define culture as "patterns explicit and implicit of and for behavior, acquired and transmitted by symbols, constituting the distinctive achievement of human groups, including their embodiments in artifacts." Although there exist genetic differences among individuals in their propensities to learn various aspects of culture,

Vol. 19, No. 4

Ascent of Man

373

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

the capacity to acquire and to transmit related to him, many instincts, drives, and

culture is species-wide. This capacity has innate releasers of behavior. To make the

conferred on mankind not only an adapted- situation worse, both sides of this scien-

ness but also an unsurpassed adaptability tific controversy are exploited by clever

to a great variety of environments, partic- political propagandists, who strive to confer

ularly those created or modified by cultures a pseudo-scientific respectability on their

themselves. Man adapts not only by culture quite unscientific prejudices.

but also to culture.

No detailed analysis of the above contro-

The superiority of culture as a method versy can be given in the present article.

of adaptation is due to its far greater ver- Personally, I believe that, as so often hap-

satility compared to biological adaptive pens in scientific controversies, much of the

processes. Knowledge can, in principle, be disagreement arises because both sides

transmitted to anybody, while genes can be overstate the generality and the significance

passed solely to one's progeny. A new idea of their findings. Most ethologists admit

or an invention may be conveyed to any that "instincts" are not absolutely rigid

number of people at the same time; a and impervious to modification by circum-

genetic mutation or a recombination, even stances. Especially in higher animals, the

if it is very advantageous, needs many innate behavior patterns act as a canvas

generations to spread through a species. upon which learning and experience design

Biological evolution is, accordingly, out- the actually observable behaviors. This is

distanced by the cultural. As pointed out most of all true of man. Surely man shares

above, modern man must be genetically a sex drive with a multitude of animal

adapted principally to environments created species. But it is also true that the manifes-

by his cultures, rather than to physical en- tations of this drive are transmuted in a

vironments. These latter he can modify, at great variety of ways by the rules and

least to some extent, at his discretion.

customs prevailing in diverse societies.

Genetic adaptedness to cultural environments has an interesting and important characteristic which adaptedness to physical environments does not usually have. Adaptedness to culture is based on genetically conditioned flexibility, rather than on fixity, of behavior patterns. The capacity for learning, and the resulting plasticity of behavior, are the outstanding adaptive traits of mankind; yet it does not follow that man's behavior is entirely learned. Some authors contend that man has lost all the innate patterns that play such important roles in the behavior of other animals. Thus, Montagu (1969, p. 122) states flatly:

They are also recast by individual decisions. After all, there have been celibates of both sexes throughout recorded history. The incidence of premarital sexual experience has varied at different times and different places. Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that man has also some innate aggressive impulses and territorial imperatives. Does it follow that every society must legitimize aggression and provide outlets for territoriality? Nonsense! Man learns how to act; though some of his impulses are genetically conditioned, his observable behavior is at some removes from his genes.

"In the first place, man has no instincts." A theoretical model could well be con-

By contrast, Lorenz (1966), Tinbergen structed that would assume that modes of

(1951), Morris (1967) and other etholo- behavior characteristic of different cultures,

gists claim that man continues to share nations, and social classes might be selected

with animals, especially with those closely biologically and eventually fixed geneti-

374

Dobzliansky

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

cally. However, would genetic fixity by ad- nostalgic for what they call man's natural

vantageous? It could be so, if the environ- state and regard everything that distin-

ments in which these modes of behavior are guishes civilized man from the imaginary

adaptive remained constant for long periods "noble savage" as evil. However, modern

of time. But this proviso is rarely satisfied. followers of Rousseau have a newfangled

The human lot is too changeable and un- argument, that the greatest evil of civiliza-

predictable; not only individuals but also tion is genetic enfeeblement of mankind.

families and more inclusive groups suffer Man is so soft and frail that he would not

changes of fortune, and the resulting altera- last long in the environments of the Nean-

tions of their environments and circum- derthalers or Australopithecines. And he is

stances. Fixation of traits which are getting feebler all the time and must prop

adaptive in particular cultures or subcul- himself up with tranquilizers or stimulants.

tures is too risky an operation. Develop- But let us face the facts. Our lives depend

mental flexibility of behavior, based on the on civilization and technology, and the

ability to learn and to profit by experience, lives of our descendants will depend on

is a better adaptive strategy.

them even more completely. There is no

Adaptation by genetic changes is largely replaced in man with adaptation by cultural changes. This has its advantages but also its dangers. Mankind meets challenges of his physical and cultural environments usually not by genetic alterations but by cultural, mainly technological, innovations. Having so evolved, mankind is wholly dependent on its culture, and probably could not survive without it. Even temporary and partial breakdowns of the technological

turning back to the state, cultural or physical, of our cave-dwelling ancestors. Man's "natural" state and "natural" environments are those created by civilization, and we wish to be adapted to that state and to these environments, not to environments long since obsolete and gone. The remedy for our genetic dependence on civilization and technology is a better civilization and better technology, not regression to the past states.

framework of society, such as took place in the early stages of the Russian Revolution,

CHANCE AND NECESSITY

spelled disasters to millions of people. Far

IN EVOLUTION

more serious disruptions could result from In his best seller Chance and Necessity,

modern "improvements" of the instru- Monod (1971, p. 112) finds "Pure chance,

ments of war. Extinction of mankind is a absolutely free but blind, at the very root

possibility, and if it does occur it will be by of the stupendous edifice of evolution." He

suicide rather than replacement by some also declares that "man knows at last that

better adapted species, as in the "relays" he is alone in the universe's unfeeling im-

recorded in paleontological history. Man, mensity, out of which he emerged only by

the sole being who knows that he has chance." Because the modern biological

evolved and is evolving, can put an end to theory of evolution (sometimes, rather im-

that evolution. He can also continue and precisely, called neo-Darwinian) ascribes

accelerate his evolutionary ascent to ever evolution to "chance," it has been disputed

greater heights.

and rejected by many critics. "Chance"

Starting at least with Rousseau and the should not however be confused with un-

Romantic Movement, there have always predictability. Eiseley (1969,p. 37) regards

been people who deplored man's depen- the origin of photosynthesis a "random

dence on culture and technology. They feel event that took place in Archeozoic times,"

Vol. 19, No. 4

Ascent of Man

375

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

and marvels at "the brain of man, that strange gray iceberg of conscious and unconscious life, [which] was similarly unpredictable until its appearance." The problems of chance and predictability need careful analysis to rid them of confusion with which they have become encumbered. Only a brief consideration of these problems can be given here.
The genetic endowment of mankind differs from that of its ape-like forebears in probably thousands or tens of thousands of genes. These gene differences must have arisen ultimately by mutations. Mutations are often referred to as "random events," but in what sense can they be regarded as random? Only in the sense that mutations arise regardless of whether they will be useful where and when they appear, or ever. Most of them are, in fact, deleterious, and are swept away by normalizing natural selection. But it is not true that any gene can transform itself by mutation into any other gene. If a gene is a series of some hundreds of DNA nucleotide pairs, it can be changed by single nucleotide substitutions in some thousands of ways. This is a multitude but not an infinity of possible changes.
The alpha chain of human hemoglobin differs in a single amino acid (out of 141) from gorilla hemoglobin. A single nucleotide substitution in the gene coding for this hemoglobin chain suffices to account for the difference. The human alpha chain differs however in 18 amino acids from horse, 25 from rabbit, and 71 from carp hemoglobins. The alpha and beta chains of human hemoglobin differ in 84 amino acid substitutions, additions, or losses. The genes coding for the alpha and beta chains arose from a common ancestral gene, which became duplicated in our remote progenitor and subsequently diverged by accumulation of mutations. Could the gene coding for alpha be transformed by a single mutation into

that coding for the beta chain of hemoglobin? This is utterly improbable, because it would require a coincidence of the particular 84 substitutions. A gene which also has a common ancestry with hemoglobins is that coding for another protein, myoglobin; it differs in some 115 substitutions from the hemoglobin genes. Surely, the differentiation of these genes from the ancestral one involved not a single mutation, but the compounding of many mutational steps. A single mutation is, on the molecular level, an accident. It can be compared to a sound produced by striking a single piano key at random. What we observe on the organism level are harmonious systems of components arisen by mutations. They have been orchestrated by a deaf and blind but highly resourceful composer--natural selection. Chlorophyll and other photosynthetic pigments, hemoglobins and myoglobins, the human brain, or man as a whole are no more accidental than a Beethoven symphony.
To put it in another way, mutation and sexual recombination supply the raw materials from which natural selection constructs genotypes attuned to the demands of the environments. Evidently no construction can happen without raw materials, like no mosaic picture can be composed without a supply of stones of various colors. But if a stone of exactly the right color is unavailable, a slightly different shade may still permit a mosaic picture to be made. Ours is not the best of all thinkable worlds, perhaps only of possible worlds.
Natural selection has often been called another chance factor, on a par with mutation. This is a misapprehension; natural selection is an anti-chance agency. The origin of the misapprehension is that natural selection operates mostly with probabilities. To be promoted by selection, a variant gene or a gene combination need

376

Dobzhansky

Social Biology-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

only to increase the likelihood that they will be transmitted to the next generation more often than some alternative genes or gene combinations. Vice versa, a gene need not be a lethal to have its frequency in a population diminish from generation to generation. The crux of the matter is that natural selection involves a feedback between the gene pool of a species and its environment. The gene pool is continuously in flux; countless gene combinations that mutation and sexual recombination generate are being tried out for adaptedness to the environment.
When environments, cultural or physical or ecological, undergo rapid alterations, the rates of genetic changes also accelerate. What is important is that the changes caused by directional natural selection are as a rule adaptive. They increase the Darwinian fitness in the environments in which they occur. There is, however, one thing that selection cannot do. It has no foresight and cannot build genotypes that will be favorable not in the present but in some future environments. It is for this reason that evolution controlled by natural selection may end in maladaptation and extinction. A genetic endowment that makes a species well adapted today may be faulty in the future. If a reconstruction of this endowment cannot be achieved rapidly enough the species may perish. Man is the only species that can anticipate future needs and can prepare for them, if he so chooses. But this belongs to the realms of artificial and cultural, not natural, selection.
Man did not arise by a lucky chance mutation. To say that he arose by a succession of chance mutations is obviously misleading; his biological foundation was constructed by natural selection, in a series of responses to environmental challenges, from mutational raw materials. Does it follow that man was bound to arise? Rensch (1971) calls evolution "a determinate pro-

cess" and writes that all future evolution is also determined. This is true in the sense of Laplacian universal determinancy, but it is only a part of the story, and not the most interesting part. A hard predetermination of the course of evolution was posited by autogenetic theories, which Rensch and a majority of modern evolutionists reject. Such theories (orthogenesis, nomogenesis, etc.) attach little significance to natural selection except as a conservative principle (normalizing selection). Berg (1926, p. 17) believed that "there are intrinsic and constitutional agencies laid down in the chemical structure of the protoplasm, which compel the organism to vary in a determined direction," and that "evolution is in a great measure an unfolding of preexisting rudiments." Other partisans of autogenesis stated explicitly that man and all other organic forms were contained in the primordial life. Evolution was only peeling off one disguise after another, until man stood revealed. It took between three and four billion years to achieve this result!
We are given no hint as to what "chemical structure of the protoplasm" brought such a miraculous outcome. The fatal objection to autogenesis is however something else. How did the succession of organic forms gradually unwrapped by evolution happen to survive in the environments into which they were thrust by autogenesis? No theory of evolution which fails to give a rational explanation of the fundamental fact of organic adaptedness is acceptable. Neither chance nor autogenetic necessity can do that. One has to recognize that organic evolution is a response of life to its environments, but not in the sense of environmental determinism. The environment does not mechanically impose or induce adaptive changes in living bodies, as Lamarckists wrongly thought. The environment offers opportunities or challenges to

Vol. 19, No. 4

Ascent of Man

377

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

its inhabitants, to -which the latter may respond, through natural selection, by adaptive changes. Man is one of the millions of such responses, and to date the most successful one.
It is now fashionable to speculate that man-like beings may, or even must, inhabit some earth-like planets in our galaxy and in other galaxies. Proposals are made that we begin all-out efforts to communicate with these extraterrestrial rational beings. Regretably, I must express skepticism about these delightfully romantic notions. I have tried to show in a recent article (Dobzhansky, 1972), and so did Simpson (1964) and myself (Dobzhansky, 1960) earlier, that the likelihood of extraterrestrial biological evolution, even if such exist, giving rise to anything even remotely resembling mankind is not perceptibly different from zero. Beliefs in extraterrestrial rational life are not easily eradicable because, since Copernicus and Darwin, scientists have been reluctant to assume that there is anything radically unique about the planet earth or the species mankind. However, the possibility of such uniqueness must again be given serious consideration in the light of our modern understanding of evolution.
ONWARD TO FURTHER ASCENT
Although Nietzsche had no use for Darwin's evolution, he made prognoses of interest to evolutionists: "Man is something to be surpassed," and "The superman shall be the meaning of the earth." Writer and philosopher Camus was no biologist either, but he wrote: "I know that something in this world has a meaning, and this is man; because he is the only being that demands to have a meaning."
So man is also the only being that is aware of his finitude--an individual's life ends inevitably in death. Death would be a

negation of all meaning, if it were not for the fact that the human species, mankind, may endure, for all we know even eternally. However, if it endured in its present state, one would still disbelieve its meaningfulness. Mankind's meaning is bound with its evolutionary perspectives.
Of course, from the standpoint of the prevailing mechanistic materialist metaphysics, all discussions about meaning are meaningless. Monod (1971, p. 176) is quite explicit about this: "any mingling of knowledge with values is unlawful, forbidden" (Monod's italics). The senselessness and futility of man and the universe are proclaimed also by many philosophers, with Sartre as their most articulate exponent. This being the judgment of some of the highest authorities in science and philosophy, it is only natural that many of the most intelligent of our young contemporaries became "turned-off" and alienated from the meaningless world. They no longer treasure their continuity with man's detestable past or care for his senseless future. Mankind may just as well become extinct by committing suicide, of which it is now technologically capable. This would only confirm the colossal absurdity of mankind as a species, men as individuals, and in fact of the whole universe.
Man and his place in nature can be seen in a different light if mankind is evolving, or can be made to evolve, towards something better than it is at present. The fundamental fact is that when mankind discovered that it had evolved, it ceased to be a flotsam carried helplessly on the evolutionary current. It can now aspire to steer for directions man himself chooses, if need be against the current. Perhaps man will even be able to change the direction of the current, for himself and for other species, and as a distant ideal for the whole universe. Ideas of this kind may be taken as evidence of hubris, intellectual arrogance

378

Dobzliansky

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

afffictíng many scientists (see Kass, 1971, for a vigorous statement of this indictment). And so it is, in some instances. Some of our colleagues imagine that they know toward what end human evolution should be directed and how to reach that end most speedily. Humility and willingness to learn and to control one's preconceptions are certainly called for. The road is long, and many decisions will have to be reached--not all at once, but gradually, at many way stations. The decisions and choices cannot validly be made without science, but neither can they be made by

science alone. The accumulated wisdom of millennia of man's intellectual evolution will have to be summoned.
If man can evolve to become a superman, though hopefully not the kind of superman invisioned by Nietzsche, then he does have a meaning. The lives of individuals may also be meaningful, despite their mortality, when and if they participate in the evolutionary movement. As far as I can see, only on this basis can the nightmare of meaninglessness be dispelled. If science helps to achieve this end, it will have served mankind magnificently.

REFERENCES

BARBOTO, I. C. 1966. Issues in science and religion. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
BERG, L. C. 1926. Nomogenesis or evolution determined by law. 1969 printing. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge.
DARWIN, C. 1971. The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex. Murray, London.
DAVIS, K. 1970. The climax of population growth. Calif. Med. 113:33-39.
DOBZHANSKY, T. 1960. Evolution and environment. In S. Tax (ed.), Evolution after Darwin, I. Chicago Univ. Press, Chicago.
_____. 1972.Darwinian evolution and the problem of extraterrestrial life. Persp. Biol. Med. 15:157-175.
EISELEY, L. 1969.The unexpected universe. Harcourt Brace, New York.
JENSEN, A. 1969. How much can we boost I.Q. and scholastic achievement? Harvard Educ. Rev. 39:1-123.
KASS, L. 1971. The new biology: What price relieving man's estate? Science 174:779-788.
KIMURA, M. 1961.Natural selection as the process of accumulating genetic information in adaptive evolution. Gen. Res. 2:127-140.
KROEBER, A., and C. KLUCKHOHN 1952. Culture,

a critical review of concepts and definitions. 1963 printing. Vintage Books, New York. LORENZ, K. 1966. On aggression. Harcourt Brace, New York. MONOD, J. 1971. Chance and necessity. Knopf, New York. MONTAGU, A. 1969. Man: His first two million years. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.
MORRIS, D. 1967. The naked ape. McGraw Hill, New York.
NAGEL, E. 1961. The structure of science. Harcourt Brace, New York.
RENSCH, B. 1971. Biophilosophy. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.
SIMPSON, G. G. 1964. This view of life. Harcourt Brace, New York.
_____. 1967. The meaning of evolution. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.
SLOBODKIN, L. B. 1964. The strategy of evolution. Amer. Scien. 52:342-357.
STEBBINS, G. L. 1969. The basis of progressive evolution. Univ. N. Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
THODAY, J. M. 1953. Components of fitness. Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 7:96-113.
TINBERGEN, N. 1951. The study of instinct. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

