Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Use of recall data in survey research on human sexual behavior
Graham B. Spanier
To cite this article: Graham B. Spanier (1976) Use of recall data in survey research on human sexual behavior, Social Biology, 23:3, 244-253, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988235 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988235
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles Citing articles: 12 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Use of Recall Data in Survey Research on Human Sexual Behavior

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Graham B. Spanier
Division of Individual and Family Studies College of Human Development The Pennsylvania State University University Park,Pennsylvania
ABSTRACT: A critical, but often neglected, concern in survey research is the use of recall data. This article identifies two sources of possible error in restrospective accounts, particularly of human sexual behavior. "Faulty recall" is unintentional false reporting due to poor memory or changing perception of past reality. "Falsified accounts" involve intentional false reporting due to a fear of being honest with the interviewer or a desire to present a false image for ego enhancement. Previous warnings about the use of recall data are reviewed. The variety of ways and the circumstances under which faulty recall and falsified accounts can influence research findings are elaborated. However, with care in data collection and analysis, these problems need not preclude the use of recall data in survey research.

Social scientists have a variety of re- largely on observation (see Spanier and

search tools and methods available to Cole, 1973, and Cole and Spanier, 1973,

them for investigation of social phenome- for a review of these participant observa-

na. The characteristics of a given prob- tion studies). Humphries (1970) and

lem, the nature of particular social phe- Roebuck and Spray (1967) also studied

nomena, and the researcher's skills and human sexual behavior with other than

inclinations are such that for any particu- survey research techniques.

lar study one method usually emerges as However, a researcher interested in

the most appropriate or desirable. In sex studying the relationship between sexual

research, in particular, a number of con- socialization and premarital sexual be-

siderations may suggest the use of survey havior, for example, would find it difficult

research methods.

to use participant observation or experi-

Probably the foremost reason is that mental methods. Case study methods have

most researchers do not find it feasible to been used in the psychoanalytic and

observe sexual behavior in humans di- psychiatric literature, but this approach

rectly. There are, however, a few notable usually does not allow the scientist to

exceptions. Masters and Johnson (1966) make inferences about a population larger

did pioneering research in the observation than his or her subjects, and such infer-

of human sexual response. A later work ences can be quite meaningful.

(Masters and Johnson, 1970) develops a The purpose of this article is to examine

clinical treatment program for human what is perhaps the foremost problem in

sexual inadequacy, partially on the basis the use of survey research techniques for

of direct observation of sexual behavior. sex research--the use of recall data. Al-

In addition, there is a substantial litera- though survey research has evolved to a

ture on mate-swapping or swinging based level of sophistication that has made it an

244

Vol. 2 3 , No. 3 Recall Data in Sexual Behavior Surveys

245

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

extremely valuable method of investigation, there are certain disadvantages. In the case of sex research, the use of recall data is a crucial concern. Since the nature of the subject matter is very personal and respondents are not accustomed to discussing such personal matters with strangers, there is always the possibility that responses may not be truthful (Sudman and Bradburn, 1974).
In addition, when questions concern experience during childhood and adolescence as well as the present, there should be some concern as to whether the responses are accurate reports of reality. In sexual behavior research especially, there can be important differences between what exists in reality and what the respondent thinks occurred.
When retrospective accounts are in error, one or both of two different processes may be involved, namely, faulty recall and falsified accounts. Faulty recall will be denned as unintentional false reporting of the past due to inability to remember accurately or completely, or due to the respondent's changing perception of past reality. Falsified accounts refers to conscious and intentional false reporting of past or present behavior and beliefs due primarily to fear of being honest with the interviewer, for whatever reason, or conscious and intentional falsification of the truth for the purpose of ego enhancement or with the desire of presenting a false image to the interviewer.
Social psychologists have often observed that what a respondent thinks exists or existed can be just as important or more important than what is or was the true state of affairs. In many studies, the researcher is actually concerned with what the respondent believes and not with what happened at all. When this is the case, the problems of faulty recall or falsified accounts are perhaps not as crucial. But when the researcher is interested in the

truth about the past as well as in accurate reports about the present, the issue takes on great meaning.
In a discussion of the amenability of social phenomena to observation, Reiss (1971, p. 8) notes: "One can easily become convinced that a theoretically observable event is not amenable because the design precludes observation. Nowhere is this more apparent than when questions are raised about past behavior in relation to present behavior. Clearly one cannot observe the past." There is much evidence in the literature, particularly in the child development area, which as early as 1935 (Pyles et al., 1935) indicated the unreliability of recall data. This early study demonstrated that by the time an infant was 21 months of age, the mother's reports of pregnancy and delivery were so unreliable they had to be disregarded.
The recall of events recorded by official systems of observing and recording also often shows high unreliability. Reiss (1971, p. 8) writes:
It would be a mistake to conclude that many such studies amply demonstrate the unreliability of recall of behavior and, therefore, demonstrate the superiority of observation. They do not. What they show is that the modes of investigation we use in recall studies generally show substantial unreliability when compared with observation of the behavior. We may find more reliable ways to investigate recall, but in doing so, it will be necessary to observe as well as to assess the reliability of the mode of recall.
Gordon (1972) points out that the evidence against the reliability of recall data is serious. She notes that problems with interviews can include interviewer bias; response sets; response style; coding difficulties; and the researcher's biases, theoretical or otherwise, which may influence the results at the outset by decisions to include or omit specific questions or by instructions to interviewers to ignore certain categories of responses.

246

Spanier

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

But any issue such as this must be viewed against a backdrop of two factors, namely, the alternatives and the information necessary for execution of the study. When a researcher is working with data already collected by others--and thus has no control over research design or planning --he can only be cautious of his use of recall data. However, if a researcher has a choice of designs, he can consider one of several alternatives to collecting recall data. Probably the best alternative is a research design which provides for data collection during at least two points in time. In addition, in a cross-sectional design, a researcher can use multiple methods to check for accuracy of recall data. Finally, observational data may be collected, although for many kinds of research problems observational data may be difficult to obtain.
The alternatives generally are not used, due to the virtual impossibility of collecting accurate long-term observational data or of checking and verifying the accuracy of every important or questionable response. Secondly, the information necessary for the study has to come from somewhere. Although survey research may have flaws, it may be the best means available for obtaining the necessary information and thus should be used, albeit cautiously. Indeed, there is recent data suggesting that methodological variations in type of research instrument (interview or questionnaire), location of sex questions in the instrument, the order or sequence of questions, and other variations produce no significant differences in reported sexual behavior (DeLamater and MacCorquodale, 197S; DeLamater, 1974). This article will argue that many of the limitations of recall data in survey research can be minimized.
Kinsey and his colleagues (1948, 1953) were aware of the problems involved in collecting accurate data on sexual histories and were among the first researchers to

give serious attention to the impact of the interview on the respondent and the accuracy of the respondent's answers.1 Kinsey et al. (1948, p. 35) wrote "it is imperative that one become a master of every scientific device and of all the arts by which any man has ever persuaded any other man into exposing his activities and innermost thoughts." Despite Kinsey's efforts to gather accurate data, it may be suggested that his techniques are only useful for dealing with certain kinds of potential distortion.
Most of Kinsey's efforts to assess the validity of recall data deal with what I have defined as "falsified accounts." Specifically, Kinsey took retakes of whole histories of 162 males to test for consistency of memory from one interview to the next. Checks were made between spouses in 231 married couples. Other cross-checks assessing accuracy of memory involved internal consistency checks in a given history, cross-checks with nonspousal sexual partners, and secondhand reports from individuals known by other respondents.
These techniques are most useful for evaluating data contaminated by deliberate cover-up. But Kinsey acknowledges that the deliberate or unconscious suppression of memory and simple forgetting are additional sources of error present in varying degrees from one individual to the next. Kinsey assessed differences in immediate versus remote recall and, as expected, found that more recent events
1 Kinsey et al. (1948) elaborated 23 technical devices that proved effective in their research. These consisted of: putting the subject at ease, assuring privacy, establishing rapport, sequencing topics, recognizing the subject's mental status, recording at time of interview, systematic coverage, supplementary exploration, standardizing the point of the question, adapting the form of the question, avoiding bias, direct questions, placing the burden of denial on the subject, avoiding multiple questions, rapid-fire questioning, cross-checks on accuracy, proving the answer, forcing the subject, limits of the interview, avoiding personal identifications, avoiding controversial issues, questioning on overt activities versus attitudes, and interviewing young children. Pomeroy (1963) and others have elaborated these methods in later publications.

Vol. 23, No. 3 Recall Data in Sexual Behavior Surveys

247

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

seem, in general, to be recalled more easily. He also found that incidence data are recalled with greater accuracy than frequency data. As a whose, it is evident that Kinsey was especially successful in minimizing falsified accounts. Virtually all of his cross-check and internal consistency measures demonstrated generally high, although variable, reliability on most items and for most individuals.
What remains troublesome in validity and reliability assessment is the extent of what I have denned as "faulty recall." As Kinsey concluded (Kinsey et al., 1948, p. 152): "The least accurate data are those that concern an individual's first knowledge of an event." This conclusion will be evaluated below relative to other substantive areas of survey research. Sex researchers have certainly been aware of these issues over the years, but have failed to discuss them in detail in the professional literature. The following discussion is an attempt to fully explore the ways in which a researcher might unwittingly obtain inaccurate data.
FAULTY RECALL
Faulty recall can occur in two ways. First, the respondent may unintentionally and without a desire to deceive the interviewer give false reports simply because he or she is unable to remember accurately what happened. When this is the case, it is likely that the respondent will answer based on what he or she thinks happened, which may or may not accurately reflect what really happened. The second way faulty recall can occur is through the respondent's development of a sexual identity influenced by social desirability. These two aspects of faulty recall will now be elaborated.
POOR MEMORY
Faulty recall can occur simply through the process of forgetting over time (Sudman and Bradburn, 1974). Other things

being equal, this issue may be less important than others in retrospective accounts about sexual behavior, whereas, in other types of research, it is perhaps the most important. The distinction is an important one. In a study of sexual behavior and experiences, it is possible that most of what an individual has experienced is remembered to some extent. Sexual experiences tend to be quite important for most individuals and often are some of the most important experiences in an individual's life. I am not considering here those individuals who have through some psychological trauma repressed memories of sexual socializing experiences. Rather, I am speaking about the vast majority of individuals exposed to a culture where sex is given prominent attention and consequently, becomes an important part of an individual's self-concept. These experiences for most individuals are not easily forgotten. An individual's first sexual intercourse, first kiss, and first date, for example, are all important threshold experiences which, all other things being equal, stand up favorably in terms of their chances of being remembered.2 This point is supported by Sudman and Bradburn's (1974) observation that the greater the saliency of information required, the lower the relative response effects will be.
Freud, in particular, emphasized the importance of sexual experiences in childhood, and their relationship to later heterosexual development. Although Freud acknowledged the importance of sexual socializing experiences, he has been criticized for his lack of attention to envi-
2 There are likely to be variations, however, by gender, age, marital status, social class, and life style. For instance, gender differences may be enhanced by the ego-involvement of males and the greater reluctance to admit to sexual activity by females. As the respondent ages, there may be greater likelihood of forgetting past experiences. When one marries, he or she may be less likely to think about and thus remember premarital sexual experiences. Which experiences might be remembered can be influenced by social class and life-style variations.

248

Spanier

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

ronmental influences. Furthermore, although a child may have experiences that an adult would consider sexual or with sexual connotations, it is questionable whether or not the child responds to or internalizes the situation with the same meaning. It is my view that an experience is considered sexual by an individual only if he or she is aware of the meaning of sexuality as related to that situation. Thus, a three- or four-year-old boy who is intentionally masturbated by an adult could be as likely to consider the episode one of pleasurable tickling as one of a sexual nature.
This point is relevant when discussing faulty recall since it is postulated here that sexual experiences have a greater chance of being remembered than other experiences. Following this reasoning, the child would be less likely to recall the episode if he did not define the experience as sexual in nature. In later childhood and adolescence, however, experiences have a more clearly sexual meaning, and it is at these ages the individual begins to remember them as an adult might.
The issue of memory could be summarized as follows: An individual is more likely to remember sexual experiences than nonsexual ones, if he or she attaches a sexual meaning to these experiences. The great emphasis placed on sexuality by our culture makes it easier for an individual to retain memories about sexual experiences. Based on this reasoning, it may be concluded that this form of faulty recall in sexual behavior research is of lesser importance than the ones discussed next.
SEXUAL IDENTITY
A second possible source of error in reporting of recall data, and a subset of the problem of faulty recall, concerns social desirability and sexual identity. Understanding sexual behavior can become involved and complicated. This is certainly true for the social scientist, but it is true also

for other individuals. We all have a sexual or gender identity--a self-concept or sexual image that in part defines our behavior and in part defines how we perceive how others perceive us. The symbolic interactionist school of thought and, in particular, Cooley's notion of the "looking glass self" are relevant here, since our sexual identities are partially determined by how we think others perceive us. Some individuals are better able than others to interpret cues that people give which define their feelings. But regardless of how accurate one is in interpreting others' feelings, it is evident that the way others feel is important. In the area of sexual identity, these perceptions can become clouded. This may be because sexual cues are not as obvious as others. Ford and Beach (1951) have amply demonstrated how different sexual cues are from one society to the next. Similarly, in the contemporary United States we find a variety of ways in which individuals communicate sexual cues to each other.
It is entirely possible, therefore, that a given individual has a self-concept not at all consistent with what might be considered an "objective" evaluation of that person. In the area of sexual identity, a researcher is concerned with a part of a person's identity that is very important, personal, sensitive, and sometimes not completely rational. Sociologists are well aware of the existence of the vivid fantasy lives of many persons. Sexual fantasy, although known to exist, is not entirely understood. It is probably reasonable to state that most individuals fantasize about people and experiences that reflect what sociologists might call an "ideal type"-- something which never exists in reality, but which represents the logical extreme on a continuum of characteristics or behavior with which the researcher and individual alike are familiar. This explanation does not suggest that individuals fantasize only about things they have never experienced, but rather that the fantasy

Vol. 23, No. 3 Recall Data in Sexual Behavior Surveys

249

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

represents the ultimate pleasurable thought at that moment and in fact is usually based to some extent on some idea, thought, experience, or visual stimulation that the individual has encountered.
An individual's sexual identity, then, is influenced by his or her fantasy life and actual experiences as well as by his or her self-concept and perception of self through the reflections from others. Thus, in an interview or self-administered questionnaire situation where a respondent is asked to recall past sexual experiences, his or her responses will reflect reality only to a certain unmeasurable extent. But, more importantly perhaps, the responses will also reflect the individual's sexual identity, producing responses based in part on what the respondent thought should have happened. The latter is likely to be a problem of the greatest magnitude when the person's sexual self-concept is made up more of fantasy than reality--where the person's self-concept does not reflect the "objective" cues and feedback mechanisms coming from other persons--and when the individual has allowed these distortions to influence his perception of reality.
The problem, therefore, is not an intentionally dishonest response or one that is intentionally falsified (as will be discussed next), but rather a response based on what the respondent thinks existed or should have existed consistent with his or her current sexual identity. Stated differently, the individual has "defined the situation" in a way consistent with his or her present conception of the original event.
Although there is little information on the extent to which faulty recall may occur, certain attributes of interview schedules can be listed which may minimize the problem and which differentiate between good and bad instruments (Gordon, 1975; Sudman and Bradburn, 1974). A good interview schedule is useless, of course, if the interviewer is incompetent, if the conditions under which the

interview is taking place are unpleasant, if the interviewer and respondent cannot achieve satisfactory rapport, if the respondent does not feel confident about confidentiality and anonymity, or if the schedule is used inconsistently from one administration to the next or from one interviewer to another.
There are certain criteria that might be helpful for evaluating questions about sensitive subject matter, particularly sexuality. As noted earlier, Kinsey became aware of some of these during the course of his research on sexual behavior. Distortion in responses will best be minimized if nonsensitive factual questions are asked first, and the most sensitive questions left to the end when the respondent and interviewer have had a chance to establish a relationship (however transitory). Second, questions should be phrased carefully, with no hint in the question as to what is or is not a socially desirable response.
According to Sudman and Bradburn (1974), the greater the degree of structure in the interviewer's role, the lower the response effects will be. In sensitive areas, respondents should be given the burden of denial rather than the burden of admission. For purposes of accuracy in recall, items should be asked in chronological or logical order to facilitate the respondent's ability to think through or relive the process. Questions should not be repeated throughout the questionnaire, but similar questions can be included to check accuracy of response patterns. In other words, questions should be included such that an inconsistency in responses to a set of questions gives evidence of incorrect recall.
Open-ended questions, even if they will not be used in the final analysis, should be included (sparsely) so that respondents can describe their experiences in their own words. Discrepancies between the openended and fixed choice questions should be noted. Finally, at the end of the interview, if there appear to be errors in the re-

250

Spanier

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

sponses, the respondent should be given the opportunity, without antagonism from the interviewer, to redo the interview or change any responses he or she feels "weren't exactly right, now that I think about it."
These observations regarding the design and construction of interview schedules and their administration are equally relevant to the second set of problems with data based on retrospective accounts, namely, falsified accounts.
FALSIFIED ACCOUNTS
Falsified accounts refer to intentional false reporting of behavior or experiences. This does not necessarily mean that the respondent was being malicious or purposely dishonest; rather, it means that the respondent is aware that his or her responses are not completely accurate, but for some reason is not able to share the correct response with the interviewer. Were this falsification to be very widespread, it would be the researcher's greatest problem.
This area of concern is more directly tied to the interviewer-respondent relationship and circumstances surrounding the interview. There are many reasons why a person might falsify information. The first that comes to mind, and one which has been given attention in related substantive areas recently, is the problem of social desirability (Edwards, 1953; Edmonds et al., 1972; Spanier and Cole, 1976). A falsified account associated with this response set may occur when respondents wish to conceal experiences they have had because they do not feel that the experiences are socially desirable, or when respondents admit to ideas, beliefs, or experiences that they have not had because they think that the interviewer will think more highly of them or respect them more if they give the more conventional responses.
In their comprehensive analysis of re-

sponse effects in surveys, Sudman and Bradburn (1974) found that the greater the problems of self-presentation evoked by a question (that is, the more socially desirable some of the answers are), the higher the relative response effects will be. Of course, in many cases what is socially desirable or conventional is not clear, and the respondent is answering simply on the basis of what he or she thinks is the socially desirable response. Furthermore, what the interviewer actually considers socially desirable may be different from what the respondent would have attributed to the interviewer.
If a respondent intentionally gives false responses, for whatever reason, the data lose their reliability. If the infraction is widespread, the data may not be useful at all. Unlike the first issues raised about retrospective accounts, widespread falsified accounts are misleading and damaging to scientific inquiry. With faulty recall at least, the responses, although not an accurate reflection of reality, may still be of use to the researcher because one is still able to study the respondent's perception of past reality.
There are, to be sure, other reasons why individuals falsify information. Particularly in the area of sex research, these reasons need to be considered. If a respondent is afraid that what he or she tells the interviewer will be found out by friends, parents, school administrators, or others, the respondent may be a very reluctant participant. In the case of a questionnaire, if there is a chance someone might be looking over one's shoulder or could later identify the schedule with one's name, a person might be quite unwilling to admit to having been raped, having masturbated, having been exhibited to by a male, having had oral-genital sex, or even having had intercourse. One might suspect that the differences in findings in sex research studies over the years have only been partly due to differences in times, birth

Vol. 23, No. 3 Recall Data in Sexual Behavior Surveys

251

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

cohorts, samples, geographic regions, universities, or other demographic characteristics. It may be that the research strategy, instruments, and conditions under which the data were gathered have played a more crucial part than has been recognized.
One possibility that should be acknowledged is that some individuals, particularly those with little sexual experience, may admit to sexual behavior that has never taken place. It has been suggested that men, in particular, will often claim to have had sexual experiences that they have not really had. This pressure, traditionally applicable to men, may become increasingly applicable to females in the future. The individuals referred to here are engaged in a process of egoenhancement while in the presence of the interviewer and wish to create an image that is not an accurate reflection of their true experiences.
Of all these problems, social desirability is probably the most important. Regardless of how the person feels he or she would look best, the respondent is likely to be most comfortable when feeling his or her responses are exactly what would be desired. On the other hand, he or she is likely to be most tense when thinking his or her responses are quite deviant from the norm. All individuals are concerned with their "presentation of self," and there is no reason to suspect that they would feel any differently in an interview situation. Thus, false reporting may be a product of the respondent's fears and feelings. This problem particularly exists in sex research, but it may be diminishing since interviewing has become more and more a science as well as an art. Most carefully trained interviewers are capable of putting the respondent at ease and of preventing personal feelings and expectations from creeping into the interview atmosphere.
Falsified accounts are even more easily detected by inconsistent response patterns

than is faulty recall. If interviewers are able to establish acceptable rapport with the respondents, falsified accounts are less likely to be a problem. It is not certain if a person who distorts responses, whether wittingly or not, will be able to do so consistently. This is an empirical question for which no information is available. From the work of Kinsey et al. (1948, 1953) and others, one might conclude that if the research instrument is thorough enough, with enough cross-checks and other measures to test consistency of responses, only a skilled liar would not be detected. However, in the case of individuals who have acquired a sexual identity not consistent with reality, it is likely that their responses would be given on the basis of their current, but inaccurate, sexual identity. In other words, one who has redefined his or her past to be consistent with his or her present identity may, without knowledge, be presenting systematically consistent-- but inaccurate--data.
DISCUSSION
The extent to which the problems with recall data inhibit social scientists is highly variable. My position is that the problems must be noted; conclusions and interpretations must be made cautiously, with due respect for possible error in respondent reports (as well as other sources of measurement error); and the theoretical importance of the recall data issue must be considered. But with these considerations in mind, I believe the use of recall data in survey research should continue. If there is no feasible alternative to using recall data, or if it is the best or only means available for studying a given phenomenon, then cautious collecting and use of the data is the only viable solution.
Gordon (1972) notes that there is much evidence against the validity of recall data on any other than basic demographic material. It is likely that social scientists will be increasingly troubled by problems with

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

252

Spanier

Social Biology

the use of survey data on human sexual behavior as a result of an apparent increase in the public's concerns about personal privacy and the long-standing reluctance of many individuals to participate in surveys. Among the more innovative techniques to deal with this problem is the "randomized response" technique (Warner, 196S) and the statistical models that have been developed to implement it (Greenberg et al., 1969, 1970, 1971; Abul-Ela et al., 1967). Stated simply, the technique attempts to eliminate response bias by allowing the participant to respond to a question which he or she selects at random from one or more questions, such that the interviewer does not know which specific question is being answered. Sophisticated statistical techniques are then used to estimate sample or population characteristics from the response patterns of the randomly chosen questions.
The utility of the technique has been tested in a survey dealing with the sensitive issue of abortion, allowing estimates and variances of the mean number of abortions obtained over a lifetime in an urban population of women to be reported (Greenberg et al., 1971). It is clear that such randomized statistical models will need to be tested further in social scientific contexts. Further research on techniques for improving the validity and reliability of recall data is justified.
However, in considering the recall issue in proper perspective, it should be mentioned that sexual behavior research does not have certain shortcomings that other

substantive areas might ha* \ For instance, when researching sexual behavior, the interviewer is most often asking about events that were experienced by the respondent, rather than primarily by someone else. In child-rearing research, for example, mothers are often asked to report on their children's development, achievement, or motivation. Great inconsistencies have been reported between actual and perceived characteristics in these areas, between mothers' and fathers' reports, mothers' reports of their own behavior, and from one study to the next (Eron et al., 1961; MacFarland, 1969; McGraw and Molloy, 1941; Robins, 1963; Yarrow et al., 1964 and 1968; Burton, 1970; Gordon, 1972). Thus, recall of others' behavior allows for the possibility of further error. But in sex research, most often the individual has only his or her own behavior to recall. And as noted earlier, due to the great importance of sexuality for most individuals, most significant experiences, particularly those since puberty, are likely to be remembered with a high degree of accuracy. With caution and care in data collection and analysis, the problems involved in the use of recall data need not be a reason to stifle important social research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author gratefully acknowledges the thoughtful review and criticisms of this article made by Professors Robert F. Winch and Andrew Gordon of Northwestern University.

REFERENCES

ABUL-ELA, ABDEL-LATIF A., BERNARD GREEN-
BERG, and DANIEL HORVITZ. 1967. A multi-
proportions randomized response model. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 62:990-1008. BURTON, R. V. 1970. Validity of retrospective reports assessed by the multitrait-multimethod analysis. Develop. Psychol. Monogr. 3 (3, Part 2): 1-15.
COLE, CHARLES L., and GRAHAM B. SPANIER.

1973. Induction into mate swapping: A review. Fam. Proc. 12:279-290. DELAMATER, John D. 1974. Methodological issues in the study of premarital sexuality. Sociol. Meth. Res. 3:30-61.
DELAMATER, JOHN, and PATRICIA MACCOR-
quodale. 1975. The effects of interview schedule variations on reported sexual behavior. Sociol. Meth. Res. 4:215-236.

Vol. 2 3 , No. 3 Recall Data in Sexual Behavior Surveys

253

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

EDMONDS, VERNON H., GLENNE WITHERS, and BEVERLY DIBATISTA. 1972. Adjustment, conser-
vatism, and marital conventionalization. J. Marr. Fam. 34:96-103. EDWARDS, A. L. 1953. The relationship between the judged desirability of a trait andtheprobability that the trait will be endorsed. J. Appl. Psychol. 37:90-93.
ERON, LEONARD D., THOMAS J. BANTA, LEOPOLD
O. WALDER, and JEROME H. LAULIGHT. 1961.
Comparison of data obtained from mothersand fathers onchildrearing practices andtheir relations to child aggression. Chld. Develop. 32:457-462.
FORD, C. F., and F. A. BEACH. 1951. Patterns of
sexual behavior. Harper, New York.
GORDON, MARGARET TABER. 1972. Mobility and
child rearing: A study ofthe achievement ofblack and white metropolitan children. Ph.D. thesis, Dept. of Sociology, Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill.
GORDEN, RAYMOND. 1975. Interviewing: Strategies, techniques andtactics. 2ndedition. The Dorsey Press, Homewood, Ill.
GREENBERG, BERNARD G., ABDEL-LATIF A.
ABUL-ELA, WALT R. SIMMONS, and DANIEL G.
HORVITZ. 1969. The unrelated question randomized response model: Theoretical framework. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 64:520-539.
GREENBERG, BERNARD G., JAMES R. ABERNATHY,
and DANIEL G. HORVITZ. 1970. A new survey
technique and its application inthe field ofpublic health. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 48:39-55.
GREENBERG, BERNARD G., ROY R. KUEBLER, JR.,
JAMES R. ABERNATHY, and DANIEL G. HORVITZ.
1971. Application of the randomized response technique in obtaining quantitative data. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 66:243-250. HUMPHRIES, LAUD. 1970. Tearoom trade: Impersonal sex in public places. Aldine Publishing, Chicago.
KINSEY, ALFRED C., WARDELL POMEROY, and CLYDE MARTIN. 1948. Sexual behavior in the
human male. Saunders, Philadelphia.
KINSEY, ALFRED C., WARDELL POMEROY, CLYDE
MARTIN, and PAUL GEBHARD. 1953. Sexual be-
havior in the human female. Saunders, Philadelphia.
MACFARLAND, DAVID D. 1969. Measuring the
permeability of occupational structures: An

information-theoretic approach. Amer. J. Sociol. 75:41-61.
MCGRAW, MYRTLE, and D. MOLLOY. 1941. The
pediatric anamnesis: Inaccuracies in eliciting developmental data. Child Develop. 12:255-265.
MASTERS, WILLIAM, and VIRGINIA JOHNSON. 1966.
Human sexual response. Little, Brown and Co., Boston.
MASTERS, WILLIAM, and VIRGINIA JOHNSON. 1970.
Human sexual inadequacy. Little, Brown and Co., Boston. POMEROY, WARDELL. 1963. The reluctant respondent. Publ. Opin. Quart. 27:287-293.
PYLES, M. H., H. R. STOLZ, and J. MACFARLANE.
1935. The accuracy of mothers' reports on birth and developmental data. Child Develop. 6:372393.
REISS, ALBERT J., JR. 1971. Systematic observation of natural social phenomena, p. 3-33. In Herbert L. Costner (ed.), Sociological methodology1971. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.
ROBBINS, LILLIAN CUKIER. 1963. The accuracy of
parental recall ofaspects of child development and of child rearing practices. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol. 66:261-270.
ROEBUCK, JULIAN, and S. LEESPRAY. 1967. The
cocktail lounge: Astudy of heterosexual relations in a public organization. Amer. J. Sociol. 72:388-395.
SPANIER, GRAHAM B., and CHARLES L. COLE.
1973. Mate swapping: Perceptions, value orientations and participation ina midwestern community. Arch. Sex. Behav. 4:143-159.
. 1976. Toward clarification and investigation of marital adjustment. Intl. J. Marr. Fam. 6:121-146.
SUDMAN, SEYMOUR, and NORMAN M. BRADBURN.
1974. Response effects insurveys. Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
WARNER, S. L. 1965. Randomized response: A survey technique for eliminating evasive answer bias. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 60:63-69.
YARROW, M. R., J. D. CAMPBELL, and R. V. BUR-
TON. 1964. Reliability of maternal retrospection: A preliminary report. Fam. Proc. 3:207-218.
YARROW, M. R., J. D. CAMPBELL, and R. V. BUR-
TON. 1968. Child rearing: Aninquiry into research and methods. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.

