Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Vasectomy eligibility: Evaluative criteria in the health care system
Gerald Uhlman
To cite this article: Gerald Uhlman (1973) Vasectomy eligibility: Evaluative criteria in the health care system, Social Biology, 20:3, 308-314, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988059 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988059
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Vasectomy Eligibility: Evaluative Criteria in the Health Care System

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Gerald Uhlman
Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health Faculty of Medicine Haile Sellassie I University Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Over the past few years, the surgical procedure of vasectomy has become a popular method of family planning in the United States. This is evident not only in the increasing number of articles that have appeared in the popular and scientific press, but also by the actual number of vasectomies reportedly performed. In 1970, over 750,000 operations were reportedly performed (Nation's Health, 1971), while only 200,000 sterilizations for both sexes were acknowledged between 1955 and 1960 (Campbell, 1964).
It might be presumed from the increasing incidence that the procedure is readily accessible to men who may desire this method of family planning. Indeed, more men are able to obtain a vasectomy, since a greater number of physicians are performing the procedure than in the past. Yet, the fact that more men obtain vasectomies does not necessarily support the assumption that the procedure is readily available throughout the health care system, although there are no legal restrictions in the United States on voluntary sterilization of male or female adults seeking such operations.
If the current literature regarding vasectomy is examined, the full spectrum of

eligibility requirements defined by the medical profession is encountered ranging from explicit and detailed barriers to be surmounted by the prospective patient to complete omission of any eligibility criteria.
Medical bodies have taken cautious stands. The American Medical Association singles out religion, parity, psychiatric stigmata, and agreement of the spouse as criteria for consideration (JAMA editorial, 1968). The Association for Voluntary Sterilization proposes probably the most liberal stance, spelling out no specific criteria but urging evaluation based on the mental and emotional condition of the spouses, and family histories (AVS, 1970). The Margaret Sanger Research Bureau has age and parity requirements, but bases a decision on the needs of the individual family (Sobrero and Edey, 1970).
When individual authors are consulted, an appalling variety of eligibility requirements are encountered. The intuitive approach, reflecting years of experience, seems to be the method of choice in the absence of clear organizational guidelines.
In varying combination, age, age and parity, psychological fitness, maturity, mutual agreement, complete knowledge of

308

Vol. 20, No. 3

Vasectomy Eligibility

309

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

the operative procedure, marital stability, religious compatibility, the length of time vasectomy has been considered prior to application, psychosomatic illness, and various idiosyncratic criteria tend to be emphasized.
It would be a disservice to individual authors to omit their entire eligibility and evaluation processes in order to single out peculiarities; but, the reader who is interested in reviewing contrasting eligibility styles is directed to articles by Carlson (1970), Reimann-Hunziker (1966), Parker (1967),Erling (1971), and Stokes (1965).
In general, the accent on some criteria and deemphasis or omission of others appears to be a wholly personal--and sometimes arbitrary--matter.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Review of the vasectomy literature reveals a confusion of criteria and haphazard application of eligibility requirements. In an attempt to determine how characteristic this is in the actual delivery of services, the author surveyed 114 private physicians and 72 clinics throughout the United States which acknowledged vasectomy performance in their routine provision of medical services. Surveying was conducted by means of a mailed questionnaire in early 1972. Although both clinics and private physicians were self-selected (i.e., volunteering the information that they performed vasectomies), the survey population appeared to be essentially representative of service agents throughout the health care system.
Since vasectomy performance is available through both clinic services and private physicians, it was possible to note not only the overall configuration of eligibility criteria in the service system, but also differences between the service delivery modes. In the former, eligibility criteria and decisions potentially involve an interdisciplinary approach (i.e., the consultation between

physician, nurse, social worker, counselor, etc.), while in the latter the private physician would shoulder sole responsibility. A primary objective of the study was to compare and contrast criteria within the context of the two delivery modes.
Respondents were asked a series of questions about criteria that had been established and were followed in the decision to accept or reject a vasectomy applicant.
Specific areas of interest revolved around: the youngest age range of acceptability; age and parity combinations that would be acceptable; the importance of religious conflicts, marital status, marital stability, spouse consent, and emotional stability; and the length of time that vasectomy should have been considered by the applicant prior to application.
Individual clinics and private physicians devote different amounts of time to the performance of vasectomy in their total services; this factor was controlled so that assessment was possible of its potential influence on eligibility criteria.
Significant differences between physicians and clinics were viewed in terms of chisquare tabulations.
RESULTS
In order to control for the differing amounts of time devoted to vasectomy performance among service agents, it was necessary to determine the proportion both groups (the 114 physicians and 72 clinics) devoted exclusively to the operative procedure. This did not seem to vary greatly between the groups. Few clinics or physicians devoted more than 25% of their time to the performance of vasectomy.
Those services which devoted 75% to 100% of their time to vasectomy performance were only 2% of the physicians and 7% of the clinics; in the 50-75% category, 2% of the physicians and 1% of the clinic services reported affirmatively. The 25-

310

Uhlman

Social Biology

50% category accounted for roughly 3 % of the physicians and 8% of the clinics.
Although over 18% of the physicians and 17% of the clinic services reported vasectomy performance as being 10% to 25% of their total services provided, the majority in both groups spent less than 10% in vasectomy performance, i.e., 75% of the private physicians and 67% of the clinics.
No statistical difference emerged among group totals.
Review of the literature revealed that a common measure of eligibility is often the age of the applicant. Although clinics tended to accept a slightly higher percentage of men in the "under 21" age ranges, no statistical significance was apparent between the groups as a whole.
For men under age eighteen, 5% of the physicians and 8% of the clinic services

agents with high age requirements. For the twenty-seven to thirty-four age range, 22% of the physicians and 19% of the clinics responded affirmatively; only 1% of the physicians and clinic services expected the applicant to be over thirty-five.
When the youngest age range of acceptability was controlled for service time devoted exclusively to vasectomy, no statistical difference was seen to emerge. Apparently this exerted little influence on the age factor in vasectomy applicant acceptance.
Age alone is only one dimension, since family parity has often been advocated in the literature as a factor to be coupled with age for eligibility criteria. In the present study, several alternatives were offered the respondents coupling age and family parity in various combinations reflecting degrees of restrictiveness and flexibility. In Table 1,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
AGE-PARITY SELECTION CRITERIA FOR GRANTING VASECTOMY

ACE-PABITY CuiTESIA
Over 40, regardless of no. of children Over 35, with 2 or more children 26 to 34, with more than 2 children ., 20 to 25, with 1 or more children* .. Under 21, with 2 children Under 21, with no childrenf None of these criteria
·Chi square = 9.632; d f = l ; P<0.005. tChl square = 4.191; df = l; P<0.05.

PKIVATE PHYSICIANS
% No.
57.9 66 61.4 70 67.S 77 28.9 33 18.4 21 3.5 4 8.8 10

CLINIC SERVICES
% No.
61.1 44 68.1 49 73.6 53 52.8 38 30.6 22 12.5 9 8.3 6

were likely to grant vasectomies. Men between eighteen and twenty-one stood a better chance of obtaining a vasectomy, with nearly 20% of the physicians and 27% of the clinics approving the operation. Both clinics and private physicians tended to select the age range of twenty-two to twenty-six with greater frequency, indicating men in this range were of sufficient age to warrant a vasectomy (54%, physician; 44%, clinic). Higher age brackets showed less frequent selection, indicating fewer

the selection of age-parity criteria is shown for both groups; percentages reflect the number of respondents selecting each item as a group (N = 114, physicians; N = 72, clinics, for each alternative).
When an applicant was over forty, regardless of the number of children, nearly 58% of the physicians and 61% of the clinic services would have granted a vasectomy; for a man over thirty-five with two or more children, 6 1 % of the physicians and 68% of the clinics would have performed a vasec-

Vol. 20, No. 3

Vasectomy Eligibility

311

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

tomy. The most frequently selected ageparity category appeared to be the man between twenty and twenty-six years of age with more than two children; nearly 68% of the physicians and 74% of the clinics preferred such a candidate. For older age ranges, where parity was sufficient, no statistical differences were apparent.
However, in two of the three younger age-parity categories, significance was noted. In the "20-25 with one or more children" category, physicians (29% as opposed to 53% for clinics) were less likely to make a selection (P < 0.005); for the "under 21 with no children" category, clinics (13% as opposed to 4% for physicians) tended to be more represented in selections (P < 0.05). It is interesting to note that although the "under 21 with two children" category approached significance, the clinic percentage (31) was almost twice that of the physicians (18).
When controlled for service time devoted exclusively to vasectomy, significance was seen for those services devoting less than 10% (where the majority tended to fall) in relation to the age-parity category of "20-25 with one or more children." While the clinic services were nearly evenly divided in their acceptance or rejection (45% and 55% respectively), private physicians were more likely to reject an applicant under these circumstances (24% and 76% respectively; statistical difference was significant at the 0.05 level).
Hence, significant correlations were shown between delivery modes and younger age-parity criteria for granting vasectomy. Clinics were more likely to accept younger applicants with lower parity, perhaps reflecting a slightly more flexible, less restrictive stance in part.
Speculation suggests that age-parity is a more accurate measure of the services' position toward applicant acceptability than age alone. Few authors in the literature neglect

the link between age and parity in eligibility criteria. The data above tend to suggest, it can be speculated, that not only are private physicians more concerned about legal ramifications (self-protection and defensive medicine) and maturity of the applicant, but also higher parity tends to insure against potential untoward reactions and misgivings in the event of the death of progeny. Clinic services are less concerned about age-parity, perhaps placing greater emphasis on the individual's right to elect vasectomy despite personal circumstances.
Several additional factors are frequently suggested in the literature as potential criteria of eligibility. Among these factors are: religious conflicts, marital status (whether unmarried men should be vasectomized), marital stability, spouse consent, history of emotional instability, and period of time vasectomy has been considered prior to application.
Respondents were asked to designate whether these were important factors in consideration of eligibility within an "agreedisagree-not important" context. Questions were arranged so that responses of agreement would indicate a more restrictive stance, while disagreement or unimportance would reflect a less restrictive posture. In Table 2, responses of the two groups are shown regarding attitudes toward the above criteria, excluding time of consideration prior to vasectomy application.
When asked if vasectomy should be denied because of religious conflicts, respondents' percentages primarily fell into the "agree" category (39%, physicians; 53%, clinic), with "strongly agree" selected secondly (32%, physicians; 23%, clinic). Responses of disagreement and unimportance consisted of nearly 30% for physicians but only about 23% for clinics.
Marital status seemed to be of less importance. To the statement that unmarried men should not receive vasectomies, 23%

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

312
ag
p-l
I
3 fl
3'
a

Uhlman

Social Biology

88888 88888
\O VO O »O VO
Q o\ eo to r f co cd *sj- *

n pq

*-; © O. to ^J;

vq ro H 9 H co" cd ON d«-<*

^ r*. *q t>; co fO* tN CO tN to*

rO^Ott^O^ NHHVOH

Iliiil Hifl lilil itllil
CM ,

of the physicians and 18% of the clinic services agreed, while 19% of the physicians and 16% ofthe clinics strongly agreed. The most frequently selected was "disagree," with nearly 35% ofboth groups represented. Strong disagreement and unimportance accounted for 30% of thephysicians and 26% of theclinic services.
A majority of both services agreed that marital stability should be a factor in the vasectomy decision. Nearly 49% ineach group responded that if themarriage were not stable, vasectomy should not be granted. In addition, another 25% of the physicians and 18%of the clinic services strongly agreed. Responses of disagreement and unimportance accounted for 26% of the physicians and 34% of the clinics.
Wife's consent seemed tobe the most important of the criteria. Nearly 9 1 % of the private physicians and 86% of the clinics reported "agree" or "strongly agree" responses to the imperative procurement of wife's consent. Responses of disagreement or unimportance accounted for only 9% of the physicians and 14% of the clinics.
Observable or known history of mental illness tended to have some importance for both groups. Denial of vasectomy for this reason was supported by4 1 % of the physicians and 44% of theclinics who reported agreement, and 23% and19% respectively who strongly agreed. Yet, 36% of the physicians and 37% of the clinics responded in disagreement or unimportance.
No significant differences emerged in statistical analysis; however, "wife's consent" approached significance at the 0.05 level, with fewer clinics concerned about ' spouse consent asaneligibility factor.
On the whole, designation of religious conflicts, marital status orstability, and emotional stability as important eligibility criteria differed little between groups. I n essence, neither delivery mode enjoyed a

Vol. 20, No. 3

Vasectomy Eligibility

313

more flexible posture, excluding "wife's consent," where physicians were more representative in their responses.
Combining "strongly agree" and "agree" percentages together, both groups tended to select "wife's consent" as the primary factor of importance, with religious conflicts, marital stability, emotional stability, and marital status following in order of importance for clinics; private physicians, however, reversed the order of religious conflicts and marital stability in their configuration (Table 3).

CONCLUSIONS
The delineation of and focus upon independent criteria, it can be argued, is artificial and misleading; obviously, they overlap in application and are in concert during the evaluative process.
Yet, the overall pattern of the data seems to lend credence to speculation that confusion of eligibility criteria and haphazard application evidenced in the literature roughly mirrors actual clinical practice in the delivery system.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA RANKED BY IMPORTANCE*

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
Wife's consent Religious conflicts Marital stability Emotional stability Marital status

PRIVATE PHYSICIANS

% No.

90.S 70.2 73.7 64.3
37.4

104 80 84 72
43

* Computed by combining "Agree-Strongly Agree" percentages for Table 2.

CLINIC SERVICES

% No.

8S.4 76.7 66.2 63.0
38.3

64 S6 49 46
29

When controlled for service time devoted

exclusively to vasectomy, no significance

was noted.

When length of time that vasectomy had

been considered by the applicant was

viewed, little difference was noted. Group

percentages varied slightly, with nearly the

same figures (38%) shown for both groups

in designating that the length of time vasec-

tomy had been considered was relatively

unimportant. Although private physicians

,

.,,,,_. ° .

, ...

preference (33%) was six months, while

1- · finnf \ v.

*i, *·

clinics (30%) chose one month as a time

, . . . i , .,

preference, percentage totals for the groups were low and there wasno significant differ-

ence. Only 8% of physicians and 5% of

clinics chose a time length of one year.

Controlling for time devoted exclusively

to vasectomy revealed no statistical differ-

ence.

·

However, some consistency appeared to

emerge. That the wife's consent is procured

appears essential; and religious compatibil-

ity, and marital and emotional stability,

also seem to be fairly important to the

survey population.

O n e obvi0us implication in the data sug-

gests that younger m e n ^

lower parity

t e n d tQ h a y e mQre difficulty obtaining a

vasect

a m a n ^ a d;ssentm spouse

, , , . , , TM . , ,.

may also be hindered. The service delivery

. ,.

, ,., .

system tends to view such candidates as

.,, , , ., , . .

possible legal risks and rejection assures

P^*1"^

&

J

self-protection. yO n e w o n d e r s a b o u t t h e v a I i d i t o f t W s

position. The Association for Voluntary

Sterilization has taken great pains to pub-

licize the fact that vasectomy is completely

legal when voluntarily performed. Yet, the

314

Uhlman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

history of vasectomy in the United States, and the muddled legal position which evolved, perhaps genuinely justify acautious posture. With laws varying from state to state--often still existing from the past but disregarded--and/or not clearly denned or updated, few service agents relish the opportunity to disrupt theequilibrium.
Influential professional organizations have only sparingly offered guidance regarding vasectomy criteria and procedures. This is understandable inlight of widely differing professional opinion, and a dearth of conclusive research. Hence, in the vacuum created,

personal bias, value judgment and sometimes lack of knowledge have evolved as the underpinnings of eligibility decisions.
To debate thequestion of whether there should be clearly defined guidelines which service agents should subscribe to in the delivery of services, or whether elective vasectomy procedures should be free from imposed constraints--i.e., vasectomy on demand--is beyond the scope of this paper. However, either position would tend to greatly facilitate the transition from valueladen and inconsistent application ofservices to a more equitable process.

REFERENCES

AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION. 1968.Voluntary- NATION'S HEALTH. 1971. Vasectomies are rising.

male sterilization. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 204: No. 7, July.

822. PARKER, J. 1967. Psychiatric aspects of steriliza-

ASSOCIATION FOR VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION. 1970. tion, Internat. Psychiat. Clin. 4:110.

Questions and answers on voluntary steriliza- REIMANN-HUNZIKER, R. 1966. Twenty years ex-

tion for men andwomen. AVS pamphlet.

perience with vasectomized patients. J. Sex Res.

CAMPBELL, A. 1964. The incidence of operations 2:99.

that prevent conception. Amer. J. Obstet. Gynec. SOBRERO, A., and H. EDEY. 1970. A vasectomy

89:694.

service within a planned parenthood clinic. Ex-

CARLSON, H. 1970. Vasectomy on election. So. Med. cerpta Medica International Congress Series

J. 63:766.

224:130.

ERLING, C. 1971.OneGP's personal and profes- STOKES, W. 1965. Long-range effects of male steril-

sional commitment. Med. Opin. 7:59.

ization. Sexology4:25.

