Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
Thomas J. Bouchard Jr. & Michael Andregg
To cite this article: Thomas J. Bouchard Jr. & Michael Andregg (1977) Book notes, Social Biology, 24:4, 342-344, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1977.9988309 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988309
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

342

Book Reviews

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

practices (KAP) of birth control across HUMAN BIOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION

samples. The strongest effect of education TO HUMAN EVOLUTION, VARIATION,

upon all factors affecting family size oc- GROWTH, AND ECOLOGY. Edited by-G.

curred when mothers had at least some A. Harrison, J. S. Weiner, J. M. Tan-

secondary education. The more obviously ner, and N. A. Barnicot. Second edi-

biological effects (e.g., rates of stillbirth, tion. Oxford University Press, Oxford,

time interval to next birth lengthened by 1977.

breast feeding) demonstrate the universality of human physical nature, while the observed cultural and educational influences underline our diversity as a species.
The work is of value for all persons interested in human biology. Its successor volume will further broaden our knowledge of human reproduction.

A superior text by four pioneers of human biology. Part I deals with human evolution (primates through human society). Part II deals with human genetics (from Mendel through gene action through population genetics). Part III deals with the major forms of biological variation in modern populations (race, body size,

JEROME WALLER
Department of Biostatistics University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, Pa.

shape, and color, biochemical variants, blood groups, etc.). Part IV deals with growth and physique. Part V deals with human ecology (nutrition, climate, disease, population stability). Each part in-

cludes a list of suggestions for further read-

ings. The book is organized into twenty-

six generally brief and tightly organized

chapters. This organization makes as-

BOOK NOTES

signments easy and allows the student to deal with them efficiently. The writing is

clear and succinct. References are as late

HUMAN EVOLUTION: AN INTRODUCTION as 1976.

TO BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY: By C.

L. Brace and Ashley Montagu. Second

edition. Macmillan Publishing Co., HUMAN DIVERSITY: ITS CAUSES AND SO-

New York, 1977. 493 pp. $12.95 (hard- CIAL SIGNIFICANCE: Edited by B. D.

bound).

Davis and Patricia Flaherty. Ballin-

The first section of this three-part text introduces the student to the history of

ger Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass., 1976. 248 pp. $15.00 (hardbound).

evolutionary thought, develops the ele- This book is a summary of formal pre-

mentary principles of Mendelian genetics sentations and discussions by 35 scholars

and population genetics, and includes a who participated in four two-day seminars

brief chapter on primate behavior. The (winter, 1973-spring, 1974) sponsored by

second section, by far the longest, deals the American Academy of Arts and Sci-

with fossil man. The approach is heavily ences. Seminar I dealt with evolution;

historical, and the tremendous conceptual Seminar II, with genetics; Seminar III,

problems faced by workers in this field are with behavior genetics; and Seminar IV,

faced directly. Part Three deals with the with intelligence and group differences.

concept of race and the significance of con- The diversity of opinion, particularly with

temporary human variation.

respect to the issues discussed in the last

Vol. 24, No. 4

Book Reviews

343

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

two sections, was very great; and as one would expect, no consensus was reached. The book would make a poor introduction to the topics discussed, but would be of interest to individuals with a working knowledge of the domains. Cronbach's discussion of IQ tests is especially articulate and informative. Unfortunately, the participants never did get to the issue of the social significance of human biological and behavioral diversity.
HUMAN GENETICS: By Edward Novitski. Macmillan, New York, 1977. 458 pp.
An introductory text which minimizes the need for mathematical skills and an understanding of basic chemistry. The approach is nonhistorical, and the author attempts to relate scientific knowledge to biological-social problems. For example, there are chapters on the nuclear energy controversy, carcinogenesis-teratogenesis-mutagenesis, behavior and intelligence, genetic counseling, and the manipulation of man's genetic system.

RACE AND RACES: By Richard A. Goldsby. Second edition. Macmillan, New York, 1977. 158 pp. $5.50(paper).
This primer on race discusses at a nontechnical level the biological meaning of race, races, human diversity, evolution, the origin of races, and race and mental ability. The first edition of this book was written in response to the furor created by Arthur Jensen's work on mental ability. The Nichols and Anderson paper (Social Biology, 1973, Vol. 20, pp. 367-374) is cited as evidence that matching on social class dramatically reduces the IQ difference between Blacks and whites, without mention of the problem of the matching fallacy so carefully described by those authors. Nevertheless, the book on the whole is well balanced, well written, and worth looking at if you teach a course that needs a brief supplementary text on race.
HANDBOOK OF RESEARCH DESIGN AND
SOCIAL MEASUREMENT: By D. C. Mil-
ler. Third edition. David McKay Co., New York, 1977. 518 pp. $7.95 (paper).

HEREDITY AND SOCIETY: READINGS IN
SOCIAL GENETICS: Edited by A. S. Baer. Second edition. Macmillan, New York. 1977. 460 pp. $7.95 (paper).
This is a broad-gauged reader designed for courses dealing with genetic aspects of contemporary social problems. Forty-five papers are reprinted, covering nine major areas: social structure, agriculture, environmental hazards, behavior, aging, population problems, medical genetics and counseling, evolution-race-intelligence, and gene therapy and the future. Each major section is prefaced by an overview of the issues and a selected bibliography. It is a very readable volume, emphasizing ideas rather than method or sheer facts.

Aimed at the advanced graduate student and researcher in sociology, this book is nevertheless a gold mine of information for researchers who are interested in sociological methods but whose primary training is in another area. The book is divided into five parts: (1) general guides to research design and sampling; (2) guides to data collection techniques, and to data already collected (social science archives); (3) guide to statistical analysis; (4) a very broad and useful selection of sociometric scales and indexes; and (5) a discussion of research funding, costs and reporting, including a guide to the major sociological, psychological, political science, public administration, anthropological, educational, and organizational journals. It is an extremely useful book for any social science researcher.

344

Book Reviews

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

PATTERNS OF SEXUALITY AND REPRO-
DUCTION: By A. S. Parks. Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford, 1976. 148 pp. $7.25 (hardbound); $3.75 (paper).
A brief little book designed for the nonspecialist biologist and educated layman on the topic of reproductive biology. I suspect it will prove useful in highschool and college courses in human sexuality. It is well written and authoritative, with numerous very informative and easily interpreted charts and graphs. The nine chapters cover: the reproductive life cycle; variations such as puberty, menarche, menstruation; seasonal effects; environmental effects; multiple births; the sex ratio; the social impacts of reproduction; sexuality; and social factors influencing reproduction.
THOMAS J. BOUCHARD, JR.
Department of Psychology University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota
METHODOLOGY IN MEDICAL GENETICS: AN INTRODUCTION TO STATISTICAL
METHODS: By E. H. Emery. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh, London, and New York. 1976. 157 pp. $14.95 (hardbound).
An outstanding practical guide to elementary statistical methods used in the study of medical genetics, its virtue lies in its clear and very concise descriptions of

computational methods. The emphasis is entirely on practical application. Topics range from populational measures such as mutation rates, heritability, and detection of disease associations through segregation analysis, estimation of linkage, and estimation of recurrence risks for genetic counseling. The book is well referenced for those who wish more detailed consideration of particular questions. Nevertheless, examples are provided throughout, along with essential tables, so that reference to other works would be unnecessary for the solution of many problems of interest to students of medical genetics.
GENETIC COUNSELLING: By A. Stevenson, D. Davison, and M. Oakes. Second edition. J. B. Lippincott Co., Philadelphia, 1976. 357 pp. $15.00(hardbound).
The first third of this guide for genetic counselling is devoted to chapters on elementary genetics and methods for the derivation of risk estimates. Following this section are concise clinical descriptions of a wide variety of inherited disorders. Included is the mode of transmission, if simple, or empirical risk estimates if causation is multifactorial. The book's utility is enhanced by its systemic organization of inherited disorders.
MICHAEL ANDREGG
Dight Institute of Human Genetics University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota

