Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Fertility effects of family planning programs: A methodological review
Jacqueline Darroch Forrest & John A. Ross
To cite this article: Jacqueline Darroch Forrest & John A. Ross (1978) Fertility effects of family planning programs: A methodological review, Social Biology, 25:2, 145-163, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988332 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988332
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Fertility Effects of Family Planning Programs: A Methodological Review

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Jacqueline Darroch Forrest and John A. Ross
Alan Guttmacher Institute, 515 Madison Avenue, New York,New York;and Centerfor Population and Family Health, ColumbiaUniversity, New York, New York
ABSTRACT: Extensive effort over the last ten to fifteen years has been applied to questions of what family planning programs do to birth rates. Here we review this body of work, looking especially at the different methods used. First, attention is called to the diversity of the field, in its questions, its techniques, in the program types studied, and in assumptions as to modes of actions. Then clarifications are suggested regarding which program features can produce fertility change and which patterns in fertility trends can result from the net action of these factors. Each of the major methods used is then presented, with its advantages and disadvantages and with recent illustrations of its application. A matrix comparison of the methods is added to show their characteristics in relation to each other, and suggestions are made as to the appropriate circumstances for using each. Finally, recent work is described that promises partially to give more comparability of results across different methods and program settings.

Since the early 1960's some 52 investigations' have been undertaken into how family planning programs may have changed the course of fertility, either that of acceptors or of the general population. In addition, there are perhaps 20 efforts of a less empirical nature--official plans that calculate the probable effect over the next five or ten years of a national program or computer simulations that relate birth control to fertility change. In the approaches taken, these are not always easily separable from estimates of the past effects of actual programs. We offer here a critical review of this body of research, looking especially at its methodological character.

tal, reflecting research opportunities and available data, but are also partly a reflection of disparate thinking; that is, the studies tend to differ in ways that reflect different thinking in the field:
First, in questionsasked. Strong interest has always rested on what programs can do to the population growth rate, or at least to the crude birth rate. However, because these measures respond to numerous influences other than the program, it has often seemed fair to ask instead for effects upon marital fertility, or even upon acceptors alone. Measures have included, besides overall rates, age-specific and parityspecific rates, and sometimes prolongation of time to the next birth.

DIVERSITY OF THE FIELD
The work so far done ranges over a considerable variety of questions, program types, data sets, assumptions, and methods. These differences are partly acciden-
1 A full bibliographic review has been separately prepared, forthcoming (1978) in Population Index.

Second, in research methods used. At least seven major methodological approaches, described below, have been prominently employed. The approaches differ greatly in their logical structure, data requirements, and strength of conclusions. Some differ enough that they cannot be applied to the same situation.

145

146

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Third, vnprogram type investigated. It is vehicle for what people already wish to do,

customary to think of all family planning while others believe it can also hasten

programs as a group, and the literature changes in intention. Such differences in

reviewed implicitly assumes a commonal- concept as these are often taken to be

ity among all "programs." Yet some are mutually exclusive, and shadings are ig-

small pilot projects lasting a year or two; nored. Many commentators have been doc-

others are projects of individual clinics; trinal, closed to the possibility that differ-

and still others are national efforts. Some ent programs at different times, even

have silently added contraceptive services within the same country, can conceivably

to existing facilities, while others have serve more than one function.

mounted determined mass media cam-

paigns or assigned a corps of workers to visit homes to urge birth control practice.

PROGRAM MECHANISMS

Some have established service points at a high density throughout the countryside, and others have done little outside provincial cities. Some have invoked commercial distribution, and others have used incentives involving income tax rules, housing eligibility, and other inducements. While it can of course be argued that it is just these differences that are under investigation, they have nevertheless muddled the nature of the interventions, just as discrepancies in fertility measures have blurred the picture of outcomes.

What then, in fact, can a-program do? What are the mechanisms that can impinge upon fertility rates? These fall into five kinds, as follows:
1. The provision of means of fertility control. A program can establish the supply and service of modern birth control means or put them on a much more dispersed basis throughout the population. The usual discussion of this area refers to the provision of additional methods, better technology, or closer distribution points. In analyses focused on this topic, emphasis is

Fourth, in mode of action assumed. Considerable disagreement attends the question of how programs can affect fertility. The literature contains many shadings of terminology, which often reflect fervent controversy. A program is seen in any of the following ways:
(a) "merely substitutes for other means that would have been used anyway."
(b) "is simply the means by which a reduction, dictated by social and economic

on the source supplying the means (commercial vs. government-supported), and the crucial factors influencing fertility behavior are seen as mechanical features-- price, technology, variety of methods, propinquity to users. An additional means is neutral non-persuasive information about particular methods of birth planning and where to obtain them, presented through channels that vary from personal contact to mass communication.

development, is achieved."

2. Education. Attempts at persuading

(c) "is a facilitator of fertility reduction." people to change their fertility behavior can

(d) "determines the timing and rapidity be delivered through many channels.

of the decline although the conditions for it These attempts can range from fairly mild

were present."

statements to strong propaganda programs

(e) "is a social intervention that has an ("Stop at Two"). They generally focus on

additional effect on fertility beyond that the link between lower fertility and ex-

attributable to the on-going socio-economic pected benefits for the person, family, or

and demographic processes."

country and try to convince people to

Some argue that the program can be only a change their own fertility behavior and

Vol. 25, No. 2

Family Planning Programs

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

norms as the result of logical, moral, economic, or political appeals.
3. Legitimation. As a program spreads, its de facto presence in terms of services, buildings, publicity, and clientele can foster a presumption of the acceptability of birth planning and use of program services. On another level, open endorsement of the program and of new attitudes and behavior by nationally visible and respected figures as well as by local leaders helps make respectable what might otherwise might not be. For instance, as Freedman et al. (1970, pp. 12-13) comment:
In making easily and cheaply available on a large scale first the IUD and then the pill under legitimate and respected auspices, the [Hong Kong Family Planning] Association as a "supplier" helped to redefine the demand by changing the "product." This may be of particular importance for couples who feel the need for birth control but are ambivalent about what to do for a problem without traditional solutions.

S. Combinations. Clearly, different programs give different degrees of emphasis to the mechanisms just listed. The first mechanism chiefly concerns "supply"; the others, "demand." All, however, may merge, flowing together in the society, with supply and practice themselves changing people's perceptions of what others are doing and thereby hasten normative change. When this process is not recognized, there is confusion about what the program may possibly have done and how any fertility impact may have been produced. That is, the possibility of combinations can be stressed without insisting on any particular combination. A frequent error has been an insistence that "programs in general" perform only certain function^), which overlooks the large differences among and within countries in the character and components of the program.
ALTERNATIVE FERTILITY PATHS

4. Incentives/Disincentives. A program can try to affect fertility behavior by offering inducements of some kind to acceptors. In Ghana, for example, powdered milk was given to mothers accepting family planning. In Taiwan, discounts on the costs of IUD's have been offered through field workers. The Indian governmental program has provided monetary compensations for missed work time to vasectomy acceptors. In some countries disincentives or sanctions against continued large families have been applied. These have ranged from anti-natalist taxes to housing and job restrictions and other regulations whose effect is to encourage small families. While these actions are usually taken outside the service delivery network, programs have been encouraged by and have benefited from them. In some governmental family planning programs, such as that in Singapore, these actions have come to be closely identified with overall program activity.

While it is clear that programs can operate through various modes of action and in numerous combinations, examination of effects on fertility seldom reaches down to this layer of analysis. Rather, the sum of program activities is usually treated as a whole, and only the net balance of influences from the various modes of action is traced. Alternative concepts of program effects at the societal level can be represented, as is done in Figure 1, which portrays competing views (a, b, c, d, e) of what the family planning program as a whole may do to fertility. Figure la fits the extreme causation view, that of the program entering astatic situation and by itself producing an important decline. The mechanisms for achieving such a decline would necessarily combine supply, information, education, and legitimation. Figure 16 represents a more common construct, in which a decline had clearly begun before a program was instituted and would

148

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Fertility with a program ._ Fertility without a program Initiation of program
FIG. 1.--Alternative fertility trends with and without family planning programs.
have continued, but the program acceler- an implementing effect by providing ated and increased it. Again the mecha- means, or better means, than would othnisms are partially obscure, but in this case erwise have been available. The final result program influence supplements other in- is unchanged but the downward path confluences already at work in the society. tains savings of births. Figure Id illustrates Figure \c depicts the view that the program the view of complete substitution, that the makes no additional normative change in a program was one vehicle for avoiding situation where fertility is falling, but has pregnancy but that it had no net effect. It

Vol. 25, No. 2

Family Planning Programs

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

only placed an alternate supply source or of their strengths, limitations, and applica-

different methods at the disposal of a popu- tions. The methods so far used are of

lation that already had access to other greatly differing character, and range from

sources. Figure le represents a final view, matching, use of control groups, and com-

that investment in the family planning pro- parisons of pre- and post-acceptance (or

gram contributed to decreased fertility but program) fertility behavior, to the statisti-

took the place of other program, actions, or cal controls of multiple regression and

supply sources that would have produced simulation of the nonprogram situation

even greater decline. For example, had the within a stochastic model. Detailed techni-

programs not been instituted, then commercial activity, different legal structures, or liberalized abortion practices might have begun to operate, conceivably with superior effectiveness. Thus, the net fertility decline under the program was less than would have occurred without the program.
Again, in any actual situation, it is usu-

cal considerations are omitted here; an excellent review has been prepared by the U.N. Population Division (United Nations, 1977). Each method offers a reasonable means for making an estimate of a particular kind, and each carries its own peculiar advantages and limitations.

ally only the net balance of all these forces

A. DECOMPOSITION OF CHANGE

that can be traced. If several forces are By standardization, the change in the

active, that fact may not be detectable. crude birth rate (or general fertility rate) for The analytic methods currently available a given period is decomposed into the con(described below) differ considerably in tributions of marital fertility, nuptiality,

their character, but none of them can pro- age distribution, and interactions. If changduce much refinement in telling how large ing marital fertility is found to have

a role was played by each of the above contributed significantly to the overall models. The actual course that fertility fol- change, attention usually turns to estimatlowed is subject to empirical measure- ing the relative impact of program vs. pri-

ment, but the hypothetical line of what it vate sources of contraception by comparing would have been without the program is the proportions of couples receiving sup-

not. This line is crucial to determination of plies or service from each sector. Calcuprogram effect, and several of the methods lation periods are often picked to match the below can in a sense be interpreted as establishment or strengthening of program

alternative means to its estimation. In fact, the variety of methods available for measuring program effect is not only due to the need to address varying data types, but in large part is the result of different attacks on the problem of how to get some estimate of what would have happened without the program, in terms of aggregate or personal fertility behavior.

activity.
In some cases no further analysis is made; but in others the detection of change in marital fertility as a key factor in the crude birth rate change prepares the ground for further research using some of the methods outlined below. Chandrasekaran and Hermalin (1975, p. 550) note that decomposition of change "is an important

safeguard in any kind of trend analysis in

METHODS

that it prevents falsely attributing to the program that which is due to change in

From the body of studies examined, we demographic structure."

now present a classification of basic meth- This method allows separation of nup-

odological approaches, with a comparison tiality and age distribution effects from fer-

150

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

tility changes. The decomposition is fairly substantial changes in it) and fertility

clear even to those not familiar with pro- trends over time or across areas or groups.

gram analysis and shows the relative con- Close association is taken as evidence that

tributions of changes in the three factors program activity was a causal factor in the

examined in a reasonably simple way. De- fertility change, while lack of association is

scription of relative levels of program and damaging to claims of program effect. The

public supplies of contraception provides a association may be between a downward

rough picture of the relative influence of the turn in a time series of fertility measures

two sectors on the change. However, data and the introduction (often lagged) of the

on the demographic factors (by age groups) program stimulus. It may also be based on

and the source of supply are often unavail- evidence of lower fertility (or steeper de-

able. This method does not deal with moti- cline) in areas with greater program input

vation for change in fertility behavior but or among groups on whom the program

only with the source of supplies, and no was focused or which provided dispropor-

direct connection is made between the pro- tionate numbers of acceptors. Brass (1976,

gram activity and fertility change.

p. 1) expresses this approach: ". . . if the

Because the variations in the crude birth rates and in the other factors considered are usually small, even slight changes can produce large swings in the percentages of change due to various factors over fairly short time periods. Calculations for seven countries with numerous time periods appear in Ross et al. (1972), with marital fer-

relation between the fertility fall and the program development is close in time and detailed pattern, and if there is evidence that the social and economic conditions failed to establish a significant trend when operating alone, the balance of probabilities can be taken strongly to favor a direct effect."

tility change accounting for from zero to 89 This method stays close to the data,

per cent of the crude birth rate change, and avoiding complex techniques with heavy

the percentage of married contraceptors statistical assumptions. Its information

using public supply sources varying from demands are modest compared to several

34 per cent to 88 per cent. More recent of the other techniques. It usually can be

work has identified changing marital fertil- readily employed, especially where ade-

ity as an unimportant factor (without giv- quate vital statistics exist. The geographic

ing percentages) in crude birth rate change approach can take advantage of informal

in Trinidad and Tobago, 1961-67 (Thein, area comparisons where more formal ap-

1970), and in Fiji, 1959-68 (Fairbanks, proaches are not feasible--where areas

1970). On the other hand, Reynolds (1972) cannot be matched, experimental and con-

estimated that marital fertility change ac- trol areas are lacking, and the data and/or

counted for more than SO per cent of the analysis capabilities needed for area analy-

crude birth rate decline in Costa Rica, sis using regression are unavailable.

1960-69.

There are limitations. Data on fertility

before and after program input may not be

B. CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN PROGRAM ACTIVITY AND FERTILITY CHANGE IN TIMING, GEOGRAPHIC AREAS,

available, especially when the program is first established. Judgment is involved in assessing the proper lag from program in-

POPULATION SUBGROUPS BY AGE,

puts, which have cumulative effects, to

PARITY, AND RACE/ETHNICITY

subsequent fertility declines. Identification

This approach identifies parallels be- of and controls for alternative explanations

tween the establishment of a program (or are poor; private sector use, later marriage,

Vol. 25, No. 2

Family Planning Programs

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

and other factors can affect the patterns of correspondence found. Variations in program activities may be accompanied by variations in socioeconomic development that also reduce fertility, making the program appear more important than it was. Conversely, lack of fertility decline may be interpreted as a sign of no program effect when in fact it existed but was simply countered by other factors working toward fertility increase. Applications of this method are available for Mauritius (Brass, 1976), Taiwan (Freedman, 1965; Freedman and Muller, 1965; Freedman et al., 1972), Hong Kong (Freedman and Adlakha, 1968; Freedman, 1969, 1973; Wat and Hodge, 1972; Chan, 1976; Freedman et al, 1970), and Georgia (Darney, 1975a,fc), all of which .-how sharp patterns of correspondence across time and subgroups that persist when (limited) controls are introduced for nonprogram factors.
C. MATCHING STUDIES
Matching studies attempt to remove the influence of nonprogram factors by matching subjects to controls (areas or individuals) on extraneous factors thought also to affect fertility. For individuals, acceptors are compared to nonacceptors possessing similar characteristics, with nonacceptors taking whatever birth control steps they wish within the private sector. To the extent that the matching procedures truly equalize subjects and controls, the fertility data for the controls suggest what acceptors would have experienced without the program. Then, residual fertility differences between program and nonprogram groups are ascribed to program impact. If the subjects used are a representative sample of all acceptors, results can be generalized to the entire program.
The matching method typically uses a one-to-one comparison, but with secondary data this procedure almost always wastes cases. Under any given set of match-

ing rules (i.e., the set of similarities used in pairing), the mean value for two or more subjects, or matches, on a variable is preferable to any of the individualized values. In fact, all the cases available for the study may be cast into a detailed cross-tabulation containing each category for each variable used in the matching. If one imagines two of these tables, one for subjects and one for matches, each case will fall into an appropriate cell. Amean value for the variable of interest (e.g., fertility) can then be computed for all cases in each cell, and this value will be more stable than if it were based on any one individual. The comparisons are not one subject to one match, but cell mean to cell mean; otherwise the calculations proceed unchanged. Sampling errors cannot easily be computed, but they will be reduced from the one-to-one method.
This adaptation of the matching approach has additional virtues: (1) One gains the picture of the distribution of subjects and matches across the control variables, as in the Chow et al. (1969) Taiwan study. (2) Extra cases are easily exploited by adding them to the cells where they fit. (3) The format permits immediate application of the usual standardization techniques regardless of cell sizes (providing the experimental cases and the matches follow roughly similar distributions within the two tables).
Two studies in particular illustrate the potential of the method, one for Taiwan (Chow et al., 1969) and one for Malaysia (Johnson et al., 1973; Anonymous, 1976). In Taiwan, all IUD acceptors in four townships were selected; in Malaysia, a sample of acceptors was used to represent all national acceptors. Vital registration information permitted the identification of nonacceptors with similar characteristics and gave detailed birth records on all individuals. In the Taiwan study, fertility fell 80 per cent for acceptors vs. 48 per cent for

152

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

controls over two years, the decline for pends on good vital statistics, registration

both groups probably being related partly systems, or special identification numbers

to the alignment within the birth interval, (as in Malaysia and Venezuela) to identify

as many women had a recent birth. In matches.

Malaysia, 1968 acceptors had 28 per cent

fewer births than did controls over the en- D. EXPERIMENTAL AND CONTROL AREAS

suing five years 1969-74. Acceptors with Where similar groups (areas or individ-

more than five children had 37 per cent uals) are initially identified and some then

fewer births.

receive program input (experimental

Matching with areas as units is an attrac- groups) and others do not (controls), later

tive approach and has been applied to differences in fertility declines are ascribed

Georgia counties (Rochatetal., 1972), pair- to the program. An important assumption

ing each of seven counties with programs to is that other factors are not only similar at

a contiguous county without a program, the start but that their effects upon the two

matched on geographic contiguity, popula- groups are similar throughout the experi-

tion size, and racial distribution. Fertility mental period. This assumption needs to be

fell 13 per cent more in program counties, verified by examination of nonprogram

with much larger differentials for sub- factors wherever possible.

groups with high acceptance rates.

Control groups present a gauge of what

It must be stressed that matching is ex would have happened without program ac-

post facto, being done after acceptance or tivity and therefore provide a standard for

program initiation has occurred. The measuring net program effect. However, it

motivation of acceptors, and factors such is hard to find comparable groups, espe-

as leadership that affect program place- cially areas, and it is often practically and

ment in specific areas, have not been politically difficult to assign them ran-

matched and are not controlled. Such fac- domly to experimental or control status.

tors may have been strong enough to have Usually only a few areas are used, and so

brought about some fertility decline even if the cell sizes for areal variables in the anal-

the program had not existed, although this ysis are very small. Contamination of pro-

speculation loses some of its force where gram influence from experimental to con-

large differences are found. General diffu- trol groups is a common problem. In some

sion of family planning information from cases, actions necessary to achieve isolation

the program may also affect and contami- may be more elaborate than can be justified

nate the nonprogram subjects, blurring by the program effort involved or by the

measures of program impact and produc- potential outcome. Prominent examples of

ing an underestimate of effect. Matching of this method are experiments in Koyang-

areas has not been used to assess a program Kimpo, Korea (Bang, 1968), which found a

with national coverage since no clear con- three times greater decline in the total fertil-

trol areas are available; it may, however, ity rate in the intensive program area; in

be used in the early stages of program Singur, India (Rao and Mathen, 1970),

growth before the program is widespread. which obtained a steeper birth rate decline

Even then, finding equivalent areas for in the experimental area during the inten-

comparison is often a problem. The more sive phase of the program; in Khanna, India

variables used in matching, the greater the (Wyon and Gordon, 1971) where no differ-

number of factors accounted for, but the ence was found; and a Taichung birth-

more impractical the actual research be- spacing experiment with as yet indecisive

comes. Matching individuals usually de- results.

Vol. 25, No. 2

Family Planning Programs

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

E. MULTIPLE REGRESSION ACROSS AREAL cially when subgroupings are used; the

UNITS

necessity of formulating an astute causal

This method requires measurements on model; the uncertainty as to the mecha-

a number of variables for each of many nisms by which the program had its effect;

small administrative or statistical areas. and contamination of influence of the pro-

Conceptually, it works only with variables gram and nonprogram factors across areal

that are genuinely areal or societal. Multi- borders. Nevertheless, this method is one

ple regression and correlation techniques of the most powerful and valuable ones

are then applied within the structure of a available when the necessary data are at

posited causal model. The areas serve in a hand. Freedman-Berelson (1976) and

sense as small experiments across a range of Mauldin-Berelson (1977), applying it to

strength of both program and nonprogram cross-national data, have demonstrated

variables. With other factors held constant strong independent effects of both socio-

statistically, it is possible to see, for in- economic variables and program inputs

stance, how variations in program strength upon fertility, as has Srikantan (1977).

across the areas are related to fertility Hermalin (1968), applying it to small areas

trends and to determine whether or not the in Taiwan, has found independent pro-

family planning program had an indepen- gram effects and, interestingly larger net

dent fertility effect.

effects in rural areas where fewer alterna-

This method focuses on the level of social units rather than on individuals. Therefore, program activity can be related to effects on the whole population, and program impact through diffusion of nonservice effects to nonacceptors can be picked up. Fertility trends can be related to pro-

tives exist than in urban areas (see also Freedman et al., 1969). Cutright and Jaffe (1976) used it on U.S. county data and found very consistent independent relations between numbers of clients in federally financed programs and fertility decline.

gram efforts directly without tracing all the

intermediate linkages (e.g. acceptance, continuation, overlap of contraception use

F. NATIONAL EFFECTS OF BIRTHS AVERTED AMONG ACCEPTORS

with lactation, onset of sterility). The re- A group of techniques calculates births

searcher can take advantage of socioeco- averted among program acceptors and re-

nomic data gathered on an areal basis and lates them to the total population to arrive

can directly address questions about the at the national effect. Some do so with cor-

separate contribution of socioeconomic de- rections to yield the net program contribu-

velopment.

tion.

However, extensive data and data manipulation requirements make this method inapplicable in most countries. Among weaknesses of the approach are the difficulty of generalization from crosssectional data to time trends, questions of how best to measure program inputs, many statistical complexities inherent in the cor-

One approach compares the actual fertility of an accepting group or of a program area to a standard of what the fertility level would have been without the program. This standard is obtained through methods already described--extension of time trends, or use of the fertility of comparison, matched, or control groups (or areas).

relational character of the method; its A second approach is based on segments

strong parametric assumptions; the small of contraceptive use. The number of births

numbers of units (areas) upon which the averted varies directly with the extent to

numerous statistical controls rest, espe- which use of program contraception pro-

154

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

longs the fecund portion of the birth intervals of acceptors. The average use time of the contraceptive is reduced by such factors as overlap with lactation amenorrhea, unknown sterility at acceptance, subsequent sterility, and contraceptive failure. The remaining use time is done on an agespecific basic.
It is sometimes problematic how to distribute the averted births by periods of calendar time, and different techniques handle this problem differently. However, a core approach used in many variants is the following. Annual cohorts of acceptors are each moved forward under a decay curve that shows surviving users through time. Simple addition across these curves gives total number of all users at each date. This curve is then simply lowered by a proportion that represents the corrections mentioned above, for amenorrhea, etc. Any direct effect on fertility must then come from these users, displaced about nine months. It is straightforward to translate the time curve of users into fertility prevented by reference to an estimate of the expected fertility of acceptors had they not accepted. This estimate is taken from one of the following:
(a) their own recent (3-5 years) agespecific fertility history (Potter, 1969; Wolfers, 1969, 1970; Sivin, 1974);
(6) a "natural fertility" level (fertility level of fecund noncontraceptors in the society, as in the TABRAP (Nortman and Bongaarts, 1975) estimation method);
(c) a simple rule, such as one birth prevented for every three or four person years of use (country plans, discussed below);
(d) the marital age specific fertility rates prevailing in the general population (Laing, 1977; Astawa et al., 1975);
(e) a matched group not using program contraception/sterilization that suggests expected fertility among acceptors (Malaysia) (Johnson et al., 1973; and Johnson et al., 1976, unpublished);

(/") the recent fertility history of acceptors who had prior contraceptive use (Potter, 1969, 1973).
Depending upon the approach used, the expected fertility level may or may not be corrected to allow for the net program contribution. As the above listing indicates, the different procedures for choosing a potential fertility level may on one side recognize that acceptors typically show higher fertility performance in the recent past than do nonacceptors and may on the other side recognize that some proportion of acceptors would have done something anyway to avoid births, the proportion, however, depending partly upon how rich the environment is in alternative supply/sources.
In any case, the end result is a calculation of numbers of births prevented among acceptors, usually scheduled over calendar periods. Although certain applications of this method stop at this point, it is quite easy to take it to the final step, putting births prevented against the total population to obtain the program-induced change in the crude birth rate.
A logical extension of this method projects future births averted from past and future acceptor cohorts to predict the future course of the crude birth rate. A number of country plans do this, to develop targets for their national family planning programs. Fourteen of these plans have been compared (Ross, 1975). They agree closely in targeting a decline of about one point per year in the crude birth rate (e.g., from 35.0 to 34.0). They are, however, unconvincing that the program alone can produce this decline, a doubt buttressed by experience so far even in countries with strong programs. Six plans intend to reach this ambitious goal by recruiting 5-10 per cent of married women of reproductive age each year (MWRA); another five plan to recruit from 5 to 16 acceptors per thousand population per year (roughly 3-10 per cent of MWRA, or about the same level). This

Vol. 25, No. 2

Family Planning Programs

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

range agrees reasonably well with current program performance (Freedman and Berelson, 1976; Nortman and Hofstatter, 1976).
Of eight plans that speak to the question, six assume that acceptors have the same potential fertility as other married women, not higher. This assumption is surprising since, as noted above, most data on the question show acceptor fertility in the last three to five years to have been well above that of other married women of the same age, even with a control on date of the last birth. To assume that acceptors and nonacceptors are of equal fertility potential is conservative, in that fewer births are thereby considered to be prevented among acceptors. Another conservative feature is that most plans neglect the effects of later marriage and private birth control in the society.
Overall, however, it seems fair to say that the plans tend to overestimate direct program effects, through excessively high continuation assumptions for each method, and a failure to correct for superfluous use time by discounting for overlap with lactation, for onset of sterility, marriage breakup, contraceptive failure, etc., which together can easily cancel up to a third of calculated "use" time under life table projections.
Most plans are forced to major simplifications in their calculations. One simplification is to ignore the age of acceptors. Age data on acceptors are incorporated in only six of the plans, and only one (Turkey) follows cumulative acceptance rates. (The TABRAP/CONVERSE simulation program [Hortman and Bongaarts, 1975] also keeps track of the cumulative acceptance rate within any age cohort.) Most plans calculate the number of person years of contraceptive use produced by a given schedule of acceptance and continuation rates and then translate this figure to births prevented by a simple rule of one birth

prevented to either three or four person years of use. No distinction is made between one person using contraception for a full year vs. several people using it for intervals that sum to a year. However, multi-year use by individuals occurs more frequently where there are more sterilizations or higher continuation rates, or a smaller role of recent acceptors as the program ages.
No country recognizes the profound implications for the plan objectives of the gradual disappearance of lactation, or the heavy dependence of current birth intervals upon the lactation/post-partum amenorrhea component. Crude calculations (Waston, 1973, unpublished) suggest that national reductions in the proportion lactating and their mean duration of doing so would cancel large portions of the calculated effect of the national programs.
Because the focus of this entire method is on acceptor behavior, much of the data needed are often available through program activities and records and through client follow-up surveys. This method points up the national implications of levels of acceptance, choice of methods, and continuation rates. However, the choice of a standard of expected fertility is difficult and problematic, as are the numerous corrections and refinements called for to achieve precision. Only direct effects among acceptors are considered; indirect effects of the program are omitted.
G. SIMULATION
This approach is based on formulation of a mathematical model to represent demographic processes, usually for an entire population , with calculations set into a component projection. Relationships are specified between contraceptive practice and assumed levels of expected fertility among acceptors with allowances for sterility and numerous other factors. A number of models have been proposed but are not yet

156

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

prominently used in operating programs before they are instituted. Many assump-

(Bogue et al., 1973; Venkatacharya et al., tions are built into the models; and missing

1974).

input data, often required in great detail,

One, however, has been used for several must be estimated in some way. There are

Asian countries under ESCAP auspices, practical drawbacks in terms of demands

with especially detailed results for Thai- for computer time, money, and specialized

land (Nortman and Bongaarts, 1975). This staff.

TABRAP/CONVERSE model was devel-

oped for a dual purpose: (1) to yield esti-

mates of what birth control practice is required to achieve a given path of decline in the crude birth rate (TABRAP), and (2) to

COMPARISON OF METHODS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS

show what crude birth rate decline will The matrix in Table 1 compares the vari-

follow from a specific regimen of birth con- ous methods on a number of distinguishing

trol practice (CONVERSE). The two pro- characteristics--subjects investigated, use

grams embrace all calculations within a of controls for certain variables, provision

component population projection, estimat- of separate estimates for the effect of non-

ing the reductions which birth control program factors on fertility, types of data

makes in baseline natural marital fertility required, design complexity, advantages,

levels. No explicit feature is incorporated limitations, and illustrative examples of

to separate program from nonprogram where each method has been used.

birth control, but certain improvisations The matrix highlights the fact that the

permit useful approximations (Nortman et methods are differently suited to the vari-

al., 1977).

ous questions about program effect. In

The POPSIM model (Horvitz et al., many cases, choice of a method for estimat-

1969; Lachenbruch et al., 1973) also offers ing a program's fertility effect is, of course,

a number of attractive features and has largely determined by investigator or ad-

been used to approximate conditions for ministrator interests, and often the choice

India (Rao et al., 1973) and Korea (Tread- is severely limited by what data are avail-

way, 1975a,6, unpublished). However, be- able. For instance, multiple regression

sides making unrealistic demands for de- across areal units can be done only where

tailed data, POPSIM was not originally measures for a number of areas are avail-

designed to measure the effects of con- able. Likewise, matching can usually be

traceptive usage or of national programs. It done only when records exist for drawing

is a full stochastic model, dealing with in- comparison cases.

dividuals who are subjected to monthly Ideally, however, the choice of method is

probabilities of marriage, birth, death, and based on its appropriateness to the question

other events, with life histories generated being asked; and, while no single "best"

during the forward projection. In practice, method has emerged, it is clear that for a

it has proved both awkward and time- particular purpose one method may be

consuming for measuring program effect best. For example, while several methods

(Treadway, 1975c, unpublished).

can be used to provide estimates of pro-

Simulation models can be used for gram effect on the total population of an

exploratory purposes to show implications area, only three--matching individuals,

of program contraception and other dem- national effects of birth averted among ac-

ographic factors and can also test the po- ceptors, and simulation--focus specifically

tential impact of some program changes on changes in acceptors' fertility.

Vol. 25, No. 2

Family Planning Programs

157

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Similarly, for calculation of separate es- ance births without regard to duration of

timates for the role of nonprogram factors contraceptive use.

on fertility change, most methods are inap- One may then ask whether the program

plicable. Two are partially useful: decom- had an additive effect for acceptors above

position of crude birth rate change and and beyond what they have done had no

simulation approaches offer some estimate program been present. By translating this

of the influence of other demographic fac- question into a comparison of what hap-

tors. However, if one needs estimates of the pened among acceptors and among similar

fertility influence exercised by socioeco- women not accepting program contracep-

nomic factors, multiple regression across tion, the matching method becomes a rea-

areal units is the most appropriate ap- sonable approach, comparing acceptors to

proach.

nonacceptors with similar characteristics

A common first step is to ascertain to see whether through time their fertility whether an important change in marital differs. If the above method, or others,

fertility has occurred. If the data exist, re- produce an estimate of net program effect

searchers can look directly at marital fertil- on fertility among acceptors, a simple linkity trends. Failing that, decomposition of age to effects on fertility in the entire popu-

the change in the crude birth rate (or gen- lation can be made by adding averted

eral fertility rate) can show the contribution births to total actual births. If the latter is of lowered marital fertility in the context of unknown, averted births are simply di-

contributions from later marriage or age vided by the population size to show the distribution changes. If marital fertility crude birth rate reduction, without specify-

change is established, the investigator can ing its current level. These procedures ig-

look at the proportion of total contracep- nore indirect contributions that the protive use that depends upon program gram may have made to depress both ac-

sources. He may also examine the corre- ceptor and nonacceptor fertility.

spondence between program activity and When the interest of the analysis focuses

fertility change. While all this yields help- strictly upon the societal level, areal meth-

ful information, it is hard to rule out effects ods become appropriate, even necessary.

of other influences on fertility.

These methods can catch effects, if any,

One approach is to ask whether program that occurred apart from the level of ser-

contraception was in fact a vehicle by vices and can pick up such indirect effects

which a decline in acceptors' fertility oc- as changed fertility among nonacceptors

curred without asking what they would due to diffusion of all types and changed

have done without it. For this question, the fertility among acceptors due to general

analyses of segments of contraceptive use modernization.

employed by Potter (1969, 1972) for Three areal methods have been em-

Taiwan, Wolfers (1969, 1970) for Singa- ployed. Use of experimental and control

pore, and Sivin (1974) for the International areas is especially suited to pilot programs

Postpartum Program are well suited. They and early stages of a program. Of all ap-

move from acceptance through continua- proaches, it is the one that provides for

tion to termination or pregnancy and birth direct and detailed examination of what

events, estimating the births averted due to occurred in a control area, generally via

utilization of program contraception. surveys and service statistics. Matching

Laing's method (Laing, 1977; Astawa et areas on pertinent variables may be su-

al., 1975) is similar except that he moves perior where enough areas and the

directly from acceptance to post-accept- needed data are available, but it omits any

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
COMPARISON OF CHARACTERISTICS OF METHODS FOR STUDYING THE EFFECT OF FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMS ON BIRTH RATES

A

VARIABLES
Subjects Acceptors

Decomposition of CBR Change

Total population . . .

X

Subgroup of population
Use of controls

Possible where data are avail-
No

Separate estimates

for role of other

factors

*

Yes--age distribution, nup-
tiality, program vs. private con-

Data requirements . . .

Age dist. of
women of child-bearing age; % married by age; MASFR; contraceptive use levels by program/private supply source.

Complexity of design .. .

Simple

B Correspondence Between Program Activity & Fer-
tility Change
X
X
No
No
Fertility & program data for time periods, geographical areas, or population subgroups.
Simple

c
Matching Studies
X
(Matching individuals)
X
(Matching areas)
Post hoc matching is an attempt to approximate controls on matching variables.
No

METHODS
D Experimental and Control
Areas
X X Yes
No

Measures for
matching variables; fertility measures.

Measures to es-
tablish initial similarity; fertility and program measures.

Intermediate Simple

E
Multiple Regression
Across Areal Units

F National Effects of Births Averted among Acceptors

x
XX

XX

Only statistical controls.

No

Yes, both demographic and socioeconomic factors.
Extensive: program strength; fertility measures; other demog. and socioeconomic measures by area.
Complex

No
Need fertility and/or pregnancy measures for both acceptor & comparison experience; contraceptive method accepted; reproductive process measures. Complex

G Simulation
x
X No
Yes, demographic factors. Extensive
Complex

01 CO
**i 0
I
a
9
a. 93 e
0
o
03
15"

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Advantages Limitations Illustrative applications

. . . . Simple calcula- Few statistical tions. Good first assumptions. step. Isolates effect of marital fertility change.

Uses independent comparison group. Controls many confounding variables.

Independent comparison group. Areal basis. Controls many confounding variables.

Can provide measure of program effect independent of socioeconomic factors. Covers both direct & indirect effects.

Availability of "subjects through program. Links acceptance and continuation to fertility. Program effect on whole country is estimated.

Useful exploratory tool. Full population component framework.

, , No direct link between program activity and fertility change. Data by age groups often unavailable. Program/private
division of contraceptive use
may not reflect true relative contributions. Ceylon, Hong . . . . Kong, Korea,
Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, Tunisia--Ross
etal., 1972. Korea--Cho,
1973; Cho& Hahm, 1968.
Hong Kong-- Freedman & Adlakha,
1968; Freedman, 1969, 1973; Freed-
man etal., 1970; Wat & Hodge, 1972; Chan, 1976. Malaysia-- Chander, 1970.

Hard to rule out competing explanations.
Taiwan-- Freedman, 1965; Freedman & Muller, 1967; Freedman etal., 1972.
Hong Kong-- Freedman & Adlakha, 1968; Freedman, 1969, 1973; Freedman etal., 1970; Wat & Hodge, 1972; Chan, 1976.
Mauritius-- Brass, 1976.
Georgia-- Darney, 1975a,6.
Turkey--Fisek, 1974.
See Ross etal., 1972.

Unavailability of
data for matching. Contamination dangers. Hard to control for motivation/ leadership. Lack of nonprogram match areas in national pro-
grams.

Contamination
dangers. Small numbers of areas. Equivalence of areas hard to achieve. Political &practical problems in
execution.

Area Koyang--Bang,

Georgia--

1966, 1968.

Rochat et Singur--Rao &

al., 1972.

Mathen, 1970.

Individual

Malaysia--

Johnson et

al., 1973,

1976;

Anonymous,

1976.

Taiwan--

Chow etal.,

1969.

Washington, D.Q

Okada, 1969.

Poor data avail-
ability. Complexity of data manipulation & interpretation. Unclear temporal implications of crosssectional data. Small numbers
of units.

Often omits indi-
rect program effects. Uncertainty in estimation of "expected" acceptor fertility.

Developing

Taiwan--

countries--

Potter, 1969,

Freedman &

1972.

Berelson,

Singapore--

1976; Mauldin Wolfers, 1969;

& Berelson,

1970. Gorosh

1977. Srikan- & Wolfers,

tan, 1977.

1977.

Taiwan--

India--

Hermalin,

Simmons,

1968. Schultz, 1971.

1971. Bali, USA--Cutright Philippines--

&Jaffe, 1976. Astawa

etal., 1975;

Laing, 1977.

Inter. Postpar-

tum Pro-

gram--Sivin,

1974.

Extensive data needs & data manipulation requirements. Numerous assumptions for unavailable data.
Thailand-- Nortman & Bongaarts, 197S; also Nortman et al., 1977.

 "
2?
p
to
S1 ^<
m
11.
1o3 %<a
*
t--i
VI

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

160

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

random assignment of program stimuli to different areas. It cannot be applied to a fully national program for lack of territories from which to choose control areas. Where feasible, multiple regression across areal units can be much more fruitful. It can be used in a national program where all areas receive some input, and it has the distinct advantage of supplying measures of the effects of nonprogram factors.
CONCLUSION
At the outset we called attention to the variety of questions, methods, data sets, and modes of program action in this field. There is nevertheless a common focus. From approaches as different as examining the effect of one IUD upon one acceptor to calculating areal regressions for an entire country, researchers examine whether program action did anything to alter the number of children born. Any effects at the societal level can occur only through changes in individual behavior; and so, in that sense at least, all approaches must come together.
Nevertheless, there remains the difficulty that much of the literature in this field cannot be directly compared. To lessen the particularistic nature of much of the research, the United Nations Population Division has encouraged a series of projects that apply different methods to a single program setting (United Nations, 1977). These projects have been completed for Karnataka State, India (Srinivasan, 1977), Tunisia(Jemai and Jemai, 1977), and Chile (Taucher and Bocaz, 1977). There are limits to this process in the sense that certain methods address data and measures of such

different character as to preclude comparisons; still, this is a most useful approach. A further test of method differences, in the simulation area, was made by Clague and Ridley (1973), who applied alternative methods to the same set of simulated data and contrasted these results with results from their own micro-simulation model REPSIM-B. This isolated example suggests at once both the need for and value of more method comparisons.
It is also to be hoped that this process may be reversed--that the same method may be applied to many different programs, so as to clarify program differences, just as the above procedure clarifies method differences. One cannot anticipate that a method so demanding of exceptional data as small-area regression work could ever be done in many countries. However, other approaches, based upon individual survey data and program statistics, might be used. Recently, three important projects directed toward this objective have appeared: first, a new methodology by Potter (1977) combining features from his and Wolfers' methods and relaxing rigor to permit easier field application; second, a manual by Gorosh and Wolfers (1977) offering a method based on a "standard couple year of protection" with data requirements that can either be easily met or can be replaced by fairly robust assumptions; third, the TABRAP/CONVERSE simulation program (Nortman et al., 1977) mentioned above which is being applied to several Asian programs. Together with the Bogue manual (Bogue et al., 1973) previously available, these three projects should encourage the appearance of more extensive cross-program calculations.

REFERENCES

ANONYMOUS. 1976. Family planning enrolees had 30 per cent fewer births. Fam. Plan. Persp. 8(6):281282.
ASTAWA, I. B., S. WALOEYO, and J. E. LAING. 1975.
Family planning in Bali. Stud. Fam. Plan. 6(4):86-101.

BANG, S. 1966. The Koyang Study: Results of two action programs. Stud. Fam. Plan. 1(11):5-12. . 1968. A comparative study of the effectiveness of a family planning program in rural Korea. Ph.D dissertation. Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
BOGUE, D. J., S. EDMONDS, and E. J. BOGUE. 1973.

Vol. 2 5 , No.2

Family Planning Programs

161

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

An empirical model for demographic evaluation of changing agestructure. Pop.Stud. 22(2):181-198.

the impact of contraception and marital status on FREEDMAN, R., and B. BERELSON. 1976. The rec-

birth rates: With computerized applications to the ord of family planning programs. Stud. Fam.

setting of targets and quotas for family planning Plan. 7(1):1-40.

programs. Family Planning Research and Evalua- FREEDMAN, R., L. P. CHOW, A. HERMALIN, and J.

tion Manual No.6, Community and Family Study Y. TAKESHITA. 1969. The family planning pro-

Center, University of Chicago, Chicago.

gram for all of Taiwan, p. 313-350. In R. Freed-

BRASS, W. 1976. Impact of the family planningpro- man andJ. Y. Takeshita, Family planning in

gramme on fertility in Mauritius. IPPF Med. Bull. Taiwan: An experiment in social change. Prince-

10(4):1.

ton Univ. Press, Princeton,N.J.

CHAN, K. C. 1976. The role of the family planning FREEDMAN, R., A. HERMALIN, and T. H. SUN.

association in Hong Kong's fertility decline. Stud. 1972. Fertility trends inTaiwan: 1961-1970.Pop.

Fam. Plan. 7(10):284-289.

Index 38:141-166.

CHANDER, R. 1970. Family planning and fertility FREEDMAN, R., and J. MULLER. 1967. The continu-

trends inWest Malaysia, p. 230-255. In Proceed- ing fertility decline in Taiwan: 1965. Pop. Index

ings ofthe Combined Conference on Evaluation of 33:3-17.

Malaysia National Family Planning Programme FREEDMAN, R., D. N. NAMBOOTHIRI, A. L.AD-

and East Asia Population Programmes, Kuala LAKHA, and K. C. CHAN. 1970. Hong Kong's fer-

Lumpur, March, 1970.National Family Planning tility decline, 1961-1968. Pop. Index 36(1):3-17.

Board, Kuala Lumpur.

GOROSH, M., and D. WOLFERS. 1977. Standard

CHANDRASEKARAN, C., and A. I. HERMALIN (eds.). couple-years of protection: Amethodology for pro-

1975. Measuring the effect offamily planningpro- gram assessment. Paper prepared for presentation

grams on fertility. Ordina Editions, Dolhain, Bel- to the International Union forthe Scientific Study

gium.

of Population, General Conference on Technical

CLAGUE, A. S., and J. C. RIDLEY. 1973. The assess- Advances in tieAssessment of the Effect of Fam-

ment ofthree methods of estimating births averted, ily Planning Programs, Mexico City, August,

p. 329-382. In B.Dyke and J. W.MacCluer (eds.), 1977. (Manual under the same title forthcoming).

Computer simulation in human population studies: HERMALIN, A. I. 1968. Taiwan: An area analysisof

Proceedings of aconference sponsored bythe Social the effect of acceptances onfertility. Stud. Fam.

Science Research Council and held atthe Pennsyl- Plan. 1(33):7-11.

vania State University, June, 1972.Academic HORVITZ, D. G., F. G. GIESBRECHT, B. V. SHAH,

Press, New York.

and P. A. LACHENBRUCH. 1969. POPSIM--A

CHO, L. J. 1973. Current fertility estimates and demographic microsimulation model, p. 95-106.

trends. Korean Institute for Family Planning, In Proceedings of the International Union for the

Seoul, Korea. Reprinted in 1974. In Populationand Scientific Study of Population, General Confer-

family planning inthe Republic of Korea, Vol. II, ence, London, September, 1969.International

p. 401-410. Korean Institute for Family Planning, Union for the Scientific Study of Population,

Seoul, Korea.

Liege, Belgium.

CHO, L. J.,andM. J. HAHM. 1968. Recent change in JEMAI, Y., and H. JEMAI. 1977. Application of

fertility rates of the Korean population. Demog- methods of measuring the impact of family plan-

raphy 5(2):690-698.

ning programmes on fertility: The case ofTunisia,

CHOW, L. P., M. C. CHANG, and T. H. Liu. 1969. p. 140-244. In United Nations, Department of

Taiwan: Demographic impact of an IUD program. Economic andSocial Affairs, Population Division,

Stud. Fam. Plan. 1(45): 1-6.

Methods of measuring the impact of family plan-

CUTRIGHT, P., and F. S. JAFFE. 1976. Family plan- ning programmes onfertility. United Nations, in

ning program effects on the fertility oflow income collaboration with the International Union for the

U.S. women. Fam. Plan. Persp. 8(3):100-110.

Scientific Study of Population, Committee on

. 1977. Impact offamily planning programs on Demographic Aspects of Family Planning Pro-

fertility: TheU.S. experience. Praeger, New York. grammes, New York.

DARNEY, P. D. 1975a. Astatewide family planning JOHNSON, J. T., T. B. ANN, and L. CORSA. 1973.

program's effect on fertility, p. 85-89.In J. R. Udry Assessment offamily planning programme effects

and E. E.Huyck (eds.), Thedemographic evalua- on births: Preliminary results obtained through di-

tion of domestic family planning programs. Bal- rect matching of birth andprogramme acceptor

linger Publ. Co., Cambridge, Mass.

records. Pop. Stud. 27(l):85-96.

. 19756. Fertility decline and participation in JOHNSON, J. T., L. CORSA, T. B. ANN, R. CHAN-

Georgia's family planning program: Temporal and DER, D. FERNANDEZ, and W. H. BOND. 1976.

areal association. Stud. Fam. Plan. 6(6):156-165. Impact of the Malaysia family planning program

FAIRBANKS, I.J. 1970. Family planning in the Pacific on births: A comparison of matched acceptor and

Islands: The Fijian example. J. Pacific Hist. non-acceptor birth rates. Ms.

5:145-150.

LACHENBRUCH, P. A., M. C. SHEPS, and A. M.

FISEK, N. H. 1974. Anintegrated heath/family plan- SORANT. 1973. Applications of POPREP, a mod-

ning program inEtimesgut District, Turkey. Stud. ification of POPSIM, p. 305-328. In B.Dykeand

Fam. Plan. 5:210-220.

J. W. MacCluer (eds.), Computer simulation in

FREEDMAN, R. 1965. The accelerating fertility de- human population studies: Proceedings of acon-

cline inTaiwan. Pop. Index 31(4):430-435.

ference sponsored bythe Social Science Research

. 1973. A comment on "Social and Economic Council and held at thePennsylvania State UniFactors in Hong Kong's Fertility Decline" by versity, June, 1972. Academic Press, New York.

Sui-Ying Wat and R. W. Hodge. Pop. Stud. LAING, J. E. 1977. Final report on the National

27:589-595.

Acceptor Survey. University of the Philippines

FREEDMAN, R., and A. L. ADLAKHA. 1968. Recent System, Population Institute, Manila.

fertility declines in Hong Kong: The role of the MAULDIN, W. P., and B. BERELSON. 1977. Cross-

cultural review ofthe effectiveness of family plan-

162

Forrest and Ross

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

ning programs. In Proceedings of the International gram. Paper presented to the International Sym-

Population Conference, Mexico, 1977. Interna- posium on Statistical Problems in Population Re-

tional Union for the Scientific Study of Population, search, East-West Center, Honolulu, August,

Liege, Belgium.

1971.

NORTMAN, D., and J. BONGAARTS. 1975. Con-
traceptive practice required to meet a prescribed crude birth rate target: A proposed macro-model

. 1973. Explanation ofbirth rate changes over space and time: A study of Taiwan. J. Polit. Econ. 81(2):238-274.

(TABRAP) and hypothetical illustrations. Demog- SIMMONS, G. B. 1971. TheIndian investment in

raphy 12(3):471-489.

family planning. The Population Council, New

NORTMAN, D., and E. HOFSTATTER. 1976. Popula-

York.

tion andfamily planning programs: A factbook, Sivin, I. 1974. Contraception and fertility change in

Reps. Pop./Fam. Plan. 2.1-102.

the International Population Program. The Popu-

NORTMAN, D., R. G. POTTER, J. BONGAARTS, and

lation Council, New York.

S. KIRMEYER. 1977. Model relations between SRIKANTAN, K. S. 1977. The family planning pro-

birth rates and birth control practice. The Popula- gram in the socio-economic context. The Popula-

tion Council, New York.

tion Council Books and Monographs Program,

OKADA, L. 1969. Use of matched pairs inevaluation New York.

of a birth control program. Publ. Hlth. Reps. SRINIVASAN, K. 1977. Application of methods of

84(5):445-450.

measuring the impact of family planning pro-

POTTER, G.G. 1969. Estimating births averted in a grammes on fertility: The case ofKarnataka State,

family planning program, p. 414-434. In S. J. India, p. 86-139. In United Nations, Department

Behrman et al. (eds.), Fertility and family plan- of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Divi-

ning: A world view. Univ. ofMichigan Press, Ann sion, Methods of measuring the impact of family

Arbor.

planning programmes on fertility. United Nations,

. 1972. Contraceptive impact over several in collaboration with the International Union for

generations. In T. N.E. Greville, Population dy- the Scientific Study of Population, Committeeon

namics. Academic Press, New York.

Demographic Aspects of Family Planning Pro-

. 1977. Reproductive process analysis. Paper grammes, New York.

prepared at the request of the United Nations TAUCHER, E., and A. BOCAZ. 1977. Application of

Population Division and presented tothe Seminar methods of measuring the impact of family plan-

on Patterns of Response to Family Planning Pro- ning programmes on fertility: The case of Chile, p.

grammes, Palais de Congrs, Liege, April, 1977, 245-310. In United Nations, Department of Eco-

sponsored bythe International Union forthe Sci- nomic and Social Affairs, Population Division,

entific Study of Population, Liege, Belgium.

Methods of measuring the impact of family plan-

RAO, M. N., and K. K.MATHEN. 1970. Rural field ning programmes onfertility. United Nations, in

study of population control, Singur (1957-1969). collaboration with the International Union for the

All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Scientific Study of Population, Committee on

Calcutta.

Demographic Aspects of Family Planning Pro-

RAO, A. V., Q. W. LINPSEY, R. C. BHAVSAR, B. V.

grammes, New York.

SHAH, D. G. HORVITZ, and J. R. BATTS. 1973. THEIN, T. M. 1970. Some variables of fertility de-

The evaluation offour alternative family planning cline in Trinidad and Tobago. International Insti-

programs for Popland, aless developed country, p. tute for the Study of Human Reproduction, Co-

261-304. In B.Dyke and J. W.MacCluer (eds.), lumbia University, New York.

Computer simulation in human population stud- TREADWAY, R. C. 1975a. Evaluation of alternative

ies: Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the family planning programs in Korea by computer

Social Science Research Council andheld at the simulation. Ms.

Pennsylvania State University, June, 1972. Aca-

. 1975b. Evaluation of alternative family

demic Press, New York.

planning programs by a computer simulationex-

REYNOLDS, J. 1972. Evaluation of family planning periment: Family planning simulation experiment.

program performance: Acritical review. Demog- Ms.

raphy 9(1):69-86.

. 1975c. Sources, procedures, and problems in

ROCHAT, R. W., C. W. TYLER, JR., and A. K. preparing basic demographic and family planning

SCHOENBUCHER. 1972. The effect offamily plan- data for the POPSIM family planning simulation

ning in Georgia on fertility in selected rural coun- experiment: A supplement to "Evaluation ofalter-

ties, p. 6-14. In A. J. Sobrero and R. M. Harvey native family planning programs by a computer

(eds.), Advances in planned parenthood: Proceed- simulation experiment" and "Experience in using

ings of the Eighth Annual Meeting of the Amer- POPSIM in a simulation experiment." Ms.

ican Association of Planned Parenthood Physi- UNITED NATIONS, DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC

cians, Boston, April, 1970, VI. Excerpta Medica, AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS, POPULATION DIVISION.

New York.

1977. Methods of measuring the impact of family

Ross, J. A. 1975. Acceptor targets, p. 55-91. InC. planning programmes on fertility: Problemsand

Chandrasekaran and A. I. Hermalin (eds.), issues, p. 4-85. In Methods of measuring the im-

Measuring the effect offamily planning programs pact the family planning programmes on fertility.

on fertility. Ordina Editions, Dolhain, Belgium. United Nations, incollaboration with the Interna-

Ross, J. A., A. GERMAIN, J. E. FORREST, and J. tional Union for the Scientific Study of Population,

VAN GINNEKEN. 1972. Findings from family Committee on Demographic Aspects of Family

planning research. Reps. Pop. Fam. Plan. 12:1- Planning Programmes, New York.

47. VENKATACHARYA, K., T. K. ROY, A. SEBASTIAN,

SHULTZ, T. P. 1971. A framework foranalysis and and U. P. SINHA. 1974. A method of projecting

its application to Taiwan family planningpro- population at micro level with special reference to

Vol. 25, No. 2

Family Planning Programs

163

India. Sankhya: Indian J. Statist. 36(Ser. B.,Pt. 1):70-92.
WAT, SUI-YING, and R. W. HODGE. 1972. Social
and economic factors in Hong Kong's fertility decline. Pop. Stud. 26(3):455-464. WATSON, W. B. 1973. Example ofdemographic significance of declining lactation. Ms. WOLFERS, D. 1969. The demographic effects of a

contraception program. Pop. Stud. 23(1):111-140. . 1970. Thedemographic effect of thepro-
gramme, p. 158-188. In D. Wolfers (ed.), Postpartum intra-uterine contraception in Singapore. Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam.
WYON, J. B., and J. E. GORDON. 1971. The Khanna
Study: Population problems in therural Punjab, India. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

