Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Invited discussion: Genetics in epidemiology
Helen Abbey , Richard H. Ward & Leon Gordis
To cite this article: Helen Abbey , Richard H. Ward & Leon Gordis (1979) Invited discussion: Genetics in epidemiology, Social Biology, 26:2, 154-160, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988373 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988373
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

InvitedDiscussion:Genetics in Epidemiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Helen Abbey

Departmentof Epidemiology School of Hygieneand Public Health TheJohns HopkinsUniversity Baltimore, Maryland

Is epidemiology a tool which the merits of the generalized single-locus

geneticist studying human populations model for segregation analysis versus

can use to sort out more precisely the na- mixed models which include cultural in-

ture of genetic effects? Or, is genetics a heritance, polygenes, and major loci. Al-

tool which the epidemiologist can use to though these models are indeed useful

sort out the importance of environmental tools, in reality the geneticist is plagued by

risk factors influencing the manifestation small numbers and small sizes of families,

of a disease or other deleterious effect? as well as by the typical problems of epide-

Judging from the papers which have been miological studies, including bias of ascer-

presented, the answer to both of these tainment, lack of uniformity of definitions

questions is "yes".

and of collection procedures, missing val-

Epidemiology is a necessary tool for ues, misclassification, and others. A ques-

sorting out the relation of risk factors to tion which has not been addressed by the

disease or other deleterious effects when proponents of elegant mathematics to

experiments of the kind performed in lab- differentiate among the proposed genetic-

oratory genetics cannot be done. Clearly, environmental mechanisms is: To what

in human genetics the environment in extent is the potential discriminatory

which the genetic effect is operating can- power lost or the conclusions rendered

not be held constant nor can the appropri- misleading because of these and other

ate mating classes be ordered. And, in deficiencies in the data themselves?

fact, the mating categories often cannot The study of the epidemiology and

even be identified. As the epidemiologist genetics of schizophrenia in this series of

defines disease entities more specifically papers is an example in which enormous by subdividing them according to clusters amounts of epidemiological input is reof risk factors, so also he subdivides dis- quired before testing elaborate genetic-

ease entities into groups within which the environmental models will provide mean-

genetic mechanisms can be more precisely ingful insights as to the factors which are

defined.

operating. The problems of defining the

The tools described in the previous pa- disease in a uniform manner and of the aspers have been of two types: those relating certainment of cases are clearly apparent. to the analysis of the data, i.e., mathe- The authors noted that, for example, estimatical or statistical tools, and those relat- mates of prevalence were affected by the ing to the collection of accurate data. An data collection process, and even more by example of the first is the discussion of the the concept of the investigator of what

154

Vol. 26, No. 2

Invited Discussion

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

constituted a case. It would seem premature to look for specific modes of genetic action until the observations can be made more precisely than is presently possible.
What has the epidemiologist to learn from genetics? From the papers which have been presented, two areas emerge. First is that mathematical or descriptive models are useful. They force one to sort out what factors are thought to be operating and to specify the presumed mode of operation. Furthermore, they point out the types of data which would be needed to test the relation between the models and reality, and perhaps even more important, the developers and users of such models cannot avoid facing the fact that the truth is more complex than the mathematics. For example, the idea that many genetic conditions operate like a constitutional democracy is a pleasing one, but leads to the reflection that constitutional democracies may in fact operate quite differently than the rules for their operation would suggest.
The second area in which genetics can be useful to the epidemiologist has been emphasized in two of the previous papers. In both of these, genetics was used as a tool. In the first of these, genetic markers

were being monitored to measure changes in the environment. As more markers are identified by the geneticists, this tool should become more and more important for studying the effect of environmental factors on disease. In the second paper, twins, a genetic condition, were being used, not to study genetic contributions to disease, but rather to study environmental contributions.1 This is a new twist but an exciting one and suggests that other genetic effects may also be used in this way.
In summary, the papers presented here have shown that the sciences of epidemiology and human genetics are useful tools--each for the other discipline. A geneticist who plans to do human population studies should have a skilled epidemiologist as a part of his team or he should acquire these skills for himself. At the other end of the spectrum, the epidemiologist should look at genetics as a tool by which he can identify and quantify environmental factors for which his present measurement techniques are inadequate.
1"The Swedish Study of Smoking-Discordant Twins," by Rune Cederlof, Department of Environmental Hygiene, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, was presented at the symposium but was not available for publication here.

Invited Discussion: Genetics in Epidemiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Richard H. Ward

Departmentof Epidemiology School ofMedicine University ofWashington Seattle, Washington

While "genetic epidemiology" has be- statement of the problem, the correct epi-

come an increasingly popular term since demiological questions cannot be

late 1974, the integration of epidemiolog- identified, and the results of applying

ical principles into genetic models actually genetic statistics will lack biological in-

dates back to Weinberg's classic paper of ference. If "genetic epidemiology" is to

1912 which laid the foundation of human mean more than merely the application of

statistical genetics. In turn, the subse- genetic statistics to data collected by epi-

quent work of early pioneers, like Apert demiologists, there should be a greater fo-

and Bernstein, which dealt with the prob- cus on study design. It would also help to

lem of ascertainment, also embodied epi- define the position of "genetic epide-

demiological principles. Likewise, the la- miology" in the health sciences.

ter developments initiated by Bailey, The importance of developing a better

Smith, and Morton, among others, can be perspective of how genetic epidemiology

viewed as the incorporation of modern can contribute to the health sciences is in-

statistical principles in deriving analytic dicated by the fact that although the num-

tools to handle epidemiological concerns ber of genetically defined disease states

in a genetic setting. It is thus not surprising has increased exponentially since

that the current interest in "genetic epide- McKusick's first catalog, the genetic bur-

miology" is largely concerned with the den of ill health remains undefined and

derivation of statistical techniques to han- unquantified. This situation arises be-

dle complex data sets.

cause: (1) For the most part, we have little

Unhappily, there has been far less at- knowledge about the distribution of

tention paid to the adequacy of study de- defined Mendelian/Chromosomal dis-

sign with respect to uncovering the under- eases in specific populations, in terms of

lying biological factors involved in age-specific incidence rates broken down

etiology. This is unfortunate, since any by sex, geographic area, ethnic origin, etc.

successful epidemiological investigation (2) For the great number of common dis-

requires that the disease being studied eases, where single gene lesions only

must be placed in its biological context. make a minor contribution to overall mor-

The biological context delimits the hy- bidity, the proportionate attributable risk

potheses and determines the overall study of genetic factors cannot be specified in

design as well as identifying the variables terms of etiological involvement. The de-

to be measured and the subsequent statis- velopment of genetic epidemiology holds

tical manipulations. Without a biological considerable promise for answering both

156

Vol. 26, No. 2

Invited Discussion

157

these questions, but only if the field is cor- how the burden is distributed and partly rectly perceived in its health science con- because of the requirements inherent in text. the etiological nature of the disease. In
To this end, it would be helpful to con- any event, epidemiological principles sider the concept that diseases are distrib- should be incorporated into the study deuted along an etiological spectrum ranging sign with a quasi-experimental design chofrom the purely genetic to the purely en- sen whenever the aim is to identify causal vironmental. Six etiological classifications factors. Sample units should have epideof disease can thus be recognized-- miological justification and phenotypic inMendelian, Chromosomal, Multi- formation should be maximized. Lastly, factorial-high heritability, Multifactorial- hypothesis testing should proceed in a -low heritability, Infectious Agents, hierarchical fashion since no single analEnvironmental Hazards. Within each of ysis can provide a definitive answer. To these categories the distribution of the the extent that geneticists and epidemiologenetic burden by age, sex, etc., will be gists collaborate in setting up and testing unique, and the pattern will also differ for the hierarchical succession of hypotheses, various populations. In addition, the strat- the burgeoning field of genetic epideegy for research will differ by category, miology should yield the promise that has partly as a function of the perception of been prophesized by its advocates.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

InvitedDiscussion: Genetics in Epidemiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Leon Gordis

Department of Epidemiology School of Hygieneand Public Health TheJohns Hopkins University Baltimore, Maryland

This symposium is testimony to the vironmental agent or class of agents be-

common interests shared by genetics and cause of (1) a specific genotype, (2) pre-

epidemiology. Indeed, many questions existing disease, or (3) simultaneous or

cannot be explored without the use of prior exposure to other environmental

methodologies from both disciplines. For agents. Such screening has particular rele-

this reason, there is a great need for in- vance to the occupational setting since an

creased collaboration between geneticists across-the-board reduction in permissible

and epidemiologists in both research and standards for given environmental agents

training.

associated with the work place may ulti-

Before discussing the question of how mately prove to be highly destructive to such needs might be met, I should also like social and economic functioning of comto mention that such collaboration is es- munities. It may be more reasonable to sential if the two disciplines are to contrib- identify subsets of the worker population ute to the critical questions involved in en- who are at risk so that appropriate convironmental control--particularly in the structive action can be taken for them.

occupational setting. In this regard, I Just as we have genetic counseling, en-

should like to draw a distinction between vironmental counseling could be devel-

genetic screening as it is now widely ac- oped. The subject would be given infor-

cepted and what I should like to term "en- mation regarding his risk of disease and

vironmental screening."

his susceptibility to the effects of particu-

Genetic screening may be defined as a lar pollutants or occupational chemicals

search in the population for persons on the basis of his genetic predisposition,

possessing certain genotypes that (1) are history of past disease, and exposure to

already associated with disease or predis- other environmental agents; alternative

pose to disease and (2) may lead to disease options would then be suggested. A num-

in their descendants. The persons in the ber of major issues, however, emerge re-

first category are identfied so that medical garding environmental counseling. (1)

management may be provided, while Would counseling be mandatory or op-

those in the second group are ascertained tional? (2) What would be the content of

so that reproductive options may be dis- such counseling? (3) Who would do such

cussed.

counseling? (4) Who would sponsor (and

Environmental screening, on the other pay for) such counseling? (5) Who would hand, I would define as a search in the have access to the data regarding environpopulation for persons who are at risk for mental screening and counseling? (6) disease upon exposure to a certain en- Would industrial employers be able to re-

158

Vol. 26, No. 2

Invited Discussion

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

quire screening tests in selecting persons result from some common microenviron-

to work with certain materials?

mental factors. The epidemiologic search

Other issues would also have to be ad- for time trends in the incidence of a dis-

dressed: Would such screening also be ap- ease is extremely helpful in discriminating

plied to residents in areas adjacent to between environmental and genetic fac-

manufacturing plants and to the families tors. If a significant change in incidence is

of workers who may bring the agents found over a period of several decades, for

home with them from the work setting? If example, it is unlikely that such a change

an employee insists that he is willing to reflects any changes in the genetic compo-

take a risk and continue working in a high sition of the population but rather sug-

exposure situation despite the counseling, gests that this change reflects changes in

would he be permitted to do so? Should environmental exposures. Migrant studies

the data generated by such screening and have also provided an invaluable tool for

counseling be available to the health examining international and regional

officer of the industry; and, in general, differences in disease incidence and have

should the company have access to this in- often found that migrants tend to adopt

dividual information? An additional po- the disease risk characteristic of their

tential problem associated with such en- country of adoption, a finding strongly

vironmental screening and environmental suggesting a major role for environmental

counseling is that industries may feel that factors but by no means excluding the im-

such programs relieve them of their re- portance of genetic determinants as well.

sponsibility for cleaning up the industrial There is an urgent need to bridge the

environment.

gap that has all too often existed between

Naturally, in order to conduct such en- genetic and epidemiologic research.

vironmental screening and counseling, Bridging this gap will require increased

sufficient knowledge will have to be avail- collaborative activities both in research as

able regarding potential hazards of specific well as in programs designed to train a new

agents aswell as the risk factors which may generation of genetically oriented epide-

characterize persons who are particularly miologists and epidemiologically oriented

susceptible to such agents. Such informa- geneticists. There is a great need for bio-

tion can be obtained using a variety of re- logically oriented geneticists interested in

search approaches which help identify the epidemiology. There must be recognition

role of genetic and environmental factors that the traditional model of biomedical

in causing disease. In addition to retro- research which often focuses exclusively

spective and prospective studies carried on the bench laboratory may not be the

out by epidemiologists, several other ap- only one which can be productive in eluci-

proaches are particularly appropriate for dating the etiology of disease. At the same

discriminating between genetic and en- time, however, we require biologically

vironmental components in the etiology of and medically oriented epidemiologists to

disease.

carry out collaborative studies with

These include a search for association geneticists.

of a specific condition with known genetic There is an urgent need to introduce

diseases and the search for genetic genetics into the training of epidemiolo-

markers. In addition, it is often helpful to gists. This should be accomplished in

identify a familial aggregation of a given several ways: first, by emphasizing genetic

disease. But such an aggregation need not concepts in the epidemiology courses cur-

necessarily reflect genetic factors; it could rently given; second, by adding genetics

160

Gordis

Social Biology

courses to the curriculum provided by epi- both teaching and research. Furthermore,

demiology departments; third, by adding there must be recognition by geneticists

geneticists to epidemiology department that disease mechanisms can be identified

faculty as an integral part of the depart- not only by studies of a limited number of

mental program; fourth, by increasing the individuals but rather by the population-

utilization by epidemiology departments based methods which are already highly fa-

of genetic resources available elsewhere in miliar to epidemiologists, but upon which

the university outside the department it- genetic approaches can be superimposed.

self; and fifth, by involving geneticists as In order to facilitate the introduction of

preceptors and readers for doctoral theses genetics into epidemiology training as well

in epidemiology.

as of epidemiology into genetics training,

At the same time, there is a need for in- federal support is needed for truly inte-

troducing epidemiology into genetics pro- grated training programs in genetics arid

grams. Geneticists must learn epidemio- epidemiology and for the development of

logic methods. There must be an prototype programs which can serve as

increased appreciation by geneticists of models for the country. It would seem de-

the applicability of such methods to issues sirable for federal agencies to provide in-

of etiology both in terms of identifying the ducements to institutions which already

agents involved as well as the mechanisms have distinct epidemiology and genetic

which produce disease. There must be in- programs in order to stimulate them to de-

creased willingness on the part of geneti- velop collaborative endeavors on a

cists to collaborate with epidemiologists in broader scale.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

