Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
An interdisciplinary research project on fertility, fertility regulation, and partner relations
R.L. Cliquet , M. Thiery & R. Lesthaeghe
To cite this article: R.L. Cliquet , M. Thiery & R. Lesthaeghe (1972) An interdisciplinary research project on fertility, fertility regulation, and partner relations, Social Biology, 19:1, 71-73, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987972 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987972
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

Vol. 19, No. 1

Communications

An Interdisciplinary Research Project on Fertility, Fertility Regulation, and Partner Relations

71

R. L. Cliquet, M. Thiery, and R. Lesthaeghe
Center for Population and Family Studies, Ministry of Public Health and the Family, Brussels, and Anthropological and Sociobiological Research Unit, State University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium; Department of Obstetrics, State University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium; Department of Demography and Sociology, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

The purpose of this communication is to present and briefly explain the Second National Fertility Survey in Belgium (Cliquet et al., 1970). This survey was conceived as an interdisciplinary research project, relating the themes of fertility1, fertility regulation, and partner relations.
This project has a double aim: first, to study fertility, fertility regulation, and partner relations by means of an integrated, interdisciplinary and multivariate investigation; and second to undertake specific intradisciplinary studies on these themes.
The project also has two parts. The first is a cross-sectional survey, based on a nation-wide, nationally representative sample of 3,500 women, both married and unmarried, aged 30 to 34 years. The second is a longitudinal follow-up survey based on a sample of women treated at the Department of Obstetrics of the University of Ghent.
This project is partially related to the first National Survey of 1966 (Cliquet, 1969), of which a number of results are already published, but it encompasses a large number of new elements. It also includes a new theme: partner relations. Although
1 "Fertility" is understood here in its most general meaning, including potential fecundity as well as achievable fertility and realized offspring.

originally mainly conceived as a sociobiological project, it was expanded to a broad interdisciplinary investigation, including biological, medical, and psychological as well as demographic and sociological aspects. The project not only aims at studying a number of fundamental problems of theoretical scientific importance, but is also "problem-focused" on marriage counseling and education, on contraception in relation to sexual and demographic factors, and on responsible parenthood and population control. Indeed, the 1966 survey revealed clearly that the problems of fertility and fertility regulation in Belgium are no longer primarily of a quantitative nature--at least in the sense of an insufficiently controlled fertility--but of a biopsychic nature. (Cliquet, 1972). On the one hand, they concern the distribution and variability of the fertility continuum in the population from a qualitative point of view; on the other hand, they also concern biomedical, sociopsychological, and sexological relations. As for the latter, it should be remembered that modern society has not only changed the factors controlling the mechanisms involved in the procreation and survival of children, but has also influenced the social, psychological, and biological mechanisms determining family and sexual

72

Communications

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

relations. Hence, it seems plausible to assume that the factors influencing human behavior with respect to partner relations and procreation have not only altered these phenomena themselves but also the relations between them.
While the problems of fertility regulation and partner relations have very frequently been treated as independent or separate subjects, the present project aims at the study of the interrelations between them. This can only be done by interdisciplinary cooperation. A large amount of data on a number of variables (demographic, sociological, psychological, biological, sexological, and medical) is being gathered, and these variables, independent of their nature, will be interrelated by different means of multivariate analysis in order to evaluate the predictive power of certain independent variables and to define the field of interaction of all of them.
The main research topics specifically of an interdisciplinary nature are:
1. Examination of the sequence linking potential, achievable, and realized fertility.
2. Examination of the determinants and consequences of the differential use of contraceptives, abortion (when revealed), and treatment of fecundity impairments.
3. The construction and testing of a multidisciplinary typology of partner relations.
4. An interdisciplinary study of the social, psychological, and biomedical characteristics of the unmarried women included in the sample.
5. Study of the relationships between partner relations on the one hand and fertility control and procreation on the other.
A sixth topic, namely abortion, should now be added to this list, although it has practically become a separate project. Since relatively little attention could be given to this in the questionnaires so that it would be impossible to examine this problem

thoroughly on the basis of our own data, and given the fast growing public interest in the subject, an interdisciplinary literature report, examining the implications of foreign experiences and the relevant knowledge of the human sciences for possible alternatives of public policy in Belgium, was planned for the beginning of 1972. At the request of the Minister of the Family, the realization of this report was accelerated, so that it was drafted in the second half of 1971 and is now in press.
Each of the central themes of this fertility project--fertility, family planning, and partner relations--will also be studied separately in an intradisciplinary manner. The sociological and demographic approach is mainly concerned with the explanation of the use of contraception, the number of offspring, and the impact of conception control on family size. A study of differential fertility will also be undertaken. Finally, formal demographic models will be constructed for the study of interrelationships between the demographic variables recorded. The sociopsychological aims mainly concern the partner relations, with emphasis on the descriptive and interpretative analysis of psychosexual relations. An attempt will be made to obtain a deeper understanding of the impact of these relations on contraceptive behavior and family growth. In the medical approach, there are two main fields of interest, namely the gynecological-obstetrical study of fertility and fertility regulation at the level of the individual patient or couple and psychomedical counseling on family planning, taking into consideration contraception itself as well as its psychosexual implications. The biological and sociobiological aims concerning the topics fertility and fertility regulation, as described in connection with the First National Fertility Survey in Belgium (Cliquet, 1969), will be pursued more thoroughly. Two main points of inter-

Vol. 19, No. 1

Communications

73

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

est should be mentioned, namely the role of the "organic" component of mate selection, partner adaptation, and cohesion, and the intergenerational effect of mate selection, the latter mechanism becoming in modern culture an important factor of biological evolution.
In the National Survey, 3,400 women, married and unmarried, of the cohort aged 30 to 34 years, were interviewed in the course of 1971. The Survey was very successful, in both the response rate as well as the quality of the answers, particularly concerning the more delicate topics on contraception and sexual relations. The data have already been codified and are being recorded on magnetic tape. The first results will soon be available.
The follow-up survey in the Department of Obstetrics of the University of Ghent began in April 1971. These patients will be followed from pregnancy to pregnancy. The size of this sample is still partly dependent on available research funds.
A standard questionnaire, taking about one and a half hours to complete, has been developed and is used in both sub-projects. It can be divided into five parts: a sociological and demographic identification section; a biomedical section; a section dealing with the last pregnancy; a section dealing

with previous pregnancies, and a biopsychic section concerning partner relations. In addition to the items on the standard questionnaire, patients of the Department of Obstetrics undergo an obstetrical and general somatological examination as well as several psychodiagnostic tests. In couples asking for tubal ligation or vasectomy, both partners are interviewed, examined, and tested.
The National Survey is organized by the Center of Population and Family Studies, the longitudinal part by the Department of Obstetrics and the Anthropological and Sociobiological Research Center at the University of Ghent. The research team presently is composed of twelve members, namely, two sociologists, one demographer, three psychologists, one statistician, three gynecologists, and two anthropologists. The work is to be under the supervision of R. L. Cliquet, M. Thiery, and R. Lesthaeghe. The interviews in the National Survey are carried out by trained social workers or nurses, and at the Department of Obstetrics by gynecologists and psychologists. All controls are to be performed by members of the research team. Computer and programming facilities at the Central Digital Calculation Center of the University of Ghent will be used.

REFERENCES

CLIQUET, R. L. 1969. The sociobiological aspects of the national survey on fecundity and fertility in Belgium. J. Biosoc. Sci. 1:369-388. . 1972. Knowledge, practice and effectiveness of contraception in Belgium. J. Biosoc. Sci. 4:41-73.
CLIQUET, R. L., M. THIERY, R. LESTHAEGHE, G.

VAN KEYMEULEN-VAN DEN BOGAERT, H. VAN
KETS, B. BECUE, and L. ROELENS. 1970. Een
interdisciplinair onderzoeksproject over vruchtbaarheid, vruchtbaarheidsregeling en partnerrelaties. Bevolking en Gezin--Population et Famille 21:3-21.

