Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Maternal phenylketonuria
Siegfried M. Pueschel
To cite this article: Siegfried M. Pueschel (1985) Maternal phenylketonuria, Social Biology, 32:1-2, 31-44, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988588 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988588
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Maternal Phenylketonuria
Siegfried M. Pueschel
Child Development Center Department of Pediatrics Rhode Island Hospital Brown University Program in Medicine Providence, Rhode Island
ABSTRACT: This paper highlights the significant progress that has been made in the field of phenylketonuria since Föiling described this inborn error of metabolism some fifty years ago. A retrospective view of the pertinent literature relating to maternal phenylketonuria indicates that infants born to women with untreated phenylketonuria are at high risk. The author discusses investigations in nonhuman primates that explored placental transfer mechanisms of aromatic amino acids. The author emphasizes the importance of educating adolescent girls with phenylketonuria about the intricacies of maternal phenylketonuria. The primary challenge of maternal phenylketonuria will have to be met when females with phenylketonuria who were detected in early life and who were treated successfully reach the reproductive age. This ever-increasing population is in need of informed counseling and appropriate dietary management before or when pregnancy should occur. Early introduction of an individually designed low-phenylalanine diet should prevent the previously observed teratogenic effects and the insult to the fetal central nervous system.
In the spring of 1934 two severely re- described the autosomal recessive mode tarded children with a peculiar body of inheritance in phenylketonuria. Durodor were examined by Foiling, a Nor- ing the subsequent decades, many indiwegian physician and biochemist. As- viduals with significant mental retardasuming that these children had a meta- tion residing in institutions were found bolic disorder, Foiling started his to have phenylketonuria. investigations and soon uncovered an The 1950's and early 1960's witnessed increased amount of phenylpyruvic acid extraordinary progress in the underin the children's urine. He hypothesized standing of phenylketonuria. Although that aperturbation in phenylalanine me- the para-hydroxylation of phenylatabolism was causing the odor and the lanine to tyrosine had already been posmental retardation observed in these tulated by Neubauer in 1909, Udentwo children. In a short time period of friend and Cooper (1952) demonstrated onlyfivemonths after Foiling had exam- in the early 1950's the presence of the ined the children, he had a scholarly re- enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase in port ready for publication on a new the liver of many animal species includmetabolic disease which he called imbe- ing man. In the following year Jervis cilitas phenylpyruvica (Foiling, 1934). A (1953) showed that there was a marked few years later, based on their studies in reduction in enzymatic conversion of patients with this metabolic disorder, phenylalanine to tyrosine in liver tissue Penrose and Quastel (1937) coined the of persons with phenylketonuria. In term phenylketonuria. In 1939 Jervis 1957 Kaufman characterized the hy-
31

32

Pueschel

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

droxylation process in detail, and later, after many years of ingenious investigations, he described the cofactor as an unconjugated pteridine called dihydrobiopteridine (Kaufman, 1957; Kaufman, 1963).
Also, in the early 1950's Bickel et al. (1952) were reporting the effect of a low phenylalanine diet in the treatment of patients with phenylketonuria. A few years later Armstrong and Tyler (1957) confirmed that biochemical control of phenylalanine accumulation could be achieved by dietary means. During the past twenty-five years, a number of formulas and other special low phenylalanine food items have been developed which facilitate appropriate dietary management.
In the 1960's various screening methods and novel laboratory procedures were introduced that allowed early identification of children with hyperphenylalaninemia and phenylketonuria (LaDu et al., 1960; McCaman and Robins, 1962; Walz et al., 1963; Efron et al., 1964). Among the various screening tests, the Guthrie Bacterial Inhibition Assay has been found to be a most useful tool in mass screening of infants and now is employed in many countries throughout the world (Guthrie and Susi, 1963). Its easy applicability, low cost, specificity, and high sensitivity have made this test very effective in the detection of infants with phenylketonuria.
These developments laid the ground work for the establishment of many phenylketonuria programs and clinics where an interdisciplinary team of professionals provide expert care for children with this metabolic disorder. Thus, in the past twenty years hundreds of individuals with phenylketonuria have been identified in early life and have

benefitted from appropriate dietary treatment. These children enjoy good physical health, and the vast majority have normal intellectual functioning. Many of the early-detected females with phenylketonuria are already at reproductive age, and many more are approaching childbearing age soon. Since it has been known for almost thirty years that mothers with untreated phenylketonuria may give birth to retarded offspring, we are facing now a new challenge relating to the care and management of these young women with phenylketonuria.
This paper will highlight significant issues concerning maternal phenylketonuria. We review lessons learned from previously reported cases and discuss salient research on placental transfer mechanisms of aromatic amino acids. We stress that all pertinent information concerning maternal phenylketonuria should be provided to the population at risk. And, finally, we focus on the nutritional management of pregnant women with this metabolic disorder.
A RETROSPECTIVE VIEW
Since Dent (1956) had suggested that high blood phenylalanine concentrations in mothers with phenylketonuria may interfere with central nervous system development of the fetus, many reports on this subject have been published in the medical literature. These articles indicate that many children born to mothers with untreated phenylketonuria are mentally retarded, have congenital anomalies, low birth weight, and microcephaly. In a review of the world literature1 on maternal phenylketonu-
1Unfortunately, an accurate analysis of the data extracted from the literature can be doneonly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

Maternal Phenylketonuria

33

ria, Lenke and Levy (1980) found 155 mothers with phenylketonuria or hyperphenylalaninemia who had a total of 524 pregnancies with 423 live offspring and 101spontaneous abortions. The frequency of mental, retardation in offspring of mothers who had phenylalanine blood concentrations of more than 20 mg/dl was 92 per cent, as noted in Table 1. Even at relatively low maternal phenylalanine concentrations, between 3 to 10 mg/dl, more than 20 per cent of offspring had significant intellectual handicaps. Another frequent finding was microcephaly, which was observed in 73 per cent of children whose mothers had high phenylalanine blood concentrations (> 20 mg/dl). At lower
with difficulty since essential information often is not provided in the individual reports. Sometimes the offspring's mental abilities were estimated or the IQ was not reported at all, and in a few instances the intellectual assessments were misinterpreted. Occasionally, only one phenylalanine blood level or a mean phenylalanine level without range was provided by the author(s) and often no reference was made relative to the dietary intake.

maternal phenylalanine blood concentrations (3-10 mg/dl), 24 per cent of the offspring were microcephalic. In addition, a large number of children were noted to have congenital heart disease. Of the 36 offspring with congenital heart defects, seven had tetralogy of Fallot, four had ventricular spetal defect, three had coarctation of the aorta, two had patent ductus arteriosus, one had a single ventricle, and another child had an atrial setpal defect. In 18children the congenital heart lesion was not specified. Other congenital anomalies included cataracts, esophageal atresia, hiatus hernia, cleft palate, syndactyly, intestinal malrotation, situs inversus, meningomyelocele, hemivertebra, ophthalmological anomalies, agenesis of spleen, and epicanthal folds. Approximately half of the children were born with a low birth weight of less than 2,500 grams. There was also an increased occurrence of spontaneous abortions, as 27 per cent of women who had phenylalanine blood levels of more than 16 mg/dl miscarried (Lenke and Levy, 1980).

TABLE 1
ABNORMALITIES OBSERVED IN OFFSPRING OF MOTHERS WITH UNTREATED PHENYLKETONURIA AND H Y P E R P H E N Y L A L A N I N E M I A ACCORDING TO MATERNAL PHENYLALANINE BLOOD LEVELS"

ABNORMALITIES

3-10 mg/dl Total Af- Af-
fected fected NN %

Mental retardation Microcephaly Congenital heart disease Birth weight <2500g

29 6 21 5
44 0
16 2

21 24
0
13

«Adapted from Lenke andLevy, 1980.

PHENYLALANINE BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS

11-15 mg/dl Total Af- Af-
fected fected NN %

16-19 mg/dl Total Af- Af-
fected fected NN %

23 5 22 23 8 35

37 27 73 44 30 68

33 2 6 46 7 15

9 5 56 33 17 52

55 20 mg/dl
Total Af- Affected fected
NN %

172 158 138 101
225 27
89 36

92 73
12
40

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

34

Pueschel

Social Biology

Since the majority of these families had come to the attention of the investigators because the child was mentally retarded, there exists an ascertainment bias. Therefore, Levy and Waisbren (1983) studied the effects of maternal phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia on 53 offspring from untreated pregnancies in 22 mothers who had been identified by routine screening of umbilical cord blood. The authors found that the intelligence quotient of the offspring was significantly correlated with both the maternal intelligence quotient and maternal phenylalanine blood levels. Mental retardation in offspring was only present (with one exception) when the maternal phenylalanine blood level exceeded 18mg/dl. If the maternal phenylalanine blood concentration was above 20 mg/dl, all offspring had microcephaly. The authors, however, did not find an increased frequency of congenital heart disease and other congenital anomalies which Lenke and Levy (1980) had noted previously. The authors interpreted their data, suggesting that phenylalanine levels above 18 mg/dl would

lead to intellectual limitations in the offspring. If the mother had mild hyperphenylalaninemia, the child would function well cognitively.
Lenke and Levy (1980) also reported on females with phenylketonuria who were treated with a low phenylalanine diet during pregnancy. Of the 34 pregnancies, treatment was initiated in only 3 instances before conception, in 11 pregnancies the treatment was started in thefirsttrimester, in 16pregnancies during the second trimester, and in 4 pregnancies during the third trimester. There appeared to be a trend toward higher IQ and normal head circumference in the offspring when the treatment of the mother was begun prior to or in early gestation. However, no consistent relationships were noted between dietary therapy during pregnancy and prevention of abnormalities in the offspring (Table 2).
Thus, during the past 25 years, information has accumulated in the literature relating to the outcome of pregnancies of mothers with phenylketonuria. From the review of these reports, it is appar-

TABLE2
INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT, MICROCEPHALY, CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE, AND LOW BIRTH WEIGHT IN RELATION TO INITIATION OF DIETARY THERAPY DURING GESTATION"

Microcephaly

GESTATION
Before conception First trimester Second trimester Third trimester

Total Af- Af-

fected fected

N * range N N

%

2 0 8-100 7 103 74-127 13 84 53-108 3 79 48-100

3 10 15 3

0 2 8 2

0 20 53 67

"Adopted from Lenke and Levy, 1980.

Congenital heart disease

Total Affected
NN
30 11 4 16 2 40

Affected
%
0 36 13 0

Birth weight < 2500

Total Affected
NN
30 90 12 4 20

Affected
%
0 0 33 0

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

Matemal Phenylketonuria

35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

ent that women with classical phenylketonuria who did not have the benefit of dietary treatment during pregnancy often gave birth to children with mental retardation, microcephaly, low birth weight, and congenital anomalies. However, those mothers whose phenylalanine restricted diet was started before or early in pregnancy had children whose physical appearance and intellectual functioning were normal.
SIGNIFICANT RESEARCH IN NONHUMAN PRIMATES
Ethical and practical considerations do not permit investigations of maternal phenylketonuria in humans. In particular, transplacental transfer studies of phenylalanine cannot be carried out in pregnant women. Therefore, we initiated investigations that would explore placental transfer mechanisms of aromatic amino acids using nonhuman primates.
At the gestational age of 115-135 days, crab-eating monkeys and rhesus monkeys purchased from the New England Regional Primate Research Center underwent an operative procedure. After a midline abdominal incision, a hysterotomy was performed in the lower uterine segment. An oblique fetal skin incision then was made from the angle of the mandible to the clavicle and skin flaps were sutured to the uterine wall to stabilize the operative site and to prevent leakage of amniotic fluid. A polyvinyl catheter was inserted into the carotid artery of the fetus. Postoperatively the fetal catheter was protected from maternal interference by enclosure into a subcutaneous pocket.
Upon determining the fetal viability, we began experimentation two to three

days following surgery. Under ketamine anesthesia a priming dose of phenylalanine and/or p-chlorophenylalanine was given, followed by an infusion of these compounds through a catheter placed in a maternal femoral vein. Approximately 1 ml of blood was obtained from the mother and 0.7 ml of blood was taken from the fetus at specified time intervals. After the experiments were completed, the animals were returned to their cages. Phenylalanine and tyrosine concentrations were determined by a modified method of McCaman and Robins (1962) and/or by ion exchange chromatography (Spackman et al., 1958).
When we administered 10 mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg pchlorophenylalanine to the maternal circulation followed by a two-hour infusion of 100 mg/kg phenylalanine, we observed significantly higher phenylalanine and tyrosine concentrations in the fetal blood when compared with maternal phenylalanine and tyrosine blood levels (see Figure 1). This suggests an active transport mechanism at the placental level pumping aromatic amino acids against a gradient into the fetal circulation. It is postulated that this active transport system permits increased amounts of amino acids to cross the placenta unidirectional into the fetal circulation in order "to provide optimal nutrition" to the fetus. Whereas this process can be advantageous under normal circumstances, in situations where an inborn error of amino acid metabolism in the mother causes prolonged high levels of a certain compound to over-saturate the amino acid pool in the embryo/fetus, teratogenic effects and insults to the fetal central nervous system may occur.

36 Pueschel
PHE NYl At ANINE

Social Biology
lynOSINE

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

FIG. 1.--Phenylalanine and tyrosine blood levels (mg/dl) of fetus and mother after injection of 100 mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg p-chlorophenylalanine followed by a two-hour infusion of 100 mg phenylalanine.

The results of this experiment provide evidence that a high maternal phenylalanine blood level between 10to 16 mg/dl will yield an even higher fetal phenylalanine blood concentration. Such an increase of 40 to 80 per cent of phenylalanine concentration above the maternal level could potentially compromise normal fetal central nervous system development which is of particular importance during the latter part of pregnancy when maximal fetal brain growth takes place. Thus, a high but relatively "safe" phenylalanine blood concentration in the mother may cause a significant rise of fetal phenylalanine

concentration with a potentially harmful effect upon neural tissues in the fetus.
In another experiment we injected 200 mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg p-chlorophenylalanine into a maternal femoral vein followed by a two-hour infusion of 229.2 mg/hr phenylalanine and 27.5 mg/hr p-chlorophenylalanine. As noted in Figure 2, there was an initialrise of the maternal phenylalanine blood concentration up to 50 mg/dl with a lesser increase of the fetal phenylalanine blood level. However, once the maternal phenylalanine blood concentration fell below 32.5 mg/dl the fetal phenylalanine level rose above the maternal one

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

Matemal Phenylketonuria

PHENYLALANINE

TYROSINE

37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

HOURS
FIG. 2.--Phenylalanine andtyrosine blood concentrations (mg/dl) of fetus andmother after administration of 200 mg/kg phenylalanine and36mg/kg p-chlorophenylalanine followed by a two-hour infusion of 229.2 mg/hr phenylalanine and 27.5 mg/hr p-chlorophenylalaninc.

and remained higher throughout the mother. We again observed a gradient

rest of the study. Similar, although less in the placental transport across the pla-

dramatic, changes were observed in ma- centa with the fetal phenylalanine levels

ternal andfetal tyrosine levels as noted being significantly above the maternal

at the right side of Figure2.

levels. However, if 14C-phenylalanine

Thus, at a critical point of phenyla- was administered into the fetal circula-

lanine loading (32 to 36 mg/dl) most tion, the maternal total counts did not

transfer sites of aromatic amino acids change much and always remained

appear to be occupied. This saturation significantly below the fetal counts

phenomenon does not allow additional which suggests that the transfer ofradio-

phenylalanine to cross into the fetalcir- active material into the maternal circu-

culation. One may hypthesize then that lation occurs by simple diffusion. The

this mechanism has "protective" func- results of these experiments were re-

tions and under normal circumstances ported in detail previously (Pueschel et

will prevent toomuch of a given amino al., 1982).

acid from entering the fetal circulation During another experiment we first

which potentially could affect the fetal gave a prime dose of 200 mg/kg

central nervous system adversely.

phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg p-

In further investigations we injected chlorophenylalanine followed bya two-

radioactive phenylalanine into the hour infusion of 75 mg/10 ml/hr

38

Pueschel

Social Biology

phenylalanine and 18 mg/10 ml/hr pchlorophenylalanine. We then obtained amniotic fluid at the same time when fetal and maternal blood were sampled,

As shown in Figure 3 the phenylalanine concentrations in maternal blood rose sharply, reflecting the initial injection of the prime dose. Despite continuous in-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

HOURS

FIG. 3.--Phenylalanine levels (mg/dl) in maternal blood (- -), fetal blood (·

),and

amniotic fluid (

), after administration of 200 mg/kg phenylalanine and 36 mg/kg p-

chlorophenylalanine followed by a two-hour infusion of 150 mg phenylalanine and 36 mg p-

chlorophenylalanine.

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

Maternal Phenylketonuria

39

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

fusion for two hours, the maternal Group III had a "median" phenyla-

phenylalanine blood levels declined rap- lanine intake to achieve phenylalanine

idly. The amniotic fluid phenylalanine levels of approximately 10 mg/dl. Mon-

levels were initially below the maternal keys in Group IV received a "high"

and fetal blood levels. However, half- phenylalanine intake to achieve pheny-

way into the experiment the phenyla- lalanine blood levels of approximately

lanine levels in the amniotic fluid ex- 15 mg/dl. The actual intake of aromatic

ceeded the maternal phenylalanine amino acids ranged from 300 mg/kg/day

blood levels. During the first hour in this to 1000 mg/kg/day phenylalanine and 30

experiment, the fetal phenylalanine mg/kg/day to 100 mg/kg/day p-

blood concentrations surpassed the ma- chlorophenylalanine, depending on

ternal blood levels and remained above group assignment. Special pellets had

both the maternal and the amniotic fluid been prepared by ICN Nutritional Bio-

phenylalanine levels. There was neither chemicals and contained 50 g phenyla-

a constant ratio of phenylalanine levels lanine and 5 g p-chlorophenylalanine

between maternal blood and amniotic per kg of a standard SKF monkey diet.

fluidnor between fetal blood and amni- In addition, the animals received several

otic fluid during the five-hour study. Purina Monkey Chow biscuits at each

These investigations indicate that amni- feeding which took place at 8:30 in the

otic fluid phenylalanine concentrations morning and at 4:30 in the afternoon. A

will not accurately reflect fetal phenyla- vitamin C supplement was added to the

lanine levels. Thus, amniotic fluid ob- drinking water.

tained for phenylalanine determination during the second half of pregnancy will not be helpful in estimating the fetal phenylalanine blood levels.

Venous blood samples were obtained at one- to two-week intervals throughout pregnancy. The blood was analyzed for its phenylalanine and tyrosine con-

Whereas the above-described short- tent according to the method described

term studies focused primarily on pla- by McCaman and Robins (1962).

cental transfer mechanisms of aromatic Shortly after birth the infant monkeys

amino acids, we also engaged in long- were examined and anthropométrie

term investigations which were designed measurements were obtained. At six

to provide information on biological and months of age the infants were sepa-

behavioral assessments of young rhesus rated from their mothers and placed in

monkeys after intrauterine exposure of individual cages. Experimental testing

the fetus to high phenylalanine concen- was done using the Wisconsin General

trations. Nineteen pregnant monkeys at Test Apparatus (Schrier, 1961). Follow-

the gestational age of 25 to 35 days were ing pre-training the monkeys underwent

enrolled in these long-term experi- behavioral assessment: (a) The "Adap-

ments. Monkeys in Group I constituted tation Test" was designed to gauge the

a control group which was given a regu- animals' emotionality and adaptability.

lar SKF monkey diet without phenyla- (b) The "Simple Discrimination Test"

lanine supplement. Monkeys in Group measured the animals' ability to learn a

II were on a "low" phenylalanine intake short series of simple two-choice object

to achieve blood phenylalanine levels of discrimination problems, (c) The "Dis-

approximately 5 mg/dl. Monkeys in crimination Learning Set Formation"

40

Pueschel

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

studied the increase in the rate of learning of individual problems as a function of the number of problems learned, (d) The "Delayed Response Test" measured the monkeys memory, (e) The "Delayed-Matching-to-Sample Learning Set" task investigated complex learning abilities and short-term memory of the monkeys (Schrier, 1965, 1984).
In the analysis of the results, we did not find any statistical difference among the four study groups in comparing the infants' anthropométrie measurements. Moreover, no congenital anomalies were uncovered during the physical examination shortly after birth of the monkey infants. Also, behavioral testing revealed that the treatment conditions had little consistent effect on performance. Although, there was a slight difference in the mean number of days taken by the four groups to complete the adaptation test, the difference was not statistically significant. In the simple discrimination test, there was some tendency for Groups III and IV to learn the discrimination problem more slowly than Groups I and II. However, the differences between the groups again did not approach statistical significance. During the discrimination learning set formation, the treated groups formed a learning set more slowly than the control group in the second fifty problems, but the differences were quite small and not statistically significant. In the delayed response as well as in the delayed matching-to-sample testing, there was again no significant difference among the groups. In most tests effects of practice were highly significant (p <0.05 top <0.001), but the groups by practice interaction was not significant.
Although we were successful in ren-

dering pregnant rhesus monkeys hyperphenylalaninemic, as noted above, we did not observe statistically significant differences in biological measures or in behavioral testing among the respective study groups. The reason for the negative results could be due to the "late" induction of hyperphenylalaninemia in our animals at 25 to 35 days postconception. It is also conceivable that the central nervous system of the fetal rhesus monkey is less susceptible to the exposure of high phenylalanine concentrations and that there are basic differences of central nervous system maturation and/or vulnerability between human and nonhuman primates. A more likely interpretation of our data relates to the inadequacy of the animal model that attempted to replicate phenylketonuria in humans. The rhesus mothers had high phenylalanine blood levels during pregnancy, yet they did not have the inborn error of phenylalanine metabolism and did not exhibit the resultant metabolic perturbation observed in humans with classical phenylketonuria. Therefore, caution should be exercised in the interpretation of these data, and it would be prudent to say that phenylalanine blood levels up to approximately 16 mg/dl in the pregnant female are "safe."
THE IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATING
FEMALES WITH PHENYLKETONURIA ABOUT THEIR REPRODUCTIVE
RISKS
In the past the medical approach to phenylketonuria has primarily focused on large-scale screening of newborn infants and on maintaining the identified

Vol. 32,No. 1-2

Maternal Phenylketonuria

41

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

children with phenylketonuria on a phenylalanine-restricted diet. The effective screening and treatment programs have resulted in an everincreasing cohort of children with phenylketonuria who are physically and intellectually normal. As these children develop and grow up, other issues such as diet discontinuation, academic achievement, and peer relationships come more into focus and demand the attention of the caring professional. In particular, when adolescent girls with phenylketonuria approach the reproductive age and face the consequences of childbearing, they have to be familiarized with the complex problems of future womanhood. Therefore, emphasis needs to be placed on the education and counseling of adolescent girls with phenylketonuria.
Although most children with phenylketonuria have some knowledge of this inborn error of metabolism, the educational program initially should review the general aspects of phenylketonuria. A discussion of the mode of inheritance in phenylketonuria and an explanation of such terms as homozygote, hétérozygote, carrier status, and genes should be forthcoming. Furthermore, the metabolic defect, the unavailability of active phenylalanine hydroxylase to metabolize phenylalanine, and the consequences of treated and untreated situations need to be detailed.
Also, common issues of adolescence and general aspects relating to the maturing female need to be addressed. Subjects such as social interaction with peers, vocational interests, as well as emotional and physical changes during adolescence and adaptation to such changes are important concerns to young females with phenylketonuria.

Moreover, sex education is as important for adolescent girls with phenylketonuria as it is for the person who does not have this metabolic disorder.
Although these general issues are important, the educational program should be primarily concerned with the consequences of childbearing in the female with phenylketonuria. The adolescent girls with phenylketonuria need to know that if untreated during pregnancy, they may give birth to a mentally retarded child. These young females should be informed that an increased amount of phenylalanine coming from the mother will cross the placenta and may have a damaging effect upon the unborn child's brain. Prevention of these adverse effects and the dietary approach to maternal phenylketonuria also need to be discussed.
Such an educational and counseling program can be of significant help to adolescents with phenylketonuria since many of them have misconceptions concerning various aspects of this metabolic disorder and often display anxieties of what the future may hold for them. In group meetings, girls with phenylketonuria can share their thoughts and feelings and are often relieved to meet others who have similar problems. Also, parents find it helpful to share with each other their worries and concerns about raising an adolescent girl with phenylketonuria.
NUTRITIONAL MANAGEMENT OF THE FEMALE WITH PHENYLKETONURIA DURING PREGNANCY
There are numerous important concerns that need to be taken into account in the management of the pregnant fe-

42

Pueschel

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

male with phenylketonuria including the quantitative and qualitative composition of a phenylalanine-restricted diet during pregnancy, special food items low in phenylalanine, the allowance of additional natural foods, and the palatability of the formulas offered to individuals with phenylketonuria. Essential to the low phenylalanine diet is a wellbalanced amino acid mixture that will contain no or only a minimal amount of phenylalanine but will provide the necessary nutrients to the mother. There are numerous formulas on the market. However, in this country Lofenalac, and in particular Phenyl-Free, are being used effectively in the treatment of pregnant individuals with phenylketonuria. Because Phenyl-Free does not contain any phenylalanine, more natural foods can be incorporated into the diet facilitating easier clinical management of the pregnant female with phenylketonuria. In addition to the special formulas, there are other food items low in protein that can be used in the diet of individuals with phenylketonuria. These special products include Aprotein (pasta and rusks), Paygel (wheat starch and baking mix), Prono (gelled deserts), and others. Natural foods low in phenylalanine such as certain vegetables, fruits and carbohydrates can be used to supplement the diet for the pregnant female with phenylketonuria. The prescribed diet should conform with the recommended dietary allowances for nutrients during pregnancy.

ing the reproductive years. However, if the low phenylalanine diet has been discontinued previously, the introduction of an amino acid mixture might cause difficulties since the women might object to its smell and taste. Therefore, we recommend that the phenylalaninerestricted diet in these females be started several months prior to conception because at that time, the diet will likely be better tolerated than if it were introduced in the beginning of pregnancy when morning sickness might be an additional complication. Moreover, there are other pregnancy-related aspects such as increased energy expense, augmented protein synthesis, altered fluid and electrolyte metabolism, nausea, vomiting, and food cravings. There are also economic, social, cultural, religious, and psychological concerns which need to be taken into account in the planning of a diet that is not only appropriate in its quantitative and qualitative components, but also accepted and tolerated well.
In conclusion, ongoing research efforts should provide a better understanding of certain pathogenetic mechanisms in maternal phenylketonuria which together with appropriate education and counseling of phenylketonuric females and a well designed nutritional approach will make it feasible for women with phenylketonuria to be able to bear children safely.

In addition, there are other important factors which need to be taken into consideration. Those females who have continued with the low phenylalanine diet throughout childhood and adolescence most likely will not experience any difficulties taking the formulas dur-

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dr. Benjamin T. Jackson and George J. Piasecki performed the operative procedures on the pregnant monkeys which allowed us to carry out the short-term experiments. Most of the short-term experiments

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

Matemal Phenylketonuria

43

were done by Joan M. Boylan and George J. Piasecki. Dr. Allan M. Schrier supervised the behavorial assessments of infant monkeys during the long-term experiments and carried outthe analysis of the collected data. Mrs. Mary Andrews collaborated in the design of the optimal approach to dietary management of the pregnant mothers with phenylketonuria.

This work was supported by NIH Grant 501 HD 10420-02. Part of this investigation was conducted at the New England Regional Primate Research Center, Southborough, Massachusetts which is supported by a NIH Grant RR 00168 from the Division ofResearch Resources. I thank Cynthia Clay and Karen Moreau for their assistance in the preparation of this manuscript.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ARMSTRONG, M. D., and F. H. TYLER. 1955.
Studies on phenylketonuria. I. Restricted phenylalanine intake in phenylketonuria. J. Clin. Invest. 34:565.
BICKEL, A., A. J. GERRARD, and E. M. HICK-
MAN. 1953. Influence of phenylalanine intake on phenylktonuria. Lancet ii:812. DENT, C. E. 1956. Discussion of Armstrong: Relation ofbiochemical abnormality to development of mental defect in phenylketonuria in etiological factors in mental retardation. Report of 23rd Ross Conference, Columbus, Ohio.
EFRON, M. L., D. YOUNG, H. W. MOSER, and
R. A. MACCREADY. 1964. A simple Chromatographic screening test for the detection of disorders of amino acid metabolism. New Eng. J. Med. 270:1378. FöLLiNG, A. 1934. Über Ausscheidung von Phenylbrenztraubensäure in den Harn als Stoffwechselanomalie in Verbindung mit Imbezillität. Ztschr. Physiol. Chem. 227:169. GUTHRIE, R., and A. Susi. 1963. A simple phenylketonuria screening method for newborn infants. Pediatrics 32:338. JERVIS, G. A. 1939. The genetics of phenylpyruvic oligophrenia. J. Ment. Sc.85:719. _____. 1953.Phenylpyruvic oligophrenia deficiency of phenylalanine-oxidizing system. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 82:514. KAUFMAN, S. 1957. Enzymatic conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine. J. Biol. Chem. 226:511-524.
_____. 1963. The structure of the phenylalanine-hydroxylation cofactor. Proc. Nat.Acad. Sci. 50:1085-1093.
LADU, B. N., R. R. HOWELL, P. J. MICHAEL,
and E. V. SOBER. 1963. A quantitative mi-

cromethod for the determination ofphenylalanine and tyrosine inblood and its application in thediagnosis of phenylketonuria in infants. Pediatrics 31:39.
LENKE, R. R., and H. L. LEVY. 1980. Maternal
phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia. New Eng. J. Med. 303:1202-1208.
LEVY, H . L., and S. E . WAISBREN. 1983. Effects
of untreated maternal phenylketonuria and hyperphenylalaninemia on thefetus. New Eng. J. Med. 309:1269-1274.
MCCAMAN, M. W., and E. ROBINS. 1962.
Fluorimetric method forthe determination of phenylalanine in serum. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 59:885.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1980. Rec-
ommended Dietary Allowances. 9th ed. Washington, D.C. NEUBAUER, O. 1909. Über den Abbau der Aminosäuren im gesunden und kranken Organismus. Deutsch. Arch. Klin.Med. 95:211.
PENROSE, L., and J. H. QUASTEL. 1947. Meta-
bolic studies inphenylketonuria. Biochem. J. 31:266.
PUESCHEL, S. M . , J . M . BOYLAN, B . T . JACK-
SON, and G. J. PIASECKI. 1982. A study of placental transfer mechanisms in nonhuman primates using [14C] phenylalanine. Obstet. Gynec. 59:182-188. SCHRIER, A. M. 1961.Amodified version of the Wisconsin General Test Apparatus. J. Psych. 52:193-200. _____. 1965. Pretraining performance of three species of macaque monkeys. Psych. Science. 61:517-518. _____. 1984. Learning howto learn: The significance and current status of learning set formation. Primates 25:95-102.

44

Pueschel

Social Biology

_____. 1966. Learning-set formation by three species of macaque monkeys. J. Compar. Physio. Psych. 61:490-492.
SPACKMAN, D. H., W. H. STEIN, and S. MOORE.
1958. Automatic recording apparatus for use in chromatography of amino acids. Anal. Chem. 30:1190.

UDENFRIEND, S., and J. R. COOPER. 1952. The
enzymatic conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine. J. Biol. Chem. 194:503.
WALZ., D., A. R. FAHRNY, G. PATAKI, A.
NIEDERWIESSER, and M. BRENNER. 1963.
Thin layer chromatography of amino acids in urine. Experientia. 19:213.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

