Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
H. K. Cooper institute seminar on the management of oralfacial anomalies with communicative disorders
To cite this article: (1976) H. K. Cooper institute seminar on the management of oralfacial anomalies with communicative disorders, Social Biology, 23:1, 92-93, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988210 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988210
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

92

Communications

Social Biology

Regarding sampling procedure, as already stated, two subuniverses were taken because it was not possible to take a sample from the total universe, as neither the names of working women nor of housewives were listed as such in any private or official records. Hence, the first sample was drawn from the study of Social Structure of a Planned City, Chandigarh (Orient, Longman, 1968). In this study, 10 per cent of the city population was taken, and out of that 10 per cent a further 10 per cent sample was drawn from the women above the age of 20 years, for the purposes of the present study. The second sample was drawn by preparing a list of all women working in different organizations in Chandigarh, and since the number of women in the list was not too large, the total universe was taken. Therefore, the sample drawn was representative of the population in Chandigarh.
Since it was an exploratory study and the differences in the proportion of children surviving in different categories were quite obvious, rigorous statistical treatment was not given.
It is true that social status explains significant differentials in mortality when status categories are large enough, but in the present study the purpose of taking four categories separately was to observe the influence of each of the variables separately. For instance, in categories 1 and

2, there is one important status differential. Category 1 refers to highly educated working women, whereas Category 2 refers to only highly educated nonworking women. Education is common to both the categories; with one common variable, the purpose was to see the influence of another variable--employment. A similar situation exists for categories 3 and 4. Hence, it should be mentioned that the purpose of taking so many categories separately was to see the influence of each variable.
The assertion that child mortality is an intervening variable and not a dependent one is only true when we study social status as an independent variable and fertility as a dependent variable through the intervening variable of mortality. But as it is used in the present paper, child mortality is also an intervening variable in the sense that social status influences mortality, besides other variables, through fertility. Women of lower social status have higher fertility partly because they are ignorant of family planning techniques and partly because of their fatalistic attitude towards life, considering children as God's gift. Successive births at short intervals due to poor health of the mother result in higher mortality which, of course, again may result in higher fertility. In fact, as admitted by the writers themselves, the relationship between fertility and mortality is a complex one and is really a two-way relationship.

H. K. Cooper Institute Seminar on the Management of Oral-facial Anomalies with Communicative Disorders
The Twenty-first Annual Seminar on October 11-15, 1976, at the H. K. Cooper Management of Oral-facial Anomalies with Institute, Lancaster, Pennsylvania. The Communicative Disorders will be presented faculty will consist of the department heads

Vol. 23, No. 1

Communications

93

from the Institute and staff from the Pennsylvania State University, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center.
Lectures and presentation will concentrate on cleft lip and palate as well as head and neck cancer. Diagnostic and management programs based upon forty years of clinical experience and twelve years of longitudinal research will be discussed and demonstrated in detail.
The overview of the seminar includes: Genetics, Pédiatrie Aspects, Growth and Development, Instrumentation for Longitudinal Research, Parent Counseling, Pri-

mary and Secondary Surgery, Orthodontics, Prosthetics, Speech Pathology, Audiology, Otolaryngology, and Psychosocial Problems.
Medical and Dental category for continuing education credits have been applied for. Fee: $300.00. Medical and dental residents or speech and audiology doctoral candidates: $150.00.
Write for applications to: Robert T. Millard, Director of Educational Activities, H. K. Cooper Institute for Oral-facial Anomalies and Communicative Disorders, 24 North Lime Street, Lancaster, PA 17602.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Erratum: "Attitudes Toward Population Growth: Demographic Predictors"
Leo G. Reeder, April A. Allison, Linda Brookover Bourque, *Deborah Hensler, and fKenneth Bailey
School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles, California; *RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California; and ·^Departmentof Sociology, University of California, Los Angeles, California
It has been brought to our attention that No. 4, pp. 360-367) was transposed in the some of the material presented in Figure 1 preparation of the figure. The corrected of our article {Social Biology, 1974, Vol. 21, figure is given on the following page.

