Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Kissing cousins: Frequencies of cousin types in "Nebraska" Amish marriages
James P. Hurd
To cite this article: James P. Hurd (1985) Kissing cousins: Frequencies of cousin types in "Nebraska" Amish marriages, Social Biology, 32:1-2, 82-89, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988594 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988594
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

Kissing Cousins: Frequencies of Cousin Types in "Nebraska" Amish Marriages

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

James P. Hurd
Department of Anthropology Bethel College St. Paul, Minnesota 55112

ABSTRACT:One hundred and ninety current "Nebraska" Amish marriages are analyzed to determine if statistical frequencies of types of cousin marriage conform to cultural rules for marriage. The Nebraska Amish (so named because a bishop from Nebraska organized the group) are located in Central Pennsylvania. They are prohibited by church and state from marrying first cousins or closer relatives. No other mating proscriptions based on kinship exist. This analysis is based on pedigrees four generations deep for each currently-married individual. These pedigrees were constructed from private and published genealogies and from individual interviews conducted during four months of residence in the community in 1979-1980. Findings are that 47.4 per cent of all marriages are between second cousins. No significant basis exists toward marrying matrilateral or patrilateral cousins. This finding concords with the absence of prescriptive marriage rules and also reflects the demographic constraints on mate choice.

The aim of this paper is to determine through demographic and statistical analysis the types and frequencies of cousin marriage among the "Nebraska" Amish of Central Pennsylvania. Of special interest is to determine if rules for types of cousin marriage agree with actual marriage behavior. Here I understand marriage rules to mean stated preferences or stated practices. Marriage behavior I take to mean statistical frequencies of marriage types.
Levi-Strauss makes a distinction between elementary and complex marriage systems. Elementary systems have a prescriptive marriage rule, such as a prescription that a man must marry a woman of the category cross-cousin and no other woman. Complex systems have only negative rules that specify prohibited relatives based on kinship relationship between potential married partners, such as a prohibition against

marriage with a first cousin (LeviStrauss, 1969). Marriage rules also often specify a lateral preference, for instance, a preference for marrying a matrilateral relative. The Nebraska Amish have a complex marriage system in the above sense, and no stated lateral preference.
Quite apart from marriage rules, Hammel argues that certain demographic facts would lead one to expect a lateral bias in cousin marriage. This bias would exist when males marry at an age several years older than females because, in general, women on mother's side would tend to be younger than women on father's side and thus be more appropriate mates for a male ego (Hammel, 1978). Another possible bias might occur because of the custom of virilocal residence. If young men live closer to and relate more to father's people rather than mother's, we might expect them to choose a mate from their

82

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

Kissing Cousins

83

father's people. In the next section I will discuss the existence of these demographic factors in the Nebraska Amish.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The Nebraska Amish population is located in Central Pennsylvania in Mifflin, Centre, Snyder, and Union Counties. The group is called "Nebraska" Amish because its organizing bishop came from Nebraska. They use horses for farming, and horse and buggy for transportation. Car ownership, electricity, and telephones are prohibited by church rules.
Data on the Nebraska Amish population were collected in 1979 and 1980 from published and unpublished genealogies, and from selected respondents. The sample used in this paper consists of 380 currently married individuals (190 marriages).

Before 1933, the Nebraska or "White Buggy" population was one Amish church affiliation, with its roots going back to the first Amish settlers in Mifflin County in 1791 (Hostetler, 1980). In 1933 and 1978, acrimonious fissions divided the church, resulting in three separate Nebraska churches or affiliations existing today.
The SYA and CZA affiliations are each composed of three church districts and the RYA affiliation is composed of two church districts. Note in Figure 1 that church districts from the three affiliations overlap significantly.
Each affiliation has an average of 300.7 adults and children. The church district is the smallest unit of organization with an average size of 112.8 adults and children. Of married adults 84.9 per cent of spouses married someone from the same church affiliation, and 58.7 per cent married within their own church district.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

FIG. 1.--^The Nebraska Amish in Central Pennsylvania: CZA Church (3 districts), SYA Church (3 districts), and RYA Church (2 districts).

84

Hurd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Age at first marriage for Nebraska where F¡ equals F for Spouse 1, F2 Amish males is 23.2 years and 22.0 years equals F for Spouse 2, and Fn equals F for females. Church membership is re- for the (real or hypothetical) offspring

quired for marriage. Each Nebraska of 1 and 2. (See Wright, 1922, for a fuller

Amish church affiliation is endogamous, explanation of calculating relatedness.)

the extent of the endogamous unit being The value of R represents the probable

determined not by geography, but proportion of genes the spouses share by

rather by affiliation membership. For a reason of descent from common ances-

general discussion of U.S. Amish de- tors. For our purposes, R is an index of

mography, especially with respect to how closely the pair is related.

marriage and fertility, see Ericksen et al., 1979. For a fuller discussion of Nebraska Amish marriage, see Hurd, 1981 and 1983.

The quality of relatedness between spouses was determined by a computer search for all common ancestors, and the specification of the specific genea-

With the aid of the computer, geneal- logical links connecting both spouses to

ogies or pedigrees four generations deep each of these ancestors. First, the mar-

were constructed for each spouse, and riage types were classified by degree of

common ancestors identified. Pedigrees cousin married (e.g., second or third

for these individuals are 91.1 per cent cousin). (In some cases, this classifica-

complete extending back four genera- tion produced two cousin classifications

tions. To determine the quantity or for one marriage, for instance, in cases

amount of relatedness, Wright's Coef- where the spouses were related as sec-

ficientof Inbreeding, F, was calculated ond cousins and also as third cousins.)

based on the formula,

Second, each marriage was classified by

the closest connection between spouses,

ni + ni + 1

rendering just one cousin degree classi-

F = S (0.5)

(1 + F.) í (1) fication for each of the 190 marriages. All the marriages where "closest cousin

type" was second cousin were further

where «i equals the number of genera- analyzed as to type of second cousin.

tional steps from Spouse 1 back to the Sixteen possible types of second cousin

common ancestor, n2 equals the number exist. Analysis of these types rendered

of steps back to the same ancestor from frequencies of each type of second

Spouse 2, and Fa equals the Coefficient cousin classification. of Inbreeding (F) of the common ances-

tor. The value inside brackets is

summed over all pathways to all common ancestors, giving Wright's Coef-

RESULTS

ficient of Inbreeding (F). With this value

MARRIAGE RULES

in hand, Wright's Coefficient of Rela- The Nebraska Amish (like all other

tionship (R) can be calculated:

Amish groups) have no stated prefer-

ence for marrying on father's side of the

2F,12 family or on mother's side of the family.

Rn =

(2) Thus, based only on stated marriage

V (1 + F,) (1 + F2)

rules, we would not expect a patrilateral

Vol. 32, No. 1-2

Kissing Cousins

85

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

or matrilateral bias in cousin marriage patterns. Because of the limited number of nonrelated potential spouses in the church, we would expect a significant number of second cousin marriages.
No Nebraska Amish marriages are closer than second cousin. One respondent states, "Relatives and ministers don't let these people court each other, because they don't think these marriages are healthy physically. Up the valley, a man married in between first and second cousin [his first cousin was her parents]. They call this second cousin, and what we call second cousin they call third cousin."
Another respondent, when asked why the people usually marry second cousins said, "That's all there is around. Most of the people in the church are relatives." Why do most people marry within the church? "That's just the way we do. The young people go to the singin's together, and that's who they marry." She knows of many second cousin marriages including her own, but no marriages closer than second cousin.
A third respondent stated that "In Lawrence County (Pennsylvania), widows may marry their dead husband's brother [the levirate, in anthropological parlance]. They also are allowed to marry their schwartz cousin ["black" cousin; a child of their first cousin]. But we don't allow it here; we feel related to them." She believed the word schwartz cousin came from a woman named Schwartz marrying a man of this relationship.
EXAMPLES FROM THE DATA
Scanning the data collected on 190 extant Nebraska Amish marriages, we

find it appears that most "mixed marriages" (i.e., marriages between church affiliations) were contracted by people who moved to Ohio and married there. Almost all of these people later returned to Pennsylvania. Four men moved to Ohio, married women from the Swartzentruber Amish Church, stayed awhile, then came back to Pennsylvania. Two Ohio Amish men married women from the Nebraskan Church, then moved to Pennsylvania.
The following example illustrates a typical marriage pattern in one family. In one sibship, four men and three women all married second cousins. Of these seven sibs, one is no longer in the Nebraskan Church. The respondent stated that he thought individuals visited the families of their second cousins rather infrequently. He himself didn't get to know his wife well until they began attending German school together.
The R value for the Nebraskan married pair most closely related is 0.106, almost the first-cousin level. This pair shares nine ancestors in common: six GGP and 3 GGGP (see pedigree in Figure 2).
Three of the husband's four grandparents had siblings who were the wife's grandparents.
One hundred eighty one (95.3 per cent) of the marriages are between individuals with traceable common ancestors. Mean Coefficient of Relationship (R) for all married pairs is 0.041. This figure falls between first cousin (0.125) and second cousin (0.031). As previously stated, the highest value of R for a married pair is 0.106. As will be made clear in the following section, these values of R reflect not only the immediate genealogical connection between the spouses, but also multiple pathways of

86

Hurd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

J = Common Ancestor
FIG. 2.--Pedigree showing common ancestors and genealogical connections for the Nebraskan couple with the highest level of relatedness (/? = 0.106).

relatedness to more distant ancestors. The level of relatedness between spouses must be set against the backdrop of the general level of relatedness. The 380 currently married individuals could be paired up in 72,010 possible ways. The mean value of R for these possible pairs is 0.062, compared to the mean value of R for spouse pairs of 0.041.
Figure 3 demonstrates the frequency of different closest cousin types. For 90 marriages (47.4 per cent), the closest genealogical connection with spouse issecond cousin. For 74 of the marriages (38.9 per cent), closest genealogical connection is third cousin. In seventeen

of the cases (8.9 per cent), the marriages are cross-generational, i.e., one spouse is at a greater genealogical distance from the closest common ancestor than is the other spouse. In nine cases (4.7 per cent), the spouses have no common ancestors back four generations. Thus, 86.3 per cent of all marriages are between second or third cousins. In summary, the calculation of Wright's Coefficientof Relationship is an attempt to understand the quantity of relatedness that exists. A classification of cousin types such as is demonstrated in Figure 3 is an attempt to understand the nature or qualityof cousin relationships in Nebraska Amish marriage.

Vol. 32, No. 1-2
90

Kissing Cousins 74

87

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

17
9

CO

CD O

o

O co

13 co Q. I
o IQ o CD

c:O CO CD

CO

CO
co

CD
a
r+
CD
a.

FIG. 3.--Types of cousin marriage for 190Nebraska Amish marriages.

TYPES OF SECOND COUSIN MARRIAGE
There are 16possible ways a malecan be related to a female second cousin. In

each case, at least one grandparent of each spouse is sibling to one grandparent of the other spouse (See Figure 1). Eight of the cousin types are linked to

88

Hurd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

ego through his father (patrilateral) and eight through his mother (matrilateral).
If a bias in laterality existed in Nebraska Amish cousin marriage, we would expect to discover it by an analysis of types of second cousin marriage, since the types are based on the sex of the linking relatives.
In Table 1,119 total second cousin relationships exist in 90 marriages. Clearly, in some of the marriages the spouses are double second cousins. This means that in the grandparental generation two sibships intermarried. Double second cousins have double the Coefficientof Relationship compared to simple second cousins.

No respondent indicated any preference for marrying on the matrilateral or patrilateral side. Fifty-five males married a woman on their father's side and 64 married a woman on their mother's side. A chi-square test revealed no statistically significant bias towards matrilaterality. I also wished to know if the overall distribution of marriage types among the 16 categories revealed any statistically significant bias in marriage type toward any one category. A chisquare test failed to confirm any overall bias. Thus, there is no evidence that any bias in type of second cousin marriage exists among the Nebraska Amish.

DISCUSSION

HISTORY OF COUSIN MARRIAGE

TABLE 1
TYPES OFSECOND COUSIN RELATIONSHIPSFOR ALL CURRENTLY MARRIED NEBRASKA AMISH
INDIVIDUALS

Relationships

Patrilineal FFBSD FFBDD FFZSD FFZDD

.. ..

FMBSD FMBDD .. FMZSD . . . FMZDD

Total . . . .

....

Matrilineal MMBSD . . MMBDD .. MMZSD .. MMZDD ..

MFBSD MFBDD MFZSD MFZDD

.. ..

Total . . .

Total relationships .

Frequency
11 7 5 9 3 7 8 5 55
10 6 9 7 0 13 11 8 64
119

It is clear that most individuals (86.3 per cent) married either a second or a third cousin. No marriages closer than second cousin were observed. The high levels of spouse relatedness (0.041) average; a bit closer than second cousin) were generated from a succession of individuals marrying second cousins rather than from recent marriages of first cousins.
The emic (or "insider's") view of marriage expressed by respondents is congruent with the observed frequencies of marriage. It is clear that respondents recognize possible harm from high levels of inbreeding. It is not clear that they recognize the cumulative effects of a long history of endogamous marriage, or the heightened levels of inbreeding produced by marrying double second cousins. The model type of cousin marriage (second cousin) compares with respondents' statements that people customarily marry second cousins. There is

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32,No. 1-2

Kissing Cousins

89

no stated preference forpatrilateral or cousins would probably bein ego's af-

matrilateral cousins, and no statistically filiation and hence more accessible as

significant lateral bias is indicated in the marriage partners. However, few

data. women marry infrom outside the affilia-

WHY NO BIAS?

tion. Also, although marriage is predominantly virilocal, it isalmost always

On the face of it, thelack of lateral endogamous with respect to affiliation.

bias inmarriage patterns iswhat would Thus, for aninterested male, thepool of

be expected from respondents' state- young people whosocialize probably

ments. However, two demographic would include almost as many from

facts would suggest a bias in laterality. mother's side of the family asfrom fa-

First, men marry at anolder age than do ther's. These two systematic biases are

women, as noted above. If this is the both small, and since they would work

case, a male should find on the average in opposite directions, they would tend

that women on his mother's side would to cancel each other out. Therefore, the

be a bityounger than those on his fa- marriage patterns that weobserve both

ther's side, and thus he would tend to fulfill demographic expectations, and

marry in the maternal direction. The also conform to thestated preferences

male-female disparity in age atmarriage of respondents.

is small, however, and would have a

minimal effect. Second, the fact ofpre-

dominant virilocal residence might indi-

cate that men would tend to find wives on father's side. This isbecause, incases where ego's parents arenotboth from the same affiliation, mother ismore frequently the parent who has come in

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The computer program forcalculatingrelatedness wasdeveloped by TomMalancon and Napoleon A. Chagnon at Pennsylvania State University. The research for this paper

from another affiliation. This means that offspring of mother's cousins would probably bein another affiliation from ego, while offspring of ego's father's

was supported byagrant from the Hill Foundation for Anthropology (Pennsylvania State University) andfrom theNationalEndowment for the Humanities, John A. Hostetler, Principal Investigator.

REFERENCES

ERICKSEN, JULIA A., EUGENE P. ERICKSON,
JOHN A. HOSTETLER, and GERTRUDE E. HUN
TINGTON. 1979. Fertility patterns and trends among the Old Order Amish. Pop. Stud. 33:255-276.
HAMMEL, GENE. 1978. Matrilateral implications ofstructural cross-cousin marriage. In Ezra Zubrow (ed.), Demographic anthropology. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
HOSTETLER, JOHN A. 1980. Amish society.The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
HURD, JAMES. 1981. Mate choice among the

Nebraska Amish of Central Pennsylvania. Ph.D. dissertation, Anthropology department, Pennsylvania State University. University Park, Pennsylvania.
_____. 1983. Church fissioning and kin relatedness among the "Nebraska" Amish of Pennsylvania. Soc. Biol. 30(1).
LEVI-STRAUSS, CLAUDE. 1969. The elementary
structures of kinship. Rev.ed. Eyre and Spottiswoode, London.
WRIGHT, SEWALL. 1922. Coefficients of in-
breeding and relationship. Amer. Natural. 56:330-338.

