Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
New biomedical data base by ISI® features researchfront specialty searching
To cite this article: (1980) New biomedical data base by ISI® features researchfront specialty searching, Social Biology, 27:2, 155-156, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988416 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988416
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Communications
New Biomedical Data Base by ISI® Features Research-front Specialty Searching

ii ! i
!J' l\

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

An online biomedical data base featuring a new way to search the literature will be available from the Institute for Scientific Information® in July. CalledISI/ BIOMED", the data base uses a new system called research-front specialty searching that locates current literature in active biomedical research areas.
The ISI/BIOMED data base is accessible through Telenet and available through the ISI Online Network. It is drawn from the Science Citation Index® (SCI9) data base. The result is a file covering more than 1,200 of the most important biomedical journals published throughout the world. ISI/BIOMED contains full bibliographic information for each journal item indexed. Both the current year, with monthly updates, and the previous two years are covered.
Like SCISEARCH® (the online version of the SCI), ISI/BIOMED can be searched by author's name or institution, title words, language, document type, ci-

each subscriber receives.) The result will be a display of every item in the ISI/ BIOMED data base which is related to the specified specialty.
The system is made possible by ISI®citation analysis process called "co-citation clustering." Clusters are groups of closely related highly-cited papers--the core literature of active research-fronts. In 1980 there were approximately 2,800 researchfront specialties in ISI/BIOMED.
These specialties are particularly useful for viewing, organizing, and searching the literature. They are derived from the citation patterns of publishing scientists and so reflect directly, without subjective judgment, focal points of reseach activity. The names of the specialties are words used by the scientists themselves in the titles of their articles, thus reflecting accurately the most current terminology. The research-front specialties will be redefined each year to pick up shifts in emphasis and interaction in and among specialties.

ted references, source journal, and year of publication. ISI/BIOMED is unique, however, in that it offers direct access to the literature of research-front specialties, areas of intense research activity and rapid advance.
To obtain a complete bibliography of current papers on a particular specialty, the researcher simply enters the number assigned to that specialty. (A full list of specialties with their identifying numbers is found in the printed publication Research-Fronts in ISI/BIOMED which

The average search in ISI/BIOMED will retrieve about 40 papers. However, since some searches may locate as many as 600, various methods of limiting results are available. For example, the searcher may choose to display only those papers from a particular year or those papers having an above average relevance to the specialty. (An item's relevance to a specialty is determined by the number of papers the item cites in the specialty.)
Some papers in the ISI/BIOMED data base cite the core literature of more than

155

156

Communications

Social Biology

one research-front specialty. The numbers of all specialties to which the item belongs are displayed at the end of its bibliographic citation. The searcher can turn to the Index of Research-Front Specialty Numbers to find the names of the additional specialties and determine whether to search them for further relevant mate-

rial. ISI/BIOMED is updated monthly, so it can be checked for the latest work published in fields of interest.
For further information, contact Gerald Francis, Institute for Scientific Information, 3501 Market Street, University City Science Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

