Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Diseases determined by major genes
N. E. Morton
To cite this article: N. E. Morton (1979) Diseases determined by major genes, Social Biology, 26:2, 94-103, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988368 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988368
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Diseases Determined by Major Genes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

N. E. Morton
Population Genetics Laboratory University of Hawaii Honolulu, Hawaii

ABSTRACT: The rise of genetic epidemiology, its development from inspection of data to analysis of major loci, applications to recurrence risks, and the countercurrent of ideological opposition are described.

Genetic epidemiology is concerned ena must substitute, in a poor way, for ex-

with etiology, distribution, and control of periments." From this understanding that

disease in relatives, and with inherited clinical impression is a makeshift for

causes of disease in populations.Inherited statistical analysis, Weinberg, Lenz, and

is used in a broad sense to include both Bernstein developed early mathematical

biological and cultural inheritance, where approaches, which ended when Hitler

culturalsubsumes any environmental fac- came to power in Germany. A few years

tor distributed nonrandomly among fami- later, Stalin liquidated human genetics in

lies (Morton and Chung, 1978).

Russia. By then the spark had been trans-

Genetic epidemiology has roots in mitted to Fisher and Haldane in England

older studies of space-time clustering of and to Wright and Snyder in America. At

disease. Maupertuis described dominant midcentury a methodology had been de-

segregation of an extra finger in the eight- veloped appropriate to simple Mendelian

eenth century, but Mendel more than a traits.

century later had the realization that The end of World War II ushered in the

created genetics:

computer age, which for the first time per-

Among all the numerous experiments mitted study of complex inheritance in

made, not one has been carried out to such an extent and in such a way as to make it possible to determine the number of different forms under which the offspring of hybrids appear, or to arrange these forms with certainty according to their separate generations, or definitely to ascertain their statistical relations (Mendel, 1865, translated by the Royal Horticultural Society of London, reprinted in Peters, 1959).

which risks vary among families of a given mating type. Sporadic cases (which might be transmissible mutants or nontransmissible phenocopies) were introduced (Morton, 1958). At about the same time, efficient and reliable methods to locate genes on chromosomes were advanced (Morton, 1955). Inbreeding was developed into a tool for resolving the muta-

Mendel was rediscovered at the begin- tional load of deleterious genes (Morton

ning of this century, and within a few years et al., 1956) as an outgrowth of studies on

the German physician Weinberg (1908, p. genetic effects of atomic radiation (Neel

368) recognized that "In the case of man, and Schull, 1956).

the statistical evaluation of mass phenom- Neel and Schull (1954) were apparently

94

Vol. 26, No.2

Diseases Determined By Major Genes

95

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

the first to recognize that these events Serious medical interest did not begin un-

were forging a new discipline of "epide- til public health measures had reduced the

miological genetics" concerned with in- impact of infectious disease in industrial

teraction of heredity and disease. During societies. Epidemiology should span all

the next decade Blumberg (1961) edited causes of disease, but traditionally genetic

Genetic Polymorphisms and Geographic factors were excluded either because they

Variationsin Disease, and Neel, Shaw, et demanded an unfamiliar methodology or

al. (1965) produced Geneticsand the Epi- because they were illogically assumed to

demiology of Chronic Diseases in which be unresponsive to environmental inter-

Thomas Francis remarked:

vention. Quantitative geneticists are pre-

So when the human geneticist turns to occupied by improvement of domestic

diseases and disorder in the population as plants and animals through artificial selec-

the basis of genetic analysis, he is promptly tion. Evolutionary geneticists are con-

in epidemiology. And when he asserts the concept of multiple factors to produce an effect, he is in full cry epidemiologically.

cerned with interpretation of events leading to speciation. All these disciplines are

Conversely, where the epidemiologist more familiar with paradigms of experi-

seeks explanation for familial or other mental biology than with the statistical

group aggregations of health or disease, he evaluation of mass phenomena which is

is immediately involved in genetic problems.

the basis of astronomy, epidemiology, and many other sciences. Studies in animals by

By 1967, when Morton, Chung, and Mi Sewall Wright and others have been

discussed problems in genetic epide- seminal; but man is the only organism for

miology, there was a general agreement which concern about etiology and risk for

that synthesis of goal and methods from disease generates strong and persistent in-

epidemiology and genetics was inevitable terest in dissecting the contributions of

and desirable. We preferred the term genes and environment to family re-

"genetic epidemiology" because determi- semblance. Emergence of a discipline at

nants of familial aggregation may be the interface of genetics and epide-

purely environmental, whereas "epide- miology, concerned with contemporary

miological genetics" suggests an inappro- health-related problems that include ma-

priate prejudice against environmental jor loci, chromosomal aberrations, poly-

hypotheses. Without commitment to any genes, and cultural inheritance was inevi-

label, the growing consensus is reflected table but required a long gestation. When

by such recent books as Genetics, En- the history of genetic epidemiology is writ-

vironment, and Behavior (Ehrman, ten, I believe that the coming decade will

Omenn, and Caspari, 1972), Gene- be seen as the period of most rapid

environment Interaction in Common Dis- growth, to which this symposium can be

eases (Japan Medical Research Founda- no more than prologue.

tion, 1977), Genetic Epidemiology

(Morton and Chung, 1978), and The Genetic Analysis of Common Diseases

INSPECTION OF DATA

(Sing and Skolnick, 1979).

Many criteria have been used to sug-

Although genetic epidemiology is too gest the significance of genetic factors in a

young a science to have attracted histo- trait of unknown etiology, including: (1)

rians or philosophers, it is tempting to an elevated risk in relatives compared

speculate why it has emerged as a distinct with the general population, (2) greater

discipline only within the last decade. concordance of the trait in identical than

96

Morton

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

in fraternal twins, (3) an excess of consan- or quantitative trait in families and the test

guineous parentage for a presumed reces- of major loci against multifactorial al-

sive trait, (4) failure of the trait to ternatives.

"spread" to unrelated individuals, (5) on- For the first half-century after rediscov-

set at a characteristic age without a known ery of Mendel's work, human geneticists

precipitating event, (6) variation among concentrated on traits that approximated

populations and behavior on outcrossing Mendelian inheritance, at least in some

in accordance with genetic theory, and (7) pedigrees. McKusick (1978) lists 1,364

occurrence of a homologous, inherited "proven" loci, many of which were dis-

condition in other mammals.

covered during this early period (Table 1).

Consideration of these criteria is A slightly larger number are "in limbo,"

sufficient to show that individually and either because allelism with another mu-

conjointly they cannot be regarded as rig- tant is suspected or because the evidence

orous evidence of a genetic etiology. The for a major gene is not compelling. Some

genetic method consists in showing that a of the latter failures are due to small num-

trait could be due to one of several simple bers of observations; others, to the notori-

modes of inheritance. Classically, these ous difficulty of discriminating a major lo-

are dominant or recessive, autosomal or cus from multifactorial disease

sex-linked, with clear differences in trans- susceptibility (Edwards, 1960). R. A.

mission pattern (Morton, 1962). How- Fisher provided the basic tools in his

ever, when multifactorial causes are intro- theory of maximum likelihood, and

duced, both genetic and cultural, Haldane (1949) made the initial applica-

inspection of pedigrees becomes so unre- tion to man when he tested for an excessof

liable that it is useful only to suggest hy- isolated cases of albinism which might be

potheses for formal test.

sporadic phenocopies. Generalization of

this approach became feasible with the ad-

SEGREGATION ANALYSIS

vent of computers (Morton, 1958) and a mixture of two distributions was re-

An important class of problems in- solved--the high-risk group correspond-

volves detection and characterization of ing to major loci and the low-risk group to

major loci at which single genes (usually the multifactorial background (Morton,

rare) have substantial effects on disease 1969). A multifactorial model was intro-

susceptibility as reflected by high "pene- duced, comparison of the two approaches

trance" (i.e., alarge proportion of the sus- giving an approximate test for major loci

ceptible genotype denned by one locus is (Morton, Yee, et al., 1970).

affected in all multifactorial back- At this point, Elston and Stewart

grounds). The background typically in- (1971) took an important step. Until then,

cludes many genes of small effect which all analyses had taken children conditional

usually cannot be distinguished (poly- on parental phenotypes. They showed

genes) as well as numerous environmental how likelihoods for larger pedigrees could

effects which may in part be familial be calculated, under restrictions that were

(cultural inheritance). By natural progressively removed (Cannings et al.,

broadening of "segregation," which in 1978). They also introduced a generalized

classical genetics means the separation of single-locus model with transmission fre-

allele pairs and their distribution to quencies that take Mendelian values of 1,

different gametes, segregation analysis 1/2, 0 for the three genotypes in the ab-

deals with the transmission of a qualitative sence of cultural inheritance.

Vol. 26,No. 2

Diseases Determined ByMajor Genes

97

TABLE 1
GENE LOCI IN MOUSE AND MAN*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

GENE LOCI

Mousi-:

Proven

MAN

In limbo

Autosomal dominant

Autosomal recessive

Sex-linked

....

Total

194 736 753
222 521 596
16 107 98

432

1.364

1,447

·Data from McKusick, 1978.

This model holds for any combination cludes cultural inheritance, polygenes,

of major loci andpolygenes. Therefore, if and a major locus simultaneously. This

the transmission frequencies are not approach wassuggested by Carter (1969)

significantly different from Mendelian va- for pyloric stenosis (where a major locus

lues, we suspect that genetic factors are has yet tobeproven) and was used toiden-

important; but we cannot say from this tify major loci as "leading factors" in ani-

analysis whether cultural inheritance mal experiments (Wright, 1968). It has

might besimulating genetic inheritance or been implemented innuclear families con-

whether a major locus is present. Con- sisting of children andtheir parents (Mor-

versely, if the transmission frequencies are ton and MacLean, 1974) for a number of

significantly non-Mendelian, this fact sug- traits, confirming major loci for hyper-p-

gests that cultural inheritance is present, cholesterolemia, the Lp antigen, im-

but does not exclude a genetic compo- munoglobulin E, and PTCtaste sensitiv-

nent, either polygenic or major locus. We ity, but giving negative evidence for

cannot be sure that ascertainment bias, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperuricemia,

which presents unsolved problems inpedi- blood pressure, andother traits for which

grees, isnot distorting theevidence.

inspection of pedigrees had suggested a

For the generalized single-locus model, major locus to some investigators (Mor-

as currently formulated, estimates of ma- ton andChung, 1978). Current effort is to-

jor locus gene frequencies apply to the se- ward extension of the mixed model to pe-

lected pedigree, andnottothe population digrees sampled through affected

from which it was drawn; with concomi- members. There is no doubt that, despite

tant polygenic or cultural inheritance, the formidable computational problems, the

gene frequency estimate is meaningless. mixed model provides the most incisive

Because of these difficulties, advocatesof segregation analysis, and it would be sur-

the generalized single-locus model regard prising if the generalized single-locus

it as a preliminary test, critical evidence model and other preliminary tests per-

for a major locus requiring assignment by sisted into theeighties.

linkage analysis to a particular chromo-

some (Elston, 1979). This paradigm has not yetbeen successful for any locus which

LINKAGE ANALYSIS

was not obvious on inspection of pedi- Once a major locus has been detected

grees.

and its gene frequencies and effects have

Critics of the generalized single-locus been estimated, the next step is to place it

model prefer a mixed model which in- in thechromosome map, which consists of

98

Morton

Social Biology

ENOl

FUCA
AK2 UMPK

1.9 3.9
19.0 21.3 23.0
36.6 37.6

PGD ENOl
ELI RH FUCA
SC UMPK

53.4 -f PGM1

UMPK 4 8 . 6 - PGM1

86.4 AMY

86.8-AMY

103.2 108.2

01QI2 FY.CAE1 1 0 8 . 2

01012 FY.CAE1

137.5 PEPC

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Physical

Cotransference

Genetic

Nonparametric

Fig. 1--Physical and genetic maps ofChromosome 1(Rao et al, 1979).

23 linear structures corresponding to22 Genes for susceptibility tojuvenile diabe-

pairs of autosomes and the X chromo- tes, ankylosing spondylitis, hemochroma-

somes. Each chromosome pair is charac- tosis, cerebellar ataxia, and many other

terized byits banding pattern anddistribu- diseases arelocated with theHLAregion

tion of chiasmata. Methods have been of Chromosome 6, but low penetrance,

developed to detect linkage reliably in delayed onset, linkage disequilibrium,

small samples (Morton, 1956) andto con- and unknown gene frequency andsegre-

struct maximum-likelihood maps from gation parameters make resolution

data on recombination between linked difficult. Improvements in statistical

loci (Morton, 1979). Somatic cell hybridi- methods areunder way.

zation locates genes which maybe inva-

riant within ourspecies, inwhich case they permit phylogenetic comparisons but are

POPULATION STRUCTURE

not useful for genetic epidemiology.Fig- Statistical analysis of consanguineous

ure 1shows thepresent state ofknowledge marriages, which bring together genes

about recombination in males for Chro- identical by descent, provides information

mosome 1, the largest human chromo- about numbers of loci, gene frequencies,

some. The genetic map for females is and mutation rates for rare recessives

about 1.8 times the male length. As the (Morton et al.,1956; Morton, 1975). Rec-

number of mapped loci increases, use of ognized consanguinity is only one aspect

linked markers will become more feasible of population structure. Often genealo-

in genetic counseling topredict the carrier gies areincomplete, butgeographic distri-

state for disease with delayed onset. Dis- bution can still provide evidence of re-

tinction ofallelic associations from closely mote consanguinity, which falls off nearly

linked loci presents a special problem. exponentially from thecenter of gene ori-

Vol. 26,No.2

Diseases Determined ByMajor Genes

99

O > POSSIBLE CARRIER SIBSHIP

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

3ZE

3ZH

Fig. 2--Ethnohistory of achromatopsia (Hussels and Morton, 1972).

gin (Malecot, 1948). During the sixties there was rapid development of methods to determine genetic kinship from migration, genealogy, and phenotype bioassay (Morton, 1973). The importance of kinship is that it allows genotype frequencies to be inferred from gene frequencies, thereby giving estimates of genetic risks and inferences about selective pressures, population origins, and genetic drift. By chance, genes rare in the general population often "drift" to substantial frequencies in small isolated populations (called demes or isolates).Figure 2shows part ofa pedigree for achromatopsia, a rare eye disease transmitted from onesurvivor ofa typhoon twohundred years agoon Pingelap atoll (Hussels and Morton, 1972). Now 5 per cent of the islanders are affected.
There are many examples of such chance fluctuations in gene frequency, which though unlikely for any particular gene areprobable for at least oneof many genes in a small population. When the

time scale is extended, the precise historical event which gave rise to drift is forgotten, andthepossibility must be considered that high gene frequency is due to some obscure local selective pressure onheterozygotes. For example, cystic fibrosis is rare in the tropics but reaches a disease frequency of 1/3,800 in Western Europe, substantially greater than thefrequency of Tay-Sachs disease in Ashkenazi Jews.For such diseases, drift seems the likely explanation in the absence of compelling evidence for heterozygote advantage (Rao and Morton, 1973;Ewens, 1978). Fortunately, most questions in genetic epidemiology depend on the statistical evaluation of contemporary mass phenomena, and the historical uncertainties of evolutionary genetics are rarely approached.
SOME EXAMPLES
Among the thousands of diseases in man, I shall take four to illustrate these principles: hyper-pJ-cholesterolemia, hy-

100

Morton

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

peruricemia, limb-girdle muscular dys- cultural inheritance for most cases. Devel-

trophy, and Duchenne muscular dys- opments in complex segregation analysis

trophy.

support the latter interpretation (Morton,

During the last century, British physi- ms.). Probably for that reason, the bio-

cians defined "xanthoma tuberosum chemistry is poorly understood. Although

multiplex" on the basis of lipid deposition polygenic or cultural inheritance seems to

in skin and tendons, often associated with account for most cases of gout in Cauca-

cardiovascular disease in families. As sians, the etiology of hyperuricemia is het-

early as 1908, Gossage suggested a domi- erogeneous. A sex-linked gene for

nant gene, but proof did not come until deficiency of the enzyme HGPRT (hypox-

about 1920 with reliable methods to anthine-guanine phosphoribosyltrans-

measure cholesterol. It was then realized ferase) causes hyperuricemia and the bi-

that extreme disease is characteristic of zarre Lesch-Nyhan disease, characterized

homozygotes, but heterozygotes have ele- by mental deficiency and self-mutilation

vated beta cholesterol. Prevention of car- (Seegmiller, 1976). Less extreme alleles

diovascular disease in these families re- cause gout, but are rare in the gouty popu-

quires reduction of plasma cholesterol. lation. Patients with recessive glucose-6-

Even small families segregating for this phosphatase deficiency are hyperuri-

gene, which has a frequency of only 0.001, cemic, and a few families suggesting a

can be recognized and the elevation dominant gene for hyperuricemia with

shown not to be due to polygenes or nephropathy have been descibed. Two

cultural inheritance, both of which have observations suggest major loci in certain

significant effects on cholesterol level populations: a glutathione reductase iso-

(Rao et al., 1979). Goldstein and Brown zyme in Negro populations has been re-

(1973) have shown that the primary de- ported to cause gout (Long, 1967), and

fect, demonstrable in fibroblasts, is a lack Blumberg (1965) has proposed that hy-

of feedback suppression for cholesterol peruricemia in Micronesia may be due to

synthesis. For the kinetics of this reaction an unusual frequency of secretors of

they have inferred two different alleles for BAIB (3-amino-isobutyric acid), which

hyper-P-cholesterolemia (Goldstein et in other populations is generally attrib-

al., 1977), illustrating the complementary uted to a recessive gene. Etiological het-

role of statistical and biochemical anal- erogeneity makes hyperuricemia,a fertile

ysis. For genes with milder effects on dis- field, despite negative evidence for a ma-

ease susceptibility, biochemical resolution jor locus in Caucasian samples.

may be necessary before statistical anal- Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy exists

ysis is feasible. Whatever the order of dis- in two forms: a recessive type with an ele-

covery, one approach supports and vali- vated frequency of consanguineous paren-

dates the other.

tage and a sporadic type unrelated to in-

Gout is a characteristic type of painful breeding (Morton and Chung, 1959). It

arthritis, related to elevated uric acid (hy- has been suggested that sporadics may in-

peruricemia). Recognition of this disease clude rare expression in heterozygotes of a

goes back the fifth century B.C., but dis- usually recessive gene, as is known to oc-

agreement about its inheritance has per- cur in the sex-linked Duchenne form.

sisted until recent years. Even in the same However, these studies were done at a

families with gout, Smyth et al. (1948) ar- time when differential diagnosis of poly-

gued for a dominant gene, while Neel, Ra- myositis and neuropathy was less certain,

kic, et al. (1965) favored polygenes or and before efficient tests for heterozygous

Vol. 26, No. 2

Diseases Determined By Major Genes

101

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

carriers were introduced. The etiology rupted in Nazi Germany, it was destroyed

and frequency of sporadic cases should be in Russia a decade before the rest of

reinvestigated, since it determines the re- genetics surrendered to Lysenkoism. The

currence risk for parents of isolated cases. same forces are at play in the West and

Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a sex- affect the new science of genetic epide-

linked disease which affects males and miology. So far, studies of major genes

some chromosomally abnormal females, have not aroused the irrational opposition

the fertility of male patients being too low of groups which attack biometrical

to produce a homozygote. Although car- genetics because of IQ, genetic counseling

rier detection is fairly good, there is dis- because of heritability, and population cy-

agreement about the proportion of cases togenetics because of XYY behavior. It is

which are sporadic due to fresh mutation, happenstance that the XYY trait is chro-

which maintains the gene in the popula- mosomal, and failure to extend the witch-

tion despite low fertility of patients (Mor- hunt to major genes may be only a lull in

ton and Lalouel, in press).

the storm.

The battle lines between science and

RECURRENCE RISKS

antiscientism are clearly drawn. Without betraying the culture that supports it,

Even for simple modes of inheritance, genetic epidemiology can accept no con-

some parameters must be estimated from straint on analysis of data obtained in an

the data, most rigorously by segregation ethical manner to test scientific theory.

analysis which also determines polygenic The republic of science will not be safe,

and cultural inheritance. These parame- and genetic epidemiology will not realize ters may then be used to provide a specific its potential to understand and eventually

recurrence risk for a unique family, with control the major diseases and causes of

as much assurance as the input data jus- death, until militant hereditarians and en-

tify. Often these calculations can be done vironmentalists alike are perceived as

with reasonable accuracy by hand, but trespassing demagogues.

computer assistance must be invoked for

diseases with mutation, incomplete pene-

trance, etiological heterogeneity, or

significant polygenic or cultural inheritance. Replacement of crude empirical

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

risks by specific and more reliable ones based on segregation analysis is one of the promising developments in genetic epide-

This work was supported by Grant GM 17173 from the U.S. National Institutes of Health. The original version of this paper was presented at the symposium "Genetics in Epi-

miology (Lalouel, 1978).

demiology," sponsored by the AAASSections

on Biological and Medical Sciences, the So-

ciety for the Study of Social Biology, and the

DISCUSSION

American Public Health Association at the

Annual Meeting of the American Association

Human genetics is the most sensitive of for the Advancement of Science, Houston,

all sciences to ideological attack. Cor- Texas, January 4,1979.

102

Morton

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BLUMBERG, B. S. (ed.). 1961. Genetic polymorphisms and geographic variations in disease. Grune and Stratton, New York.
. 1965.Heredity of gout and hyperuricemia. Arthrit. Rheumat. 8:627-647.
CANNINGS, C., E. A. THOMPSON, and M.
SKOLNICK. 1978. Probability functions on complex pedigrees. Adv. Appl. Prob. 10:26-61.

. 1956. Thedetection and estimation of
linkage between the genes for elliptocytosis and theRh blood type. Amer. J.Hum. Genet. 8:80-96.
. 1958. Segregation analysis in human genetics. Science 127:79-80.
. 1962. Segregation and linkage, p. 17-52. In W. J. Burdette (ed.), Methodology in human genetics. Holden-Day, San Francisco.

CARTER, C. O. 1969. Genetics of common disor-

.1969. Segregation analysis, p. 129-139. In

ders. Brit. Med.Bull. 25:52-57.

N. E.Morton (ed.), Computer applications in

EDWARDS, J. H. 1960. Thesimulation of Mendel- genetics. Univ. ofHawaii Press, Honolulu.

ism. Acta Genet. Statist. Med.10:63-70.

(ed.). 1973. Genetic structure of popula-

EHRMAN, L., G. S. OMENN, and E. CASPARI

tions. Univ. ofHawaii Press, Honolulu.

(eds.). 1972. Genetics, environment, and be-

. 1975.Kinship fitness, and evolution, p.

havior. Academic Press, New York.

133-154. In F. M.Salzano (ed.), The roleof

ELSTON, R. C. 1979. Likelihood models in human natural selection in human evolution. North-

quantitative genetics. In C. F. Sing and M. Holland Publishing, Amsterdam.

Skolnick (eds.), The genetic analysis of com-

. 1979. Analysis of crossing over in man. In

mon diseases. Alan Liss Publishing,New J. L. Hamerton (ed.), Human gene mapping4

York.

(in press)

ELSTON, R. C., and J. STEWART. 1971. A general

. Genetics of hyperuricemia in families

model for the genetic analysis of pedigree with gout (ms. inpreparation).

data. Genetics 73:695-711.

MORTON, N. E., and C. S. CHUNG. 1959. Formal

EWENS, W. J. 1978. Tay-Sachs disease and theo-

genetics of muscular dystrophy. Amer. J.

retical population genetics. Editorial: Amer.

Hum. Genet. 11:360-379.

J. Hum.Genet. 30:328-329.

(eds.). 1978. Genetic epidemiology. Aca-

GOLDSTEIN, J. L., and M. S. BROWN. 1973. Fami-

demic Press, New York.

lial hypercholesterolemia: identification of MORTON, N. E., and J. M. LALOUEL. Genetic

defect in the regulation of 3-hydroxy-3- counseling in sex linkage. In 1978Birth De-

methylglutaryl coenzyme Areductase activity fects Workshop--San Francisco. Original Ar-

associated with overproduction of choles- ticle Series, The National Foundation, New

terol. Proc. Nat.Acad. Sci.70:2804-2808.

York (in press).

GOLDSTEIN, J. L., M. S. BROWN, and N. J. STONE. MORTON, N. E., and C. J. MACLEAN. 1974. Anal-

1977. Genetics of the LDL receptor. Evidence ysis of family resemblance. III. Complex seg-

that the mutations affecting binding and in- regation ofquantitative traits. Amer. J. Hum.

ternalization are allelic. Cell 12:629-641.

Genet. 26:489-503.

HALDANE, J. B.S. 1949. A test for homogeneity MORTON, N. E., C. S. CHUNG, and M. P. Mi.

of records of familial abnormalities. Ann.

1967. Genetics of interracial crosses in Ha-

Eugen. 14:339-341.

waii. S.Karger, Basel.

HUSSELS, I. E., and N. E. MORTON. 1972. Pinge- MORTON, N. E., J. F. CROW, and H. J. MULLER.

lap and Mokil atolls: Achromatopsia. Amer.

1956. Anestimate of the mutational damage

J. Hum.Genet. 24:304-309.

in man from data on consanguineous mar-

JAPAN MEDICAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION (ed.).

riages. Proc. Nat.Acad. Sci. 42:855-863.

1977. Gene-environment interaction in com- MORTON, N. E., S. YEE, R. C. ELSTON, et al.

mon diseases. Univ. ofTokyo Press, Tokyo.

1970. Discontinuity and quasi-continuity: Al-

LALOUEL, J. M. 1978. Recurrence risks in segre-

ternative hypothesis of multifactorial inherit-

gation analysis, p. 255-284. In N. E. Morton

ance. Clin. Genet. 1:81-94.

and C. S. Chung (eds.), Genetic epide- NEEL, J. V., and W. J. SCHULL. 1954. Human

miology. Academic Press, New York.

heredity. Univ. ofChicago Press, Chicago.

LONG, W. K. 1967. Glutathione reductase in red

. 1956. The effect of exposure tothe

blood cells: Variant associated with gout.

atomic bombs on pregnancy termination in

Science 155:712-713.

Hiroshima and Nagasaki. National Research

MALÉCOT, G. 1948. Les mathématiques de

Council, Vol. 16, p. 241.National Academy

l'hérédite. Masson, Paris.

of Sciences, Washington, D.C.

MCKUSICK, V. A. 1978. Mendelian inheritance in NEEL, J. V., M. T. RAKIC, R. I. DAVIDSON, et al.

man. 5th ed. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1965. Studies of hyperuricemia. II. Areconsid-

Baltimore.

eration of the distribution of serum uric acid

MORTON, N. E. 1955. Sequential tests for the de- values in the families of Smyth, Cotterman,

tection of linkage. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.

and Freyberg. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.

7:277-318.

17:14-22.

Vol. 26, No. 2

Diseases Determined By Major Genes

103

NEEL, J. V., M. W. SHAW, and W. J. SCHULL.
1965. Genetics and the epidemiology of chronic diseases. DHEW, Public Health Service Publ. 1163. Washington, D.C.
PETERS, J. A. (ed.). 1959. Classic papers in genetics. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
RAO, D. C., B. KEATS, J. M. LALOUEL, et al. A
maximum likelihood map of chromosome 1 (in preparation).
RAO, D. C., and N. E. MORTON. 1973. Large deviations in the distribution of rare genes. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 25:594-597.
RAO, D . C., N. E. MORTON, C. L. GULBRANDSEN,
et al. 1979. Cultural and biological determinants of lipoprotein concentrations. Ann. Hum. Genet. (in press).
SEEGMILLER, J. E. 1976. Inherited deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase in X-linked uric aciduria (the Lesch-

Nyhan syndrome and its variants), p. 75-145. In H. Harris and K. Hirschhorn (eds.), Advances in human genetics. Plenum Press, New York.
SING, C. F., and M. SKOLNICK (eds.). 1979. The
genetic analysis of common diseases: Applications to predictive factors in coronary heart disease. Alan Liss Publishing, New York.
SMYTH, C. J., C. W. COTTERMAN, and R. H. FREY
BERG. 1948. The genetics of gout and hyperuricemia--an analysis of nineteen families. J. Clin. Invest. 25:749-759.
WEINBERG, W. 1908. Über den Nachweis der Vererbung beim Menschen. Jahresh. Verein f. vaterl. Naturk. Württem. 64:368-382.
WRIGHT, S. 1968. Evolution and the genetics of populations, Vol. 1. Genetic and biometric foundations. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

