Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Further possible causes of assortative mating: Husband superiority or theory inferiority? Response to James' comments
Elizabeth E. Epstein & Ruth Guttman
To cite this article: Elizabeth E. Epstein & Ruth Guttman (1987) Further possible causes of assortative mating: Husband superiority or theory inferiority? Response to James' comments, Social Biology, 34:1-2, 116-118, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1987.9988666 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1987.9988666
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

Further Possible Causes of Assortative Mating: Husband Superiority or Theory Inferiority? Response to James' Comments

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Elizabeth E. Epstein and Ruth Guttman

Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut; and Department of Psychology, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel

James has pointed out that in our re- males in intra-ethnic marriages and

view of mate selection (Epstein and males in cross-ethnic marriages. Thus,

Guttman, "Mate Selection in Man: Evi- depending on cultural and other factors,

dence, Theory, and Outcome," Social what men and women "seek" is variable

Biology31:243-278,1984) we neglected and not amenable to characterization as

to mention "two processes which in- male superiority in dominance.

crease the degree of assortative mat- We also wonder exactly in what sense

ing." We were not aware of these "proc- the word "superiority" is used by James.

esses"; hence, the neglect. Neverthe- If, for example, we measure "superior-

less, since James presents these theories ity" on a scale of childbearing ability,

of mate selection, we will address his women clearly are "superior" in this

comments as we might have, had we in- particular trait. If James means to limit

cluded them in our review.

his use of the adjective "superior" to

James bases his theory of mate simi- scales of age, stature, IQ, education,

larity for age, stature, IQ, education, and social class, perhaps he might

and social class on two "norms," the sec- present a more convincing argument by ond of which serves as a restriction on empirically substantiating it. This, of

the first.

course, is not to say that men definitely

The first norm, which James apparently (since he provides no reference) sees as obvious and in no need of empirical substantiation, is stated as the following: "There is a tendency for both men and women to seek relationships in which the man is--or seems--in some sense 'dominant' and the woman 'submissive.' " He calls this the "norm for perceived husband superiority." We take exception to the absence of empirical backing for this statement. At least one study (Ahem et al., 1981), in fact, cited in our paper (Epstein and Gutt-

do not score higher than their spouses on these variables; they may indeed, and in that case the interesting question of sex differences in mate attractiveness becomes relevant and should be dealt with in a systematic, scientific manner. In reviewing a number of key articles on mate selection, however, we found no mention of actual mean differences-- only correlations--between spouses on these variables (Jenson, 1978; Price and Vandenberg, 1980; Thiessen and Gregg, 1980; Eysenck and Wakefield, 1981).

man, 1984), reported that in cross- James goes on to a more circumethnic marriages in Hawaii, the females scribed discussion of male superiority in scored higher in dominance than fe- height, and here does provide some em-

116

Vol. 34,No. 1-2

Communications

117

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

pirical basis for his assumption of a "male-taller norm" (an example of the "husband-superiority norm" allegedly influential in mate selection).
The obvious explanation for a "husband taller norm" is that the mean height of men in general is higher than that of women in general. Given this sex difference in the normal distributions of height, men would more often be the taller of a male-female couple. Gillis and Avis (1980), cited by James, examined this explanation by calculating the probability of a taller-woman/shorterman couple as 2.0/100. They estimate the actual rate of taller female spouses at 1/720. This value, much less than chance, indicates that mate selection for height is not random and is indeed biased toward a situation of husbands being taller than their wives. Given mean height differences, however, the probability of a taller-man/shorter-woman couple is still higher than that of a shorter-man/taller-woman couple. To our knowledge, no study has explicitly determined whether the actual incidence of taller-man/shorter-women in mate selection differs significantly from chance. If so, it becomes an interesting question for which we can go on to postulate and investigate possible social and biological reasons. If not, we can not assume that a "male-taller norm" exists for any reason other than the one that dictates the "woman-stronger-inchildbearing-ability norm."
James, it seems, has no trouble accepting the validity of a "male taller norm," and builds upon it a case for assortative mating. Basically, the argument runs as follows: Short men, in the impassioned search for shorter women, will leave all the tall women for the tall men, and this will result in positive assortative mating for height. An intrigu-

ing idea. But how can we be sure, for instance, that given this norm, relatively short men and tall women aren't more often left mateless, thus narrowing the range of choice and hence increasing spousal correlations for height? Also an interesting idea. When applied, as James proposes, to other, more complicated variables such as education, his intriguing idea suddenly seems rather absurd, especially in light of the lack of data showing that "male superiority for education" even exists. Also, it seems improbable that highly educated males are in competition (or would lose to, if they were in competition) with poorly educated males for poorly educated females, given sex differences in spousal qualities generally found attractive (Buss and Barnes, 1985;Buss, in press).
For the sake of following James' argument, we will assume for the timebeing that there is some empirical evidence for a "male-superiority" norm. If this is the case, what clinches positive assortative mating is the second, restrictive norm: Mutt-and-Jeff avoidance. This means that couples feel the pressure of a norm which dictates that they not be too disparate, at least in height, and this results in mate similarity. This is a groundless claim. What's more, James himself eloquently describes its second major flaw as an assumption on which an argument is based: "It may be conceded that an element of circularity is involved in invoking Mutt-and-Jeff avoidance as an 'explanation' for a correlation between spouses." Yes, it may. Thus, if this "restriction" is taken away, then the argument of assortative mating based on the norm of husband superiority makes no sense. Logically, it may just as well result in our claiming that short, low-IQ, poorly educated men are more often unmarried than tall, high-IQ, highly edu-

118

Communications

Social Biology

cated men, a claim which is as press), was not widely mentioned in the

unsubstantiated--and thus as plausi- mate selection literature. The direction-

ble--as James' logical conclusion of as- ality of spousal differences for certain

sortative mating.

characteristics should be noted, along

Despite James' faulty logic, oversim- with correlations, in future research.

plified and unsupported assumptions, This could facilitate the study of sex dif-

and irresponsible use of the word "su- ferences in mate preference and selec-

periority," he brings up an intriguing tion.

question, which, until recently (Buss, in

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

AHERN, F. M., R. E. COLE, R. C. JOHNSON,

tal satisfaction. Adv. Behav. Res. Ther.

and B. WONG. 1981. Personality attributes

3:151-192.

of males and females marrying within versus GILLIS, J. S., and W. E. Avis. 1980. The male

across ethnic groups. Behav. Genet.

taller norm in mate selection. Person. Soc.

11:181-194.

Psychol. Bull. 6:396-401.

Buss, D. M., and M. BARNES. 1986. Prefer- JENSEN, A. R. 1978. Genetic and behavioral ef-

ences in human mate selection. J. Person.

fect of non-random mating, p. 51-105. In

Soc. Psychol. 50:559-570.

C. E.Noble, R.T.Osbome, and N. Weyle

Buss, D. M. Sex differences in human mate selection criteria: An evolutionary perspective. In C. Crawford, M. Smith, and D.

(eds.), Human variation: Biogenetics of age, race and sex. Academic Press, New York.

Krebs (eds.), Sociobiology and psychology: PRICE, R. A., and S. G. VANDENBERG. 1980.

Ideas, issues, and applications. Erlbaum,

Spouse similarity in American and Swedish

New Jersey.

couples. Behav. Genet. 10:59-71.

EPSTEIN, E. E., and R. GUTTMAN. 1984. Mate THIESSEN, D., and B. GREGG. 1980. Human as-

selection in man: Evidence, theory, and

sortative mating andgenetic equilibrium:

outcome. Soc. Biol. 31:243-278.

An evolutionary perspective. Ethol. So-

EYSENCK, H. J., and J. A. WAKEFIELD. 1981.

ciobiol. 1:111-140.

Psychological factors as predictors of mari-

