Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Heterosis again
Napoleon Wolanski
To cite this article: Napoleon Wolanski (1971) Heterosis again, Social Biology, 18:2, 208-215, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987922 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987922
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

208

Communications

Social Biology

by Wolanski, Jarosz, and Pyzuk there is much discussion about increased parental birthplace distance resulting in increased heterozygosity (e.g., p. 2, 11), but the investigations reported upon involve thegenetically complex and poorly understood anthropometry of height, weight, head size, and the like. Much more informative would have been serological studies involvingMN, Ss, Cc, and other antigen systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In writing this response the author has profited from discussions with A. J. Kelso, Professor of Anthropology, University of Colorado and Director of the University of Colorado Anthropometric and Genetic Survey, andwith Kenneth L. Beals, Assistant Professor of Anthropology, Oregon State University. In addition, Professor Kelso has read and favorably commented upon the earlier draft of this response. Both Professors Kelso and Beals agree with the general character of the comments although the final wording is mine alone.

REFERENCES

BKESLER, JACK B. 1970. Outcrossings in Caucasians and fetal loss. Soc.Biol. 17:17-25.
PEATMAN, JOHN G. 1963. Introduction to applied statistics. Harper and Row,New York.

VVOLANSKI, NAPOLEON, EMILIA JAROSZ, and M I R A
PYZUK. 1970. Heterosis in man: Growth in offspring and distance between parents' birthplaces. Soc. Biol. 17:1-16.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Heterosis Again
Napoleon Wolanski
Department of Developmental Morphophysiology National Research Institute of Mother and Child Warsaw, Poland
Mr. Tinsman's remarks are perhaps not study systematically grow or decrease conso much addressed to the problem of hetero- comitantly with the increase in distance besis itself as to several problems of method- tween the birthplace of the father and that ology of scientific research. In these re- of the mother. For this purpose the material marks the well-known method was used to was divided into cohorts each with a charsuggest something that was not said in the acteristic range of distances (e.g., a class paper, nor, in the author's opinion, does it up to 10 km. is a village or a district of a by any means result from his paper. Let us, town where there are great chances for the however, analyze the remarks of Mr. Tins- people to meet, as we have written in the man on our paper (Social Biology 17:17- paper; see page 3). Five cohorts were thus 25). formed, andfour differences were calculated.
1. If either Table 7 or 9 would settle It was known beforehand that even if all matters unequivocally, we should not have four differences had the same sign (direction considered it necessary to publish both of change), this would not have amounted to these tables, but only oneof them. In Table a statistical proof. This results from the 7, the authors had in mind to investigate to fact that even as abundant material as ours what an extent the somatic characters under cannot be broken up into many classes,

Vol. 18, No. 2

Communications

209

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

each of which, in turn, would include too few persons, so that nothing could be proved here statistically. Apart from that, the analysis was made more arduous by the fact that the distances between parents' birthplaces do not constitute a normal, Gaussian distribution. In this situation, correlation coefficients for the checking of the problem were calculated on the strength of four-field tables, i.e., dividing the distances and the various features into large and small ones.
2. Scientific research, done correctly from the point of view of methodology, is not undertaken with the attitude that something will result from it. Usually, when scientific research is carried out, in particular when a grant of an important institution has been received, a program of investigation is submitted hypothesizing the result expected or raising the question one is trying to test. Therefore, Mr. Tinsman's remark that the title contains the formulation "Heterosis in Man" is unfounded. Our study merely aimed at investigating whether heterosis exists in human populations. The remarks submitted in our article are not theoretical speculations, but the report (multilateral as far as possible, if not comprehensive) of research results and an attempt at their interpretation.
3. Statistical methods (significance tests) cannot prove a hypothesis. The checking of working (null) hypotheses by means of mathematical statistics is merely an attempt to evaluate the credibility of alternative hypotheses. It is assumed here that the given event may be not realized, in the way postulated in the study, once, 5, or 10 times per 100 times, depending on the level of significance. It is only the determination of the degree of confidence in the credibility of a given result, not that of a scientific truth. Scientific truths are proven by way of logical reasoning and the analysis of their concordance with known scientific facts. If the probability of an event is even very great,

but logical analysis does not establish the character of direct relationship, no reasonable person will adopt it as a system of cause and effect. In other words, (1) the logical analysis of a problem does not release one from checking the frequency of deviation from an established fact (we find the fact, but the question arises if it always occurs) and (2) statistical analysis does not absolve one from logical reasoning, and the knowledge of the subject investigated must be greater still than that of statistical methods. My mentor and friend, Dr. Stanley M. Garn, probably rightly said that (I used this formulation as the motto of one of my books) less than 10% of scientific workers know when a given statistical method ought to be used, but 1 per thousand at the utmost know when it must not be used. When a hypothesis is not subject to logical refutation and it is shown that the given fact will take place in, e.g., 95 cases per 100, we are inclined to consider this hypothesis to be a theory. For a theory to be rejected, however, it is enough to show any logical error in the reasoning or to show that in fact such events are rare.
4. In our case, a doubt might indeed persist how to interpret the fact that in some age or sex classes there are statistically significant positive correlations, while for other ones these latter are negative. The absence of correlation, however, is here no obstacle for reasoning. We have here two kinds of facts in mind:
a) Concerning Mr. Tinsman's remark concerning our Tables 7 and 9, the contradiction of results suggested does not exist. Let us consider the facts he points out. The stature-distance correlation for 8-year-old boys amounts to 0.7810 (Table 9), but the result in Table 7 shows 3 cases of concordant increase of stature (of which one is in tenths of mm, which was not indicated in the table) concomitantly with the increase of the distance between the parents' birthplaces, and only in one case is there no such

210

Communications

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

concordance. Other quoted cases are similar. Even in the case of the Quetelet index in 16year-old girls, the correlation coefficient (0.0106) is statistically insignificant, and the system of the direction of changes (in Table 7) is twice in the direction of an increase of the magnitude, and twice in the direction of decrease. In the case of the stature-distance relation in 8-year-old girls in Table 9, a statistically significant correlation coefficient of 0.6917 appears, but in Table 7 the distance increases twice and diminishes twice, which means that no contradictions appear, only incomplete concordance. This is entirely comprehensible, and that is why we adopted calculated correlation coefficients as the criterion of the statistical assessment (as mentioned above in point 1). For methodological purposes we showed also the parallel application of the method of comparison of arithmetic means and correlation coefficients, in order to point out the diversity of results; however, no contradictory results occurred. It could be foreseen that such an eventuality may happen. Our article is an instance of the same, and it is difficult to fight facts. This should be no surprise for persons with mathematical training.
b) The other remark concerns the comprehensive grasping of the phenomenon (for 24 combinations). In our opinion reasoning of this kind is erroneous. As it seems to result from our paper, heterosis is an effect that is manifest in a relevant pace of development (acceleration). So its nature is a developmental one. Hence, every age class has to be separately treated. It seems comprehensible to us that the heterosis effect grows in the eighth year of age for a number of traits (somewhat also for those that in fact do not exhibit heterosis, as the head circumference or cephalic index), and it is comprehensible that with age.(e.g., at the age of 16 years for some traits) this effect diminishes. Our hypothesis asserts that heterozygotic subjects exhibit more sensi-

tivity to the stimulating effect of external environment factors. Naturally, under the influence of unknown factors (e.g., hormonal ones), this may appear more intensely in some age classes only.
c) In our view, the effect of heterosis may be mentioned, however, when it is noted in a concordant manner, that is when it occurs in all age classes as a significant positive event and, possibly, without correlation. In case a statistically significant and positive correlation coefficient appears in some age or sex classes, and in other classes of age or sex a statistically significant and negative coefficient appears for the same trait, this does not entitle us to maintain that the heterosis effect exists. Parallel to the data of Morton (1958), Schull (1962), and Schork (1964) we formulate the conclusion that this effect does not appear in the period of fetal development. Undoubtedly, this effect, as we mentioned it in our paper, requires further investigations. That is why we published as complete data as possible (both Table 7 and 9), so that the possibility may exist to repeat research in other regions and for other populations similar to our research. We are interested in the result of investigations in other regions, to see whether somewhat different results may be obtained for other populations.
5. The fact that the most numerous significant correlation coefficients appear in children at the age of 8 years may also result from the fact that the parents of these children experienced the time of the war during their adolescent age. Maybe a factor is involved here that indirectly exerts an influence on the biological value of the gametes of these parents. This would be a factor whose existence is conjectured (Wolaftski, 1966; Wolanski and Charzewska 1967). Some differences (but rather in the evaluation of level of significance) may result also from the fact that we examined more 8-yearold than 4-and 16-year-old children (Table 1).
6. The qualification is unimportant that

Vol. 18, No. 2

Communications

211

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

children of the same parents occur repeatedly. Firstly, 1,896 children of 1,606 families (not 1,500) were examined, but this does not change the essence of the problem.1 Secondly, the correlations were counted separately for the various age and sex classes, eliminating twins from the material. Consequently a different effect is involved here than, for example, the calculation of similarity coefficients between parents and their children at various ages, that Mr. Tinsman perhaps had in mind. He is wrong in suspecting us of such an error which any student of biology or mathematics knows by rote (another formula for the calculation of the correlation-similarity coefficient is used in that case).
7. The other data in which Mr. Tinsman is interested are presented in a paper now in the press in Poland (Wolanski, 1970). The data were not supplied in the present publication, as they exhibit an entirely chaotic arrangement and contribute nothing new in this matter, as we stated in the paper. These tables, however, extend on several typescript pages and include many data (education, earnings, profession of the parents, etc.). Health service is free of charge in Poland; therefore, differences are small and random. No statistically significant differences were found in the physical development of children of Szczecin whose parents belong to different social classes; this is typical for other Polish cities (Wolanski, 1970).
8. Mr. Tinsman's remark on the political aspect of my statements is incomprehensible for me. Any great social and demographic processes have their political significance. From the biological point of view, however, it is very interesting and important to find out at what rate the integration of a popula-
1 Unfortunately, the authors did not receive the proofs of their paper due to mail delays. The paper should also have read that 950 girls were examined, not 850, and in Table 3 the difference between the parent's age for girls age 4 should average 2.92 years, not 2.78.

tion of over 300,000 inhabitants occurs. This results from the fact that the achievement of panmixia leads to specific conclusions in the field of population genetics. I t can of course be debatable whether the yardstick we adopted is correct. Mr. Tinsman, however, formulates his words imprecisely. It was not the fact of contracting marriage at Szczecin which was a yardstick for us, but the fact of giving birth to children thereandof contractingmarriage and taking up residence in Szczecin. Only this yields the basis for ascertaining the biological integration of this population. Of course, there will never be 100% of marriages contracted in Szczecin, if only because of migration. We determined, however, the level of immigration (which is here more important than emigration) and at present it amounts to 2.6%, from the final value. As a result of the above we expect full integration around the year 1977 (Wolanski, 1970). We should be glad to hear another proposal for measuring the biological integration of the population.
9. As a matter of fact, we have already in press other yardsticks of the changes occurring in the population investigated. We quote one instance in Figure 1. We see that the typical maturation (i.e., the appearance of menarche) of women in the summer time (which is typical for the countryside) has now turned to maturation in the winter time (which is typical for cities) (Kowalska, Valsik, and Wolanski, 1963).
10. The effect of heterosis has to be studied (or such was at least the assumption of our paper) on quantitative traits. Heterosis in maize, for instance, is measured in quantitative features such as yield. In the case of the working hypothesis which we adopted and of well-known publications on the nonexistence of heterosis in infants, and of its existence in adults (Hulse, 1957; Nold, 1963; Schreider, 1967) we have to assume that heterosis is a property appearing in the course of development. Therefore,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

,, Rural" peat
Girls from Szczecin, menarche:
1964-5

peak

1961-2
Women from Szczecin, menarche:
1950

\72

1947

Mother ofsons

Mot her of daughters
1937-8
Spring Summer Fail

Winter

FIG. 1.--Season of the appearance of menarche in present-day female inhabitants of Szczecin before their arrival in Szczecin; in other females who matured after having settled in Szczecin (after 1945-1947); and in their daughters already born in Szczecin (according to Wolanski, 1970).

Vol. 18, No. 2

Communications

213

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

features have to be investigated which are modified with age. Mr. Tinsman suggests that the research should be made based on serological features. These latter features do not change with age, so we cannot investigate them under the aspect of interest for us. In fact, Kolataj (1967) investigated the properties of DNA and RNA in the erythrocytes of the blood in chickens and found there a heterosis effect, but this refers to quantitative, not qualitative features of the blood. We do not think that body height and other somatic features are a less apt case for investigations. Mr. Tinsman may find a discussion of the differences between quantitative and qualitative features in the interesting book Human Development (1966) in Hunt's chapter. Were Mr. Tinsman, however, interested in research on other relationships of blood groups, he would first have to prove that there is a relationship (a real genetic linkage) between blood groups and, for example, body height.
11. Mr. Tinsman formulates the question whether or not it is correct to use Quetelet's coefficient instead of body weight. This problem is well known. Body weight is highly correlated with stature (body height), while after normalization on stature (i.e., the application of Quetelet's index) this index shows no correlation with stature (Billewicz, Kemsley, and Thomson, 1962). It is, therefore, a feature of the organism differing from stature and body weight, and that is why we became interested in it. The reasons for investigating the cephalic index are similar. We knew the head circumference, and probably head length and head width would have shown similar results, but we expected other results from head shape expressed in the cephalic index.
And now a few minor explanations, according to Mr. Tinsman's wish:
1. The measurements of chest circumference were made with an accuracy of 1 mm, but it is usual to supply significant fig-

ures for direct measurements, and therefore statistics on head and chest circumference were supplied in tenths of millimeters, and stature in mm.
2. In Tables 10 and 11 the stature of children was standardized, i.e., expressed in percentages of the mean body height of the father and mother, as should have been clear from the text (first paragraph on page 11 of our paper).
Concerning the numbered remarks in Mr. Tinsman's comments:
1. The standard errors of arithmetic means (Ef) have been published in Tables 3 and 5; it is easy to realize therefrom the significance of the results presented.
2. None of the parents of the children examined were born during World War II, and the difference results from the fact of the rounding off of the figures. In some regions of Poland the war lasted 3 years, and in other ones nearly 6 years. This resulted in some differences in the limits of fluctuations for the fathers of 8-year-old children and in mothers of 4-year-old children. We presented the problems and debated this point in other papers of ours (Wolanski, Jarosz, and Pyzuk, 1968; Wolanski, 1969, 1970).
3. In our opinion there are not too many studies on the effect of heterosis in man and sometimes they are contradictory (see, for example the interesting investigations made by Ferak, Lichardova, and Bojnova [1968]).
4. The explanation was present in our paper under discussion.
5. 6, and 8. I supplied the explanations above.
7. Mr. Tinsman's reasoning is not correct. This results from the fact that at the present moment children are already being born to the children who had been born, already after the war, in Szczecin. Hence, the tendency grows towards a decrease in the mating radius (the average distance of the parents' birthplaces). When the investigations were made, the mating radius amount-

214

Communications

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

ed to some 270 km. Therefore the applica- heterosis (luxurience) appearing in post-

tion of the sum of percentages by Mr. natal development.

Tinsman leads to wrong conclusions.

As a matter of fact, an opinion appears

9. By the term "pure race" (p. 13) that as early as the last three months of

Kola,taj means animals from inbred lines pregnancy male fetuses develop more rapid-

mating. Wemerely meant Negro or white ly (Ounsted, 1969) than female ones. This

girls, in contradistinction to their hybrids, opinion seems to bewrong, when the nearly

i.e. mulattos.

twice as high mortality of the small male

10. This problem is now the object of fetuses in the last three months of preg-

our studies. As is known, there are two nancy, as compared with female fetuses, is

concepts of heterosis conducting to ap- taken into consideration (Wolanski, 1970).

parently different effects: (a) high hybrid In fact, weaker heterozygotic (XY)male

vigor, (b)balanced polymorphism. In fact, fetuses ofsmaller body size die. This creates

however, these two effects seem to beinter- an apparent impression that surviving

related. As I have pointed it out already subjects developed more rapidly. In fact,

earlier (Wolanski, 1970), sexual differences it is possible that male subjects die fre-

in body size innewborn infants depend to a quently because they are heterogeneous;

certain extent on the selection of weaker this corresponds with Bresler's (1970)

and/or smaller male fetuses. Live male general thesis that there aremore frequent

newborn infants are some 2.3% heavier fetal losses with the increasing of parental

than female ones, but stillborn male fetuses outcrossings.

are nearly 3 % lighter than female ones.To 11. Ingenetics, capital letters (A, B, etc.)

some extent this is an equivalent, on a are used fordominant characters, and small

populational scale, for the fact that many letters (a, b, and so on) for recessive

more numerous live fetuses are born than characters. Hence, a heterozygote Aagives

stillborn ones. The body length of live-bom as a result a phenotypic effect A also for

boys is in Warsaw some 1.4% higher than quantitative characters. But, if two different

that of girls and this, perhaps, isin relation alleles Ai and A2 would pair, this would

with the above-mentioned mechanism of give an intermediate effect in quantitative

selection. This difference, however, amounts characters. I t is also worthwhile to be

in adults to some 6.6%. Thus, it exceeds the acquainted with papers on the effect of

effect of selection in the fetal period by overdominance and the "intermeshing" of

more than 5%.

dominance in attempts at explaining the

In this connection it may be assumed substrate of theheterosis effect. These are

that it is possible to explain the increasing matters covered in the textbooks.

difference in body height by means of the It seems to me that in Mr. Tinsman's

heterosis effect. That means that subjects statements, regrets areexpressed that were

with sexual heterochromosomes (XY, i.e., caused by the loss of a considerable portion

males) canbe treated as heterogeneous, as of the originality of the studies made at

compared with homogeneous (XX) females, Boulder for 16months. I t ought, however,

in particular since the genes responsiblefor to be taken into account that, inthe present-

body height seem to be situated in the sexual day world, competition exists not only in

chromosomes. In this situation, that surplus sports, but also inscientific discoveries. As a

of 5% of body height in males as compared matter of fact webegan our investigations

with females, achieved in post-natal de- in 1963, and in 1964 we obtained a grant

velopment, maybe simply a symptom of from the United States Public HealthSer-

Vol. 18, No. 2

Communications

215

vice. We carried out the aforesaid series of investigations as far back as 1966 and in that same year we reported them at the 7th International Congress of Nutrition in Hamburg. No wonder then, that we obtained our results earlier. We shall, how-

ever, read with great interest the reports from the investigations made in Boulder. I had the opportunity to visit this interesting scientific center in 1965.1 shall be glad if the remarks made here will help my colleagues in Boulder in their research problems.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BILLEWICZ, W. Z., W. F. F. KEMSLEY, and A. M.
THOMSON, 1962. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med. 16:183. BRESLER, J. B. 1970. Outcrossings in Caucasians
and fetal loss. Soc. Biol. 17:17-25.
FERAK, V., Z. LICHARDOVA, and V. BOJNOVA, 1968.
Endogamy, exogamy, and stature. Eugen. Quart. 15:273-276. HULSE, F. S. 1957. Exogamie et hétérosis. Archives Suisses d'Anthropologie Generale 22:103-125. HUNT, E. E., JR. 1966. The developmental genetics in man p. 76-122. In F. Falkner (ed.), Human development. Saunders, Philadelphia. KOIATAJ, A. 1967. Physiological investigations on heterosis in chickens. III. DNA and RNA acids in erythrocytes of the blood. Folia Biologica 15:117-126.
KOWALSKA, I., J. A. VALSIK, and N. WOLASKI.
1963. Season of the year in which menstruation begins in relation to age and social and geographical environment. Prace i Materialy Naukowe IMD (Research Reports) 1:81-108. MORTON, N. E. 1958. Empirical risk in consanguineous marriages: Birth weight, gestation time, and measurements of infants. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 10:344-349. NOID, F. 1963. Korpergrösse und Akzeleration. In Wehrdienst und Gesungheit, 7. Wehr und Wiesen Verlagsg., Darmstadt. OUNSTED, M. 1969. Familial factors affecting fetal growth. In Perinatal factors affecting human de-

velopment. PAHO--WHO, Sc. Publ. 185:60/67. Washington. SCHORK, M. A. 1964. The effects of inbreeding on growth. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 16:292-300. SCHULL, W. J. 1962. Inbreeding and maternal effects in Japanese. Eugen. Quart. 9:14-22. WOLANSKI, N. 1966. Environmental modification of human form and function. In J. Broek (ed.), The biology of human variation. Annals New York Academy Sciences 134:826-840.
. 1969. Srodowiskowe czynniki biologicznosocjalne rodziny i ich wplyw na rozwój fizyczny dziecka. Problemy Rodziny 4:9-19.
. 1970. The biological development in man. Pastwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, p. 438, Warszawa (in Polish).
. 1970. Stan biologiczny i procesy integracyjne populacji miasta Szczecina w 25-leciu PRL. Przegld Zachodnio Pomorski (in press).
. 1970, Genetic and ecological factors in human growth. Hum. Biol. (in press).
WOLASKI, N., and J. CHARZEWSKA. 1967. Similarity
of some anthropological characteristics of parents and their offspring in different phases of ontogenetic development. Acta genet. (Basel) 17: 365-381.
WOLASKI, N., E., JAROSZ and M. Pymc 1968.
Heterosis effect as a causative factor in the secular trend of some continuous traits in man. Anthropologie 6:15-17.

