Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Further causes of assortative mating: The norms for perceived husband superiority and muttandjeff avoidance. Comment on epstein and Guttman's "mate selection in man: Evidence, theory, and outcome"
William H. James
To cite this article: William H. James (1987) Further causes of assortative mating: The norms for perceived husband superiority and muttandjeff avoidance. Comment on epstein and Guttman's "mate selection in man: Evidence, theory, and outcome", Social Biology, 34:1-2, 114-115, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1987.9988665 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1987.9988665
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 4
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

Communications
Further Causes of Assortative Mating: The Norms for Perceived Husband Superiority andMutt-and-Jeff Avoidance. Comment on Epstein and Guttman's "Mate Selection in Man: Evidence, Theory, and Outcome"

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

William H. James

MRC Mammalian Development Unit Wolfson House University College London, England

In their review of mate selection short women, and tall women are pre-

("Mate Selection in Man: Evidence, pared only to marry tall men, then as-

Theory, and Outcome," Social Biology sortative marriage will be the probable

31:243-278, 1984), Epstein and Gutt- result. Tall men, being in competition

man make no mention of two processes with short men in the search for short

which increase the degree of assortative women, will be under pressure to marry

mating over a range of human charac- tall women; and short women, being un-

teristics, e.g., age, stature, IQ, educa- der competition with tall women in the

tion, and social class. There is a ten- search for tall men, will be under pres-

dency for both men and women to seek sure to marry short men. Thus a correla-

relationships in which the man is--or tion between mates' stature will result.

seems--in some sense "dominant" and This stems not from any preference of

the woman "submissive." Let us confine individuals for mates of their own size,

attention to stature, though the princi- but simply from a preference of both

ple applies to the other variables men- partners for a height differential favor-

tioned above. In Western societies, a ing the husband.

"husband-taller" norm exists (Beigel, 1954; Gillis and Avis, 1980). Both men and women tend to seek and find mates who will enable them, as a couple, to observe the norm.

However, this norm is probably not the only consideration. Tall men and short women face the restriction that the height differential within couples should not be greater than is decreed by "suit-

Consider the effects of this. If tall ability," that is members of couples feel

men and short women are prepared to the necessity to avoid the appearance of

marry any partner (tall or short), but Mutt and Jeff with their great disparity

short men are prepared only to marry in height. This latter norm would also

114

Vol. 34, No. 1-2

Communications

115

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

act to increase (slightly) the correlation between spouses. These two norms together would produce a bivariate distribution of husbands' and wives' heights that is not bivariate normal. Instead it would be rather similar to that described by McManus and Mascie-Taylor (1984), showing both nonlinearity and heteroscedasticity.
The mean "scores" of grooms at the time of marriage exceed those of brides in stature, age, and years of education. One might speculate that bivariate distributions (by bride and groom) of (a) age and (b) years of education at marriage are similar to that described by McManus and Mascie-Taylor (1984) relating to stature, and at least partially because of the norms suggested. The other two variables (IQ and social class) are not so readily assessed as age and stature, and their means are roughly the same for brides and grooms. But for prospective marriage partners, these variables too are presumably subject to the same norms of perceived husband superiority and Mutt-and-Jeff avoidance. In this latter context, one has merely to reflect on the opprobrium attaching to May-December weddings, and on the suitability of liaisons between

doctors and nurses as opposed to doctors and tea-ladies.
Now, since (1) the vast majority of people marry, (2) the IQ's of the brides and grooms are roughly the same, and (3) it is not easy to assess IQ, it follows that in a substantial proportion of couples, the IQ of the bride exceeds that of the groom (neither perhaps being aware of this). In other words, the norm is frequently unwittingly violated. Nevertheless, to the extent that people can assess IQ at all, it still has the effect of increasing any husband-wife IQ correlation attributable to other causes. And the same is true of Mutt-and-Jeff avoidance.
It may be conceded that an element of circularity is involved in invoking Mutt-and-Jeff avoidance as an "explanation" for a correlation between spouses. (A phenomenon is not explained by noting that there is a norm for it.) But the same objection does not so forcibly apply to the norm for perceived husband superiority, because it is not immediately clear that such a norm does lead to a correlation between spouses.
In short, these two norms may help to explain assortative mating for characteristics in which human beings can--if only roughly--rank one another.

REFERENCES

BEIGEL, H . G. 1954. Body height in mate selection. J. Soc. Psychol. 39:257-268.
EPSTEIN, E., and R. GUTTMAN. 1984. Mate se-
lection in man: Evidence, theory and outcome. Soc. Biol. 31:243-278. GILLIS, J. S., and W. E. Avis. 1980. The male

taller norm in mate selection. Person. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 6:396-401.
MCMANUS, I. C., and C. G. N. MASCIE-
TAYLOR. 1984. Human assortative mating for height: Non-linearity and heteroscedasticity. Hum. Biol. 56:617-623.

