Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Reply to Saini's comment on "the brain drain from India"
Herbert Inhaber
To cite this article: Herbert Inhaber (1977) Reply to Saini's comment on "the brain drain from India", Social Biology, 24:1, 91-91, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1977.9988268 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988268
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Vol. 24, No. 1

Communications

91

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Reply to Saini's Comment on "The Brain Drain from India"

Herbert Inhaber

Advanced Concepts Centre Planning and Finance Service Environment Canada Ottawa, Canada

The brain drain can be viewed as adequately described through government lists of visas and emigration permits or, if this is deemed unsatisfactory, evaluated through unobtrusive measures. I have worked long enough in government to know that much of its data are, to say the least, imperfect. As a result, I decided to use more objective and less confused measures.
Who is Publishing in Science (WIPIS) is, by now, acknowledged as a valuable tool by sociologists of science. This is brone out by the scores of articles which have employed either it or its companion publication, the Science Citation Index.
It can be misused. However, there is simply nothing else comparable which lists most of the world's working scientists, their addresses, and the papers they publish.
WIPIS lists scientists by where they are publishing, not by their visas or source of funds. It can then be used to cut through often confusing government statistics. Nowhere did I state I was evaluating visa status. I was considering where scientists were, not where governments thought they were.
These major points aside, let me discuss the comments in detail. In paragraph four, the entire point of my correlation values

was missed. This was perhaps due to the condensation required in the original article. I was trying to show that most Indian name groups tended to remain fairly constant in their location for the two years considered. For example, a name like Sastri was concentrated more than 80 per cent in India for the two years; a name like Srinavasan was only about 50 per cent in India. In consequence, the comments of paragraph four are invalid.
Those of paragraph five testify, as Robert Merton has written, "to a powerful (though perhaps slightly willful) imagination." My reference to "all scientists in India" came immediately after-- and before--two sentences which clearly indicated that I was referring to scientists listed under "India" in WIPIS. I did not contact CSIR for the reasons stated above. The paragraph is a distortion of what I said.
Finally, the last paragraph is a contradiction of what was said before. If there is a surplus of scientists in India, it is logical that some would try to leave. Their legal status is, in the long run, less important than the fact they do their work outside their home country.
Most of the points I made here were contained in the fifth paragraph of my original article. I am sorry to have to repeat them.

