Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
Kenneth A. Bennett
To cite this article: Kenneth A. Bennett (1976) Book notes, Social Biology, 23:2, 179-181, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988228 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988228
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

BIOSOCIAL INTERRELATIONS IN POPULA-
TION ADAPTATION: Edited by Elizabeth S. Watts, Francis E. Johnston, and Gabriel W. Lasker. Mouton Publishers, The Hague, and Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago, 1975. 412 pp. $24.50 (hardbound).
The twenty-three articles in this volume center around human adaptation. However, the book is unique in stressing the integrated effects of biology and culture upon human populations. There are four general subject areas in which these original reports appear: (a) Adaptation and Adaptive Strategies, (b) Genetics, Society, and Population Dynamics, (c) Nutrition, Health, and Disease, and (d) Growth and Development. Because the coverage emphasizes the relationships among genetics, demography, nutrition and human development, and culture, this volume would be an attractive textbook for upper-level college courses in biocultural anthropology.
ECOLOGICAL GENETICS: Fourth edition: By E. B. Ford. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1975. 442 pp. $32.50 (hardbound).

about evolutionary principles, and much of it centers around aspects of genetic polymorphism. Those familiar with the first three editions will find the sections of mimicry and melanism considerably revised and expanded. Ford's writing style is crisp and lucid, as always, and this edition may be highly recommended to both students and professionals in biology and botany.
OUR FUTURE INHERITANCE: CHOICE OR
CHANCE?: By Alun Jones and Walter F. Bodmer. Oxford University Press, London, 1974. 141 pp. $13.00 (hardbound); $4.00 (paper).
Jones and Bodmer have directed this small book toward those who are interested in recent developments in biology and genetics. This group includes both scientists and the general public, and the latter should have little difficulty in understanding it. Discussed in this book are: the pros and cons of biomedical advances; artificial insemination by donor and the treatment of infertility; artificial fertilization; genetic screening and selective abortion; organ transplantation; genetic engineering and cloning; and social concerns about recent biological advances.

Ford stresses that the outstanding aim
of ecological genetics is the study of evolu- ABORTION IN A CROWDED WORLD. THE tion in natural populations, but that both PROBLEM OF ABORTION WITH SPECIAL field and laboratory investigations are REFERENCE TO INDIA: By S. Chanvital for advances in our understanding of drasekhar. University of Washington evolutionary biology. Ecological Genetics Press, Seattle, 1974. 184 pp. $6.95 is basically an intermediate-level book (hardbound).

179

180

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

After a brief review of world attitudes on abortion, Chandrasekhar describes in detail the problems of population growth in India. He then discusses the various historical and religious factors that led to liberalization of abortion in India and presents the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Bill of 1969. Appendices to the book include a summary on the legal status of abortion in several selected countries, a list of diseases that indicate artificial interruption of pregnancy, the questionnaire of the committee that studied legalization of abortion in India, several Indian censuses, Indian press editorials about abortion, and U.S. Supreme Court decisions in Texas and Georgia abortion cases.

Stierlin formulates three transactional modes that reflect the interplay and/or relative dominance of centripetal and centrifugal forces between parents. He discusses how such modes affect parent-child interactions, and how they either trigger or associate with a child's impulse to escape from its family. In this context, separation dynamics in schizophrenia and waywardness are examined.
THE ANATOMY OF RACISM: CANADIAN
DIMENSIONS: By David R. Hughes and Evelyn Kallen. Harvest House, Montreal, 1974. 230 pp. $8.50 (hardbound); $4.50 (paper).

POPULATION, ECOLOGY, AND SOCIAL
EVOLUTION: Edited by Steven Polgar. Mouton Publishers, The Hague, and Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago, 1975. 354 pp. $16.50 (hardbound).
Written by archeologists, social anthropologists, and physical anthropologists, most of the thirteen papers in this volume involve the role of population dynamics in culture change. Oriented around historical and ecological perspectives, the kinds of topics include the respective effects of biology and culture on population dynamics, how the culture historian views the components of population dynamics, demographic changes during human evolution, and ecosystem analogies in cultural ecology. Anthropologists, demographers, and sociologists should find this book particularly interesting.
SEPARATING PARENTS AND ADOLES-
CENTS. A PERSPECTIVE ON RUNNING
AWAY, SCHIZOPHRENIA, AND WAY-
WARDNESS: By Helm Stierlin. Quadrangle/The New York Times Book Co., New York, 1974. 204 pp. $8.95 (hardbound).

This is a two-fold book, the first half written by a physical anthropologist (Hughes) and the latter half by a social anthropologist (Kallen). Hughes begins with a general discussion of human diversity and the evolution of human populations and follows with chapters on inheritance, environment and human adaptability, and race and intelligence. After a chapter on the peopling of the New World and Canada, Kallen examines the origin, development, persistence, and change of systems of ethnic stratification, as well as how ethnic integration occurs. The authors integrate social and biological phenomena in a useful and timely fashion to plead for human rights and fundamental freedoms in Canada.
NEUROSCIENCES RESEARCH SYMPOSIUM
SUMMARIES (Vol. VII): Edited by Francis O. Schmitt, George Adelman, and Frederic G. Worden. The M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1973. 528 pp. $15.00 (hardbound).
The seventh annual anthology of the Neurosciences Research Program Work Session reports, this volume continues the coverage of current research topics in the

Vol. 23, No. 2

Book Notes

181

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

neurosciences. Included are core topics from neurophysiology, cell biology, neurochemistry, and animal behavior. Each of four critical summaries of research provides a "state-of-the-art" report and indicates current research directions for neuroscientists. Newcomers to the field will derive particular benefit from the extensive bibliographies at the end of each summary.
AN ATLAS OF MAMMALIAN CHROMO-
SOMES (Vol. VIII): By T. C. Hsu and Kurt Benirschke. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1974. $19.80 (unbound).
Included in this volume are (a) a table of contents for the first eight volumes and a list of recent references for volumes one through seven, (b) fifty-two unpaginated folios representing volume eight, and (c) a cumulative index for the entire series. The karyotypes presented here represent certain species within the orders Marsupialia, Insectivora, Chiroptera, Edentata, Lago-

morpha, Rodentia, Cetacea, Carnivora, Pinnipedia, Artiodactyla, and Primates.
THE SOCIOLOGY OF HUMAN FERTILITY. AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY: By
Ronald Freedman. Irvington Publishers, Inc., New York, 1975, 283 pp. $14.95 (hardbound).
In this cumulative annotated bibliography on human fertility, Freedman classifies and covers a general collection of papers. These papers represent topics such as measurement techniques; descriptive and historical studies; studies relating stratification variables to fertility or fertility norms; studies of the effects of nonfamilial institutions with specific programs to affect fertility; social-psychological variables; social and demographic factors relating to fertility; and many other topics. Nearly all of the articles listed were published after 1961.
KENNETH A. BENNETT

