Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Marketable licenses for babies: Boulding's proposal revisited
David M. Heer
To cite this article: David M. Heer (1975) Marketable licenses for babies: Boulding's proposal revisited, Social Biology, 22:1, 1-16, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988142 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988142
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Marketable Licenses for Babies: Boulding's Proposal Revisited

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

David M. Heer
Population Research Laboratory University of SouthernCalifornia Los Angeles, California

In 1964, the well-known economist Kenneth Boulding suggested a new means of fertility control: marketable licenses for babies (Boulding, 1964). Boulding realized his idea would not be taken seriously by the general public. He therefore devoted only two short paragraphs to its exposition. Events during the past decade, including especially the 1974 energy crisis, have since forced the American people into much more direct confrontation with the problems posed by continual population increase.
Although the actual crisis caused by the Arab embargo on petroleum exports to the United States has been ended, the nation is faced with the long-term prospect that energy prices will remain far above their pre-1974 levels and that even at the new higher prices domestic energy supplies will be considerably less than domestic demand. Moreover, at the same time as the price of energy has increased dramatically, so has the price of our major food crops, partly, of course, as a direct result of the rise in the price of the former, since American agriculture uses extremely large amounts of inanimate energy per acre of crop production (Brown, 1974). The higher the rate of America's future population growth, the more serious the problems of adequate en-

ergy and resources will become. Therefore, what was unthinkable in 1964 may, in the future, appear to many persons as common sense.
Accordingly, I wish to present a rather thorough treatment of the Boulding proposal which will include: (1) discussion of the very crucial matter of enforcement, which Boulding never mentioned; (2) two suggestions for modifying his basic scheme; (3) a consideration of some other matters he either did not treat or treated with less than proper thoroughness; and (4) a comparison of his proposal with alternative policies aimed at regulating the quantity and quality of the human population.
I hold no firm belief in my own mind that a proposal as seemingly radical as this one will ever be deemed necessary in the United States. On the other hand, the Commission on Population Growth and the American Future concluded in 1972 "that no substantial benefits would result from continued growth of the nation's population," "that the stabilization of our population would contribute significantly to the nation's ability to solve its problems," and "that the nation [should] welcome and plan for a stabilized population" (Commission on Population Growth and the Amer-

1

Heer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

ican Future, 1972, p. 110). A possible implication from these remarks of the Commission is that the United States may in the not too distant future seriously debate whether a policy of precise control of future population growth is necessary and desirable. If and when such a moment comes, I feel strongly that professionals in the field of population studies should be able to prepare the ground for intelligent decision-making through having themselves a thorough understanding of the probable consequences of the various possible mechanisms of securing that control.
Boulding's original proposal (Boulding, 1964, pp. 135-136) was as follows:
I have only one positive suggestion to make, a proposal which now seems so farfetched that I find it creates only amusement when I propose it. I think in all seriousness, however, that a system of marketable licenses to have children is the only one which will combine the minimum of social control necessary to the solution to this problem with a maximum of individual liberty and ethical choice. Each girl on approaching maturity would be presented with a certificate which will entitle its owner to have, say, 2.2 children, or whatever number would ensure a reproductive rate of one. The unit of these certificates might be the "deci-child," and accumulation of ten of these units by purchase, inheritance, or gift would permit a woman in maturity to have one legal child. We would then set up a market in these units in which the rich and the philoprogenitive would purchase them from the poor, the nuns, the maiden aunts, and so on. The men perhaps could be left out of these arrangements, as it is only the fertility of women which is strictly relevant to population control. However, it may be found socially desirable to have them in the plan, in which case all children both male and female would receive, say, eleven or twelve deci-child certificates at birth or at maturity, and a woman could then accumulate-these through marriage.
This plan would have the additional advantage of developing a long-run tendency toward equality in income, for the rich would have many children and become poor and the poor would have few children and become rich. The price of the certificate would of course reflect the general desire in

a society to have children. Where the desire is very high the price would be bid up; where it was low the price would also be low. Perhaps the ideal situation would be found when the price was naturally zero, in which case those who wanted children would have them without extra cost. If the price were very high the system would probably have to be supplemented by some sort of grants to enable the deserving but impecunious to have children, while cutting off the desires of the less deserving through taxation. The sheer unfamiliarity of a scheme of this kind makes it seem absurd at the moment. The fact that it seems absurd, however, is merely a reflection of the total unwillingness of mankind to face up to what is perhaps its most serious long-run problem.
THE PROBLEM OP ENFORCEMENT
Let me first take up the very important matter of enforcement which Boulding never considered. Note that he wished to combine the minimum of social control necessary to solve the problem of a toohigh birth rate with the maximum of individual liberty. However, he failed to consider any means either of preventing the existence of unlicensed children or of keeping their number at a tolerable level. Our first task, therefore is to consider what mechanisms would guarantee that the number of unlicensed children not be unacceptably high.
First of all, it should be emphasized that the legalization of abortion in the United States, secured by Supreme Court decision in 1973, makes the problem of enforcement much easier than it would have been otherwise, since abortion provides a mechanism for prior elimination of many potential unlicensed babies. (On the other hand, of course, many women may refuse to make use of abortion on moral grounds.) Let us now consider several possible types of enforcement mechanisms all of which assume the continued legalization of abortion.
At one extreme, one could rely simply on the force of public opinion to create voluntary compliance and provide no for-

Vol. 22, No. 1

Marketable Licenses for Babies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

mal mechanism to deter individuals who give birth without surrendering to the government the requisite number of child license units. In my opinion, parental desire to choose family size is too strong to make this a viable option. At the other extreme, one could institute a very direct means of eliminating unlicensed babies--immediately putting them to death. However, such a drastic proposal would, no doubt, be deemed unacceptable on moral or humanitarian grounds. Moreover, it would literally constitute an overkill, since it would be desirable to have a certain number of unlicensed babies for adoption by parents unable to have children of their own. This would suggest the possibility of putting to death only those unlicensed children who cannot be adopted. But this idea would still be considered unacceptable on moral grounds.
What less drastic means of securing compliance are then available? Edgar Chasteen has suggested the idea of a drug administered at puberty and implemented in a time capsule under the skin so that it would produce long-term sterility reversible only through administration of another drug (Chasteen, 1970). The idea is feasible only if such a contraception can be developed. If the scheme for licensing babies were to be put into effect in the absence of such a contraceptive, some other means of enforcement would be necessary. It would of course be currently quite feasible surgically to sterilize every woman immediately after giving birth to an unlicensed baby. This policy has been advocated by Kingsley Davis (1973) and might prove a suitable deterrent to some women. However, many others might not be influenced at all. Consider a woman who very much wants a third child, feels she cannot afford to purchase the requisite number of license units, and yet definitely wants no more than three children. Obviously for such a woman

the prospect of surgical sterilization would have little or no deterrent effect.
In many respects, the least disadvantageous means of ensuring compliance at the present time would be a system in which all unlicensed babies were immediately relinquished by their mothers and placed under governmental custody. A presupposition for the effectiveness of such a plan is the presumption that most pregnant women would rather seek an abortion than suffer the substantial emotional pain of relinquishing their baby with the prospect of never seeing it again. Most persons would probably agree with Kingley Davis (1973) that as many unlicensed babies as possible should then be handed over for adoption by childless couples--couples who would in return surrender the appropriate number of child license units to the government.
Obviously, some provision would have to be made for the possibility that not all unlicensed babies could be adopted. These babies would have to be brought up in foster families or in children's homes. In order to reduce the number of children brought up outside of a normal family situation, it might be considered appropriate to combine the rule of state custody for all unlicensed children with ·the regulation that all mothers of unlicensed babies must be sterilized. I said earlier that sterilization would probably not have much effect in itself. However, it would eliminate the possibility that a woman would ever bear more than one unlicensed baby.
In summary, the Boulding proposal is probably not feasible unless some sanctions exist to deter, prevent, or eliminate unlicensed babies. The development of a longterm contraceptive implant would be of very significant aid in this regard. Only if such an implant were available could the government legislate, as Chasteen has suggested, that all females accept such implants at puberty and that the reversal of

Heer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

the implant's sterilizing effect be obtain- he proposed that child licenses be market-

able only upon surrender of a childbearing able so that couples who did not wish to

license. With this type of legislation, unli- have the normative number of children

censed babies would be possible only if the would receive a monetary award and those

implant were to be illegally removed. who wished to have more than the norma-

Moreover, even assuming use of the im- tive number would have to pay for this

plant was voluntary and not compulsory, privilege. Let us now entertain the possi-

its availability would tend to shift the de- bility of extending the concept of market-

cision-making focus away from the ques- ability so that licenses may also be bought

tion ".Should I make the effort to use a by the government. We now have a mech-

contraceptive to avoid conception?" to the anism by which we can assure that, on the

question "Should I make the effort to give average, individuals have no more children

up my contraceptive in order to have a than necessary for their own replacement.

baby?" Accordingly, there is no doubt that All the government has to do is to purchase

the number of unlicensed babies would be at the market price a number of baby li-

fewer than if no such implant were avail- censes equal in number to the excess of un-

able; and, assuming the existence of such licensed babies.

a contraceptive, quite possibly all unli- Thus, we see one definite advantage to

censed babies could be adopted by natu- be gained by allowing the government to

rally childless couples.

purchase licenses. But the .possibility that

On the other hand, in the absence of the government could purchase child li-

such an implant, it is much more likely censes is useful in another and most impor-

that the number of unlicensed babies would tant fashion. It would give the government

exceed the demand for them by naturally extensive power to make substantial an-

childless persons and that some children nual adjustment in the number of births

would have to be raised outside of a nor- and thereby regulate extensively and rather

mal family situation. Without actual ex- precisely the rate of population increase.

perimentation, it is impossible to know how In contrast, the original Boulding proposal

many such children there would be. I t is guarantees only that fertility will vary nar-

possible that the number of such children rowly around replacement level and cannot

would be unacceptably large both from the guarantee that the rate of natural increase

standpoint of the value that all children (the crude birth rate minus the crude death

deserve to be brought up by loving paren- rate) will be nil nor, a fortiori, can it pro-

tal figures and also from the standpoint of vide for zero population growth (which

the goal of fertility control.

would be obtainable with a zero rate of

natural increase only provided there was

TWO SUGGESTIONS FOR

also no net immigration from abroad).

MODIFICATION

The reason why an immediate end to

If it is assumed that there would be natural increase in the United States pop-

more unlicensed babies than the number ulation is unattainable despite fertility no

requisite to provide the involuntarily child- higher than replacement level is related to

less couples with an average of about two the fact that variation in the crude birth

children, what further mechanism would be and death rates can exist despite the fact

available to reduce the average number of that the cohort net reproduction rate re-

children to replacement level? Boulding's mains constant. The cohort net reproduc-

proposal was noteworthy for the fact that tion rate can be defined separately for

Vol. 22, No. 1

Marketable Licenses for Babies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

either females or for males. For females, it is the average number of female babies born over a life span to the original number of women born in a given year. For males, it is the average number of male babies born over a life span to the original number of a birth cohort of males.
The Boulding proposal attempts to guarantee that the cohort net reproduction rate either for females or for males will not exceed a figure close to one. Nevertheless, a cohort net reproduction rate of one by no means guarantees that the birth rate will equal the death rate, that the rate of natural increase will be nil, or that zero population growth will be achieved. The rate of natural increase will not be zero when the cohort net reproduction rate is one unless the population is in a stable state.
A stable population is defined for a closed population (i.e., one in which there is neither immigration from abroad nor emigration to other nations) of a given sex as the fixed population age distribution which will eventually result if there are no changes in age-specific death rates or agespecific rates of producing same-sex babies. It will also be true that eventually a close approximation to a stable population will be reached whenever the cohort net reproduction rate remains constantly at one for a sufficiently long period. But the crucial point is that a long time must elapse (from 75 to 100 years) after the date the cohort net reproduction rate has reached one and before the stable population is approached. In this interim, for any population which has previously experienced net population growth, the crude death rate will continue to be considerably lower than it would be if a stable population had already been attained and the crude birth rate somewhat larger. These results will obtain because of the younger average age of the actual population compared to the stable. As a consequence, the rate of population increase

(barring net out-migration) will remain fairly substantial for a long time period after the cohort net reproduction rate has remained constant at one.
Detailed studies of the amount of population growth to be expected after the net reproduction rate is reduced to a constant value of one and before a stable population is reached have been published by the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1972) and by Frejka (1973). Each of these studies is concerned not with the cohort net reproduction rate but with the period reproductive rate (defined for females as the average number of female babies which would be born to the original number of women in an artificial cohort exposed to the agespecific death rates and the age-specific female birth rates of a given period, usually a single year). However, the results of their computation should not differ very much from.the results of calculations making use of the cohort net reproduction rate.
Column 1 of Table 1 shows Frejka's calculation of population growth for the United States assuming the period net reproduction rate reaches a figure of 1.0 in 1970-75 and remains at that figure forever afterwards, and also assuming that there is henceforth no net immigration into or out of the United States. According to his projection, population growth will continue to be substantial for many decades and cessation of population growth does not occur until after 2050. Total population of the United States rises from 206 million in 1970 to 280 million in the year 2100, for a total increase of 36 per cent.
It is possible that a growing shortage of energy and other natural resources will make a total population growth of 36 per cent (or more) in the United States appear to be excessively large and hence politically unacceptable. A harbinger in this regard may be the change in the goals advocated by ZPG. Its original goal was to guarantee

Heer Social Biology

TABLE 1
PROJECTIONS or TOTAL POPULATION IN MILLIONS AND or INDICES OF POPULATION SIZE (1970 EQUALS 100): UNITED STATES, 1970-2100

1970 1980 1990 2000 2020 20S0 2100

Year

N.R.R. = 1.0 in 1970-75

Population

Index

20S.7 220.7 237.S 2S0.4 272.6 279.2 279.8

100
107
us .
122 133 136 136

N.R.R. = 0.9 in 1970-75

Population

Index

2OS.7 217.4 230.3 238.3 246.8 227.0 186.7

100
106 112 116 120 110 91

N.R.R. = 0.9 in 1970-75

and 1.0 in 1985-1990

Population

Index

2OS.7 217.4 232.2 243.6 261.6 264.2 264.2

100 106 113 118 127 128 128

SOUXCE: Tomas Frejka, 1973.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

that the average American had no more ulation would be 247 million as compared

children than was necessary for replace- with a figure of 273 million if the net re-

ment. Thus, their original emphasis was on production rate had remained at 1.0. How-

the necessity for an average two-child fam- ever, the original 1970 population would

ily. In September, 1973, ZPG revised its not be reached again until after 2070.

statement of goals to state that it believes Frejka also has made some calculations

the current population of the United States more germane to the goals now enunciated

to be in excess of "the optimum level for by ZPG. He states that to achieve imme-

the continued -well-being of its citizens." diate zero population growth would require

Accordingly, ZPG now advocates the end a period net reproduction rate of approxi-

to U.S.population growth by 1990 and a mately O.S for about twenty years. If the

reduction in U.S. population size thereafter government were willing to pay the requi-

(Zero Population Growth National Re- site market price (and we cannot now be

porter, 1973, p. 2). Also noteworthy in this sure whether it would be high or low),it

regard are the writings of A. E. Keir Nash, could purchase sufficient child licenses to

a political scientist with a special interest achieve immediate ZPG.

in population policy whowas a Director of I should now like to bring up another

Research for the Commission on Popula- possibility not considered by Boulding in

tion Growth and the American Future. his original proposal. The marketable li-

Nash (1972) has openly questioned the cense scheme might be modified to allow

"assumption that no thinkable population for the possibility that individuals, until

policy could seek a growth rate lower than they reached age 35, could loan their li-

0 nor an NRR lower than 1."

cense units to the government and receive

Let us now assume that the government interest during such time as their license

purchases from individuals approximately units were on loan to the government. Let

one-tenth of all of the licenses so that in- us assume for sake of argument that an in-

dividuals hold only enough licenses to en- dividual is given license units at age 18 for

sure a period net reproduction rate of 0.9. one or twochildren (depending on whether

The consequences with respect to popula- licenses were given to women alone or to

tion growth have already been computed both men and women). If this person did

by Frejka and are shown in Column 2 of not wish to have a child until age 25, she

Table 1. By the year 2020, total U.S. pop- (or he) could loan all of the license units

Vol. 22, No. 1

Marketable Licenses for Babies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

possessed by her (or him) to the government and receive some set amount of interest each year. In this way, early childbearing would be discouraged, resulting in a rise in the mean age of motherhood. A permanent rise in the mean age of motherhood for birth cohorts would also have a not insubstantial effect on the total amount of population increase in the United States.
Let us again refer to calculations of Frejka. He projects future population growth in the United States assuming as usual no net immigration from abroad and presuming a period net reproduction rate of 0.9 beginning in 1970-75 and changing to a period net reproduction rate of 1.0 beginning in 198S-90. He designs this projection to measure the effect of a permanent rise in the mean age at motherhood of birth cohorts. Such a change would involve a temporary decline in the value of the period net reproduction rate. Frejka's calculations show a final population of 264 million attained by the year 2050, representing a population increase of 28 per cent. This last figure may be compared with the 36 per cent increase obtained without a temporary decline in the period net reproduction rate.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS WITH RESPECT TO BOULDING'S PROPOSAL
Let us now consider several matters which Boulding either failed to consider or considered without sufficient attention to all possible consequences.
We may first note that Boulding does not indicate exactly the age at which licenses to have babies will first be granted. This is an important matter, since we have seen that future population growth in the United States will depend somewhat on the mean age at motherhood. Obviously, if no woman were granted a license to have a baby before age 25, total future population growth could be somewhat reduced. How-

ever, such an advanced age for licensing might be seen to infringe upon the rights of many women to have children when they wanted and as such might be seen as unjustified coercion.
On the other hand, there are also reasons to oppose a policy of granting licenses to individuals at puberty. Teen-age childbearing has been shown to be associated with a multitude of adverse health and social consequences not only for young mothers but for their children as well. The best summary of these associations is found in an article published by Menken (1972). Her article reveals that the infant mortality rate for white babies born to mothers under 15 years of age in 1960 was 2.2 times the rate for white babies born to mothers aged 20 to 24; for babies born to mothers 15 to 19 years of age, the rate was 1.3 times that for babies born to mothers aged 20 to 24. Moreover, a much higher proportion of babies born to teen-agers are of low birth weight and presumably also premature. Infants of low birth weight have also been shown to have greater chance of epilepsy, cerebral palsy, mental retardation, deafness, blindness, and poor motor development.
None of these adverse conditions associated with teen-age childbearing can be considered as entirely caused by teen-age childbearing per se. Some part of the association is undoubtedly due to the social conditions involved in teen-age childbearing, such as the frequent lack of prenatal care and the high proportion of out-of-wedlock births. Nevertheless, there is a considerable consensus that the physical and social immaturity of the early teen-age mother does cause considerable problems both for herself and for her child.
Accordingly, a reasonable compromise between the conflicting values of preserving individual freedoms and reducing adverse social consequences might be the

8

Heer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

stipulation that licenses to bear children be granted only at age 18 and that individuals under this age neither be allowed to purchase licenses nor to be given licenses by other persons. Before passing to another topic, I should also like to note that probably many persons would consider it to be inappropriate to invoke the penalty of sterilization for women bearing an unlicensed child prior to the age at which they could legally receive license units.
Boulding proposed to give each woman child-license units in the form of deci-child units and to provide sufficient deci-child units to each woman (22 such units) so that, on the average, each cohort of women would exactly replace itself. Such a procedure has the disadvantage that it would place a financial penalty on all women losing a child through death and give a financial gain to all women who never experience child loss. An alternative procedure would be to give each woman sufficient license units to bear exactly two licensed children and then allow the additional number of license units required to replace any children who died before they themselves reached licensing age. Thus, if the age at which licenses were first granted was 18, then a woman losing a child before that child reached its eighteenth birthday would be given a sufficient number of license units to bear an additional child; but if a child died after its eighteenth birthday, its mother would receive no additional units.
Boulding also neglected to consider what to do if individuals with license units were to die before they had used up all of their units. Here a sensible choice might be to include any existing license units as part of the estate of the deceased and allow them to be freely sold to anyone who wished to purchase them.
Boulding also failed to consider the problem of multiple births. I would suggest that no penalty for additional birth should

be imposed if a woman with a multiple birth possessed sufficient license units for a single birth.
We now come to another matter posed by Boulding--whether license units should be given only to females or equally to both females and males. I should like to point out that Boulding neglected a third possibility--that all the license units should be given to males. Let us consider for a moment this neglected alternative, which may have considerable merit because it would most probably ensure considerable reduction in the incidence of illegitimate births. Consider a male who sires a child out-ofwedlock. It seems improbable that he would wish to give up marketable license units for this child when such units could also be reserved for his legitimate children or sold for cash. On the other hand, the child's mother might very well decide that an abortion was preferable either to purchasing license units or to having her child removed from her and placed under governmental custody. By way of contrast, consider the consequences if all license units were given only to females. Then a woman having an out-of-wedlock birth would be able to keep her child simply by returning to the government the requisite license units.
Boulding argues that there are considerations of equity involved in deciding whether all of the license units should be given to women or whether half of them should be given to men. Obviously, since the licenses are marketable, they might be worth a great deal of money. If one takes the position that women deserve compensation for the various discriminations which they suffer in a man's world, one would probably opt for giving license units only to women. On the other hand, if one feels that illegitimacy is harmful and one is relatively unconcerned about the status of women, one would probably favor giv-

Vol. 22, No. 1

Marketable Licenses for Babies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

ing all of the units to men. A reasonable compromise between these two conflicting values might be to give half of the units to women and half to the men.
Whether all license units went to one sex alone or to both sexes equally would affect the decision as to the number of license units given to individuals who already had living children at the time the licensing scheme went into effect. Let us first consider the case where license units were given equally to both men and women. Here, it might seem sensible to subtract 0.5 license units per living child from the units given each married individual. Furthermore, from the license units given unmarried persons, it might be appropriate to subtract one unit per child either currently in custody or who had been in custody at the time he or she reached legal adulthood. Let us consider next the case where license units were given to members of one sex only. Here, one license unit might be subtracted for each child in current or previous custody. In either case, if subtraction resulted in a negative difference, it might be appropriate to stipulate that no licensing units be granted.
COMPARISON WITH OTHER SCHEMES
Let us now turn our attention to a comparison of marketable licenses with other suggestions for achieving a desirable degree of fertility reduction. (For the most comprehensive general discussion of various types of population policy, see Bernard Berelson, 1969.)
At the present time, a large number of people have faith that legalized abortion and extension of subsidized family-planning services throughout the United States will be sufficient to reduce the birth rate to an acceptably low level. Proponents of this belief point to the fact that both in 1972 and in 1973 the period net reproduction rate was less than 1.0 and therefore

below replacement level (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1973a and Los Angeles Times, Jan. 1, 1974). They rightly attribute a large proportion of the recent very sharp decline in U.S. fertility to recent advances in contraceptive technology and to the governmental programs which enabled large segments of the population to take advantage of them. Moreover, they see the recent legalization of abortion as resulting in still further fertility decline. They point out that in the period 1960-65, 17 per cent of all babies born in the United States were unwanted at conception by either husband or wife and 22 per cent by at least one spouse (Bumpass and Westoff, 1970). However, during the succeeding five years, a time when the United States officially began a large-scale program to reduce unwanted conceptions among the poor, the decline in the unwanted fertility rate was substantial. For the total population, the decline in the number of unwanted births per 1,000 women years of exposure to the risk of unwanted childbearing was 36 per cent, and among blacks, 56 per cent (Westoff, 1972).
Opponents of the view that legal abortion and subsidized family planning are sufficient to produce an acceptably low birth rate put forth two arguments. First, they assert that continuation of fertility at replacement level is unacceptable because it guarantees a substantial rise in U.S. population. Secondly, they argue that just as fertility has manifested an exceedingly rapid decline during the past decade, so can it show an equally sharp rise in the future. They maintain that variations in desired number of children depend upon many factors and that it is quite possible that these factors could in the future combine in such a way as to produce once more, as during the post-World-War-II baby boom, a rather high average number of wanted children per couple.

10

Heer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Ansley J. Coale, although not an advocate of immediate measures beyond family planning to reduce the U.S. birth rate, has also recognized the inherent variability in the average number of desired children. He states, "I see no logical reason to expect that on average people would voluntarily choose a number of children that would keep the long-run average a little above two per couple" (Coale, 1970, p. 135).
In short, it is argued that although family planning programs may bring about fertility reduction, they make no attempt to achieve fertility control. For example, if the government made it a national policy for the 1974 birth rate to be only 12 per thousand, there is no way that family planning programs alone could ensure this goal.
Judith Blake has been a forceful advocate of changes in social structure to eliminate "coercive pronatalism" (Blake, 1972). A similar argument has also been advanced by Kingsley Davis (1967). Blake argues that the ideology which insists that every man and woman can only find complete personal fulfillment in parenthood must be rejected. She insists that the taboo on homosexuality and lesbianism be removed and that women should be allowed to seek fulfillment in a career without feeling that this career must be combined with parenthood. In part, the changes which Blake advocates have already occurred in the last five years, particularly among the better-educated segments of the nation's young people. Although many of the changes she advocates may be desirable in their own right because they will serve to raise the relative status of women, their further effect on fertility is problematic because it is uncertain how much further these changes can continue and how much effect the changes, if made, would have on fertility» For example, there may be no way in which the coercive pronatalism ex-

erted by potential grandparents can be reduced. Furthermore, the complete societal acceptance of homosexuality or lesbianism might have very little effect upon the birth rate.
Let us now consider two types of policy usually considered as more extreme than those mentioned previously: childbearing quotas and systems of financial incentive. Quotas would simply allow each individual a maximum of n children (for example, one child) and no more. In a quota system all individuals can be given identical quotas or, alternatively, some individuals can be given larger quotas than others. Many different types of financial incentive systems are possible. To simplify our discussion let us consider just three of these. The first would provide a monthly financial subsidy to persons with no more than the normative number of children for their age. A second type would provide that persons having more than the normative number of children pay a monthly tax on each child above the norm. A third type would provide that each couple pay a relatively large lump-sum tax upon the birth of each child above the normative number. Table 2 illustrates hypothetical financial details for each of these three types of financial incentive systems.
A possible disadvantage of any system of financial incentives compared with a child-bearing quota or with present practice is that financial incentives might serve to increase the inequality of financial conditions in which children are raised. Currently, considerable inequality exists because some children have richer parents than others and because, within families of the same income class, some children have more siblings than others. These inequalities lead to such consequences as certain children having a better probability of high educational attainment than others with equal ability (Duncan et al., 1972). A pol-

Vol. 22, No. 1

Marketable Licenses for Babies

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
HYPOTHETICAL FINANCIAL DETAILS FOR THREE TYPES or FINANCIAL INCENTIVE SYSTEMS

A. Monthly Subsidy to Persons with No More than the Normative Number of Living Children for Their Age
No. o¡ Living Children

Age of Persons

20-24 2S-29 30-44

$50 $150 $100 $150 $100

3 or More
$50

B. Monthly Tax on Parents with More than the Normative Number of Living Children to be Paid until Child Reaches Age 18
No. of Living Children
3 4 or More
$50 $50 times no. in excess of 2

C. One-time Tax Payment at Birth of Child According to Number of Mother's Living Children Immediately Prior to Birth of this Child
No. of Living Children Prior to Birth
2 or More
$5,000

icy of financial incentives would have the direct effect of increasing the financial penalties on children born to parents who, despite the incentives, still chose to have large families.
On the other hand, it is not always recognized that financial incentives might well serve to motivate poor parents to have relatively fewer children and the rich relatively more. If, for example, financial incentives completely eliminated all large families among the poor (this result is much more likely when abortion is both legal and financially subsidized than when it is not), then inequality for children would probably be less under a financial incentives policy than at present, despite the fact that incomes of large families would be subject to negative transfer payments.
Different types of financial incentive

systems would probably have different consequences with respect to their effect on the degree of inequality of financial support for children. It is possible, for example, that a one-time tax on excess children might substantially reduce such inequality since it is exceedingly probable that very few poor parents would be able to make the large lump-sum payment required. However, until each of the various financial incentive systems is put into practice, it is impossible to know precisely what effect it will have.
Some idea of the possible effect is obtainable through asking respondents how they would react given the existence of such incentives. A recent set of two studies (Simon and Simon, 1973; Simon, 1974) asked respondents whether a monthly tax on children would affect their childbearing. One-third of respondents with three or more children replied that they would have fewer children if they had to pay $25 a month for each additional child after the second, and 53 per cent replied they would have fewer if forced to pay $300 a month. Moreover, the lower the family income, the higher the proportion of respondents who stated they would respond to the incentive.
An identical child-bearing quota for every couple would probably serve to reduce slightly current inequalities in financial conditions for children, since at the present time there is a negative relationship between family income and number of children (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 19736). Moreover, an individualized quota system could be devised which would guarantee that only wealthy families be allowed more than the normative number of children.
A major disadvantage of financial incentive systems over quota systems is that they provide a much less exact mechanism of fertility control. The incentives may

12

Heer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

provide too much fertility or too little. With other variables affecting fertility held constant, the elasticity of childbearing with respect to the value of the incentives could be established through experience. However, it is not likely that these other factors would remain constant and therefore it is not likely that a particular set of incentives could be relied upon to produce nationwide a targeted number of annual births.
Quotas, on the other hand, have the great disadvantage of depriving parents completely of freedom to choose the number of their children. Many persons consider that this denial of parental rights makes a system of quotas morally unacceptable. Moreover, unequal quotas might stir up so much hostility as to be politically unacceptable.
Both the various types of financial incentive systems and the systems of childbearing quotas are dependent upon enforcement mechanisms. What are the differences between them in the ease and in the acceptability of their enforcement mechanisms? With respect to financial incentives, one must minimize the number of persons who unlawfully collect a subsidy for having less than the normative number of children or unlawfully evade payment of a tax for having more than the normative number. An acceptable level of compliance for a system of financial incentives would probably involve establishment of a nationwide system of personal identification numbers so that all living children could be automatically associated in a computer with their parents. This computer system would make possible the detection of parents who willfully misreported the number of their children to governmental authorities to gain financial advantage.
Once having detected a case of unlawful reporting, the government would then have to decide what sanctions to invoke. In the

case of a monthly subsidy for having relatively few children, the government could easily refuse to make further payments; and in the case of a monthly tax, the government could also easily enforce future payment through payroll withholding. On the other hand, a suitable penalty for past illegal acceptance of the subsidy or for past failure to pay a monthly childbearing tax is more difficult to devise. Payment of the money due the government might result in financial hardship not only to parents but also to children. A prison sentence to impecunious offending parents would also be harmful to the welfare of their children. Moreover, many persons would consider it unwise to have the government assume custody of older children whose parents had defrauded the government. Under these conditions, perhaps it might be best if there were no penalty for past failure to comply with the law for parents below a certain income level. For a one-time tax at childbirth, an effective if not entirely acceptable enforcement mechanisms would be the stipulation that if the tax were not paid, custody of the child would revert to the state.
What about a satisfactory means of enforcing individual childbearing quotas? The conclusions reached earlier with regard to the enforcement of a marketable license scheme and the one-time tax at childbirth are equally relevant with respect to childbearing quotas. To recapitulate, the development of a long-term contraceptive implant would make enforcement much easier. Furthermore, with or without such an implant, perhaps the most acceptable procedure to deal with children born without a license would be to put out for adoption as many of them as possible and place the remainder under the guardianship of the state.
Systems of financial incentive may also be'compared with childbearing quota sys-

Vol. 22, No. I

Marketable Licenses for Babies

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

terns with respect to eugenic consequences. Since children of the well-to-do generally have higher I.Q.'s than children of the poor and since a system of financial incentives would probably deter childbearing among the poor more than among the rich, it is likely that financial incentives would provide what many persons would consider a eugenic effect. This eugenic effect would be largely absent in a quota system which allowed exactly the same number of children to each couple. On the other hand, quotas could be individualized for a maximum eugenic effect. Bajema has suggested a plan of this nature. He proposed that all couples be given a preliminary, license to have exactly two children. He then presumes that not all couples will be able or will wish to have two children. These licenses will then be granted to applicants who already have two children but want more on the basis of proof of their genetic superiority. This superiority would be established on the basis of contests involving mental ability, personality, and athletic, musical, artistic, literary, and business skills (Bajema, 1971).
It should now be clear that the proposal for marketable licenses is a compromise between proposals that place a childbearing quota on individuals and proposals that rely completely on financial incentives. In essence, it places a childbearing quota on the nation but leaves individuals technically free to have as many children as they want subject to financial incentives to have fewer.
How does the original Boulding proposal for marketable licenses or the suggested variant proposed here compare to the various financial incentive schemes and individual quota proposals we have discussed? Table 3 presents an evaluation of the various relatively extreme proposals on the several dimensions we have been considering. To summarize, in either version, mar-

ketable licenses would place fewer restraints on individual liberty than quota systems. They would probably serve to increase equality of financial supports for children, since it is likely that only the well-to-do could afford to pay a sizeable sum in advance for the privilege of having more than two children. Enforcement would appear to be as effective as for any other proposal; however, the acceptability of the enforcement mechanism might be inferior to that of the monthly subsidy and monthly tax schemes. The original Boulding proposal would be able to keep the net reproduction rate close to 1.0 but would be less successful in keeping the crude birth rate at a particular level. My own modification of the Boulding proposal would provide a mechanism for a fairly precise regulation of the birth rate itself. Finally, either version of the marketable license proposal would have a moderate eugenic effect. This effect would obviously be less pronounced than that of a quota system designed to maximize eugenic effect.
However, a compromise between the marketable license scheme and the eugenic quota proposal is possible. Bajema (1971) has already suggested the possibility of a marketable license system in which prospective purchasers of license units for children beyond the second child would first have to pass a screening based on the revealed genetic quality of their existing children. Such a compromise proposal would preserve many of the other advantages of the marketable licensing system. However, the political acceptability of this compromise proposal is more questionable than that of a marketable license system which does not attempt explicit eugenic control.
Whether the United States will ever adopt any of the seven relatively extreme mechanisms in order to reduce its birth rate cannot now be predicted. As Bernard Berl-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
EVALUATION OF SEVEN RELATIVELY EXTREME SCHEMES FOR FERTILITY REDUCTION

EFFECT
Restriction on individual liberty
Effects on equality of children's financial support
Effectiveness and acceptability of enforcement mechanisms
Effectiveness for precise regulation ofthe birth rate
Eugenic effect

MARKETABLE LICENSE SYSTEMS

Original Boulding Proposal

Boulding Proposal Modified to Provide That LicensesMay Be Sold or Lent at
Interest to the Government

Moderately severe

Moderately severe

Probably beneficial
Effective enforcement at possible price of depriving some children of a family environment

Probably beneficial
Effective enforcement at possible price of depriving some children of a family environment

Moderate Moderate

High Moderate

FINANCIAL INCENTIVE SYSTEMS

Monthly Subsidy to Persons with No More than the Normative No. of Children

Monthly Tax on Persons with More than the Normative
No. of Children

One-time Tax for Excess Babies

Moderately severe

Moderately severe

Moderately severe

Unknown
Fairly effective enforcement

Unknown
Fairly effective enforcement

Probably beneficial
Effective enforcement at possible price of depriving some children of a family environment

Low Moderate

Low Moderate

Low Moderate

INDIVIDUAL QUOTA SYSTEMS

Identical Quota for All Couples

Individual Quotas to Maximize
Eugenic Effect

Very severe

Very severe

Slightly beneficial
Effective enforcement at possible price of depriving some children of a family environment

Moderately beneficial
Effective enforcement at possible price of depriving some children of a family environment

Moderate Slight

Moderate High

1 Biology

Heer

B*

Vol. 22, No. 1

Marketable Licenses for Babies

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

eson has correctly concluded, "What we normal family situation, and if it is also

seek is human welfare, personal freedom, assumed that theadvances in reproduction

the quality of life, and demographic trends control we have discussed have notyet oc-

and changes take on meaning only insofar curred, then among the seven relatively ex-

as they contribute to such ends. Any eval- treme proposals we have discussed, theone

uation should keep that closely in mind, most likely to be adopted would be either

what we are really after. Some costs, in the monthly subsidy plan or the monthly

short are too high, for population control tax. On theother hand, should the United

is not the final value" (Berelson, 1974, p. States decide that a rather precise regula-

12). tion of its birth rate was indeed required,

Accordingly, the outcome will probably then marketable licenses would seem in

depend on three factors. The first isthe most respects to have definite advantages

level of the birth rate attainable through over alternative proposals, advantages

less extreme measures. The second isthe which would bestrengthened if it were also

success that theUnited States will have in stipulated that the government had author-

finding a sufficient quantity of reasonably- ity both to purchase license units from in-

priced natural resources. Thethird relates dividuals and to pay interest onunits until

to certain possible developments in the they were used.

technology of reproduction control. One of Paradoxically, however, it is conceivable these developments is,of course, the possi- that perfection of the technological adbility of a safe and effective long-term con- vances in reproduction control which would traceptive implant. Another would be the serve to enhance the acceptability of the development of a feasible technology to marketable license andtheother relatively choose the sex of one's baby. Obviously more extreme proposals might by themparents able to select the sex of allof their selves reduce fertility to such an extent children would be much more willing to that the government would come to conforego the privilege of having nomore than cern itself with raising the birth rate rather the normative number of children than than attempting to cutit down. would those for whom thesexof their off-

spring was beyond control. Moreover, if some reduction in thebirth

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

rate were considered highly desirable, but not at the expense of anyincrease inthe proportion of children reared outside of a

The contribution of Professor J. William Leasure of California State University, San Diego, in reviewing an earlier draft of this manuscript is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

BAJEMA, CARL. 1971. The genetic implications of BOULDING, KENNETH. 1964. The meaning of the

American life styles in reproduction and pop- 20th century. Harper andRow, New York.

ulation control. In Carl J. Bajema (ed.), Nat- BROWN, LESTER R. 1974. Bybread alone. Praeger,

ural selection inhuman populations. Wiley,New New York.

York.

BUMPASS, LARRY, and CHARLES F. WESTOFF. 1970.

BERELSON, BERNARD. 1969. Beyond family plan- The "perfect contraceptive" population. Science

ning. Stud. Fam. Plan. 1 (No. 38): 1-16.

169 (Sept. 18):1177-1182.

. 1974. Anevaluation of theeffects of pop- CHASTEEN, EDGAR. 1970.The case for compulsory

ulation control programs. Stud. Fam.Plan 5 birth control. Mademoiselle magazine, January.

(No. 1):2-12.

COALE, ANSLEY J. 1970. Man and the environ-

BLAKE, JUDITH. 1972. Coercive pronatalism and ment. Science 170 (Oct. 9):132-136.

American population policy. Preliminary Paper COMMISSION ON POPULATION GROWTH AND THE

No. 2 (December). International Population AMERICAN FUTURE. 1972. Population and the

and Urban Research, University of California, American future. U.S. Government Printing

Berkeley.

Office, Washington, D.C.

16

Heer

Social Biology

DAVIS, KINGSLEY. 1967. Population policy: Will hypothetical-question study. Paper delivered at

current programs succeed? Science 158 (Nov. the 1973 meeting of the Population Assodation

10):730-739.

of America. Abstracted in Pop Index 39 (No.

. 1973. Zero population growth: Thegoal 3):335-336.

and themeans. Daedalus 102 (No.4):15-30.

U.S. BUREAU OP THE CENSUS. 1972. Illustrative

DUNCAN, OTIS DUDLEY, DAVID FEATHERMAN, and population projections for the United States:

BEVERLY DUNCAN. 1972. Socioeconomic back- The demographic effects of alternative paths to

ground and achievement. Seminar Press, New zero-growth. Current Population Reports, Series

York.

P-25, No. 480 (April). Government Printing

FREJKA, TOMAS. 1973. The future of population Office, Washington, D.C.

growth: Alternative paths to equilibrium. Wiley,

. 1973a. Estimates of the population of the

New York.

United States andcomponents of change: 1972.

MENKEN, JANE. 1972.The health and social con- Current Population Reports, Series P-2S, No.

sequences of teenage childbearing. Fam. Plan. 499 (May). Government Printing Office, Wash-

Perspec. 4 (No.3):45-53.

ington, D.C.

NASH, A. E. KEIR. 1972. Demographology in U.S.

. 1973b. Women by number of children

population policies. In Richard L. Clintonand ever born. Census of population: 1970. Final

R. Kenneth Godwin (eds.), Research in the Report PC (2)-3A. Government Printing Office,

politics of population. D. C. Heath, Lexington, Washington, D.C.

Mass.

WESTOTT, CHARLES F. 1972. The modernization of

SIMON, JULIAN L. 1974. The effects of income on U.S. contraceptive practice. Fam.Plan. Perspec.

fertility. Carolina Population Center, Chapel 4 (No.3):9-12.

Hill.

ZERO POPULATION GROWTH. 1973. ZPG goals. Zero

SIMON, JULIAN L., and RITA J. SIMON. 1973. The Population Growth National Reporter 5 (No.

effect of money incentives on family size: A 7):2.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

