Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The health orientation scale: A measure of feelings about sickle cell trait
Edna Q. Wooldridge & Robert F. Murray Jr
To cite this article: Edna Q. Wooldridge & Robert F. Murray Jr (1988) The health orientation scale: A measure of feelings about sickle cell trait, Social Biology, 35:1-2, 123-136, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988694 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988694
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 9
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

The Health Orientation Scale: A Measure of Feelings About Sickle Cell Trait

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Edna Q. Wooldridge and Robert F. Murray, Jr.
Centerfor Sickle Cell Disease, College of Medicine, Howard University, Washington, D.C.

ABSTRACT: The Health Orientation Scale (HOS), a written self-report instrument, was developed to objectively appraise the psychological implications of identification as a sickle cell gene carrier (AS). The HOS uses the semantic differential technique and consists, of nine situations thought to be of importance in identification as a carrier. The instrument was completed by respondents during the various phases of the screening and counseling process. Discussion will focus on a comparison of carrier and noncarrier (AA) reactions to situations which involve the diagnoses of sickle cell trait (AS), sickle cell disease (SS), cancer, and hypertension along with a comparison of feelings before and after counseling. Results suggest that noncarriers have more negative feelings about sickle cell than carriers. Further, counseling, as it is currently practiced, does not contribute to any significant differences in feelings about sickle cell for either carriers or noncarriers. The attitudes and feelings of noncarriers toward sickle cell trait and disease suggest that carrier identification is a stigma.

Genetic counseling is a comprehensive and multidimensional process which involves transmitting information about a genetically determined disorder. The genetic counselor provides the affected individual and family members with facts relative to the diagnosis, manifestations, management and recurrence risks as well as information regarding the prognosis.
In addition to providing medical information, the genetic counselor addresses the emotional and psychological concerns of the counselee, particularly the emotional impact of the discovery that one has a particular genetic disorder or that one is the carrier of a gene associated with a particular disorder. In order for counseling to be effective, medical and genetic facts must be accurately communicated, received, and understood, and the counselee's wellbeing, be it physical, social, or psychological, should be improved.

Antley (1979) points out that most persons have not seriously considered the possibility that they may carry "abnormal" genes. Quite often, in genetic counseling, the counselee enters the session feeling fine, but the nature of the information revealed in counseling may cause him to believe that he is a different person either physically and/or psychologically. It becomes important, therefore, to attend to both the content and the affect of the client's communication about himself and his self image.
Further, the psychological impact of the genetic diagnosis may interfere with the cognitive processes necessary to understand and accept the genetic information. Targum (1981) speaks of "psychological readiness" as a necessary state for comprehension and assimilation of the facts presented in genetic counseling. Further, Hsia (1979) suggests that the emotional attitude of the counselee will influence the way in

123

124

Wooldridge and Murray

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

which information is received. Such information may aggravate already existing feelings. Much has been written concerning the need to address the psychological concerns of the counselee as well as the factual content of counseling (Antley, 1979; Davis, 1979; Hsia, 1979; Kessler, 1979£, 1979c, 1979rf;Targum, 1981). Focusing on medical facts without giving ample attention to psychological issues conveys a sense that the counselee's feelings are inappropriate, unimportant, misunderstood, or abnormal and does little to enhance psychological well-being.
Only a few studies have attempted to evaluate the affective responses to identification as the carrier of a mutant gene, such as sickle cell trait (AS). Clow and Scriver (1977) evaluated the attitudes of students toward screening for the TaySachs gene. For 15 per cent of the group, the expectation of being tested was "frightening." Carriers, in contrast to noncarriers, were first unsettled upon learning their diagnosis, but subsequently adjusted to the new information. The study concluded that being identified as a carrier resulted in a 10per cent chance of "diminished self-image," and noncarrier diagnosis presented a 10 per cent chance of improvement in feelings of "self." A study by Childs et al. (1976) found that noncarriers were relieved when they learned their test result. In contrast, carriers of the TaySachs gene and their spouses who were less than thirty years old were inclined to be "upset" and reported "shocked surprise" at being singled out or being imperfect. Those who did not understand what the carrier state meant expressed anxiety, which was later relieved with the appropriate information.
Other studies have addressed psychological issues in counseling carriers

of Tay-Sachs disease (Schneiderman, 1975), persons with Down syndrome (M. A. Antley et al., 1973; Antley and Hartlage, 1976) and cystic fibrosis (Patterson, 1973). There are very few studies that have been conducted concerning genetic counseling for sickle cell gene carriers.
Stamatoyannopoulus (1974), studying sickle cell trait carriers in Greece, found that screening resulted in the stigmatization of some people. Being identified as a carrier resulted in social embarrassment and restriction of marital choices, especially for women. Parents not only instructed their carrier children to avoid marrying another carrier for fear that the union would result in offspring with sickle cell disease, but surprisingly, 20 per cent of the normal parents (AA), asked their AA children to avoid a carrier as a mate.
R. M. Antley (1973), in studying the self-image of adults and/or their children with sickle cell trait (the carrier state), found that this group exhibited more anxiety, hostility, and depression and lower self-concept than controls. Antley found that counseling actually intensified the "psychological barriers," and he was unable to determine whether the persons responding to genetic counseling were either "more upset" than people in general or whether the counseling itself was a contributing factor to this upset.
The reactions to diagnosis as the carrier of a genetic defect are compounded when one considers having children. The carrier who mates with a carrier sets up the potential for the birth of a child with disease. Callahan (1973) and Antley (1979) address the parental fear of bearing a defective child. The child is perceived as an extension of one's self. The birth of a child with some defect

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

Health Orientation Scale

125

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

may alter the parents' self image. Fur- the genetic facts on their emotional

ther, Davis (1979) suggested that carrier wellbeing. Kessler et al. (1984) concur,

identification can be stigmatizing. She pointing out that in order for counseling

found a carrier patient who believed to be effective and appropriate counsel-

himself to be "unfit" for parenthood and ing strategies employed, an assessment

another who felt "unclean."

of the individuals psychological reac-

With regard to carrier status, Soren- tions is demanded.

son (1974) points out that the signific- The purpose of this study was to ex-

ance of such an identification is more de- amine the psychological response to

pendent upon the meaning of the status identification as a carrier of the sickle

for the individual. As a result of the per- cell gene; to identify those life situations

ception, the potential exists for the de- most likely to elicit negative self-image

velopment of disabilities which are not or stigmatization in persons with sickle

the result of actual physical conditions, cell trait; and to evaluate the impact of

but rather the result of the psychological counseling on feelings about sickle cell

meaning of "carrier status" for the indi- carrier status. An intermediate objec-

vidual, e.g., change in self-perception. tive in achieving the ultimate goal of the

These studies have identified a range study was to develop the Health Orien-

of feelings which may be brought on by tation Scale (HOS) as a tool to identify

carrier identification or influenced by the psychological sequelae of carrier

genetic counseling. The effective coun- identification and assess the impact of

selor must be aware of the range of emo- genetic counseling.

tions that the client may experience. No major study of the impact of iden-

These feelings may include hostility, tification as a sickle cell gene carrier on

anxiety, depression, stigma, shock, de- self-image has been done nor has the im-

nial, upset, blame, guilt, anger, shat- pact of counseling on feelings about

tered body image, lowered self-concept, sickle cell trait been evaluated (Antley,

reduced desirability as a mate, questions 1973). Following an extensive examina-

of parental capacity, and fear of disclo- tion of the literature pertaining to the

sure (Antley, 1979; Kessler, 1979d; psychological sequelae of genetic disor-

Kessleretal.,1984).

ders, Gump (1973) suggested that learn-

Feelings and attitudes influence the ing that one is the carrier of the sickle

manner in which individuals understand cell gene might lead to a revision of the

and use the information they receive. In individual's self-concept, a change in

discussing decision-making in genetic self-image and accompanying feelings of

counseling, Antley (1979) says that feel- loss, depression, and stigma.

ings can be "alarming, motivating, or In an effort to assess the psychologi-

paralyzing factors in subsequent deci- cal reactions to identification as a carrier

sion-making" and therefore it is most of the sickle cell gene, Gump and useful to help a counselee recognize the Brooks1 initially developed the Health impact of these feelings on his evalua-

tion of life's situation (p. 138). It is not

suggested that there will always be psychological reaction to genetic diagnosis and counseling, but that persons should be evaluated to determine the impact of

1Janice P. Gump, Ph.D. and Glenwood Brooks, Jr., Ph.D., are psychologists who collaborated on the original design of the project instrument, the Health Orientation Scale. The content has been extensively modified.

126

Wooldridge and Murray

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Orientation Scale (HOS), a psychological test. The instrument was designed to estimate, objectively, (1) feelings related to the possession of a defective gene, the S gene (2) the degree of positive or negative self-image among sickle cell carriers, and (3) to reveal some of their attitudes about selected health concerns. The developers also hoped that the HOS would be useful for evaluating the psychological impact of genetic counseling.
Stigma as "fall-out" from the diagnosis of genetic disease has been discussed by several researchers (Kaback, 1974; Murray, 1973b; Smith, 1972; Headings, 1975; Kelley, 1977). However, the major influence in the approach of Gump and Brooks to the development of the HOS has been the work of Goffman (1974). In defining stigma, Goffman (1974, p. 2) suggests:
While the stranger is present before us, evidence can arise of his possessing an attribute that makes him different from others in the category of persons available for him to be and of a less desirable kind--in the extreme, a person to a tainted, discounted one. Such an attribute is a stigma especially when its discrediting effect is very extensive. . . .
Goffman (1974) divides the stigmatized into two groups based on the nature of the defect possessed: the "discredited," whose defects are readily evident, and the "discreditable," whose defects are neither known nor discernible. The sickle cell gene carrier, if stigmatized, would be placed in the "discreditable" group, since there are no external manifestations of the carrier state.
For the individual who carries the sickle cell gene, the real issue is how he deals with the information he receives about himself--the diagnosis. In effect,

he has two identities--his real identity and his social identity. When the individual possesses some characteristic that makes him different from the rest of the group and possibly less acceptable, Goffman (1974) points out that he may have the added burden of uncertainty about whether those around him will characterize him as unfavorable. Gump (1975) suggested that deciding if and when to reveal his real identity.may be a difficult task for the carrier since he will be faced with learning what others actually think of him (social identify). The carrier has no physical characteristics associated with the S gene. Therefore, given the nature of this concealed "defect," any psychological sequelae would have little impact upon relationships with strangers, but might influence interactions with intimates or others to whom the individual might disclose the information. Accordingly, Goffman (1974) theorizes that the stigmatized is a "perspective" rather than an individual and is a product of the social situation in which an individual finds himself.
Gump (1975) suggested that reactions to being a sickle cell gene carrier might differ depending upon the circumstances under which such a diagnosis is learned and/or revealed to others. There is reason to believe that "the sense of stigmatization or of loss might be greater in the context of marriage and procreation than in the context of employment (Gump, 1975, p. 9)." Consequently, a number of situations which were thought to produce differing reactions to carrier status were identified.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DESCRIPTION OF INSTRUMENT (HOS)
The Health Orientation Scale (HOS) uses the semantic differential technique

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

Health Orientation Scale

127

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Situation A
B C D
E
F G H I

TABLE1
SITUATIONS IN THE HEALTH ORIENTATION SCALE
I am in charge of 50 people who do different kinds of jobs. I learn that several of my employees have sickle cell trait. I feel: As the boss (in Item A above), I imagine that the sickle cell trait carrier might feel: My doctor has just told me that I have sickle cell trait. I feel: I have sickle cell trait. Over a game of cards, there is a conversation about sickle cell. As I consider whether or not to mention that I have sickle cell trait, I feel: My spouse (husband or wife) and I have been diagnosed as sickle cell trait carriers. This means that we might have children with sickle cell disease. As I consider the risk we take should we have children, I feel: My doctor has just told me that I have sickle cell disease. I feel: My doctor has just told me that I have cancer. I feel: My doctor has just told me that I have high blood pressure. I feel: The following terms best describe me:

developed by Osgood et al. (1957). The semantic differential is a wellrecognized, valid, and reliable method for the general measurement of attitudes. Nunnally (1970, p. 420) points out:
Attitudes concern feelings about particular social objects, types of people, particular persons, social institutions, government policies andothers.
As shown in Table 1, the HOS provides a measure of attitudes toward nine situations, six of which address sickle cell trait and disease, two of which deal with more generally feared health concerns (cancer and hypertension), and one which addresses self-concept. Each situation is followed by (the same) twelve bipolar semantic differential scales which cover the basic dimensions of semantic space identified by Osgood et al. (1957). These are (1) the evaluative dimension (e.g., good-bad), (2) the potency dimension (e.g., weak-strong) and (3) the activity dimension (e.g., active-passive). The polarity and order of the scales are randomized for each of the nine situations (Table 2).

The bipolar scales provide a measure of both the direction (positive or negative) and the intensity of feelings associated with each situation. Guilford (1954) notes that the "attitude continuum" is bipolar and the individual's attitude influences his reactions to situations in a manner which can be judged as favorable or unfavorable. Brammer and Shostrum (1977) add that feelings are generally seen as positive, negative, or ambivalent. Feelings evaluated as positive are "ego-constructive"; asnegative, "ego-destroying." Along the continuum, ambivalence, or the mid-point, reflects feelings which are in conflict or contrast. Scores obtained on the Health Orientation Scale provide a measure of feelings (bipolar score) and generalized attitudes (situation score) along a continuum which can be broadly evaluated as favorable, ambivalent, or unfavorable.
ADMINISTRATION
The Health Orientation Scale (HOS) was administered to 199 persons (between 1979 and 1984) during three

128

Wooldridge andMurray

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

TABLE2
HEALTH ORIENTATION SCALE
Below isa list of items which getat your feelings about sickle cell and some other health concerns. There are no wrong orright answers, only information about how you feel. Please complete all the items. Give your first response and donot go back over items already answered.
Indicate your feelings byplacing an "X" in themiddle of the space closest to the word which best describes your feelings.
1. My doctor has just told methat I have sickle cell trait. I f e e l . . .

Rprl "(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)

Nn( guilty

"(') (4) (3) (2) (1)

«5trnn

Sari T Tnmftrkpd TTnnhlp

Tmrtivp
Sirk
h Score for scale position.

Good Unafraid
Guilty Unashamed Weak Relieved Happy Marked Able Angry Active Healthy

phases of the sickle cell screening and up, sixmonths after counseling. Of the

genetic counseling process--before sixty-three noncarriers (AA), the in-

counseling, after counseling, andsix strument was completed by forty-four

months after counseling. These analyses subjects (70per cent) before counseling,

reflect the responses of persons iden- five subjects (8per cent) after counsel-

tified as carriers (AS) and noncarriers ing and fourteen (22 per cent), six

(AA). Carriers (AS) had been screened months after counseling.

for sickle cell disease byelectrophoresis The original intent of this design was

and found tohave AS hemoglobin. Indi- to assess the effects of both screening

viduals characterized as noncarriers had andgenetic counseling. The HOS was to

been screened and found to have AA have been administered before screen-

(normal) hemoglobin.

ing, after screening (before counseling),

SUBJECTS

after counseling, and in follow-up, six months after counseling. Because of the

Of the one-hundred and thirty-six small number of subjects in one cate-

(136) sickle cell carriers (AS) participat- gory (noncarriers after counseling,

ing in the study, the HOS was com- N = 5) and the difficulty in obtaining

pleted by seventy-two subjects (53 per subjects prior toscreening, itwas necescent) before counseling, twenty-five sary to collapse categories for these subjects (18per cent) after counseling, analyses. The redefined categories inand thirty-nine (29per cent) in follow- cluded a Before Counseling Group

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

Health Orientation Scale

129

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

TABLE3
ADMINISTRATION OFTHE HEALTH ORIENTATION SCALE

Scale Administration
Before Counseling After Counseling" Follow-up6
Total

Carriers (AS)
72(53%) 25(18%) 39(29%)
136(100%)

* * These categories collapsed into one group--After Counseling.

Noncarriers (AA)
44(70%) 5 (8%) 14(22%)
63 (100%)

which consisted of either carriers (iV = 72) or noncarriers (N = 44) who had been screened for sickle cell hemoglobin but had not received genetic counseling and an After Counseling Group consisting of carriers (N = 64) and noncarriers (N = 19) who completed the HOS after counseling or in follow-up (Table 3). Noncarriers who received genetic counseling participated
in the sessions because a family member (i.e., spouse or child) had been identitled as a carrier of the sickle cell gene.
The majority of persons with sickle cell trait (carriers) were female (67 per cent), thirty years of age or younger (54 per cent), black (100 per cent) with some college or a degree (51 per cent). Seventy-six per cent of the carriers indicated that they knew someone else with sickle cell trait, whereas only 50 per cent
knew someone who had sickle cell disease (SS). Among noncarriers, most (70 per cent) were thirty years of age or younger and female (68per cent). Sixty per cent of the noncarriers indicated that they knew someone with sickle cell trait and59per cent knew someone with sickle cell disease.
RFT IARTT TTV
Reliability coefficients were computed for the Health Orientation Scale, A Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient of 0.82 was obtained for a test-retest of the HOS, indicating that the HOS is a stable measurement instru-

ment. A coefficient alpha of 0.97was obtained for the entire HOS (all situations), and a subdivision of those situations addressing sickle cell only. An alpha of 0.93 was obtained for the remaining situations. These coefficients indicate that the reliability estimated for internal consistency is very high,
v
To assess the construct validity ofthe HOS, a factor analysis was performed. An inspection of the factor loadings revealed that variables clustered around situations. The factorial composition of the HOSsuggests that subjects were responding to each situation as a whole and that the factors denned for the HOS are, in fact, the situations themselves and not some other undefined factors,
DISCUSSION
Mean ratings andstandard deviations for all subjects on all situations were computed. A 2 x 2 analysis of variance (diagnosis x counseling) revealed no significant interaction effects on situation scores. A significant main effect of diagnosis (AS vs AA) was revealed for situations A, B, C, D, and E (Table 4). Whether or not one had sickle cell trait differentiated feelings relative to these situations, with noncarriers reporting significantly lower mean scores than carriers on these situations. These lower mean scores indicate that noncarriers

130

Wooldridge and Murray

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

TABLE4
SITUATION MEANS", STANDARD DEVIATIONS AND ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE

SITUATION
A B C D E F G H I

CARRIERS (N = 136)

Before Counseling (N = 72)

After Counseling (N =64)

Mean S.D.

Mean S.D.'

41C 8.09 43 7.96 35 11.84 38 11.51 39 10.21 39 11.12 41 11.16 41 11.83 32 10.16 31 11.29
28 9.55 28 11.57 24 8.20 26 10.09 32 8.98 37 9.42 48 8.08 49 8.44

NONCARRIERS (N = 63)

Before Counseling (N = 44)
Mean S.D.

After Counseling (N «= 19)
Mean S.D.

/>>0.05*

37 6.51 38 7.04 D 28 8.63 32 10.84 D 30 10.05 35 11.09 D 33 11.71 36 12.19 D 27 10.29 31 11.11 D
28 11.12 31 12.18 24 10.89 25 10.09 34 10.32 40 7.79 C 48 7.39 49 8.15

"Situation mean ranges from 12to 60.
'Results of a 2 x 2 ANOVA with Diagnosis (AS v. AA) by Counseling (yes vs. no) as main effects and D x C as the interaction.
cThe interpretations below are provided for the situation mean scores:

Very Unfavorable 12

Unfavorable 24

Ambivalent 36

Favorable 48

Very Favorable 60

tended to select scale positions closer to carrier status to friends, considering the

the negative pole of the bipolar contin- risk of the birth of a child with sickle cell

uum. (Higher mean scores are associ- disease, and beliefs about how carriers

ated with positive or favorable ratings of feel about themselves (in a work setting)

the situations and lower mean scores are were significantly more negative or un-

associated with negative or unfavorable favorable.

ratings.) A significant main effect of To facilitate the interpretation of sit-

counseling was obtained for Situation uation mean scores for carriers and non-

H. Subjects after counseling had signi- carriers, a series of t-tests were com-

ficantly higher mean scores. There were puted for each bipolar adjective pair for

no significant main effects of counseling each situation of the HOS. (This data is

for the remaining situation scores, indi- available upon request.) Mean scores

cating that genetic counseling did not for these bipolar scales ranged from 1to

differentially influence feelings about 5. A mean score of 1 indicated an ex-

these situations, especially those rela- treme left position (very negative/very

tive to sickle cell trait and sickle cell dis- unfavorable rating) on the bipolar con-

ease. tinuum. As example, on the scale "bad-

Where significant differences were obtained, the noncarriershad consistently lower mean scores than carriers and hence more negative feelings about these situations. These results indicate that carriers and noncarriers had significantly different perspectives about sickle cell trait. More specifically, feelings associated with reactions to the diagnosis of sickle cell trait, disclosure of

good" a mean of 1indicated feeling very "bad" with feeling falling in the very unfavorable range of the continuum. A mean of 5 indicated an extreme right position (very positive/very favorable rating) on the continuum. On the bipolar scale "bad-good," a mean of 5 indicated feeling very "good." A mean of 3 reflected a central tendency to select the midpoint of the continuum. Such feel-

Vol.35,No. 1-2

Health Orientation Scale

131

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

ings were neither "good" nor "bad" and weak (x = 2.58) and unable. In con-

suggested ambivalence or neutrality. trast, the carrier's feelings as measured

In general, the situation mean scores by the rating of these adjective pairs

provided little evidence that carriers be- were significantly more positive, sug-

lieve that sickle cell trait is a stigmatizing gesting that carriers might believe that

condition. The favorable ratings ac- the boss senses that they have more fa-

corded those situations addressing vorable feelings about themselves.

sickle cell trait and the very favorable It is important to look at those situa-

rating given self-concept demonstrate tions where no significant differences

how positively carriers felt about them- were obtained, i.e., cases in which the

selves. There was however, some suggestion of stigma association with Situation D. As carriers considered their feelings about telling friends that they had trait, their selection of the scale "marked" fell in the unfavorable range along the continuum. A similar response was observed for "marked" and "guilty" in response to considering the risk associated with the birth of a child with sickle cell disease. It is of note that for these selected adjectives there were no significant differences between carriers and noncarriers, suggesting that feelings associated with stigma were similar for both groups.

responses of carriers and noncarriers appear to be the same. Perceptions were not significantly different for the two groups as they considered how they would feel upon learning that they had sickle cell disease, cancer, and hypertension. Ratings of these situations were generally unfavorable with cancer receiving the most negative evaluations. Thisfindingpoints out that regardless of classification, as normal or carrier, feelings about disease states were very negative.
There were no significant differences between carriers and noncarriers and their choice of adjectives to describe

In contrast, the noncarrier reported self. It appears that carrier status did not

more negativefeelings than carriers on differentiate or diminish feelings about

all of the situations where significant dif- self in general. Rather, both carriers and

ferences were noted. Of special concern noncarriers saw themselves in a very

was the finding with respect to Situation positive light. Of note however, is that

B. The significantly lower mean score there was no mention of sickle cell trait

suggests that noncarriers believe that as a variable in the self-concept situa-

carriers have unfavorable feelings about tion. When carriers were asked to react themselves; more negative feelings than to the discovery of sickle cell trait, they

carriers themselves believe others hold for them. Reporting how the boss (a noncarrier) believes carriers actually feel, noncarriers said that carriers felt very bad (x = 1.80), very sad (x = 1.98), sick {x = 2.28), marked (x = 2.26), and unable (x = 2.77) (see Figure 1). The implications of thisfinding in the work setting are important suggesting that a noncarrier boss tends to believe that his carrier employees feel

felt "bad," "sad," "angry," and "shocked." When they considered parenthood with a carrier mate and disclosure of their diagnosis to friends, they revealed some negative feelings and an intimation of stigma. Surely, these reactions reflect feelings about self, suggesting that carrier identification does influence serf-image and results in some degree of stigmatization. However, it should be noted that noncarriers gener-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

132 Wooldridge and Murray

BAD SAD

CARRIERS

SICK INACTIVE

NONCARRIERSj

MARKED

AFRAID GUILTY

UNABLE ASHAMED

WEAK ANGRY SHOCKED

Social Biology
HEALTHY ACTIVE UNMARKED UNAFRAID NOT GUILTY ABLE UNASHAMED STRONG PLEASED RELIEVED

FIG. 1.--Comparison of noncarrier (JV =63) and carrier (N = 136) mean ratings on Situation B ("As the boss in Situation A, I imagine that the sickle cell trait carrier might feel . . .").Underlined adjectives show a significant difference between means (p *s 0.05).

ally report more negative feelings than carriers. Here lies the more serious threat of stigmatization of carrier status.
In evaluating the impact of counseling on feelings about these situations, there was only one significant difference revealed, on Situation H (hyperten-

sion). Subjects after counseling reported significantly higher scores than persons before counseling. This is surprising since hypertension is not usually discussed in counseling for sickle cell trait or disease. It may be that subjects altered their perception of hypertension

Vol. 35,No. 1-2

Health OrientationScale

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

as a result of what they learned about ents or spouses of carriers and received

sickle cell trait and disease. How this oc- genetic counseling on their behalf.

curs, we are unable to explain.

These persons were intimate associates

or significant others in the lives of carrier

CONCLUSIONS AND

persons, and they will undoubtedly play

IMPLICATIONS

major roles in the formation and/or

The HOS has identified certain hypothetical situations which may be associated with negative attitudes for both groups. However, the results reported here indicate that where there were significant differences in attitudes about

maintenance of personal identity. The implications of their significantly more negative attitudes are far-reaching and underscore the need to further explore the basis for noncarrier responses in these situations.

the situations, noncarriers or unaffected Even though carriers are generally

persons consistently reported signi- more positive in attitude as regards

ficantly more negative responses. Dif- these situations, in some instances re-

ferences of this kind, in evaluating these ponses fell around the mid-point of the

situations, point to a potential problem scale, indicating ambivalence. Goffman

in relationships between carriers and (1974) observes that when an individual

noncarriers and a concern that carrier finds out that he has some particular at-

identification is a stigma.

tribute that sets him apart from others,

A significant frame of reference for self can be reflected in the attitudes of others toward that individual and some attribute he possesses. If noncarriers (for example, as employers) believe that carriers feel "marked," "bad," and "weak," at what point will the carrier claim such feelings as his own? Is this a self-fulfilling prophecy? Will the noncarrier treat the carrier differently based on such beliefs?
Goffman (1974) notes that intimates, in addition to assisting the "discreditable person" in concealing the stigmatizing attribute, may protect the individual by leading him to believe that he is more completely received as being normal than in truth is the case. Such individuals may be more aware of the "dif-

he will in all probability experience some sense of ambivalence. There will be "oscillations" between feelings about the group with which he must now identify--in this case carriers and feelings about "normals." Further, Goffman (1974) suggests that the stigmatized person receives a mixed message. The stigmatized individual sees himself as part of the wider group, but he and those around him also believe him to be someone "set apart" or marked. These feelings' are self-contradictory and conflicting and Brammer and Shostrom (1977) point out that it is important to identify and help the client to accept and address ambivalent feelings, as they can be a source of personal conflict and tension for the individual.

ferentness" and any associated difficul- These results suggest that the impact

ties, than the affected person himself. of counseling on feelings about sickle

So the management of stigma is of con- cell carrier status is insignificant. Kessler

cern to the stigmatized individual and (1979a) points out that counseling has

intimates.

the potential for modifying feelings and

Of the 63 noncarriers who partici- attitudes. If no significant difference in pated in the study, at least 19 were par- feelings is produced with counseling,

134

Wooldridge and Murray

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

then how can counseling be considered as effective? As measured by the HOS, counseling does not appear to alter perceptions of these situations and would therefore be considered ineffective. Kessler (1979d) adds that genetic counseling must be in touch with the "psychological meanings" associated with the concerns it addresses. In most places, genetic counseling as presently practiced places greater emphasis on the communication of medical facts than on identifying and addressing the psychological responses to the information revealed in counseling.
In general, the responses on the Health Orientation Scale suggest the following trends: (1) Carriers tend to have a more positive perspective about sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease than do noncarriers. Noncarriers seem to believe that carriers have a more unfavorable attitude about carrier status than the carrier actually does. (2) On the surface, diagnosis as a carrier of the sickle cell gene does not appear to alter feelings about self-image for carriers. In comparing responses to the self-concept situation with others of the HOS, selfconcept is evaluated more favorably. When carrier identification is introduced as a variable, feelings appear to be more negative. This finding tends to support the hypothesis that the importance of carrier status and its associated feelings may depend on the situation in which it becomes a variable.
There is some suggestion of stigmatization reflected in feelings of being "marked" when the carrier considers disclosing the diagnosis of AS to friends, and of fear and guilt upon considering the risk associated with the birth of an SS child. However, the greater potential for stigmatization clearly appears to lie with noncarriers who consistently reveal

more negative attitudes than carriers towards sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease and the capabilities of carriers.
These results strongly suggest that there is a need to place greater emphasis on the importance of addressing and dealing with psychological concerns in genetic counseling so that psychological wellbeing can be improved. If counseling is to be most effective, it is expected that there should be significant improvement in feelings after counseling, with a positive shift toward a more favorable attitude about sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease. That is, persons who have had the benefit of counseling should have a different and more positive perspective than those who have not.
It is important to make sure that noncarriers and those who are closely associated with carriers, be they parents, spouses, employers, etc., have an accurate picture of sickle cell disease and sickle cell trait and that they are able to distinguish between the two. Further, since noncarriers are consistently more negative in their attitudes and feelings about sickle cell trait than carriers, the need to involve them in genetic counseling is underscored. Because of the potential for noncarriers to stigmatize carriers, every effort should be made to educate the general public about sickle cell disease and its variants. Even though the carrier presently seems to have a generally positive outlook, others have the potential to make him or her feel "different," and the carrier's feelings of ambivalence can become decidedly negative.
Further studies with larger and perhaps more generalizable samples are desirable. The Health Orientation Scale should be administered to persons identified as carriers and noncarriers in other sickle cell counseling programs in order

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

Health Orientation Scale

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

to establish the generalizability of these findings. In addition, other counseling models and populations need to be evaluated.
The original intent of this design was to administer the HOS before screening for sickle cell, before counseling, after counseling, and six months after counseling. This format is necessary to fully assess the potential for stigmatization and to measure any change in feelings or attitudes for those who actually learn their hemoglobin type. These data would be reflected in a comparison of results before screening with results before counseling. It is recognized that the results reported here are for the independent variables of counseling and diagnosis only.
The HOS, as with any paper-andpencil self-report questionnaire has limited application. Are the feelings the subjects report on the HOS truly representative of "feelings"? Unfortunately, we have no data which are an index of overt behavior. However, Kiesler et al. (1969) suggest that attitudes foster overt actions. They add: "If we hold the stimulus constant, individual differences in behavior should correspond to individual differences in attitude" (p. 17).
The Health Orientation Scale does reveal a difference in the self-assessed feelings of carriers and noncarriers. The

data reported here indicate that the HOS has the potential to be a reliable and valid tool for providing information about the affective response of carriers and noncarriers of the sickle cell gene and for evaluating the effectiveness of counseling. The HOS can be valuable in identifying persons with strong negative feelings or attitudes and these results reinforce the need to focus on the psychological aspects of counseling for such an individual. Further, the HOS may be a screening tool to identify stigmatization. Even if only 5-10 per cent of such persons are identified, the HOS will have proved its usefulness. Antley (1979) notes "Not all counselees have psychological reactions which they need help handling, but all need to be evaluated to find out what meaning they are attaching to the facts and how upsetting that meaning is to them" (p. 154).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the contribution of Drs. Janice P. Gump and Glenwood Brooks, Jr., to the initial concept and design of the Health Orientation Scale. Appreciation is also extended to Dr. Saundra Murray for her helpful suggestions, constructive criticism and guidance with this project.
This work was supported by the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health Grant Number HL 15160.

REFERENCES

ANTLEY, M. A., R. M. ANTLEY and L. C.
HARTLAGE. 1973.Effects of genetic counseling on parental self-concepts. J. Psychol. 83:335-338. ANTLEY, R. M. 1973. Responses to genetic counseling of positive families after sickle cell screening. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 25:12a.
. 1979. The genetic counselor as facilitator of the counselee's decision process, p. 137-168. In A. Capron, M. Lappé, R. F. Murray, Jr. T. Powledge, S. Twiss, and D.

Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts, values and norms. A. R. Liss, New York.
ANTLEY, R. M. and L. C. HARTLAGE. 1976.
Psychological responses to genetic counseling for Down's Syndrome. Clin. Genet. 9:251-265. CALLAHAN, D. 1973. The meaning and significant of genetic disease: Philosophical perspectives, p. 837. In B. Hilton, D. Callahan, M. Harris, P. Condliffe, and B. Berkeley (eds.), Ethical issues in human genetics. Plenum Press, New York.

136

Wooldridge and Murray

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

CHILDS, B., L. GORDIS, M. M. KABACK, and
H. H. KAZAZIAN. 1976.Tay Sachs screening: Social andpsychological impact. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 28:550-558.
CLOW, C., and C. R. SCRIVER. 1977. The ado-
lescent copes with genetic screening: A study of Tay Sachs Screening among high school students. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 26:381-393.
DAVIS, J. 1979. A counselor's viewpoint, p. 113-122. In A. Capron, M. Lappe, R. F. Murray, Jr., T. Powledge, S. Twiss, and D. Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts, values andnorms. A. R. Liss, New York.
GOFFMAN, E. 1974. Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. John Aronson, New York.
GUILFORD, J. P. 1954.Psychometric methods.
McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York. GUMP, J. 1973.The measurement of psycholog-
ical sequelae to sickle cell trait identification. Unpublished manuscript. HEADINGS, V. E. 1975. Alternative models of counseling for genetic disorders. Soc.Biol. 22:297-303.
HSIA, Y. E. 1979. The genetic counselor as information giver. In A. M. Capron, M. Lappe, R. F. Murray, Jr., T. Powledge, S. B.Twiss andD. Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts, values and norms. A. R. Liss, New York.
KABACK, M. M., M. H. BECKER and M. V.
RUTH. 1974.Sociological studies in human genetics: Compliance factors in a voluntary heterozygote screening program. In D. Bergsma (ed.), Ethical, Social and legal dimensions of screening for human genetic disease. Stratton Intercontinental Medical Book Corporation, New York. KERLINGER, F. 1973.Foundations of behavioral research. 2nded. Holt, Rinehart, andWinston, Inc., New York.
KESSLER, S. 1979a. The counselor-counselee relationship, p. 53-63. In S. Kessler (ed.), Genetic counseling: Psychological dimensions. Academic Press, New York. . 1919b. The genetic counselor as psychotherapist. In A. M. Capron, M. Lappé, R. F. Murray, Jr., T. Powledge, S. B.Twiss and D. Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts and norms. A. R. Liss, New York.
. 1979c. The process of communication, decision-making and coping in genetic counseling, p. 35-51. In S. Kessler (ed.), Genetic counseling: Psychological dimensions. Academic Press, New York.
. 1979d. The psychological foundations of genetic counseling, p. 17-33. In S. Kessler (ed.), Genetic counseling: Psycho-

logical dimensions. Academic Press, New York.
KESSLER, S., H. KESSLER, and P. WARD. 1984.
Psychological aspects of genetic counseling III: Management of guilt and shame. Amer. J. Med. Genet. 17:673-697.
KELLEV, P. 1977. Dealing with dilemma: A manual for genetic counselors. Springer Verlag, New York.
KIESLER, C. A., B. E. COLLINS, and N. MILLER.
1969. Attitude change: A critical analysisof theoretical approaches. John Wiley, New York.
MURRAY, R., JR. 1973. Screening: A practitioner's view, p. 121-130. In B. Hilton, D. Callahan, M. Harris, P. Condliffe, and B. BERKELEY (EDS.), Ethical issues in human genetics, Plenum Publishing Company, New York.
NUNNALLY, J. C. 1970. Introduction toPsychological Measurement. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, New York.
. 1978. Psychometric theory. McGrawHill, Inc., New York, New York.
OSGOOD, C. E., G. Suci, and P. TANNENBAUM.
1957. The measurement of meaning. University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois.
PATTERSON, P. B., C. R. DENNING, and A. H.
JUTSCHER. 1973. Psychological aspects of cystic fibrosis. The Foundation of Ihanatology, New York. SCHNEIDERMAN, G. 1975.Tay Sachs diseaseand carrier screening programs: Psychological aspects. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 18:415-423.
SMITH, S. H. 1972. The sociopsychological aspects of sickle cell anemia, p. 18-24. In Department of Health, Education and Welfare (Pub. No. HSM 73-9141), First International Conference ontheMental Health Aspects of Sickle Cell Anemia. NIMH, Washington,D.C.
SORENSON, J. R. 1974. Some social andpsychological issues in genetic screening: Public and professional adaptation to biomedical innovation, p. 165-184. In D. Bergsma (ed.), Ethical, social and legal dimensions of screening for human genetic disease. Stratton Intercontinental Medical Book Corporation, New York.
STAMATOYANNOPOULUS, G. 1974. Problems of screening and counseling in the hemoglobinopathies, p.268-276. In A . G . Motulsky and W. Lenz (eds.), Birth defects: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference, Vienna, 1973. Excerpta Medica, Geneva.
TARGUM, S. 1981. Psychotherapeutic considerations in genetic counseling. Amer. J. Med. Genet. 8281-289.

