Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
A scale to measure microbehaviors of oral contraceptive pill use
Deborah Oakley & Jeffery Parent
To cite this article: Deborah Oakley & Jeffery Parent (1990) A scale to measure microbehaviors of oral contraceptive pill use, Social Biology, 37:3-4, 215-222, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988761 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988761
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

A Scale to Measure Microbehaviors of Oral Contraceptive Pill Use

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Deborah Oakley and Jeffery Parent
School of Nursing, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; and Department of Mathematics, Arizona State University, Tucson, Arizona

ABSTRACT: The ways in which contraceptive methods are actually used is of increasing interest to researchers, clinicians, and policy makers. Although contraceptive "use" has multiple dimensions, existing indicators measure only one aspect of use or combine unidimensional measures to produce a questionable pastiche. This study uses a subsample of 612 respondents from a larger study of first-time patients at a public-health-department family planning clinic to develop a new measure. Psychometric properties of this measure are examined and discussed.

Contraceptive "use" as a multidimensional concept is well defined in the clinical literature by Hatcher et al. (1984, 1985, 1986), but the practical definitions have not been translated into reliable valid measures for research. Single dimensions such as ever use, first use, and current use have been measured, although there is no definitive analysis of the most valid or reliable wording for these items, nor has there been an in-depth analysis of the effects of interviewer instructions for follow-up or probes, respondent self-definitions, or researchers' editing rules on categorization as a "user."
Use over time, as shown by a life table, is the most highly developed research measure, as shown by Potter (1966) and by Trussell and Kost (1987). Life tables can account for several dimensions of use (starting, stopping, and sometimes method switching or restarting and/or using while pregnant or amenorrheic). But life table analysis requires a dichotomous assignment of whether a method is used or not used. Currently, life tables are not commonly used to analyze gradations of use. However, pill "users" can range from those

who take their pills at the same time every single day to those who take their pills at varying times of the day, miss pills (with or without making them up within the recommended time limit), and take pill "holidays."
The fact that use effectiveness is always lower than theoretical effectiveness suggests that some patterns in the way people actually use their contraceptive method differs from the ideal. Yet specific use behaviors that are commonly incorporated into clinical practice with clients have not been measured systematically with widely agreed upon measures.
Furstenberg and the group of researchers in southeastern Pennsylvania (Furstenberg et al., 1983) found that teenagers who reported the most consistent use of birth control were considerably less likely to become pregnant. Similarly, Henshaw and Silverman (1988) found that one-third of the national sample of abortion patients they surveyed conceived while they were "using" contraception. In some other countries, "use" has been documented more carefully. Seaton (1985) documented significant problems with the regularity

215

216

Oakley and Parent

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

of pill taking in the model family planning program in Bangladesh, even in the first three to four months after a clinic visit. Laing (1985) showed lower than expected effectiveness, even for contraceptive pills, in the Philippines. And in Colombia, Potter et al. (1988) found that only 42 per cent of pill users had taken their pills correctly during the two weeks prior to the interview.
In the Furstenburg et al. study (1983), increasingly restrictive measures of "use" produced a variety of distinct research indicators; and each had its own set of determinants and outcomes. New measures of how contraceptive methods are actually used could contribute to knowledge of why use effectiveness is lower than theoretical effectiveness. This information could be helpful to clinicians as they design care for maximum effectiveness and to users as they plan their specific use behaviors. According to Urquhart (1989), underdosing and drug "holidays" are the most common noncompliance problems in prescribed drug therapies in general. Under-dosing, over-compensation for missed pills, drug holidays, and cycle transitions appear to be the most common problems in use of oral contraceptive pills. IUD expulsion or self-removal and "holidays" from coitus-dependent methods also are common, even after "use" has begun.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This report is part of a larger study of an experimental clinical intervention with initial women clients in a public health department's family planning clinic. The analysis reported here is based on the first 612 study participants. The aim of this paper is to report on a new scale of specific use, or microbehaviors, in taking the pill.

All initial family planning clinic patients seen in the clinic for a 26-month period were asked to participate in the study by specially trained study nurses. The study design included a questionnaire assessment upon entry into the study. In addition, chart data were collected by a health department staff member who was also employed by the study. Outcome data were collected by highly trained, well-supervised telephone interviewers. Special procedures were maintained to protect confidentiality of the respondents. The health department participated in the training and agreed to all procedures.
MLCROBEHAVIOR SCALE FOR ORAL
CONTRACEPTIVE PILL USE
The scale was developed by identifying the specific behaviors required for effective pill use, as stated in the popular clinical handbook, Contraceptive Technology by Hatcher et al. (1984, 1985, 1986). Six aspects of use could be incorporated into a scale of items with similar response formats. These items covered taking a pill daily, only the woman's own pills, all pills in the pack, in the prescribed order within the pack, within two hours (plus or minus) of the same time, and use of a backup method when needed. The response format was a 6point range that went from always to never. The wording for each item was proposed and reviewed by experienced nurse and physician clinicians and by family planning researchers in various locations. Items were pretested and altered as necessary. They were then included in the outcome interview.
The psychometric properties tested were those of greatest relevance to its future use for clinical care and in research studies. These properties included its accuracy as indicated by test-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No.

Oral Contraceptive Pill Use

217

retest reliability and its scalability to produce a single summary measure.
For test-retest reliability, between two and four weeks after the first outcome interview, 30 respondents were reinterviewed. Cohen's kappa wasused to test for agreements between the test and retest. The results showed that kappa wasbetween 0.80 and 1.0, showing high test-retest reliability for the scale items.
The pill microbehavior scale includes six items. All six were summary reports that covered the period since respondents hadenrolled inthestudy. Since we are interested in developing a measure of the most effective contraceptive microbehaviors, a simple mean of theitem 6-point responses would notbe themost satisfactory measure for the current analysis. Rather, we need to knowhow many of these behaviors each woman does in the way that provides the most contraceptive protection. Clinically, there is a valid need to distinguish between mid-range responses such as "often" and "sometimes." For some research purposes, the mean value could be important; but for scale development, clarity of what is being measured in the summary scale isessential. Therefore, responses were categorized aseither most effective or not. Depending on thewording of the item, the response

actually indicating the most effective action waseither "always" or "never."
With this dichotomy, the six items showed diversity in the proportion of the first 612 study respondents reporting that they consistently didthemost effective behavior, as shown in Table 1.Although almost all women always took only their ownpills andtook them in the same order within the pack, about 16 per cent hadpills left over in at least one of the months. Only 60 per cent either did not need to use a backup method (were pill users before coming to the clinic and did not miss more than the prescribed number of pills in arow),and less than half took apill every single day. A small group managed to take their pills at the same time every single day (plus or minus two hours) since coming to the clinic. While every study participant did at least one of the specific behaviors in the most effective wayallthe time, less than 11per cent of this sample reported that they did allsix. Thirty-one per cent reported doing five of the specific behaviors in the most effective way all the time; 17per cent, four of the behaviors; 33per cent, three of the behaviors; 8 per cent, two of the behaviors; and 1per cent, one of the behaviors.
Guttman scaling techniques were used to test the qualities of this scale. Guttman scales areformed bya series of

TABLE 1
PER CENT REPORTING MOST EFFECTIVE MICROBEHAVIORS FOR ORAL CONTRACEPTIVEPILLS

Microbehavior
Own pills only Always same order None left at end of month Backup method used if needed Pill taken every day Pill taken same time every day .

Per Cent Most Effective Action
98.4 98.2 84.3 60.0 41.8 16.7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

218

Oakley and Parent

Social Biology

dichotomous variables with increasing or decreasing frequencies of affirmative responses. An example can demonstrate the concept. If four arithmetic problems are ordered,
1. 8 + 5 2. 19 x 31 3. 1/81 + 3/91 4. log (29)
correct answers to these problems require increasing knowledge. A person able to answer the fourth problem correctly is very likely to be able to answer the first three correctly. That is, there is an expected pattern of response. Let "--" denote an incorrect answer and " + " denote a correct response. The pattern of responses one would expect to emerge from the above series of questions is shown in Table 2. If the items used in constructing the scale all have a perfect response pattern, then by knowing the total score (scale score), we also know the component responses. However, it is unlikely that all of the responses will fall into one of the above patterns. For a 4-item scale, there are 24 = 16 possible response patterns. Guttman analysis shows the extent to which the observed pattern of responses deviates from a perfect "scale type."
The above problem is approached in the following manner. First, the error

rate must be calculated. An error is a response outside the scale type. For example, a response pattern of +H h would be considered an error, since the respondent, being able to solve Problem 4, which is presumably more difficult, should be able to solve Problem 3. This leads to the definition of the coefficient of reproducibility:
Cr = 1 -- (total no. of errors/total no. of responses)
= 1 -- (total no. of errors/total no. of respondents x no. of questions).
According to Moser (1969), a general guideline for the interpretation of this measure is that it should be above 0.9 in order to indicate a valid scale. Since judicious choice of the number of items and the particular cutpoints used to classify positive and negative responses, if dichotomous transformations are made, can result in an artificially high value of C,, a second measure, the minimum coefficient of reproducibility, Cm, is needed. It constitutes the minimum coefficient of reproducibility that could have occurred for the scale, given the dichotomies used and the proportion of the respondents in each of the two groups (positive and negative). The minimum coefficient of reproducibility is the sum of the maximum item mar-

TABLE 2
GUTTMAN SCALING MODEL

QUESTION
123 4

++ +

++
_

+ 1:
+

__

TOTAL CORRECT
4
3
2 1
0

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 37, No.

Oral Contraceptive Pill Use

219

ginals foreach item divided by the total are switched. Furthermore, duplicate

number ofresponses. The difference be- popularities do not contribute tothe

tween C, and Cm isthe percent improve- Guttman model. Finally, thepopulari-

ment:

ties of items forming a Guttman scale

Cp = Cr ~ Cra
Taking this measure, the final coefficient of interest, we derive thecoefficient ofscalability as follows:
C, = Cp I (1 - Cm). Here, the denominator represents the largest value that the per cent improvement mayattain. Thecoefficient of scalability varies from 0to 1 and should be. well above 0.6to show that items on the scale measure the same construct and are cumulative.

should divide the interval (0,1) into roughly equal parts. In the above case, own pills and same order are very close to 1and add little tothe scalability. For these reasons, further analysis was carried out in which four- and five-item scales were considered. The five-item scale consisted of Items 2-6 inTable 1; the four-item scale consisted ofItems 3 6. As shown in Table 3, both versions form Guttman scales. The results for the five-item scale are particularly strong.

These results imply that knowing the

scale score, which inthis work isknown

RESULTS

as the Microbehavior Scale, provides knowledge of the response to theindi-

Guttman analysis wascompleted for vidual items. Forexample if a respon-

the six dichotomous items in the pro- dent has ascale score of3 onthesix-item

posed scale. The coefficient of repro- scale, it is most likely thecase thatthe

ducibility was 0.949; the coefficient of respondent answered the first three

scalability, 0.739. Both coefficients indi- questions (own pills, same order, and

cate that thesix items form a Guttman none left) as always themost effective

scale. This finding implies that from the behaviors; andthe last three (backup,

marginal total, onecanpredict the re- every day, andsame time) asnotalways

sponse to an item contributing to the the most effective behaviors. Theactual

construction ofthescale.

propensity to proceed along thechainof

Note however that the popularities correct answers is depicted in Figure 1.

(i.e., the per cent ofpositive responses) Always doing the most effective behav-

for using only their ownpills andtaking ior isshown bya "yes" choice. Reading

their pills always in the same order down the left-hand branches, forin-

around the pack are nearly identical. A stance, wefind thevast majority dotake

different sample may produce results n only their own pills, andofthese individ-

which theorder of these two variables uals almost allalways take them in the

TABLE3
GUTTMAN STATISTICS FOR 6-ITEM, 5-ITEM, AND 4-ITEM ORAL CONTRACEPTIVE PILL MICROBEHAVIOR SCALES

Reproducibility (C,) Scalability ( Q

STATISTIC

6
0 949 0 739

No. OF SCALE ITEMS
5
0.956 0.879

4
0.939 0.787

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

/
^J3
A

\ No
Of
A

\
- No
IO1
A

Yes No Yes No Yes No 65 170 11 73 13 171

to * J
AA

1J
A

Yes

No Yes

No Yes

No

4

14 1

24 6

39

FIG. 1.--Response tree for 6-item microbehavior scale (N = 612).

O
o

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Oral Contraceptive PillUse

221

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

same order. Lower branches show higher tendencies toward errors, so that, of those who answer that they always take a pill every single day, more subsequently answer that they do not take those pills at the same time every day (plus or minus two hours). The right-hand branch of the figure, those few women who do not always take their own pills, shows a similar pattern of subsequent errors.
DISCUSSION
Existing measures of contraceptive use have been useful because they recognized the episodic nature of some people's use. It has been helpful to know, for instance, that social characteristics are related to whether a person uses a contraceptive method at first intercourse, but not to measures of subsequent use (Hogan et al., 1985; Mosher and Bachrach, 1987). Although the timing of first use continues to deserve substantial individual, family, programmatic, and policy attention, there is increasing need to encourage successful use of contraceptive methods by those women who are supposedly using a method. For this purpose, we need to develop clinical and research indicators that will allow us to measure the process of successful use. Measuring only the outcome (pregnancy) is flawed scientificallysince it is affected by fecundity, frequency of intercourse, and theoretical method effectiveness. Waiting to measure pregnancy outcome is also not helpful clinically. Providers need to have a quick valid way to assess a client's specific behaviors in order to help the client achieve pregnancy prevention (the goal that brought her to the clinic in the first place).

The need to change the focus of research to the quality of use by women supposedly using a contraceptive method is shown by Bachrach'sfinding (1984) that by 1982 only 7 per cent of currently married women exposed to the risk of pregnancy were not currently practicing contraception. But the Jones and Forrest (1989) recalculations of national data indicate significantly higher contraceptive failure rates than had been previously accepted. Pratt and Horn (1985) showed that only 62 per cent of conceptions to ever-married women were planned at the time of conception. Furthermore, according to Mosher and Horn (1988), while 67 per cent of women receive birth control counseling at their first family planning visit, only 50 per cent actually begin using a method. Westoff (1988) has shown that there could be a significant decrease in unintended pregnancy from a shift in contraception toward more effective methods. However, even the most effective methods could be used more effectively if we knew more about the distribution of errors in use and their determinants.
The scale proposed here is only one of many versions that could be developed. For each method, alternate scales could be proposed. Each should be tested for reliability and, most important of all, predictive validity. Tests of predictive validity for the current scale will be the next step in the proposed program of research being undertaken. Subsequent papers will report on similar scales developed for users of diaphragms and condoms. Since these methods were less commonly used by study participants, larger total samples are required to have an adequate number of method users.

222

Oakley and Parent

Social Biology

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Support forthis research project was provided by NIH grants RO1NR01341 and SO7 RR05796-10. Data management by Corinne Haslett, and Nina Riley, and preliminary

analyses by Joanna Tsai are gratefully acknowledged. Jeffery Parent is a doctoral student in theMathematics Department at Arizona State University. This paper was written while he was a student of Biostatistics in the School of Public Health, University of Michigan.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

FURSTENBURG, F . F . , J . SHEA, P . ALLISON, R .
HERCEG-BARON, and D. WEBB. 1983. Con-
traceptive continuation among adolescents attending family planning clinics. Fam. Plan. Persp. 15:211-217.
HATCHER, R. A., G. K. STEWART, F. STEWART,
F. GUEST, N. JOSEPHS, and J. DALE. 1984,
1985, 1986. Contraceptive technology. Irvington, New York.
HENSHAW, S. K., and J. SILVERMAN. 1988. The
characteristics and prior contraceptiveuse of U.S. abortion patients. Fam. Plan. Persp. 20.158-168.
HOGAN, D., N. ASTONE, and E. KITAGAWA.
1985. Social and environmental factors influencing contraceptive use among blackadolescents. Fam. Plan. Persp. 17(4):165-169.
JONES, E. F., and J. D. FORREST. 1989. Contra-
ceptive failure in theUnited States: Revised estimates from the 1982 National Survey of Family Growth. Fam. Plan. Persp. 21(3):103-109. LAING, J. E. 1985. Continuation and effectiveness of contraceptive practice: A crosssectional approach. Stud. Fam.Plan. 16(3):138-153. MOSHER, C. A. 1969. Survey methods insocial investigation. Heinemann, London.
MOSHER, W. D., and C. A. BACHRACH. 1987.
First premarital contraceptive use: United States, 1960-82. Stud. Fam. Plan. 18(2):83-102.

MOSHER, W. D., and M. HORN. 1988. First fam-
ily planning visits by women. Fam. Plan. Persp. 20(1):33-40. POTTER, R.G. 1966.Application of life table techniques to measurement of contraceptive effectiveness. Demography 3(2):297304.
POTTER, L., S. WRIGHT, D. BERRIO, P. SUAREZ,
R. PINEDO, and Z. CASTANEDA. 1988. Oral
contraceptive compliance in rural Colombia: Knowledge of users andproviders. Intl. Fam. Plan. Persp. 14:27-31.
PRATT, W., and M. HORN. 1985. Wanted and
unwanted childbearing: United States, 1973-82. Advance Data No. 108. U.S.National Center forHealth Statistics, Hyattsville, MD. SEATON, B. 1985. Noncompliance among oral contraceptive acceptors in rural Bangladesh. Stud. Fam. Plan. 16(1):52-59.
TRUSSELL, J., and K. KOST. 1987. Contracep-
tive failure in the United States: A critical review of the literature. Stud. Fam. Plan. 18:237-283. URQUHART, J. 1989. Patient compliance: Getting stronger claims out of clinical trials. Pharm. Exec. 9(3):82-88. WESTOFF, C. F. 1988. Contraceptive paths toward the reduction of unintended pregnancy and abortion. Fam. Plan. Persp. 20(1):4-13.

