Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Ambivalence toward small families in Rural Latin America
Alan B. Simmons
To cite this article: Alan B. Simmons (1974) Ambivalence toward small families in Rural Latin America, Social Biology, 21:2, 127-143, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988100 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988100
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Ambivalence Toward Small Families in Rural Latin America

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Alan B. Simmons
Population and HealthSciences International Development ResearchCentre Ottawa, Canada

The recent proliferation of fertility surveys and the use in them of simple measures of family size preferences have led to a widespread discussion of the nature of fertility motivation among traditional women. On the one hand are those investigators who assume that straightforward questions on the "best" or "ideal" number of children (for oneself, or for women in general) can be readily understood, even by women ignorant of birth control, and that responses to these questions are meaningful measures of motivation. For example, Stycos (196S) argues that although lower class and rural Peruvian women have seldom thought about family size preferences or discussed them with their husbands prior to being interviewed on the topic, their answers to several questions on family size preferences indicate a latent motivation for small families which could likely be activated through public discussion and the spread of contraceptive knowledge.
On the other hand, evidence collected in several studies suggests that attitudes toward small families may in fact be very ambivalent. In Puerto Rico, it was noted that women who had "small" family size ideals often also saw clear advantages to

large families (Hill et al., 1959, pp. 23-24). Ambivalence in family size issues (e.g., the pleasures provided by a new baby) and about contraceptive practice itself have similarly been noted for lower class Black women in the United States (see Rainwater, 1960). Young women who have never been exposed to pregnancy, as well as mated women entirely ignorant of contraception, may not even recognize family size differences as salient dimensions when presented with photographs of various size families (Simmons, 1971; Stycos, 1964).
In reviewing several studies of family size attitudes, Hauser (1967, pp. 399-405) concludes that a simple interpretation of available data on family size desires is not possible; that validity checks have been sorely absent from the research on this topic; and that more elaborate scales and new measures must be devised. Mertens (1970, Part 4.2) comes to similar conclusions regarding research on this topic in Latin America. As a result of such considerations, the direction of at least some current research seems to be more toward determining "concretely the patterns of values and motives which favor large and small families in different cultures and social

127

128

Simmons

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

contexts, the importance of these motives women were sampled in each country. Rural

relative to other values, and their net effect areas were defined to include villages with

on family size preferences (see, for example, less than 2,500 inhabitants and scattered

Flapan, 1969; Wyatt, 1967; Hoffman and farm populations. Small urban areas were

Hoffman, 1973; Mueller, 1972).

defined as towns with between 2,500 and

The purpose of this paper is to analyze social definitions of "large" and "small" families in rural Latin America and to examine perceptions of advantages ("good" features) and disadvantages ("bad" features) associated with family size. The paper develops a hypothetical model of the relationships between patterns of perceived

20,000 inhabitants. Together, the rural and small urban areas sampled contained about half of the population in the four nations studied. In the present analysis, we consider only currently mated women, since birth planning and family size preferences are likely to be particularly meaningful issues for these women.

advantages and disadvantages, diverse mea- The social-economic and family planning

sures of family size preferences, and inter- characteristics of the women vary substan-

est in learning about contraceptives. Mea- tially from one nation to another, reflecting

sures of the principal variables in this overall differences in rural development be-

model are developed, and some of the em- tween them. As Table 1 indicates, modern

pirical associations between these variables institutions (schools) and services (elec-

suggested by the hypothetical model are tricity, piped water) have achieved the

examined. The results presented here are greatest penetration into the rural and small

directed toward a better understanding of urban sectors of Costa Rica and the least

family size preferences in rural Latin Amer- penetration into these sectors in Peru, with

ica and toward an alternative methodology Colombia and Mexico occupying intermedi-

for assessing family size preferences.

ate positions.

The per cent who have knowledge of at

MATERIALS AND METHODS

least one birth control method and the per

The data for this study are from a rural fertility survey coordinated by the Centro Latinoamericano de Demografia (CELADE) in Costa Rica, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru, between 1968 and 1969.1 This survey was designed to be representative of all women IS to 49 years of age in the rural and small urban areas of these four nations. Between 2,100 and 3,000

cent who have ever used a birth control method generally follow the pattern of educational differences, with Costa Rica being much more advanced in the spread of contraceptive knowledge and practice, followed in order by Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. Levels of contraceptive use (range: 34 per cent to 11 per cent) are low. Only in Costa Rica have more than half of the women discussed contraceptives or family

1 These rural surveys were carried out to supplement previous comparative fertility research coordinated in Latin America by the United Nations Latin American Demographic Centre (CELADE) Santiago, Chile. The cumulative nature of this survey has been discussed by Mertens (1970, Part 1-3) and some preliminary results from the pilot stage of the rural surveys have been compared with previously collected urban information by Miró and Mertens (1968). Selected general results from the earlier urban surveys may be found in Miró (1966) and Elam (1971).

size issues with their husbands. In Peru, only 19 per cent of the women have discussed contraceptive use with their husbands. Although women sampled have on the average not yet completed their childbearing, the number of children already born to them is high in all four nations (ranging from 4.8 in Peru to 5.3 in Costa Rica and Mexico).

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

129

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF CURRENTLY MATED WOMEN SAMPLED m RURAL AND SMALL URBAN AREAS or FOUR LATIN AMERICAN NATIONS

CHAKACTEEISUCS
Some schooling Electricity in home Running water in home Radio in home Know at least one birth control
method Have ever used a birth control
method Have ever talked with husband
about using contraceptives Have ever talked with husband
about no. of children wanted Mean no. of children ever
born alive

COSTA RICA COLOMBIA (N = 1,336) (N = 1,712)

MEXICO W = 2,009)

ALL

PERU

NATIONS

(N = 1,757) (N = 6,814)

82% 41% 60% 77%

73% 29% 32% 66%

63% 41% 21% 74%

53% 20% 11% 38%

67% 33% 29% 63%

67%

37%

32%

18% 37%

33% 18% 10% 10% 17%

64% 43% 28% 20% 37%

S2%

34%

44%

40%

42%

5.3 5.2 5.3 4.9 5.2

SODBCE: Pecfal-Rural survey of all women IS to 49 years of age in rural and small urban (population less than 20,000) areas of Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Peru, 1969. Percentages rounded to the nearest whole number for presentation.

A MODEL OF FAMILY SIZE ATTITUDES
The methodological approach and analysis in this study emerged from the following general conceptualization of the nature of attitudes toward family size.
1. Attitudes toward a given number of children may be considered in terms of preferences among alternatives. A woman's belief that "4 children is the best number to have" can be interpreted as saying that "4 children is better than some other numbers (3 children, 5 children, etc.)" which she has in mind as alternative possibilities.
2. Preferences form within a range of alternatives which are principally denned by cultural circumstances. In some cultural settings the desire not to have any children may not be "legitimate" or even "possible"; hence, this alternative would lie outside the range in which preferences are made. In other cultural settings, having twelve children would be equally "unthinkable," and hence outside the range within which preferences are made. One of the research problems in the area of family size preferences is to determine, for any given

culture, the range of alternatives which are considered.
3. The formation of a preference may be explicit and reflected upon, as would be the case when the issue has been publicly discussed and/or privately thought about, or it may be unconscious and nonreflected upon, as would be the case when cultural patterns or individual characteristics make discussion and private consideration unlikely. If the possibility of limiting fertility is unknown, individuals generally will not have explicitly thought about advantages and disadvantages of large and small families. When asked for their preference, they may frequently answer with "can not say," "the number that God sends," or with a number that reflects the typical family size in their community. If asked for the advantages and disadvantages of large and small families, they may have great difficulty in answering. In such cases, one may say that the attitude or issue in question does not seem to exist; in other words, awareness of the implications of family size differences is low.

130

Simmons

Social Biology

4. The formation of preferences involves weighing of advantages and disadvantages among alternatives. When a given alternative is chosen, the mix of advantages and disadvantages which lie behind it are usually referred to as the reasons or motives for the preference. The net combination of various advantages and disadvantages perceived may be referred to as a valence pattern. Valence patterns need not always produce a clear preference. Awareness of compensating advantages and disadvantages among the various alternatives may produce ambivalence.
5. A respondent may reveal a general valence pattern favoring more children than she currently has, yet for reasons re-

lated to her own current situation she may indicate a personal desire for no more children. Her motivation to limit her childbearing (as evidenced, for example, in the desire to learn about contraceptives) will likely rest on both her stated desire for more children and on her general family size valence pattern.
Table 2 summarizes the principal concepts in the above five points and indicates the logic behind the empirical measures which will be developed for each of these. The analysis section of the paper corresponds broadly to these steps. First, an estimate of the range of alternatives is obtained for rural women in Latin America by analyzing the number of children which

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
A MODEL OF FAMILY SIZE ATTITUDES

GENERAL MODEL
1. The range of perceived family size alternatives will vary by culture and social circumstance.
2. Awareness of the advantages and/or disadvantages of different-sized families will also vary by culture and social circumstance.
3. Any perceived advantages and/ordisadvantages toward various family sizes will be balanced cognitively against one another to determine a distinctive family size valence pattern.
4. Numerical family size preferences will be related to valence patterns.
5. Motivation to limit child-bearing will reflect both personal preferences and general valence patterns.

MEASOBES ANDEMPIRICAL ASSUMPTIONS
1. The commonly perceived upper and lower limits of the range of alternatives in a particular cultural setting, such as rural Latin America, maybe estimated from beliefs about the number of children which constitute "large" and "small" families.
2. One measure of awareness of the implications of different-sized families is whether or not respondents perceive "good" or "bad" features to "small" and "large" families.
3. Four elements of awareness may be distinguished. These are awareness of: (a) the "good" features of a large family, (b) the "bad" features of a. large family, (c) the "good" features of a small family, and (<J) the "bad" features of a small family. Theoretically, these are independent of one another; hence, any combination of these four elements is possible. Each combination indicates a distinctive attitude pattern. These attitude patterns may be grouped according to their overall valence.
4. A woman whose valence pattern is clearly biased in favor of a small family will tend to prefer the number of children which she believes constitutes a small family. An ambivalent woman will prefer a number in-between her definitions of small- and large-sized families.
5. One limited measure of motivation to limit childbearing is the extent to which women who know nothing about contraception would like to learn about it. This desire is likely related to the respondent's family size valence pattern even when her personal desire for more children is controlled.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21,No.2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

131

women in our samples believe constitute are defined as having on the average be-

"large" and "small" families. Second, atti- tween 3.2 children (Colombia and Peru)

tudes toward these polar family size defini- and 4.0children (Mexico).

tions are analyzed to determine whether Awareness.--In relation to herown defi-

rural women areaware of the implications nitions of "large" and "small" families, the

of family size differences. Third, patterns respondent was asked to indicate the ad-

of attitudes toward large and small families vantages and disadvantages she saw to

are analyzed to determine whether thegen- each. Four separate questions were asked

eral valence pattern tends to favor large to cover separately the good andbad fea-

families, small families, or in some part tures of large and small families, respec-

both large and small families. A fourth step tively. All followed theformat: "Why (for

involves an assessment of the influence of what purpose) is it good (bad) to have a

the general valence pattern of family size large (small) family?" As Table 2 indi-

attitudes on the desire to learn about con- cates, a high proportion of respondents in

traceptives among women who want no all countries saw no disadvantages and

more children and who know no contracep- many advantages to small families. How-

tive methods. The measures and response ever, most respondents also saw both

distributions of the variables entering into advantages and disadvantages to large

this analysis are discussed in the following families.

section.

Between one-fifth and one-third of the

respondents in each nation gave specific

RESULTS

advantages and disadvantages for both

MEASURES AND RESPONSE DISTRIBUTIONS

large and small families, while a small pro-

Range of alternatives.--Early in the in- portion of respondents in Colombia, Mex-

terview, respondents were asked: "There ico, and Peru sawneither advantages nor

are large families and small families, is that disadvantages to either large or small fam-

not so? How many children are there in a ilies, indicating very lowawareness ofthe

large family? In a small family?" The in- implications of family size differences

terviewer was instructed to insist on a con- (Table 4 ) .

crete answer. The average numbers of Advantages and disadvantages noted by

children in large and small families noted the respondents were coded for each ques-

by therespondents in each of the four na- tion into one of 25 or more categories.

tions are shown in Table 3. "Large"fam- These categories included reasons concern-

ilies are denned as having on the average ing: the health of the mother, the health of

between 9.5 children (in Peru) and 10.7 the children, care of thechildren, schooling

children (in Costa Rica). "Small" families of the children, family income, mother's

TABLE 3
MEAN NUMBER OF CHILDREN I N "LARGE" AND "SMALL" FAMILIES AS DEFINED BY CURRENTLY MATED WOMEN IN FOUR LATIN AMERICAN NATIONS

FAMILY SIZE
"Large" Family "Small" Family

Costa Rica
10.7
3.4

MEAN NO. or CHILDREN

Colombia
10.4 3.2

Mexico
11.4 4.0

Peru
9.5 3.2

All Nations
10.5 3.5

132

Simmons

Social Biology

TABLE 4
PER CENT OF RESPONDENTS PERCEIVING ADVANTAGES AND/OR DISADVANTAGES TO "LARGE" AND " S H A L L " FAMILIES

ADVANTAGES/DISADVANTAGES TO FAMILY SIZE
Advantages to large families Disadvantages to large families Advantages to small families Disadvantages to small families
Advantages and disadvantages to both large and small families
No advantages or disadvantages to either large or small families

COSTA RICA
76 88 95 39
32
0

COLOMBIA
83 88 95 42

MEXICO
79 82 92 37

34 27

I2

PERU
76 62 77 33
20
6

Aix NATIONS
78 79 89 38
28
2

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

career, prestige of the family, duty of the parents, etc. However, the responses to each question tended to concentrate in only a few categories. Generally, the distributions of responses from one nation to another were very similar.
Considering only those respondents who saw advantages to a large family, between 68 and 78 per cent (depending on the nation) saw help from the children (either in terms of work or income) as the principal benefit. Of those who saw disadvantages to a large family, the majority (52 to 68 per cent, depending on the nation) noted the costs of raising many children and/or the influence of cost factors on family wellbeing. An important minority (22 to 30 per cent) felt that children in large families suffered from less care, less support for schooling, or related problems arising from dividing family resources among more individuals.
The advantages of a small family tended to parallel in great part the disadvantages .of large families. Children in small families were perceived to be better cared for (28 to 43 per cent), and small families were perceived to be better off economically (46 to 55 per cent). In contrast to the preceding patterns, the responses to the question on disadvantages of a small family did vary more from nation to nation. In Costa Rica,

54 per cent felt that a disadvantage of a small family was loss of help from the children; in Peru, 83 per cent felt that this loss of help was a disadvantage. The complex combinations of responses for any given individual and the extent to which these reflect a concern with the quantity of children rather than the quality of children constitute topics beyond the limits of the present paper.
Valence patterns.--A scale to measure family size valence was developed through combination of responses to the four questions on advantages and disadvantages of small and large families. The responses to each of these questions may be considered in terms of two possibilities: a "yes" (indicating that a specific advantage or a specific disadvantage was noted) or a "no" (indicating that the respondent saw no advantage or no disadvantage). Since there are four questions, a total of 16 possible combinations of the "yes" and "no" codes are possible. The 16 attitude patterns and the distribution of respondents in each nation by attitude pattern are shown in Table 5.
While each of the 16 attitude patterns is unique, they may be grouped into five broad valence categories, as follows: (1) Clearly Favors Small. This category is formed by one attitude pattern only. It includes only those respondents who saw

Vol. 21, No. 2 Ambivalence Toward Small Families

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 5
PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONDENTS BY FAMILY SIZE ATTITUDE PATTERNS AND VALENCE CATEGORIES*

ATTITUDE PATTERNS

Large Families Have

Small Families Have

Advantages

Disadvantages

Advantages

Disadvantages

Clearly favors small

1. No

Yes

Yes

No

Favors small

2. No

Yes

3. Yes

Yes

4. No

No

5. No

Yes

Total subsample

Yes Yes Yes No

Yes No No No

Ambivalent (and zero-awareness)

6. Yes Yes Yes

7. No No Yes

8. No

Yes No

9. Yes

No

Yes

10. Yes Yes No

11. No No No

Total subsample

Yes Yes Yes No No No

Favors large

12. Yes

No

13. Yes

Yes

14. No

No

15. Yes

No

Total subsample

Yes No No No

Yes Yes Yes No

Clearly favors large

16. Yes

No

No

Yes

Total sample

PEE CENT DISTRIBUTION

Costa Rica Colombia Mexico

Peru

All Nations

TOTAL No.

19 12 14 11 14 927

4 3 4 2 3 216

31 37 35 23 32 2,157

1 1 1 3 1 93

1 ...

(32)

37 41 40 30 37 2,498

32 34 27 20 28 1,905 (8)
(11) 7 6 9 12 8 568 1 1 1 2 1 78
1 2 6 2 170 40 42 38 40 40 2,741

2 3 3 6 3 228 1 1 1 2 1 84
(12) 1 1 2 7 3 189 3 5 6 15 7 514

1 1 1 4 2 134 100 100 100 100 100 6,814

* All percentages shown were rounded to the nearest whole numbers. "Total subsample" percentages were derived by rounding the sum of the exact per cents and thus are not always the sum of the rounded per cents shown. Figures in parentheses in the "Total No." column represent numbers whose per cents rounded to zero.

only disadvantages (no advantages) to Clearly Favors Large, follow the prelarge families, and only advantages (no ceding logic. The five valence categories disadvantages) to small families. (2) Fa- arealso shown in Table 5. vors Small. This category includes four Theclassification of twoof the attitude attitude patterns in which the respondent patterns into the valance categories proshows a greater awareness of the relative vided an interesting conceptual problem, advantages of small families despite the These two categories are the four "yes's" fact that other elements in her attitude and the four "no's". Onthe one hand, they pattern counterbalance one another. (3) reflect the two extremes of awareness of the Ambivalent. This category is formed by implications of different-sized families. On attitude patterns which permit no predic- the other hand, our conceptual model hytion of therespondent's valence, due to the pothesizes that family size preferences refact that the responses completely balance fleet thevalence of the respondent's underone another. The remaining two valence lying attitude pattern. From the latter categories, (4) Favors Large and (5) point of view, both should predict inter-

134

Simmons

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

mediate family size preferences, since they show no bias to either small or large families. This is an assumption which will be investigated later in the paper. For the moment, we have provisionally included them in the Ambivalent category. Results bearing on the family size preferences of individuals with these attitude patterns are shown in Table 8, ahead.
The distributions of respondents in the attitude patterns and valence categories ara rather similar from one nation to another, and thus we may focus on the average pattern for all four nations to summarize these principal findings:
(a) The most frequent response pattern (32 per cent of the total) is the one in which both advantages and disadvantages of large families and only advantages of small families are noted (Attitude Pattern 3, Table 5). This single pattern accounts for more than four-fifths of all respondents who fall in the Favors Small valence category and nearly two-thirds of all respondents in the Clearly Favors Small or Favors Small categories combined. Thus, even among those respondents whose combination of perceived advantages and disadvantages tends to support a small family preference, there is widespread awareness that large families, containing on the average 10 to 12 children, also have advantages.
(b) The second most frequent pattern (28 per cent of all respondents) is the one in which both advantages and disadvantages were noted for both small and large families (Pattern 6). In great part due to the high proportion in this one pattern, a total of 40 per cent of the sample fall into the Ambivalent category. Ambivalent attitudes would appear to be a central feature of family size attitudes in rural Latin America.
(c) Only a small proportion (2 per cent) of the entire sample falls into the lowest

awareness category where no advantages or disadvantages were noted to either small or large families (Pattern 11). Another 11 per cent fall into patterns where only one advantage or disadvantage is noted (sum of patterns 4, 5, 8, 9, 14, and IS). Altogether, 87 per cent of the sample noted two or more concrete advantages and/or disadvantages. Thus, the great majority of respondents are at least aware of certain implications of extreme family size differences.
(d) Only 7 per cent fall in the Favors Large Family valence category and only 2 per cent fall in the Clearly Favors Large valence category. Thus, despite considerable ambivalence on the issue, less than 10 per cent in total were biased toward large families.
Preferences.--Three different measures of family size preferences were collected (Table 6):
(1) Choice among Fixed Alternatives. After noting the advantages and disadvantages of small and large families, the woman was asked which of these she would prefer to have. This question may have been difficult to answer, since the choice was often between two equally undesirable alternatives, the "small" family perhaps being too small and the "large" family too large. Other respondents may have found both the small and the large family to be equally desirable. Still others may have found the entire issue to be unimportant. For these reasons, a high proportion--between one-quarter and onethird of respondents--said that they could not choose between the two alternatives. Nevertheless, more than half (between 57 and 59 per cent) of the women in each country chose the small family. Only a small proportion (between 10 and 20 per cent) in each country chose the large family.
(2) "Best" Number of Children. At the

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

TABLE 6
RESPONSES ON THREE MEASTTRES OF FAMILY SIZE PREFERENCE

PREFERENCE MEASURES
AND RESPONSES
Which do you like better: a small family, a large family, or doesn't it matter?
"Small" Family "Large" Family Doesn't matter
How many children is the best number for a woman to have?
Mean best number
Do you want more children? How many more?
Want no more children

COSTA RICA

COLOMBIA

MEXICO

PERU

57% 10% 33%
4.8
51%

58% 14% 28%
4.6
65%

57% 20% 23%
6.0
54%

59% 17% 24%
5.2
64%

135
ALL NATIONS
58% 16% 26%
5.2 59%

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

very beginning of the interview, the respondent was asked: "How many children is the best number for a woman to have?" The interviewer had specific instuctions to obtain a numerical answer. For example, if the woman answered "those that come" or "those that God sends," the interviewer was instructed to probe further with questions such as: "What is a good number for God to send?" In this way,the so-called "vague" responses were reduced to five per cent or less in each sample. The ideal measured by this question refers to the "best number for a woman to have," not the number that the respondent herself might want; hence, it can simply be interpreted as the respondent's view of a culturally appropriate number of children. As noted in Table 6, the mean number considered ideal is high, varying from 4.6 (in Colombia) to 6.0 (in Mexico).
(3) Desire for Additional Children. Only one question in the interview refers directly to the respondents own immediate family size desires. After several questions on prior childbearing experience and contraceptive knowledge, respondents were asked: "Do you want more children? How many more?" As may be noted in Table 1, a moderately high proportion (between 43

per cent and 59 per cent) in all countries said they wanted no more children.
Motivation.--The complexity of counterbalancing attitudes which, according to the model presented earlier, may lie behind the formation of any overall stance toward large and small families warns against the use of any simple (single indicator) measure of motivation to limit childbearing. However, our focus here is on the operational (or instrumental) element of motivation only: Arewomen interested in learning something about the contraceptive methods which would allow them to limit their fertility? This would appear to be a relevant question, given that roughly twothirds of the women sampled have no knowledge of contraceptive methods (Table 1) and that three-fifths of all women claim they want nomore children (Table 6).
In the middle of the interview, a series of questions on contraceptive knowledge and use gave women ample opportunity to learn in general terms what contraceptives were if they had not heard of them before. Subsequently, they were asked: "Would you like to learn about things (methods) which would keep you from becoming pregnant and allow you to have children only when you wanted?" The

136

Simmons

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

proportions answering "no" were as follows: 48 per cent, Costa Rica; 61 per cent, Colombia; SO per cent, Mexico; 60 per cent, Peru; 55 per cent, all four nations. Such negative attitudes toward learning about birth control quite likely reflect many factors, such as the "legitimacy" of treating sexual matters and/or nature in such an instrumental manner. However, it is our expectation that these negative attitudes toward learning about birth control also reflect ambivalence toward small families and positive valence toward large families.
SELECTED INTERRELATIONSHIPS
In this section interrelationships are examined to test in part some of the assumptions and hypotheses in the model of family size attitudes. These relationships were examined separately for each nation. However, the results turned out to be quite similar from one nation to another, except in those instances where the number of cases analyzed became very small. For this reason, the results presented below are for all four nations grouped together.
Range of alternatives and family size preferences.--The meaning of the forced preference between a "small" and a "large" family is not immediately clear, since it may depend on the definitions which the respondent gives for "small" and "large." For example, those women who prefer "large" families may do so because they define "large" as a relatively small number, or because they define "small" as so small as to be quite undesirable. Alternatively, definitions of "large" and "small" may be constant in a given culture, and those women who prefer large families may have the same definition of "large" as do women who prefer small families. In this case, preference would measure important differences in family size attitudes.
The data in Table 7 support this hypoth-

TABLE 7
MEAN NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN DEFINITIONS OF "SMALL," "LARGE," AND " B E S T " FAMILY SIZES BY PREFERENCE FOR "SMALL" OR "LARGE"

PREFERENCE
Small family Large family Small or large;
doesn't matter All choices

MEAN NO. OF CHILDREN

"Small" "Large" Size Size

"Best" Size

3.5 10.2 4.7 3.5 11.1 6.4

3.6 10.9 5.6 3.5 10.S 5.2

esis. Considering all respondents from the four nations together, the mean number of children defining "small" and "large" families does not vary greatly by family size preference. If anything, there is a slight tendency for those who prefer large families to define "large" as being composed of more children (11.1 children, on the average) than do those who prefer small families (10.2 children, on the average).
The mean "best" number of children for a woman to have varies directly by preference, such that those who prefer small families have the smallest definition of "best number" (4.6 children), while those who prefer large families have the largest definition (6.3 children). It is of interest to note that those who could not name a preference seem to be an "intermediate" group, whose "best number" (5.6 children) lies between the extremes.
Family size valence and preference.--As Table 8 indicates, there is a high but not perfect association between valence pattern and family size preference. As one moves along the valence continuum from Clearly Favors Small toward Clearly Favors Large, both the proportion choosing a "small" family and the proportion defining "best number" as four or fewer children decline in a linear fashion. Eighty-five per cent of women in the Clearly Favors Small category did choose a small family on the

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 8
FAMILY SIZE CHOICES, FAMILY SIZE PREFERENCES, AND RESPONDENTS' SCHOOLING BY FAMILY SIZE ATTITUDE PATTERNS AND VALENCE CATEGORIES*

ATTITUDE PATTERNS

Large Families Have

Small Families Have

Advantages

Disadvantages

Advantages

Disadvantages

Clearly favors small

1. No

Yes

Yes

Favors small

2. No

Yes

3. Yes

Yes

4. No

No

5. No

Yes

Total subsample

Yes Yes Yes No

Ambivalent (and zero-awareness)

6. Yes Yes Yes

7. No N o Yes

8. No

Yes No

9. Yes

No

Yes

10. Yes Yes No

11. No No No

Total subsample

Favors large

12. Yes

No

13. Yes

Yes

14. No

No

15. Yes

No

Total subsample

Yes No No No

Clearly favors large

16. Yes

No

Total sample

No

No
Yes , No . . . . . . No No
Yes Yes Yes No No No ,
Yes Yes Yes , No ,
Yes

* Figures based on all four national samples combined.

PER CENT WHO CHOSE "SMALL"
FAMILY

PER CENT WHO DEFINED "BEST
NUMBER" AS 4 OR FEWER CHILDREN

PEE CENT WHO HAVE No SCHOOLING

85 60 35
77 60 24 65 49 31 69 47 52
67 Vo' 32
48 46 25
41 Vs' 43
36 36 48 47 28 65 46 43 32
23 34 42 21 30 31
2*9 29 59 25 31 51
11 24 54 57 46 34

forced choice question; however, despite the logic of their previous responses, IS per cent said that they either could not choose or that they preferred the large family. At the other end of the valence continuum, 11 per cent of those respondents in the Clearly Favors Large category actually chose a small family.
The proportion in the Ambivalent valence category preferring small families (46 per cent) is close to the midpoint between the preferences for small families at the extremes of the valence continuum (i.e., it is close to the midpoint between 86 per cent and 11 per cent). The range of variation in the per cent denning "best

number" as four or fewer children (24 to 60 per cent) is not as great as the range of variation in per cent choosing the "small" family (11 to 85 per cent).However, both of these preference variables follow the same general pattern in relation to valence. We may conclude that, as expected, valence does predict family size preferences quite well.
Table 8 also provides information onthe independent influence of awareness (of the implications of family size differences) on preference. When the per cent who chose a "small" family is used as the measure of preference, awareness seems to have no independent influence on preference. To

138

Simmons

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

take the most extreme example, respon- tends to produce "intermediate" levels of

dents who indicated no awareness (Attitude preference for small families. In cultural

Pattern 11) have nearly the same level of settings where "large" families are denned

preference for a small family as do respon- as having, roughly 10 or more children, the

dents who noted explicit advantages and family size preferences of respondents with

disadvantages on all four questions (Atti- some schooling may remain rather large.

tude Pattern 6). In these two cases, 48 Of course, levels of schooling among re-

and 47 per cent, respectively, preferred a spondents who clearly favor small families

small family. It would appear that an inter- are also rather high (65 per cent have

mediate level of forced choice preference attended school). Once schooling has been

for a small family can arise through either controlled, just what other characteristics

counterbalanced awareness or through lack distinguish women in Attitude Pattern 1

of awareness.

(Clearly Favors Small) from those in Atti-

When the per cent who gave four or fewer children as the "best number" is used as the measure of preference, there is a relationship between awareness and prefer-

tude Pattern 6 (complete awareness; Am-
bivalent) is an interesting question which
lies outside the limits of the present analysis.2

ence. This is most evident in the compari- Desire to learn about birth control.--

son of the no-awareness attitude pattern Sixty per cent of the women in our sample

(Pattern 11) with the complete-awareness attitude pattern (Pattern 6). Despite this variation within the ambivalent valence category, the proportions denning a "best number" as four or fewer remain intermediate relative to the proportions found in the extreme valence categories.

said that they did not want any additional children beyond the number they had already borne. If this is really a serious statement about their family size motivation, then one would expect that women who are ignorant about birth control methods would be strongly interested in

Evidence on the proportions with no learning about them. This does not appear

schooling in each of the valence categories to be the case for a substantial proportion

and attitude patterns (see Table 8) sug- of these women. As Table 9 indicates, of

gests that both valence and awareness are those respondents who did not want more

related to schooling. Those respondents who children and who did not know of any

clearly favor small families are much birth control method, 44 per cent did not

more likely to have attended school (65 express any interest in learning about

per cent) than are respondents who clearly birth control when explicitly asked. This

favor large families (46 per cent). How- finding leads one to question any simple

ever, controlling valence, there is also a interpretation of the stated desire not to

strong relationship between awareness and have more children among these women.

schooling. Only 35 per cent of those respondents with zero awareness have attended school, while 75 per cent of those with complete awareness have attended school.

The desire to have or not to have more children is, in itself, only one measure of personal family size motivation.- Other at-

Paradoxically, it would appear that for many respondents schooling tends to increase awareness of the advantages of large families as well as awareness of the advantages of small families, and in this manner

2 The relationships of a number of social-cultural background characteristics--such as occupational sector (farm versus nonfarm), age, and ethnicity--to ambivalence and to valences favoring small or large families are being investigated by the author in collaboration with Mauricio Culagovski.

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 9
DESIRE T O LEARN MORE ABOUT BIRTH CONTROL AMONG WOMEN WHO KNOW NO METHODS AND WHO WANT NO MORE CHILDREN, BY VALENCE AND AWARENESS DIMENSIONS or FAMILY SIZE ATTITUDES*

ATTITOTE CATEGORIES
Valence categories Clearly favors small families Favors small families Ambivalent (and zero awareness) Favors large families Clearly favors large families
Awareness categories High Answered all four questions Answered three of four Answered two of four Total subsample Low Answered one of four Answered none of four Total subsample
Total sample

WOMEN WHO KNOW NO METHODS AND WANT NO MOEE CHILDREN

Per Cent Who Want To Learn
More About Birth Control

Per Cent Who Do Not Want To Learn More About
Birth Control

No.

64 36 61 39 51 49 46 54 19 81

319 850 788 153 40

57 43

502

60 40

886

55 45

561

58 42 1,949

51 49 21 79 41 59

117 64 181

56 44 2,151

* Figures based on all four national samples combined. Excluded from this table are 4,663 currently mated women who either knew a contraceptive method and/or who wanted more children.

titudes may reflect ambivalence or perhaps even a bias toward large families. One may hypothesize that these general attitudes toward small and large families will have an important independent influence on the desire for contraceptive information. To examine this possibility, the desire for birth control information was analyzed among women who want no more children, controlling their valence toward small and large families (see Table 9).
The proportion who do not wish to learn about birth control among women who are ignorant about contraceptives yet who want no more children is positively related to valence; the higher the valence toward large families, the greater the proportion who do not want to learn about contraceptives. Among those who favor large fam-
ilies, the proportion who do not want to learn about birth control rises above 60 per cent. I t would appear that the stated

desire not to have more children has relatively little operational meaning. In contrast to their stated preference for no more children, many women appear to hold attitude patterns which are ambivalent toward or which favor large families, and for this reason they are not highly motivated to learn about birth control,
Low levels of awareness on family size issues may also explain the lack of desire to learn about birth control. As Table 9 indicates, this is particularly the case for the minority of respondents who were unable to cite any advantages or disadvantages on the four motive questions. Of these women, 79 per cent said they were not interested in learning about contraceptives, despite their stated desire to have no more children.
The desire for more children appears to be a distinct measure of personal preference. It is related only modestly to the re-

140

Simmons

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

spondent's definition of a "best number" of children (see Table 10). Fifty per cent of women who had borne at least three children fewer than their "best number" said they wanted no more children. This proportion rises consistently among women as they bear more children and approach their definition of "best number." However, the low correspondence between the desire for more and the definition of "best number" among women with fewer children than they consider best is further evidence that the stated desire for more children cannot be taken at face value. General definitions of best number and underlying valence and awareness patterns toward large and small families all influence the desire for children. All these factors must be taken into account as part of a general attitude web toward family size. Use of any indicator by itself provides

TABLE 10
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN RESPONDENTS HAVE AND THE NUMBER T H E Y F E E L
WOULD B E " B E S T " FOR A WOMAN T O HAVE FOR RESPONDENTS W H O WANT N O MOKE CHILDREN*

PRESENT FAMILY SIZE
At least three children less than "best" number
Two children less than "best" number
One child less than "best" number
The number considerd "best"
One child more than "best" number
Two children more than "best" number
At least three children more than "best" number
All respondents

PEKCENT WHO WANT
No MORE CHILDREN
35 42 61 71 76 78
86 59

NO. OP RESPONDENTS
1,431 709 738 945 404 355
964 5,546

· Figures based on all four national surveys combined. Excluded from this table are 1,268 currently mated women who either did not specify a "best number" of children and/or did not have any living children and hence were not asked whether they wanted "more" children.

only a partial and perhaps erroneous view of the total attitude complex.
DISCUSSION
The issues considered in this paper combine to provide a more complex picture of attitudes toward family size in rural Latin America than has been available to date. On the conceptual side, the findings from this investigation support a model of family size preferences in which cultural definitions of extreme alternatives ("small" and "large" families) and awareness of advantages and disadvantages of each are key elements in the development of family size preferences. Within the context of the villages and scattered farm families studied here, definitions of a small family range from averages of 3.1 to 3.9 children in the four countries, while the definitions of a large family range from averages of 9.5 to 11.4 children. It is of interest that the definitions of "small" in this rural sample are similar to definitions of the "ideal number" in metropolitan areas of Latin America (see Miro, 1966; Elam, 1971).
Since many respondents saw some advantages to both "small" and "large" families, they tended to define the "best number" of children intermediate between these polar extremes. As a result, family size ideals ("best number for a woman to have") tend to be fairly large, ranging from 4.8 to 5.3 children on the average in the four samples. These relatively high ideals, then, originate both from a range of culturally defined alternatives and from the ambivalent attitudes toward the more extreme alternatives in this range. It should be noted that even if rural women were to reduce their fertility to the level of these ideals (roughly 5 children per woman), under current low and declining mortality conditions in Latin America, rural population would likely continue to grow very

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

rapidly, doubling every thirty years or less.3
On the methodological side, it appears clear that straightforward questions on the number of additional children desired or on the "best number of children for a woman to have " provide only incomplete measures of family size attitudes. Taken by themselves, they can lead to erroneous conclusions about the nature of family size attitudes and motives. Their major limitation is a failure to take ambivalence into account.
In rural Latin America, the great majority of women continue to see some advantages to families with 10 or more children. The widespread existence of underlying attitude patterns which favor large families may explain at least in part why women who claim not to want any more children also claim that they are not interested in learning about birth control. Despite ambivalence toward large families, in the balance, attitude patterns tend to favor intermediate or small families. As a result, the stated desire not to have more children is embedded in part in underlying attitude and motive patterns. However, underlying ambivalence also apparent in the family size attitude patterns would
3 Accurate data on proportions of women marrying, age at marriage, and timing of childbearing are not available for Latin America; hence, no precise calculation is possible of the impact on current fertility of the average number of children born (to mated women). However, if one assumes that 90 per cent of women marry and that these women have, on the average, 5 children each, the total fertility rate (TFR) in the population would be 4,500 per 1,000 (see Bogue, 1969, pp. 658-659). Using Bogue's (1969, p. 661) regression equations, one may further note that a TFR of 4,500 corresponds in general with a crude birth rate of approximately 32 per 1,000. Under the low mortality levels currently evident in Latin America (crude death rates of less than 10 per 1,000 in most nations; see OEA/OAS, 1972, Tables 202-221) population growth would be at levels near or in excess of 2.2 per cent per year, and the size of such populations would double approximately every thirty years or less.

support the conclusion that the motivational foundation for small families is not firmly based and hence may not have any strong operational component.
We may conclude that developing a correct understanding of attitudes toward family size is not just a matter of developing multiple questions to assess the reliability and validity of our measures. It is also a problem of measuring the multiple dimensions of the attitudes themselves. Questions concerning both the advantages and the disadvantages of both small and large families appear to be useful in identifying some features of valence and awareness dimensions of family size attitudes.
Comparisons between the findings in this paper and findings from other studies are greatly restricted by the limited amount of research carried out to date on this topic. In this context, the study reported by Eva Mueller (1972) of Taiwanese husbands (cross section of urban and rural men) is noteworthy because it is based on questions similar to the ones used in the present study to determine advantages and disadvantages of small and large families. She found that 14 per cent of the Taiwanese husbands saw only advantages to large families, while 46 per cent were ambivalent (i.e., saw both advantages and disadvantages to large families) and the remaining 36 per cent saw only disadvantages to large families. In the rural Latin American samples reported here, 17 per cent saw only disadvantages to large families, while 67 per cent were ambivalent and 16 per cent saw only advantages to large families. In other words, the rural Latin American women appear to reveal much higher levels of ambivalence and much lower levels of awareness of only disadvantages to large families than do Taiwanese men. This difference is highlighted when one further considers that "small" families

142

Simmons

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

and "large" families were defined (in the question itself) for the Taiwanese respondents as having "two or fewer" and "five or more" children, respectively. The self-defined "small" family in some parts of rural Latin America (e.g., four children on the average in Mexico) is close to the size of a "large" family as denned in the Taiwanese interview schedule.
As in the present study, the Taiwanese survey found that respondents who did note advantages to large families did so largely in economic terms. Disadvantages of large families were also given largely in terms that stressed their cost and related disadvantages (particularly for schooling) for the children. Despite wide cultural differences between Taiwan and the Latin American nations studied here, there would appear to be some structural similarities in the way that children participate in work and provide old age security. The data here suggest broadly that the importance of large families for "help" reasons may be even greater in rural Latin America than it is in Taiwan. This is of course only a tentative conclusion which points to the need for further cross-national research focusing on the institutional features of society which encourage values favoring large families.
SUMMARY
Currently mated women in representative samples of rural areas (localities with less than 20,000 inhabitants) in four Latin American nations (Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Peru) reveal attitudes favoring at least in part the very large families that early marriage and consistent childbearing are capable of producing. "Large" families, denned by respondents as typically having 10 to 12 children, are seen to provide some traditional advantages, particularly economic assistance to parents. However, these large families are also

widely perceived to be a burden on family resources and, ultimately, of detriment to the children themselves. Small families, defined by respondents as typically having 3 to 4 children, are perceived as having some advantages and few if any disadvantages.
Net attitude patterns tend to favor small families, but one must take into account findings indicating: (1) ambivalence is common; (2) the normative "best number" of children for a family to have is approximately 5 children--enough to produce high fertility and rapid population growth; (3) sizeable minorities of women partially or completely favor large families with 10 to 12 children; and (4) the awareness of the implications of different-sized families is still latent, since most women have never discussed family size issues with their husbands.
Under these circumstances, responses to a straightforward question on the desire for more children turn out to be poorly related to interest in learning about contraceptives. This finding indicates that great caution should be taken in interpreting responses to single questionnaire items on family size preferences and motivation to limit fertility. Responses on various items should be compared with a specific intent to highlight ambivalence. The findings also indicate that levels of ambivalence in rural Latin America may be high relative to Asian nations, such as Taiwan, and thereby suggest that cross cultural comparisons of the value of children would be useful for isolating the social institutions which support such values.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support for this analysis from the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada is gratefully acknowledged. The analysis was carried out under the auspices of the United Nations Latin American Demographic Research Centre (CELADE) in San-

Vol. 21, No. 2

Ambivalence Toward Small Families

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

tiago, Chile, as part of series of training and investigation seminars (SIEF seminars) in rural fertility directed by the author in the period 1972-73. A special note of appreciation is due to Dr. Arthur M. Conning and his

staff in the Fertility Sector of CELADE who prepared the data set on which this paper is based. Collection of the data was supported by the Population Council and coordinated by CELADE.

REFERENCES

BOGUE, DONALD. 1969. Principles of demography. Wiley, New York.

ulation programs. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

ELAM, EDGAR. 1971. Opinion profiles of seven MIRO, CARMEN, A., AND WALTER MERTENS. 1968.

cities. In J. M. Stycos (ed.), Ideology, faith Influences affecting fertility in urban and rural

and family planning in Latin America. McGraw Latin America. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 46

Hill, New York.

(Part I I ) : 89-113.

FLAPAN, M. 1969.A paradigm or the analysis of MUELLER, EVA. 1972.Economic motives for fam-

child-bearing motivations of married women ily limitation: A study conducted in Taiwan.

prior to birth of the first child. Amer. J. Pop. Stud. 26:383-402.

Orthopsychiat. 39:402-417.

OEA/OAS (ORGANIZACION DE ESTADOS AMERICANOS/

HAUSER, P. M. 1967.Family planning and popu- ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES). 1972.

lation programs: A book review article. Demo- America en cifras. 1972.Secretariat General for

graphy 4:397-414.

the OEA/OAS, Washington, D.C.

Hill, R., J. M. STYCOS AND K. BACK. 1959. The
family and population control: A Puerto Rican experiment in social change. Univ. of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

RAINWATER, L. 1960. And the poor get children. Quadrangle, Chicago.
ROSEN, BERNARD, AND ALAN B. SIMMONS. 1971.
Urbanization, family and fertility: A structural-

HOFFMAN, L. W., ANDM. L. HOFFMAN. 1972. The
value of children to parents. In James T. Faw-

psychological analysis of the Brazilian case. Demography 8:46-69.

cett (ed.), Psychological perspectives on popu- SIMMONS, ALAN B. 1971. Projective testing for

lation. Basic Books, New York.

ideal family size. In J. M. Stycos (ed.), Ideo-

MERTENS, WALTER. 1970. Investigacion sobre la logy, faith and family planning in Latin

fecundidad y la planificacion familiar en America. McGraw Hill, New York.

America Latina, p. 193-235. In Proceedings of the Latin American Regional Conference on Population. Vol. I. Colegio de Mexico. Mexico City.

STYCOS, J. MAYONE. 1964. Attitudes toward family size in Haiti. Human Organiz., Spring, p. 4247.
STYCOS, J. MAYONE. 1965. Family size preferences

MIRO, CARMEN A. 1966. Some misconceptions dis- and social class in Peru. Amer. J. Sociol.

proved: A program of comparative fertility sur- 70:651-658.

veys in Latin America, p. 615-634. In Bernard WYATT, FREDERICK. 1967. Clinical notes on the moBerelson et al. (eds.), Family planning and pop- tives of reproduction. J. Soc. Iss. 23:29-56.

