Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The role of technology in cultural evolution
Robert S. Merrill
To cite this article: Robert S. Merrill (1972) The role of technology in cultural evolution, Social Biology, 19:3, 240-247, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987991 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987991
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

The Role of Technology in Cultural Evolution

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Robert S. Merrill
Department of Anthropology University of Rochester Rochester, New York

Before starting this paper, I must explain
how I use the term "cultural evolution."
I use it as a general descriptive term for
the history of human cultures. Washbum
and Lancaster (1968, p. 216) have stated
this view in a way appropriate to this sym-
posium:
The statement that we may study human biological history, human cultural history, and the interrelations of the two should mean precisely the same thing as that we may study human biological and cultural evolution. Understanding comes from the study of the data, and no information is added by using the word "evolution" in preference to the word "history."
The aim of this paper is to examine
some recent anthropological work concern-
ing cultural evolution and sketch the direction I believe this work is taking us.1 Some
concept of the nature of cultural evolution
1 I owe many of the ideas in this paper to two people. For years now Rene Millon's provocative remarks about Kenneth Bock have set me to rereading him until I think I may be beginning to understand him. At any rate, I have certainly been influenced. For a year I had the opportunity to work with Dorothy Willner while she sought to systematize her rich and varied data on how things really happen in this world (e.g., Willner, 1959). Ever since, I have been trying to find ways to incorporate that picture in my thinking. I have not gotten very far, but my thinking has been changed by the attempt. Finally, I want to thank René Millon and Allan Hoben for helpful comments on an earlier draft.

is necessary before the role of technology within it can be assessed. Therefore, I organize the paper around ideas about cultural evolution and then select examples which will help shed light on the role of technology. To keep the paper within bounds, I will restrict myself to cultural evolution since the rise of modern man, and I will not deal with the interrelations between human biological evolution and cultural evolution. These interrelations are dealt with elsewhere in this symposium.
The paper is organized as follows. I first state some general propositions about cultural evolution on which there seems to be growing agreement. I then examine some recent work on hunting-gathering societies, and on the rise of civilizations, in an effort to assess the direction such work is going. I argue that this work indicates that we should search for regularities in how cultural change occurs rather than for regularities in its course or paths. Then, by means of an examination of selected aspects of two ethnographic cases, I show some of the directions we can go when we search for mechanisms of sociocultural change. I close with brief comments on implications of the argument for anthropological theory and for our conception of the role of technology in cultural evolution.

240

Vol. 19, No. 3

Technology in Cultural Evolution

241

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Recently, views about cultural evolution have developed in American anthropology which differ appreciably from some of the views proposed earlier. In particular, I believe there is a growing consensus on the following four propositions which I have selected and reformulated from Service's recent book, Cultural Evolutionism (1971, Chaps. 1, 2; see also Service, 1968). First, cultural evolution occurs through changes in single societies. There is no separately abstractable process for culture as a whole like that described by Leslie White (1959). Second, advancement, or the development of more complex societies, is neither the inevitable nor the only possible path of long-run change. Service, for example, adds such possibilities as devolution, specialization or involution, stabilization, and revolution. Third, there is no single "primemover" of the evolutionary process (Service, 1971). There is no one Jons et origo from which everything flows. After examining technology as a possible prime-mover, Service reaches the following conclusions germane to this paper (1971, p. 25):
. . . some kind of technological production of necessities, especially of food, is required for any society. In the context of evolution such production is an enabler, so to speak, without which an increase in size and density could not take place. But a necessity or an enabler is not necessarily a mover. Many stabilized societies could produce much more than they do, but it does not follow that they necessarily will, nor that if they did that they would necessarily "evolve" in some sense.
The fourth proposition is that the following elements influence every situation of cultural change: (a) the existing cultural and other characteristics of the society involved; (ö) the habitat--the physical and biotic milieu of the society; and (c) what we might call, modifying Lesser (1961), the "societal field" of surrounding societies and cultures.
This is a considerably more complex

view of cultural evolution than has usually been held in the past. Accepting it means facing this question: If the paths of cultural evolution are so varied, and if the factors that influence change are so many and so variable, then where do we find lawful regularity? What sorts of regularity are there in cultural evolution? I believe this is a really serious question. It is rendered even more serious because many of the regularities that have been proposed have not held up very well in the face of more intensive scrutiny. Let me outline two instances.
My first example is recent work on hunting-gathering societies, especially that found in the two National Museums of Canada symposia edited by Damas (1969a, 1969Ô) and in the symposium on Man the Hunter (Lee and DeVore, 1968). Huntinggathering groups are closely dependent on sources of subsistence. Therefore, one would expect to find regular relationships between, on the one hand, conditions affecting subsistence--such as technology, habitat, and external opportunities--and, on the other hand, basic societal features such as settlement patterns and community patterns. Yet, as more work, and more sophisticated work is done, the picture becomes more complex. There are a larger number of significant kinds of variation among band societies than was previously thought, rendering earlier typologies inadequate (Damas, 1969a). Careful study of such variations shows they cannot all be accounted for as adaptations to subsistence conditions. Additional "social" and "historical" factors have to be brought into the picture. Perhaps the most striking illustration of this fact is found in Damas' comparative work on the Central Eskimo (1968, 1969a, 1969Ô).
My second example is work on early civilizations starting with Robert Adams' (1966) outstanding recent book comparing

242

Merrill

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

ancient Mesopotamia and pre-Spanish central Mexico. Of particular interest are Adams' conclusions about the growth of early states (Adams, 1966, p. 12):
I also believe that the available evidence supports the conclusion that the transformation at the core of the Urban Revolution lay in the realm of social organization. And, while the onset of the transformation obviously cannot be understood apart from its cultural and ecological context, it seems to have been primarily changes in social institutions that precipitated changes in technology, subsistence, and other aspects of the wider cultural realm, such as religion, rather than vice versa.
Adams thus makes many modifications of Steward's (e.g., 1955) earlier conclusions. But he does keep Steward's multilineal framework. In his summary, Adams stresses the similarities and parallels in process and form between the two sequences of state development. However, in the body of the book he also pays close and careful attention to the many differences, some of which he characterizes as "profound," "significant," and "important" (e.g., Adams, 1966, pp. 52, 65, 130).
Looking at these differences, I am impressed by Adams' evidence which indicates that they are very systematic. The features that seem peculiar to Mesopotamia seem to be closely related to each other and to conditions peculiar to Mesopotamia. And the same holds true for those features peculiar to the Mexican sequence. Thus, if Adams had set out to show the processes of emergence of the state in, say, ancient Mesopotamia, he could have constructed a quite complete yet coherent and intelligible account showing the close interrelations between Mesopotamian conditions, details of how institutions developed, and the particular forms they took. I would guess that, if he had tried to do this, he would also have found it possible, or even necessary, to include some of the "civilizational" culture content he largely placed in the back-

ground in his book. Adams' comparative analysis of similarities in process tends to obscure significant aspects of how change took place in each case.
These conclusions seem supported by the evidence in René Millon's fascinating review of work on "Early Civilizations of the New World" (1968). Millón shows the many curious patterns of similarity and difference among different New World sequences, indicating how systematic analysis could clarify interrelations between different aspects of civilizational development in each case. His account thus suggests that each New World development had a high degree of internal coherence.
There seems to me to be a general lesson to be learned from this recent work on hunting-gathering societies and on early civilizations. The lesson is that it is much easier to understand cultural changes when we consider whole concrete societies in their full settings. Where we get in trouble is in trying to simplify such situations by selecting a relatively small number of causally significant variables. When we do this, we are forced to leave out a lot of what is going on. Therefore, our regularities tend to break down as we study further, because we find cases where variables we left out influence those we have selected.
This conclusion seems to put us further and further into the lap of history with no indication of where we might find regularities. However, a possible direction can be derived by examining the analogous problem in biology, and by remembering the work of the man whom we honor in this symposium. Surely Darwin's chief contribution was the theory of natural selection which is the central core of the modern theory of biological evolution. Now, that theory is a general theory of how species change, and, also, of how species persist. Yet, though the theory is general, every instance of speciation or other evolutionary

Vol. 19, No. 3

Technology in Cultural Evolution

243

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

change has to be studied in all its concrete particulars. There is no a priori restriction on what features are relevant or what kinds of sequences occur. Furthermore, consider what biologists do when they find phenomena analogous to cultural parallelisms or convergences, or analogous to the kind of relationship between cultural specialization and evolutionary potential that Service proposes (1971, Chap. 3; see also Sahlins and Service, 1960, Chap. 5). Biologists do not take such regularities, when empirically established, as explanations. Instead, they are taken as phenomena to be understood. Biologists try to discover how such empirical patterns can be accounted for by the operation of natural selection under special kinds of circumstances (see Simpson, 1953, 1967). Biological changes which exhibit no such patterns are explained in the same way.
All of this suggests that what we should look for in the study of cultural evolution are general regularities in the specific details of how concrete sociocultural situations change. Obviously, this is by no means a new idea. An explicit and thoughtful presentation is given by the social psychologist Donald Campbell (1965, 1970). He argues, as I have, for moving away from theories about the course of cultural evolution to theories of "the processes which produce it" (Campbell, 1965, p. 22).
However, in developing his argument, Campbell combines a focus on social change processes with the use of direct analogies to the mechanisms of biological evolution. He develops what he calls a "variation-selective-retention" model. Goldschmidt (1959) has argued less formally for similar analogies, while Alland (1967, 1970) has attempted to place cultural evolution fully within a biological framework. Vayda and Rappaport (1968) have suggested a generation-selection model based on Lotka (1945).

Examination of these and similar approaches to the study of culture-change processes indicates that using direct biological analogies may not be the most productive way to proceed. Such analogies tend to obscure the necessity of studying the details of how social and cultural changes actually take place. Whatever else may be relevant in a society's history, sociocultural mechanisms are always involved in the acceptance of new practices or institutions and in their maintenance, modification, replacement, or disappearance. It is how these changes happen that we really need to study and think about. As Barth (1967, p. 661) has said, we need "greater attention to the empirical study of the events of change."
How, then, are we to study the events of sociocultural change? What modes of analysis will help uncover general change mechanisms? It would be very useful to have a systematic assessment of available concepts and data bearing on these questions. However, that cannot be attempted here. Instead, I want to examine a few small-scale cases to show some of the directions in which we can go when we focus on the details of how cultural change happens. I will try to bring out their theoretical implications both generally and for assessing the role of technology.
As a first example, let us look at one change among the Siane of highland New Guinea: the consequences of their adopting steel axes for clearing and fencing gardens. As Salisbury (1962, p. 109) makes clear, using steel axes was a significant technological change, because, among other things, it cut the time to do axe work to about a third or a fourth of that required previously. The problem is to explain what the Siane did with the newly available time. This is no easy task because men could use their time in many different ways. They could alter their ways of gar-

244

Merrill

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

dening, or where they chose to garden, or the size and number of gardens, or their amount of sleep, and so forth. What they did choose was none of these. The Siane kept garden production essentially constant. This choice reduced the fraction of men's potential "work" time spent on subsistence production from about 80% to about 50%. This released time was mainly devoted to increased warfare (until that was stopped) and to greatly increased participation in ceremonial exchanges (Salisbury, 1962, p. 118-119).
To explain this use of extra time, Salisbury devotes most of his book to a combination of economic and structural analysis to determine the system of alternatives recognized by the Siane and the way in which alternatives were evaluated. His approach is thus similar to work using decision models (e.g., Keesing, 1970; Izmirlian, 1969), and to Barth's (1967) "generative" analyses of time and resource allocation. And, like Barth (1967) examining Fur household organizations, Salisbury went beyond an analysis of Siane categorical and evaluative criteria as they operated directly. He was able to show that the criteria themselves derived from Siane concepts about different kinds of social activities. These concepts could then be shown to explain recategonzations and reevaluations which took place as situations changed. Salisbury's profound analysis deserves presentation in detail, but that must be left to another occasion.
From Salisbury's work and other work like it can be derived an important general conclusion. Many actions we interpret as fairly direct manifestations of sociocultural rules or categories probably really reflect situationally determined variants of more fundamental concepts. Such concepts can account for alterations of rules and criteria as situations change. This means that a substantial fraction of what we describe as

change does not involve change in the full cultural sense but rather variant expressions of more basic unchanged institutions. Such a widened view of institutions points to an important general mechanism underlying a wide range of changes in conduct.
Now let us turn to another example--· Frank Cancian's provocative analysis (1965) of changes and disequilibrium in the cargo system of the municipio of Zinacantan in Chiapas, Mexico. Cargos are religious offices whose duties are carried out by different people each year. Over the past several decades, both the population and per-capita income of Zinacantan have increased. This has made many more people both interested in and able to undertake the financial and other burdens of cargos, including the more expensive and prestigeful cargos. However, the traditional cargo system consisted of a fixed number of cargo offices to be filled each year. The institution did not contain, as part of its ordinary and regular operation, any mechanism for adjusting to pressures for increased participation.
Let us stop and consider this point. As I interpret it, Cancian's data show that there were limits on the adaptive capabilities of the cargo system. This does not mean there were no adjustive mechanisms. There were, for example, a variety of institutionalized mechanisms for filling cargo positions if there was an apparent shortage of persons. Nevertheless, there were limits, and, when one comes to think about it, it is evident that this must be a very general phenomenon. It is extremely unlikely, if not impossible, for an institution to be so well adapted that it is able to function effectively under any and all circumstances. This point has been recognized theoretically, but, so far as I know, it has not been systematically pursued in anthropology. Francesca Cancian (1960) explicitly uses the idea of adaptive limits in developing a

Vol. 19, No. 3

Technology in Cultural Evolution

245

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

functional analysis of change. She, in turn, obtained the idea from Nagel's (1956) formal analysis of functionalism. Herbert Simon (1947, 19S7, 1969) has made extensive use of the idea in a wide variety of forms and contexts.
From the standpoint of studying mechanisms of cultural change, it is clear that the idea of the adaptive limits of institutions is very important. For example, if one institution's adaptive limits are reached, its failure to operate as usual is likely to affect the operation of other institutions. Should such effects cause other institutions to reach their adaptive limits, a whole set of institutional changes could be started by the one initial change. Systematic efforts to define the adaptive limits as well as functions of institutions are likely to improve our understanding of how societies work, especially in situations of change.
Let us now go back to the Zinacantan case and ask what actually happened. The answer is that a series of definite institutional changes were made. The number of cargos in the cargo system was increased (Cancian, 1965, p. 162-165). In addition, an elaborate waiting-list system was developed which made possible more orderly handling of the increasing pressure, and some indirect reduction of the pressure itself (Cancian, 1965, Chap. 15). One especially interesting feature of these changes is that some of the ways in which the numbers of cargos were increased look as if they involved preexisting culturechanging institutions which were triggered into action by the difficulties caused by the pressure on the cargo system. The most well-defined institution of this sort, and the one which could be activated repeatedly, worked as follows. A resident of a hamlet dreamt that a particular saint wanted to come to the hamlet provided a properly cared-for chapel was prepared for him in

advance. The chapel was built and, though the saint has not come, pictures were obtained for the chapel and cargos established (Cancian, 1965, p. 165). This mechanism of social change is linked to pressures on the cargo system as a whole through the fact that the dreamer had to convince his neighbors to provide the resources to establish the chapel and to accept the responsibility in having new cargos which had to be filled by hamlet residents. Thus, the willingness of a hamlet to undertake such changes is sensitive to the resources and desires of hamlet members for greater cargo participation.
This aspect of the Zinacantan case suggests another general mechanism of cultural change: the existence of definite culture-changing institutions which are triggered into operation when particular kinds of difficulties develop in the functioning of existing institutions. As in the case of adaptive limits, this idea can be related to wider theory. Such second-order change mechanisms can be analyzed using the systems theory concept of "control hierarchies" which has recently been applied, in a somewhat different way, by Rappaport (1971) in his analysis of ritual. The systematic search for such second- and possibly even higher-order change mechanisms should enlarge still further our knowledge of how societies adapt.
It is clear, however, that these do not exhaust the inventory of change mechanisms. Some of the changes in Zinacantan appear to involve less routine kinds of innovations. Furthermore, Zinacantan is reaching the point where the adaptive limits of all the known institutional mechanisms will be reached; yet the cargo system will not be restored to its previous mode of functioning. Additional change is clearly in the offing. Examination of cases of more radical cultural change should, therefore, reveal additional processes.

246

Merrill

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Let me now summarize the general conclusions which are suggested by the two ethnographic cases and by the earlier discussion. It is my hope that the case discussions have given you some idea of what a sociocultural process approach to the study of cultural evolution might be like. I think the examples indicate that such an approach, despite its focus on the particulars of particular cases, is likely to lead to the isolation of mechanisms of change of some generality and interest. I also believe such an approach will contribute to our general understanding of how societies work.
Beyond this, the direction such work seems to take us has a broader significance. For a number of years now Kenneth Bock (1952, 19SS, 19S6, 1963, 1966) has been telling us that, despite all the many changes in theory, anthropologists still base their thinking about the relationships between historical events and change or evolution on assumptions which go back to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. As I understand him, he thinks we always try to abstract from, or otherwise ignore, the concrete messiness of the ways events happen and seek some other realm of greater order and simplicity. This, he believes, is fundamentally wrong. There is no such realm. Such order as there is lies in relationships among events and nowhere else. It seems to me that, as we probe more deeply into concrete processes of change, we are coming closer to Bock's views. If so, his corollary should also follow, that we should look much more deeply into documented history than we have already begun to do.
Turning back now to the body of this paper, the materials I have dealt with also

have implications for views about technology. They indicate that technology is a factor which, along with others, affects the alternatives available in a society. This suggests a picture of the role of technology which, though in many ways quite obvious, is drastically different from that prevailing in much current discussion. Let me end this paper by sketching that picture as I see it.
Technologies are means for doing things. As such, they are inert, passive--just there. By themselves they do nothing. Only when people use a technology in some way does it have an impact on human life. However, knowing that a technology is used tells us almost nothing about its effects. What we really need to know is the way of life of the people who are using it and the places they make for it in their schemes of things.
A technology is adopted when people or groups find it desirable and possible to change what they are doing in ways that involve particular uses of that technology. Such people and groups are the active, initiating elements in the change in technical practices. Moreover, it is not the technology alone, but what these people do, which influences further change. Beyond that, it is the circumstances of the societies involved, and how they work, which determine the wider effects of a technology on cultural evolution. To assess the role of a technology we need to know a great deal about it so we can envision its problems and possibilities (see Merrill, 1968). But we cannot say anything about the actual effects connected with a particular technology until we understand why people do what they do with it. On this subject we know relatively little; but I think we are at the point where we can start to find out.

Vol. 19, No.3

Technology in Cultural Evolution

247

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ADAMS, ROBERT M C C . 1966. The evolution of LEE, RICHARD B., and IRVEN DEVORE (eds.). 1968.

urban society. Aldine, Chicago.

Man the hunter. Aldine, Chicago.

ALLAND, ALEXANDER, JR. 1967. Evolution and LESSER, ALEXANDER. 1961. Social fields and the human behavior. Natural History Press, New evolution of society. Southwest. J. Anthropol.

York.

17:40-48.

_____. 1970. Adaptation in cultural evolution: LOTKA, ALFRED J. 1945. The law of evolution as An approach to medical anthropology. Colum- a maximal principle. Hum. Biol. 17:167-194.

bia Univ. Press, New York.

MERRILL, ROBERT S. 1968. Art. Technology I. The

BARTH, FREDRIK. 1967. On the study of social study of technology. International Encyclopedia

change. Amer. Anthropol. 69:661-669.

of the Social Sciences. Macmillan, New York.

BOCK, KENNETH E. 1952. Evolution and historical MILLON, RENÉ. 1968. Art. Urban revolution II.

process. Amer. Anthropol. 54:486-496.

Early civilizations of the NewWorld. Inter-

_____. 1955. Darwin and social theory. Philos- national Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences.

ophy of Science 22:123-134.

Macmillan, New York.

_____. 1956. The acceptance of histories: NAGEL, ERNEST. 1956. A formalization of func-

Toward a perspective for social science. Univ. tionalism. In Ernest Nagel, Logic without

of California Press, Berkeley.

metaphysics. The Free Press, Glencoe, Ill.

_____. 1963. Evolution, function, and change. RAPPAPORT, ROY A. 1971. Ritual, sanctity, and

Amer. Sociol. Rev.28:229-237. (Reprinted in cybernetics. Amer. Anthropol. 73:59-76.

S. N. Eisenstadt (ed.), Readings in social evolu- SAHLINS, MARSHALL D., and ELMAN R. SERVICE tion and development. Pergamon, New York.) (eds.). 1960. Evolution and culture. Univ. of

_____. 1966. The comparative method in anthro- Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

pology. Comp. Stud. Soc. Hist. 8:269-280.

SALISBURY, R. F. 1962. From stone to steel: Eco-

CAMPBELL, DONALD T. 1965. Variation and selec- nomic consequences of a technological change

tive retention in socio-cultural evolution, p. 19- in New Guinea. Cambridge Univ. Press, New

49. In Herbert R. Barringer, George I. Blanks- York.

ton and Raymond W. Mack (eds.), Social SERVICE, ELMAN R. 1968. Art. Evolution IV. Cul-

change in developing areas. Schenkman, Cam- tural evolution. International Encyclopedia of

bridge, Mass.

the Social Sciences. Macmillan, New York.

_____. 1970. Natural selection as an epistomo- _____. 1971. Cultural evolutionism: Theory in

logical model, p. 51-85. In Raoul Naroll and practice. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New

Ronald Cohen (eds.), A handbook of method York.

in cultural anthropology. Natural History SIMON, HERBERT A. 1947. Administrative behavior:

Press, New York.

A study of decision-making processes in admin-

CANCIAN, FRANCESCA. 1960. Functional analysis istrative organization. Macmillan, New York.

of change. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 25:818-826.

_____. 1957. Models of man: Social and rational.

CANCIAN, FRANK. 196S. Economics and prestige Wiley, New York.

in a Maya community: The religious cargo _____. 1969. The sciences of theartificial. M.I.T.

system in Zinacantan. Stanford Univ. Press, Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Stanford.

SIMPSON, GEORGE GAYLORD. 1953. The major

DAMAS, DAVID. 1968. The diversity of Eskimo features of evolution. Columbia Univ. Press,

societies, p. 111-117. In Lee and DeVore (eds.), New York.

Man the hunter. Aldine, Chicago.

_____. 1967. The meaning of evolution. (Rev.

_____. 1969a. Characteristics of Central Eskimo ed.) Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

band structure, p. 116-138. In D. Damas (ed.), STEWARD, JULIAN H. 1955. Theory of culture

Contributions to anthropology: Band societies. change: The methodology of multilinear evo-

National Museums of Canada, Bulletin 228, lution. Univ. of Illinois Press, Urbana.

Anthropological Series 84, Ottawa.

VAYDA, ANDREW P., and ROY A. RAPPAPORT. 1968.

_____. 1969b. Environment, history and Central Ecology, cultural and noncultural, p. 477-497.

Eskimo society. In D. Damas (ed.), Contribu- In James A. Clifton (ed.), Introduction to cultions to anthropology: Ecological essays. Na- tural anthropology. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.

tional Museums of Canada, Bulletin 230, WASHBURN, S. L., and JANE B. LANCASTER. 1968.

Anthropological Series 86, Ottawa.
GOLDSCHMIDT, WALTER. 1959. Man's way: A preface to the understanding of human society.

Art. Evolution III. Human evolution. International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences. Macmillan, New York.

Holt, New York.

WHITE, LESLIE A. 1959. The evolution of culture:

IZMIRLIAN, HARRY, JR. 1969. Structural and The development of civilization to the fall of

decision-making models: A political example. Rome. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Amer. Anthropol. 71:1062-1073.

WILLNER, DOROTHY. 1969. Nation-building and

KEESTNG, ROGER M. 1970.Kwaio fosterage. Amer. community in Israel. Princeton Univ. Press,

Anthropol. 72:991-1019.

Princeton, N.J.

