Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Master's level training in data management in the health sciences
To cite this article: (1974) Master's level training in data management in the health sciences, Social Biology, 21:1, 96-97, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988094 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988094
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Communications Human Biology Council

N
Id i J
J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

A number of North American human biologists met in April, 1973, and initiated the formation of an organization for the purpose of supporting the journal Human Biology and nominating its editors.
Therefore, the Human Biology Council to advance the science of human biology, through advice to and support of Human Biology and other relevant publications, and through promotion of research and teaching concerning human biological variation, has now been established.
Members for 1974 will be considered Charter Members. Scholars and students who wish to join should write to the chairman pro-tem, Dr. Paul Baker (Department of Anthropology, Sll Social Science Building, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802), and should summarize their qualifications. Student membership is for a

period of not more than 3 years and applications must include a statement from a professor who can vouch for the status as a student.
Dues for 1974 are $10.00 for regular members and $6.00 for student members. Dues include subscription to the quarterly journal Human Biology. Checks should be made out to the "Human Biology Council" and may be sent with applications to Dr. Paul Baker, chairman of the Organizing Committee, who will arrange the review of applications and will forward dues payments to the acting treasurer, Dr. Michael A. Little.
Donations to help cover the organizing expenses will be appreciated. Arrangements are being made to suitably recognize supporting members and benefactors and to gain tax exempt status.

Master's Level Training in Data Management in the Health Sciences

The Department of Biostatistics at the
University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill now offers one-year programs of study leading to either the Master of Public Health (MPH) or the Master of Science in Public Health (MSPH) degree in Biostatistics with special emphasis on management of computer-based health data

systems. Graduates will be prepared for

w o r k i n intermediate level statistical and/

o r c o m p u t e r s y s t e m s mziyst

positions in

local, state, federal or private health pro-
&aras f o r &e d e I i v e r v a n d evaluation of health services.
In addition to an introduction to health

96

Vol. 21, No. 1

Communications

97

programs, the curriculum includes: methods for the collection and processing of different types of record files and large data sets, sample survey methods, introduction to research and experimental design, data analysis, and techniques of program evaluation. Admission to both programs requires a bachelor's degree. Calculus background is desirable for the MPH; it is required for MSPH admission.

Students lacking adequate background in computer sciences will be expected to attend the basic computer sciences course during the second summer session in July and August preceding entry into the program. For details contact: Dr. E. C. Coulter, Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27S14.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Advanced Study Program in International Nutrition Planning

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology International Nutrition Planning Program, in collaboration with the Center for Advanced Engineering Study, will initiate in September, 1974, a special ninemonth Advanced Study Program for Fellows in International Nutrition Planning.
The program is designed primarily for officials of governments and international agencies who are involved in or likely to become involved in the planning, implementation, or evaluation of programs designed to combat malnutrition in low income countries.
A small number of persons will be accepted each year for this nondegree program and will undertake a program designed to supplement existing talents

and experience, whether in public health, finance and economics, or administration. Among potentially relevant subjects are development economics, human nutrition, quantitative methods and data analysis, health services administration, and regionoriented political development. The program is limited to individuals able to meet certain entrance requirements, including fluency in English, and who are sponsored by their respective organizations or governments and can demonstrate that they have adequate financial support.
For further information on the program, write: Dr. John O. Field, Advanced Study Program, International Nutrition Planning Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 30 Wadsworth St. (ES3-46S), Cambridge, Mass. 02139.

