Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Wives' and husbands' expected costs and benefits of childbearing as predictors of pregnancy
Ellen Shapiro Fried & J. Richard Udry
To cite this article: Ellen Shapiro Fried & J. Richard Udry (1979) Wives' and husbands' expected costs and benefits of childbearing as predictors of pregnancy, Social Biology, 26:4, 265-274, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988385 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988385
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 13 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Wives' and Husbands' Expected Costs and Benefits of Childbearing as Predictors of Pregnancy

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Ellen Shapiro Fried and J. Richard Udry
Research Triangle Institute,ResearchTriangle Park, North Carolina; and Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina,ChapelHill, North Carolina
ABSTRACT: This paper examines the usefulness of one-sex and two-sex utility models of reproductive behavior in predicting births as consequences of wives' and husbands' perceptions of the costs and benefits of another child. We used longitudinal data on a sample of 280 white and 69 black young urban American couples. For whites, female models are mostly better than male models. Two-sex models generally predict more variance than female models. We show that the white wife's utility considerations dominate the predictions, with husband as ajunior partner and partial redundancy of female and male models. The utility considerations of black husbands dominate the predictions, with wives asjunior partners and no redundancy in female and male models. We conclude that neither sex incorporates completely the spouse's utility considerations into its own utility structure. Because some male models are surprisingly strong, researchers cannot omit males without running the risk of leaving out an important component of the determinants of fertility.

The purpose of this paper is to explore 1972; Arnold and Fawcett, 1975; Hoffman

the usefulness of one-sex and two-sex util- and Hoffman, 1973; and Terhune, 1974)

ity models of reproductive behavior in un- Two recent studies are similar to ours both

derstanding the process by which the util- in their theoretical orientation and in the

ity considerations of two spouses fact that they are longitudinal (Davidson

separately and jointly influence the repro- and Jaccard, 1979; Townes et al., 1977).

duction of the couple. We do this by anal- Davidson and Jaccard (1979) based

ysis of data collected in a longitudinal their study on interviews of 244 married

study of a panel of young black and white white women at three yearly intervals.

married urban U.S. couples.

Using an approach based on the work

In the past few years we have learned a of Rosenberg and Fishbein, they attempt

great deal about applying utility models to to predict reproductive behavior using a

predict fertility. Utility models of fertility, variable combining a birth or an attempt

simply put, state that having or not having to become pregnant and a variable which

a child (or intending or not intending to is a birth or no birth. They use an attitu-

have a child) is a function of the dinal component and a normative compo-

individual's perceived payoff matrix from nent as their predictors and are able to

having a birth compared with the matrix explain 25 per cent of the vari-

for not having a birth.

ance in births or no births and 35 per cent

Several researchers have proposed that of the variance in births or attempts to be-

measurements of the anticipated costs and come pregnant.

benefits of another child are useful predic- Townes et al. (1977) interviewed 74

tors of fertility and fertility plans (see, for married couples twice, a year apart. The

example: Becker, 1960; Namboodiri, respondents were for the most part highly

265

266

Fried and Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

educated and middle class. Race is not reported, but we assume they were white. The investigators used a subjective expected-utility approach. At the first interview they measured the positive and negative values associated with having or not having another child for both the wife and the husband. At the second interview, they determined whether the wife had become pregnant or had tried to become pregnant. They reported that they can predict the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a pregnancy attempt quite well. Among couples for whom they predicted there would be no pregnancy, there were very few pregnancies or attempts, while among those for whom pregnancy was predicted, about half reported a pregnancy attempt.
Births are presumably the consequence of actions of both parents. In what way do utility functions determine what plans will be made and what reproductive consequences will follow, when there is more than one actor? Becker (1974) deals with this question in the theoretical analysis of households by introducing the concept of the household head who by definition in his/her own utility function optimizes those of all other members of the household. (Becker says one does this out of "love.") The empirical importance of Becker's model depends upon whether households have "heads" in this specific sense.
With respect to fertility decisionmaking, is there a head in Becker's sense? More generally, how do the utility considerations of husband and wife contribute to determining reproductive events?
FERTILITY DECISION MAKING
PATTERNS OF INFLUENCE
Let us suppose that wife and husband contemplate their plans for another child.

Each considers the costs and benefits of having or not having another child. Each spouse identifies a distinctive cost-benefit structure when surveying the domains of possible outcomes. The couple may discuss th'ese considerations with one another, so that each partner knows the other's payoff structure. On the basis of their discussion, they may decide to stop contraceptive measures in order to conceive; or they may not discuss the issue, but each may try to imagine how the other's payoffs look; or they may ignore how the situation appears to the other.
Let us suppose that as a result of whatever subjective considerations each makes, whatever deliberations they share, and whatever individual or joint action they take (or fail to take), a knowledge of the wife's payoff perceptions allows us to predict well whether or not a birth occurs, and that adding information from the husband does not improve our prediction. We would then say that the wife's utility structure influences the occurrence of the event. But we could be wrong. She may have so completely incorporated his considerations with her own that the influence of his is also represented by hers. We can discover this incorporation by examining our ability to predict reproductive events by examination of his utility structure alone. If, in addition to what has been said, his payoff structure alone predicts as well as hers alone, and the addition of hers to his does not improve the prediction, we may say that their payoff structures are completely redundant. Because of the consideration of one another necessary to arrive at this state, we will identify this state of affairs as a Love Pattern.
Now consider the circumstances where knowledge of the payoff structure of each spouse predicts the events equally well, but simultaneous consideration of both payoff structures allows us to predict events twice as well as using either alone.

Vol. 26, No. 4

Costs and Benefits of Childbearing

267

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

In this circumstance, we may imagine that sider nondifferentiated marriages as rare

neither spouse has incorporated the con- events, as Herbst (1960) and Blood and

siderations of the other into a personal Wolfe (1960) have shown.

payoff structure. We may say that the Of course, we have only stated the ex-

couple's payoff structures are completely treme cases in our models. Redundancy

nonredundant. Because the pair is in- can have any value from zero to one hun-

volved in a joint venture in which each dred per cent. Predictive powers of male

considers only an individual payoff struc- and female models can differ greatly or lit-

ture, we will identify this state of affairs as tle. But the simplifications may help us to

a Partnership Pattern.

understand the influence structure of fer-

In yet a third set of circumstances, sup- tility events. A number of researchers

pose that knowledge of the payoffs of one have examined two-sex models of repro-

partner alone allows a much better predic- ductive behavior, primarily to answer the

tion than knowledge of the other alone, practical question of whether or not addi-

and addition of knowledge of the second tion of the husband's data improves pre-

partner's payoffs makes a negligible im- dictions of fertility enough to justify

provement in the prediction. We can then nearly doubling the expense of surveys of

say that one partner or the other domi- fertility determinants. Evidence on the

nates the events, and the other has a negli- advantages of collecting data on husbands

gible influence. The case of domination by as well as on wives is sparse and mixed.

a single partner will be called a Wife Pat- Data from our pilot study (Hofferth

tern if the wife dominates, and a Husband and Udry, 1976, ms.) showed that models

Pattern if the husband dominates. Where which used expected consequences from

one sex dominates and the other makes a both spouses were considerably more

lesser additional contribution which is not powerful predictors of contraceptive be-

redundant with the first, the sex making havior than models which used the conse-

the lesser contribution may for conven- quences expected by only the wife or the

ience be designated a junior partner.

husband. Neal and Groat (1977) report on

Of course, this discussion of patterns a study in which wives' and husbands'

represents a great simplification of the cir- alienation scores were used to predict

cumstances. Sometimes one spouse will various aspects of reproductive behavior.

be indifferent because personal payoffs They found that having the scores for both

are not affected very much one way or the spouses improved predictive ability over

other. Sometimes one spouse will be am- the scores for either spouse alone and that

bivalent, because of anticipating many husbands' scores often predicted as well as

strong benefits which are offset by many those of wives.

high costs.

There is, however, evidence on the

We have eliminated by definition the other side. Bumpass and Westoff (1970)

case where wife and husband have identi- found that husbands' family-size desires

cal payoff structures independent of con- added very little to the variance explained

siderations of the other. This situation in estimated completed family size by

cannot occur because we have defined wives' family-size desires. In predicting

their payoff structures as different. In mar- childbearing intentions in our study

riages where wife and husband have simi- (Fried et al., 1980), we found that female-

lar motivational structures and no division only models were better than male-only

of labor by sex, these definitions distort models. Two-sex models were usually bet-

reality. In practice we shall have to con- ter predictors than one-sex models, but

268

Fried and Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

not very much better. Townes et al. (1977) woman was married to the same man at

compared the ability of wives', husbands', the time of all of the interviews.

and wives-and-husbands' subjective expected utility scores to predict the occur-

STATISTICAL MODEL

rence of a pregnancy. They report that the We used multiple regression models to

model using an average of wives' and hus- explore the questions we have raised. For

bands' scores predicted about as well as each dependent variable, we ran separate

wives' scores alone but that husbands' analyses for the female and male indepen-

scores alone did not predict a pregnancy as dent variables as well as a joint run using

well. In addition, when they used stepwise both female and male independent varia-

discriminant function analysis with both bles. This procedure was done separately

wives' and husbands' variables, several by race. In each run, a forward entry

wives' variables entered before any hus- multiple regression was performed with

bands' variables. The question is still an F=2.0 and tolerance of 0.30 required to

open one.

enter the model. The run was cut if the to-

tal F for the model increased after a de-

MATERIALS AND METHODS

cline. No more than ten variables were allowed to enter. Couples which were sterile

Our study is based on data from the sec- or in which the wife was pregnant at Time

ond and third waves of a panel study. In 1 were excluded from the analysis. There

1973 (Time 0), we obtained area samples are 69 black and 280 white couples in the

of 100 white and 100 black ever-married analysis.

women aged 15-44 from urban low income census tracts. The whites were in

DEPENDENT VARIABLES

predominantly white tracts and the blacks 1. PREGNANCY is a dummy variable

in predominantly black tracts. The areas which is scored 1 if the woman has been

were in 16 SMSA counties (14 for blacks, pregnant between Time 1 and Time 2 and

because of the small black population in 2 0 if she has not. Since we excluded from

of the 16 counties) which had previously our analysis women who were pregnant at

been defined as likely to show a demo- the time Time 1 interview, this group in-

graphic response to a subsidized family cludes only pregnancies presumed to have

planning program. Almost all of these started after the measurement of the inde-

tracts were in the central cities. In addition pendent variables. Fourteen per cent of

to this low income sample, a sample of 100 the black women and 28 per cent of the

ever-married white women aged 15-44 white women had a pregnancy during the

from middle income census tracts was in- interval between interviews.

terviewed in 5 of the 16 counties. The 2. TRYOREV is a dummy variable

tracts from which these women came were which is scored 1 if the woman has been

contiguous to the central city boundaries. pregnant in the interval or if she reports at

The data for this report come from the the time of the second interview that she is

two waves of the study which were carried trying to become pregnant. It seemed rea-

out in 1976-77 (Time 1) and 1978 (Time 2) sonable to expect that we might be able to

with a subsample of these women and predict this variable better with our

their husbands. The subsample consists of measures of anticipated consequences

women who were under age 30 at the time than we could predict actual pregnancies

of the initial interview. For the present since those couples who are subfecund

analysis, we used 505 couples in which the might not have become pregnant during

Vol. 26, No.4

Costs and Benefits of Childbearing

269

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

the one-year interval, even though they 2. Sex of the Children. Respondents

were trying. (Davidson and Jaccard were asked how important it is to them to

[1979], found this to be true for their sam- have a (another) boy and how important it

ple.) Twenty-three per cent of the black is to them to have a (another) girl. We av-

women and 37 per cent of the white wo- eraged the responses to form an index.

men reported either that they had been 3. Changes in the Respondent's Feelings

(or were) pregnant or that they were try- about Themselves.We asked respondents,

ing to become pregnant at Time 2.

"If you (your wife) became pregnant

INDEPENDENT VARIABLES

during the next few months, how would you feel about yourself?" A list of six

The independent variables in our utility items of the following form was presented:

model were selected to represent each of "Would you feel more or less proud of

the major domains of consequences of yourself?" The other adjectives were: ma-

having birth. An extensive review of litera- ture, successful, embarrassed, critical,

ture on consequences of reproduction for and selfish. Responses to the six items

the parents led us to identify the following were averaged to create an index, with a

major domains: (1) satisfactions and cost high score indicating an expectation of

which derive directly from infant and child positive feelings.

care; (2) differential satisfactions related to 4. Cost of Children. This variable was

the child's sex; (3) changes in self- constructed from three items in which re-

evaluation; (4) monetary costs of a birth spondents indicated the extent to which

and child; (5) consequences for the marital various financial costs associated with

relationship; (6) normative responses from pregnancy and child rearing would influ-

important persons in the parent's social ence their decisions to have a (another)

network. For each of these domains we de- child. A high score on this index indicates

veloped one variable from our question- financialmatters would influence their de-

naire which seemed best to represent that cision.

domain. The exception to this was Area 6, where we included as variables the normative responses anticipated from several persons in the social network.

5. Changes in the Marriage. We used two variables to measure changes that respondents might expect to occur in their marriages as a result of having a (another)

The independent variables were all child in the next year (see Orden and

measured at Time 1. In each case our in- Bradburn, 1968, for properties of the

terest was in the respondent's perceptions scale). One variable deals with positive as-

of the consequence as a cost or benefit (re- pects such as being affectionate. For each

ward). Each question was asked of both of nine items, respondents were asked

wives and husbands, so there is a female whether they would expect to do them

and a male variable for each. We describe more often, less often, or about the same.

the areas below.

The second variable deals with tensions.

1. Infant Care. We presented the re- For each of nine areas of potential ten-

spondents with a list of ten items related to sion, respondents were asked whether

taking care of babies, for example, talking they would be more troublesome, less

to the baby or changing the baby's diaper. troublesome, or about the same.

We asked respondents to rate each of the 6. Responsesfrom the Social Network.

items on a five-point scale from "like a For each of seven individuals in a person's

lot" to "dislike a lot." Scores on the index social circle, we asked respondents

were the average often responses.

whether they thought that individual

270

Fried and Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

would be more approving or more critical TRYOREV results only. For whites, the

if the wife became pregnant in the next results in Table 1 resemble the Wife Pat-

few months. If the respondents indicated tern, with male-only models weaker than

that they expected such a change, they female-only models, and partial redun-

were asked how they would feel about it: dancy. The two-sex model is only a minor

whether they would be pleased or improvement over the female-only

bothered by it. We constructed one varia- model. For blacks, the results in Table 2 fit

ble for each person in the respondent's so- the Husband Pattern, with wife as junior

cial circle based on the respondent's reac- partner, and no redundancy. The male

tion to the anticipated behavior change. model is stronger, but the two-sex model

The persons asked about were best friend, is as good as the sum of the one-sex

sibling, mother, father, mother-in-law, models.

father-in-law, and spouse.

Our sole interest in this paper is to examine the relative influence of husband

PARITY-SPECIFIC MODELS

and wife utility considerations in deter- Several scholars maintain that fertility

mining subsequent fertility events. In the decisions may be governed differently at

interest of simplification, we have avoided different parities (Terhune, 1974; Nam-

the examination of the importance of par- boodiri, 1973).

ticular husband and wife variables on out- Earlier studies of family decision mak-

comes. It is in the nature of the statistical ing show that the more children there are

procedures used that entry of one specific in the family, the less the decision-making

husband or wife variable may reduce the power of the woman (Blood and Wolfe,

statistical effect of subsequent variables so 1960; Heer, 1963) when considered over

that in two-sex models, different variables all decision-making domains. We ex-

may enter than entered in single-sex amined whether this holds for fertility de-

models.

cisions specifically by looking at the whites

separately by parity. (There are too few

RESULTS

blacks to obtain stable models by parity.) These data appear in Table 3. At Parity 0,

OVERALL MODELS

the model predicting pregnancy shows the

Table I1 shows the overall results for whites, and Table 2 shows the overall results for blacks. For both blacks and whites, the prediction of TRYOREV is distinctly superior to the prediction of pregnancy. We show results using each dependent variable, but for brevity and simplicity offer interpretations of the

male model slightly better than the female model, with the female model completely redundant to the male. But the model predicting TRYOREV shows the female model stronger, and the male model mostly redundant. At Parity 1, the TRYOREV results fit the Wife Pattern, with husband a junior partner, and no redundancy. At Parity 2 and over, male and fe-

1 An extensive search of the statistical literature male models are about equal, and there is

and consultation with a number of statisticians have moderate redundancy, suggesting a

failed to identify a legitimate and straightforward method for testing the differences in R2's (or multiple

Partnership Pattern.

R's) between models. Thepractice of using a Z trans-

The parity-specific models are some-

formation to compare multiple R's is not valid. Furthermore, there are no tests for the differences between two Fs; indeed, such a test is not statisti-

what better than the all-parity model, indicating that for the purposes examined

cally possible.

here, there is some utility in examining the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 4

Costs andBenefits of Childbearing

TABLE 1
PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R2) BY ONE-SEX AND TWO-SEX MODELS, FOR WHITE COUPLES
(AT=280)

271

DEPENDENT VARIABLES
PREGNANCY . . TRYOREV

FEMALE MODEL

7 No.of Var.

10* 8 16* 15

4 4

MALE MODEL

Adj. No. of R2 R2 Var.

6* 5 12* 10

3 4

TWO-SEX MODEL

Adj. No. of R2 R Var.

12* 10 20* 18

6 7

'Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

results byparity (butseeFried et al., 1980 works there is less differentiation of sex

for conflicting results). The TRYOREV roles with respect to childrearing than

results for different parities areas a group among couples inwhich the wife isnot em-

not out of line with the all-parity model ployed. One would therefore assume that

and can be characterized without too childrearing was more thepreserve of the

much violence as Wife Patterns with hus- nonemployed woman. Under these cir-

band as junior partner and moderate re- cumstances, one would predict that

dundancy.

among couples in which the woman does

Why do we find white wives generally not work outside the home, wives would

more influential? Isit simply because they have more impact and husbands less on

must bear thechild? Ordoes it have to do fertility decisions than among couples in

more with the subsequent changes in her which the wife is employed. A review of

life being more dramatic than those in the the literature on family decision making

husband's life? We can examine this shows contradictory findings, depending

further by making a few simple assump- on the research techniques used (Udry,

tions.

1974, pp. 268-269). Table 4presents anal-

WIFE'S EMPLOYMENT STATUS

ysis for employed-wife and nonemployedwife couples separately. This table shows

Assume that in couples where the wife that nonemployed wives dominate the fer-

TABLE 2
PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R2) BY ONE-SEX AND TWO-SEX MODELS, FOR BLACK COUPLES

DEPENDENT VARIABLES
PREGNANCY . . TRYOREV

FEMALE MODEL

Adi. No. of
R2 R Var.

T5 11* 8

2 2

·Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

MALE MODEL

7 No. of
R2 Var.

9* 6 27* 25

2 2

TWO-SEX MODEL

Adj. No.of
R2 R1 Var.

15* 10 41* 34

4 7

272

Fried and Udry

Social Biology

TABLE3
PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R2) BY ONE-SEX AND TWO-SEX MODELS, BY PARITY, FORWHITE COUPLES

FEMALE MODEL

DEPENDENT VARIABLES

Adj.

No. of

R2 R Var.

Parity 0 ( N=58) PREGNANCY TRYOREv
Parity 1(N=96) PREGNANCY TRYOREv
Parity 2 + (A/=126) PREGNANCY TRYOREV

27* 31*
14* 17*
16* 17*

23 25
10 12
15 16

3 4
4 5
2 2

'Significant at0.05 level orbeyond.

MALE MODEL

Adj.

No. of

R2 R Var.

35* 20*
4 8*
12* 15*

30 16
3 6
10 13

4 3
1 1
3 4

TWO-SEX MODEL

Adj.

No. of

R2 R Var.

35* 38*
16* 25*
23* 23*

32 31
12 19
20 21

3 6
4 7
4 4

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

tility decision process more than em- with respect to fertility is child care. We

ployed wives. The model for nonem- might suppose that themore the husband

ployed wife couples isapure Wife Model, participates in child care, the more

while for employed wife couples it is a influential hewill beindetermining subse-

Partnership Model with partial redun- quent reproductive events. Ameasure of

dancy.

division of labor with respect to child

TI ,,

,,,,

rearing is available in ourdata set. We

HUSBAND PARTICIPATION IN CHILD CARE

. ,, ,

.,

,,

,

asked fathers inthestudy about how many

A keydomain in producing differential hours per week they spent with the

utility structures for husband and wife children. Onemight assume that themore

TABLE 4 PER CENT OF VARIANCE IN REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R2) BY ONE-SEX AND TWO-SEX MODELS, BYWIFE'S EMPLOYMENT STATUS, FOR WHITE COUPLES

FEMALE MODEL

DEPENDENT VARIABLES

FT

No. of Var.

Wife employed (N= 146)

PREGNANCY

6*

TRYOREV . . . 1 6 *

Wife not employed (/V= 134)

PREGNANCY

12*

TRYOREV .

20*

4 14
10 18

2 4
3 4

·Significant at0.05 level or beyond.

MALE MODEL
Adj. No. of «2 R2 Var.

10* 9 14* 12
43 9* 6

2 4
2 3

TWO-SEX MODEL
Adj. No. of R2 R Var.

10* 9 21* 18
14* 12 21* 18

2 6
4 5

Vol. 26, No. 4

Costs and Benefits of Childbearing

TABLE 5 PER CENT OFVARIANCE INREPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR EXPLAINED (R2) BY
ONE-SEX AND TWO-SEX MODELS, BY HUSBAND'S INVOLVEMENT IN CHILD CARE, FORWHITE COUPLES

273

FEMALE MODEL

MALE MODEL

DEPENDENT VARIABLES

Adj. No. of R2 Var.

Adj. R2 R2

Husband spends <25 hours per week with children (A'= 101)

PREGNANCY . . . .

18*

15

3

16*

14

TRYOREV

20*

18

3

24*

21

Husband spends >26 hours per week with children (N=111)

PREGNANCY

13* 10

4

3

TRYOREV

14* 11

3

3

2 2

No. of Var.
2 4
1 1

'Significant at 0.05 level or beyond.

TWO-SEX MODEL
Adj. No. of R2 Var.

28* 24 29* 26
19* 14 20* 15

5 5
7 6

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

time the husband spends with the shown) indicates that dichotomizing on

children, the less the division oflabor, and family income does not produce results

therefore, themore hisinfluence relative which are different from the results for the

to that of the wife. But Table 5 shows it total sample.

doesn't work outthat way. Forhusbands

who spend more than 26hours perweek with the children, the male model doesnot

CONCLUSIONS

reach significance, but for husbands who While there is some diversity in the re-

spend less time than that, the male model sults, the conclusions from our analysis

vies with the female model for equal may bestated relatively simply. For white

influence. On the other hand, the two-sex couples in our sample, the relative

model represents about a 50 percentim- influence ofwife and husband utility struc-

provement over the best single-sex model tures on reproductive events fits a Wife

for both categories of time spent with Pattern with husband as junior partner,

children. Overall, husband's time spent and partial redundancy of the single-sex

with children does not affect relative models. Models constructed byparityare

influence of husband and wife on fertility an improvement over all-parity modelsin

outcomes inthe predicted way.

predictive power, butgenerally are of the

FAMILY INCOME

same type. Two-sex models generally predict more variance than female-only

It may be hypothesized that family in- models. However, among couples in

come affects the division of labor in the which thewife is notemployed, thedata

family. Numerous studies show that in show a Wife Pattern. Household income

high status families, the husband domi- and husband's time with the children do

nates the decision making more than in not differentiate distinctive models.

low status families (Blood and Wolfe, This study gives ussome insight to the

1960). We therefore examined our models way inwhich utility structures of husband

when the sample was dichotomized for and wife act jointly to determine repro-

family income. The data analysis (not ductive outcomes. First, there islittle em-

274

Fried and Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

pirical evidence forthe existence ofhouse- two-sex models? While our previous re-

hold headship in Becker's sense. Neither search indicates that the two-sex models

wives nor husbands subsume the utility are only a marginal improvement when

structure of the other in their own. How- predicting reproductive intentions, the re-

ever, the partial redundancy of male and sults of this analysis indicate clearly for

female models suggests that love may be a blacks, and with more ambiguity for

force to be reckoned with. The skeptical whites, that having the husbands' input in

reader will prefer to explain redundancy predicting reproductive events is worth

as a consequence of those domains in the cost. Because male models are some-

which husband and wife outcomes are the times surprisingly strong, researchers who

same (for example, concern with costs) do not have husband data cannot be sure

because they are not affected by role that they have not left out half of what

differentiation.

they need to know.

The black results are something else

again. TheTRYOREV results for blacks

are strongly Husband Pattern, with wife as junior partner, with noredundancy. It is a

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

pity that we do not have enough blacks in the sample to explicate this finding. This we save for further research.
From a practical point of view, is it worth interviewing husbands in order to gain the additional predictive power of

This is arevision ofa paper presented atthe 1979 annual meeting of the Population Association of America. The research on which it is based wassupported by funds from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (#N01-HD-42804). Thanks are due Jov Wood fordata analysis.

REFERENCES

ARNOLD, F., and J. T. FAWCETT. 1975. The value

Bell and E. F. Vogel (eds.), A modern intro-

of children: A cross-national study. Vol. 3. duction to the family. Free Press of Glencoe,

East-West Population Institute, Honolulu.

Glencoe, Ill.

BECKER, G. S. 1960.An economic analysis offer- HOFFERTH, S. L., and J. R. UDRY. 1976. The con-

tility, p. 209-240. In National Bureau of tribution of marital outcomes to explaining

Economic Research (ed.), Demographic and the reproductive behavior of couples. Paper

economic change in developed countries, presented at the meeting of the American So-

Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.

ciological Association.

_____. 1974. A theory of social interactions. J. HOFFMANN, L. W., and M. L. HOFFMAN. 1973.

Polit. Econ. 82: 1063-1093.

The value of children toparents, p. 19-76. In

BLOOD, R. O., JR., and D. M. WOLFE. 1960. Hus-

J. T. Fawcett (ed.), Psychological perspec-

bands and wives. Free Press of Glencoe, Glen- tives on population. Basic Books, New York.

coe, Ill.

NAMBOODIRI, N. K. 1972. Some observations on

BUMPASS, L. L., and C. F. WESTOFF. 1970. The la-

the economic framework forfertility analysis.

ter years of childbearing. Princeton Univ. Pop. Stud. 26: 185-206.

Press, Princeton.

NEAL, A. G., and H. T. GROAT. 1977. Alienation

DAVIDSON, A. R., and J. J. JACCARD. 1979. Varia-

and fertility in the marital dyad. Soc. Forc. 56:

bles that moderate the attitude-behavior rela- 77-85.

tion: Results of a longitudinal survey. J. Per- ORDEN, S. R., and N. BRADBURN. 1968. Dimen-

sonal. Soc. Psychol. 37: 1364-1376.

sion of marriage happiness. Amer. J. Sociol.

FRIED, E. S., S. L. HOFFERTH, and J. R. UDRY.

73:715-731.

1980. Parity specific and two-sex utility TERHUNE, K. W. 1974. Explorations in fertility

models of reproductive intentions. Demo- values. Calspan Corp., Buffalo.

graphy 17: 1-12.

TOWNES, B. D., F. L. CAMPBELL, L. R. BEACH,

HEER, DAVID M. 1963. The measurement and

and D. C. MARTIN. 1977. Birth planning va-

bases of family power: An overview. Marr. lues and decisions: The prediction of fertility.

Fam. Liv. 25: 133-139.

J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 7: 74-88.

HERBST, P. G. 1960. Task differentiation of hus- UDRY, J .R. 1974.The social context ofmarriage.

band andwife in family activities. In N. W. 3rd ed. Lippincott, Philadelphia.

