Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
Kenneth A. Bennett
To cite this article: Kenneth A. Bennett (1975) Book notes, Social Biology, 22:4, 379-381, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988195 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988195
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

FAMINE AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT. T H E
DUTCH HUNGER WINTER OF 1944/45:
By Zena Stein, Mervyn Susser, Gerhard Saenger, and Francis Marolla. Oxford University Press, New York, 1975. 284 pp. $12.95 (hardbound).

and six from Volume 4 (Genética! Variation in Human Populations). Each reprint is preceded by a short paragraph that provides a summary and critical references of work done in the area since its initial publication.

Written by three epidemiologists, this technical report analyzes the long-term consequences of acute undernutrition among Dutch children as a result of German occupation of the Netherlands during World War II. The book is unique, because individuals in an entire population rather than a sample were followed from birth to adulthood. Among the topics considered are the effects of famine on fertility, intrauterine development, deaths between birth and adulthood, mental performance, body size, and general health. This book should be a valuable source for both epidemiologists and demographers.
HUMAN VARIATION AND NATURAL SELEC-
TION: Edited by D. F. Roberts. Halstad Press, New York, 1975. 209 pp. $14.50 (hardbound).
This is Volume 13 of the Symposia of the Society for the Study of Human Biology, and it contains fourteen reprints of articles published in earlier Symposia volumes now out of print. Included are two articles from Volume 1 (The Scope of Physical Anthropology and its Place in Academic Studies), six from Volume 2 (Natural Selection in Human Populations),

T H E RACE CONCEPT: By Michael Banton and Jonathan Harwood. David and Charles, Newton Abbot, 1975. 160 pp. $9.18 (hardbound).
The first two chapters in this short book offer a succinct history of the biological concept of race. They are followed by four chapters discussing not only the misconceptions and controversies associated with the concept, but also how they developed and their effects in modern society. These aspects are examined from anthropological, sociological, psychological, and behavioral viewpoints. The book is quite informal and should be appropriate for anthropology or sociology courses at the advanced highschool and college freshman levels.
GENETIC STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION: By
P. F. Smith-Keary. Halstad Press, New York, 1975.368 pp. $11.95 (hardbound).
Smith-Keary assumes previous fundamental training in biochemistry, molecular biology, and genetic principles in this introduction to biochemical genetics. By his choice, classical Mendelian genetics is treated very briefly and population genetics

379

380

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

is not discussed at all. Instead, emphasis is placed upon the function, organization, and fine structure of genetic material. Included among the many topics are genetic analysis in various organisms, analysis of genetic fine structure, recombination, mutation, protein structure and synthesis, transcription and translation, regulation of gene activity in procaryotes, and genetic organization and function in eucaryotes.
HUMAN POPULATION GENETICS IN INDIA:
Edited by L. D. Sanghvi, V. Balakrishnan, H. M. Bhatia, P. K. Sukumaran, and J. V. Undevia. Orient Longman Ltd., New Delhi, 1974. 288 pp. $22.50 (hardbound).
The twenty-eight articles in this volume, the Proceedings of the First Conference of the Indian Society of Human Genetics, are written by Indian scientists about Indian populations. The book contains three divisions. The first, "Genetic Marker Studies," contains fourteen papers that deal mainly with distributional studies of blood group antigens, red-cell enzymes, and some serum proteins. Five papers are included in the second section, "Analytical and Theoretical Studies." The third part, "Dermatoglyphics and Other Studies," contains nine articles. Among these reports are reviews of GM and INV immunoglobulin allotypes, red cell enzyme polymorphisms, population genetic models, computer applications, and the genetics of hand-clasping.
T H E LIFE AND CONTRIBUTIONS OF WALTER
BRADFORD CANNON, 1871-1945: Edited by Chandler McC. Brooks, Kiyomi Koizumi, and James 0 . Pinkston. State University of New York Press, Albany, 1975. 264 pp. $20.00 (hardbound).
The articles in this book resulted from a May 1972 symposium held in honor of Walter B. Cannon, one of America's foremost physiologists. Contributors to the vol-

ume include his past students and colleagues in addition to contemporary scientists with interests paralleling those of Cannon. The first part of the book is devoted to his influential contributions to gasteroenterology, roentgenology, neurology, and the study of homeostasis. Although historical, these papers are couched in the context of modern knowledge in these areas. The latter portion of the book is essentially biographical, including personal reminiscences by those who knew him well. In sum, the book is a pleasantly blended tribute to Cannon as a scientist and a person.
T H E PEOPLE OF AFRICA: By Jean Hiernaux. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1975. 217 pp. $12.50 (hardbound); $4.95 (paperbound).
Hiernaux's book is the third in the Peoples of the World Series and is written in the informal but documentary style characteristic of others in the series. It is a welcome addition to the literature on modern human population biology. Hiernaux makes no attempt to classify African populations into various races, but instead discusses population diversity in terms of the integrated effects of ecology, biology, and culture. The book begins with a survey of the earliest known African hominids and concludes with genetic, morphological, linguistic, and historical data on modern African groups. These groups include the Khoisan peoples, the Pygmies and Pygmoids, the Nilotes, and populations in the Western Sudan and in the Guinea rain forest.
POPULATION. Third Edition: By William Petersen. Macmillan Publishing Co., New York, 1975. 784 pp. $13.95 (hardbound).
Petersen maintains that his book is intended primarily for undergraduate sociology courses, but it is equally appropriate

Vol. 22, No. 4

Book Notes

381

as an introduction to population analysis for undergraduate anthropology students. It is not a formal textbook on demography and does not require the mathematical skills necessary for such a text. Rather, Petersen outlines in general terms the determinants of population processes, including age and sex structure, Malthusian theory, fertility, mortality and morbidity, and migration. These processes are then discussed as they operate in primitive, preindustrial, and technologically advanced societies.

recommended for the layman interested in living systems. Although the subject matter ranges from behavior to ecology, to the biology of cells and humans, to evolution, the dust-cover statement that this work is "comparatively short on lists of facts, and long on discussions of ideas and concepts that illuminate the facts and give them meaning" is very appropriate. The book is illustrated both profusely and artistically, and the writing style is more reminiscent of that of a naturalist than a molecular biochemist.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

AN INTRODUCTION TO PERSONALITY. RE-
SEARCH, THEORY, AND APPLICATIONS:
By Donn Byrne. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1974. 591 pp. $11.95 (hardbound).
This second edition of Byrne's comprehensive textbook on personality theory and research differs quite clearly from the first edition. Particularly noteworthy is a change in conceptual approach from analysis of individual differences to an emphasis on certain aspects of social psychology. This change has led to the incorporation of completely new chapters comprising roughly one-third of this edition. These subjects involve interpersonal attraction, aggressive behavior, sexual behavior, and altruistic behavior. In addition, the material in other chapters on individual differences, authoritarianism, need for achievement, manifest anxiety, intelligence, and self-concept have been updated and revised in accordance with recent psychological research.

SCIENCE AND ANTI-SCIENCE: By Morris Goran. Ann Arbor Sciehce, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1974. 128 pp. $10.00 (hardbound).
Goran deals with the conflicts, myths, and misunderstandings surrounding science and scientists. The book details many aspects of the anti-science movement as well as agencies harassing science and scientists. It does not, however, neglect the struggles within the scientific enterprise itself. Goran presents a perspective of science by presenting false myths currently in circulation, and by discussing certain characteristics of science that are not well known. Many examples are used in this objective view of the scientist as a professional and a human being.
GENE-ENZYME SYSTEMS IN DROSOPHILA:
By W. J. Dickinson and D. T. Sullivan. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1975. 163 pp. $25.00 (hardbound).

LIFE ON THE PLANET EARTH: By Harold
J. Morowitz and Lucille S. Morowitz. W. W. Norton and Company, New York, 1974. 379 pp. $8.95 (hardbound).
This book is intended as a general introduction to biology for either high-school students or college freshmen majoring in nonbiological subjects, but it can also be

This book summarizes much of the biochemical, genetic, and developmental work on enzymes in Drosophila. It documents the utility of gene-enzyme systems as investigative tools for examination of a number of problems, particularly those about the organization and regulation of the eukaryotic genome.
KENNETH A. BENNETT

