Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Discussion: Man's evolutionary past session i
F. Clark Howell
To cite this article: F. Clark Howell (1972) Discussion: Man's evolutionary past session i, Social Biology, 19:2, 128-135, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987978 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987978
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

Discussion: Man's Evolutionary Past Session I
F. Clark Howell
Department of Anthropology University of California Berkeley, California

J
¡ääa "*%. imm
{88 j

J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

I was scheduled as a discussant following this morning's session. Now, it is instead the end of a long day.1 So it is necessary to be brief. I will seek only to accent, to supplement, and to explicate some points raised in papers presented this morning. Some perspective is necessary if recent developments in the study of early hominids, their behavior, and their world are to be appreciated.
The stress that Charles Darwin placed a hundred years ago on bipedality and on tool-use, as both cause and effect in the adaptive shift from an ape-like to a manlike condition, has become dogma. It is a view to which one must ultimately pay homage. When that situation presents itself, it is usually wise to reexamine some basic premises. This is especially true when models are based on the evident contrasts between living species, but when there still is little historical documentation to afford a temporal evolutionary perspective.
It is necessary to stress that the matter of hominid origins is still largely a subject of speculation. Speculation is fun, and the
1 The discussant's commentary on the morning's papers was presented at the end of the afternoon session, rather than at the end of the morning's papers which were concerned with recent advances in the study of human origins.

formulation of hypotheses is challenging. However, hypotheses must be evaluated and tested in the light of empirical data, old and new, and revised or discarded accordingly. Evidently, there is a critical need for further empirical data.
In this connection it is worth considering how concepts of the origins of Hominoidea, and in particular of the divergence of Pongidae and Hominidae, have changed. Not long ago there prevailed much uncertainty and widely different concepts were held. To some, it may seem that great differences still exist in points of view. However, I would argue that much greater differences existed between the standpoints of colleagues forty and twenty years ago, and even as recently as a decade ago. It is a fact, not merely a hope, that important advances are being made toward reducing the wide range of disagreement which has prevailed until only recently.
Dr. Pilbeam suggests that the Hominidae were differentiated about fifteen to twenty million years ago. Not long ago some knowledgeable students of the subject would have doubled the former figure. My colleague Dr. Washburn suggests that the figure is more likely between four to five and ten million years. Scarcely any stu-

128

Vol. 19, No. 2

Discussion: Session I

129

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

dents of this problem would accept a four to five million year figure; and only a very few would seriously support a figure of twenty million years. So the differences even between current estimates are being narrowed. The persistence of speculation suggests that the level of uncertainty is still too high. Additional facts are sorely needed, along with improved bases and techniques to better interpret these data. My own thoughts are of course speculative (maybe more so than the views of some colleagues, who feel they already know the answer) and derive from evaluations of many different lines of evidence, rather than unduly stressing any one. In my view, the origins of Homtnidae lie demonstrably prior to five to six million years ago, while they are not demonstrably prior to fifteen million years ago. So a reasonable estimate would be ~ 10 ± 4 million years. This affords paleontological researchers, who ultimately must afford fossil documentation of the phylogeny of the higher primates, a substantial time range in which to concentrate their efforts. It is a range of geologic time which is more often than not ill-known in Africa, as well as in most of Asia, and even in some parts of Europe.
It may seem commonplace to measure these evolutionary events and phylogenetic relationships in terms of years. However, it is a recent development to do so on the basis of reliable systems of calibration which afford ages derived from isotopic radiometry (as opposed to "ages" derived from speculation). The customary procedures for referring to such past events require the terminologies of rock-stratigraphic units, of time-stratigraphic units, of units of geologic time, of biostratigraphic units (of several kinds), and so on. These terminologies, and their referents, have specific usages and significations and are to be employed only in prescribed ways (as set out in the Code of Stratigraphie Nomen-

clature). Unfortunately, many students of hominid evolution appear to be unfamiliar with the requisite aspects of historical geology, and as a consequence there is much in the way of confusion and misconception in the literature. These terminological and semantic difficulties continue to present formidable hurdles to mutual understanding, and particularly so to individuals with very different backgrounds and academic training.
All students of vertebrate evolution have been forcibly impressed by the relevance of the increasing quantities of biomolecular data for longstanding phylogenetic problems. However, with some notable exceptions, there unfortunately has been an overall tendency toward polarization of viewpoints. This has been both unnecessary and premature. The results of biomolecular studies afford another set of useful and very informative data. With respect to the order Primates at least, that data thus far confirm at almost all levels generally accepted (i.e., traditional) concepts of phylogenetic affinities. As Prof. Washburn has said, "it reinforces the way in which we need to look at primates." However, it also sometimes affords unusual and frankly conflicting results in the case of the proteins of certain species. These are particular problems which will require particular solutions. Biochemists will have to resolve them. For these and other reasons it is unwise either to promote or to accept the concept of a "protein clock." Biochemists have afforded us additional and powerful means of assessing degrees of affinity. However, the translation of degrees of affinity into units of time is quite another problem. Thus far it has not been done successfully.
It is worth remarking here on concepts of protohominids, and more particularly of Ramapithecus. Dr. Pilbeam, one notes, has come to bet on his scientific hunches, as Dr. Washburn has long sug-

130

Howell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

gested one ought to do. Pilbeam thinks there is a 75% chance that the genus Rantapithecus is the most ancestral hominid.2 I think that most students of the evolution of the higher primates, those who are personally familiar with the original material (the primary data), now would support this position. However, one wants to see that probability figure raised, and one major way to do so is to seek actively to recover additional specimens.
Much of what is currently thought about hominid genesis and the fundamental adaptations of Hominidae is still mostly derived from inference and speculation. There is a remarkable dearth of positive evidence upon which conclusions might be more solidly based. This is certainly true with respect to locomotor adaptations. Dr. Washburn has previously suggested, in part following an idea of Sir Arthur Keith, that protohominids must have been knucklewalkers. That opinion has been vigorously opposed by others, notably Dr. Russell Tuttle. Now Dr. Pilbeam says he feels quite certain that Rantapithecus, as representative of a protohominid or an earliest hominid stage, was either a knuckle-walker or a hanger-swinger. These concepts stand in contrast to that of an erect biped. However, as the evolution of bipedalism is still largely unknown, our concept of bipedality is certainly incomplete. Actually, pitifully little is known, beyond a distal humérus from Fort Ternan (Kenya), which is potentially informative about the locomotor capabilities of such a hominoid.
The dietary adjustments of protohominids have also come under renewed scrutiny. The seed-eating hypothesis, ingeniously applied to protohominids by Clifford Jolly, has provoked discussion and renewed
2 On the other hand, we have Washburn's word on the seemingly inverse relationship between the state of preservation and completeness of fossil specimens and the interpretation and significance attributed to them.

interest in this important question. In contrast with Dr. Pilbeam, and in agreement with Prof. Washburn, I remain skeptical of the seed-eating model as a basis for the earliest hominid adaptation and radiation. This does not, however, exclude "small, tough vegetable objects" as significant elements in a protohominid diet. Probably most important is the effect of this and other ideas upon orthodox (i.e., traditional) views of meat-eating as the dietary base of the earliest hominid adaptation. This concept has also become dogma and is most often presented as fact to students and lay audiences, rather than as an hypothesis to be tested.
One of the most important implications of Dr. Pilbeam's paper is that we must reconsider, I believe at every level, our ideas (and preconceptions) concerning the origins of Hominidae. How different this discussion would have been with Franz Weidenreich some twenty-five years ago, or even a few years past with the recently deceased Sir Wilfrid Le Gros Clark! The subjects discussed and the approaches to them have altered remarkably. There have been, as Dr. Washburn indicated, very rapid changes, and these changes have involved new data, new techniques, and new conceptual frameworks.
In the past decade, major breakthroughs have been effected in the understanding of the Pliocene/Pleistocene time range, particularly in eastern Africa. These advances have resulted from intensive interdisciplinary studies, in the field and in the laboratory of a number of sites of fossiliferous sediments in or adjacent to the Rift Valley System. These studies have been characterized by a return to the straightforward and rigorous procedures of stratigraphie geology in the field--associated with extensive mapping and measuring of sections-- and they have taken advantage of ongoing developments in isotopic dating, in the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

Discussion: Session I

131

establishment ofa paleomagnetic time scale, as well as in studies of plate tectonics and the history of sedimentation in the earth's ocean basins. Asa consequence, wehavean increasingly detailed appreciation of the ages, relative andabsolute, andof theassociations and contexts of early Hominidae.
The three charts presented here show better than any extended discussion the major changes effected during the past two decades. The first (Figure 1), prepared by

pared by H. B. S. Cooke and published a decade later, was a schematic correlation of rock-stratigraphic units on the basis of biostratigraphic criteria. This publication, and two papers onpaleoclimates andon the bases of correlation in eastern Africa published about thesame time by Prof. R. F. Flint, largely sounded the death knell for an assumed paleoclimatic succession insubSaharan Africa. The third (Figure 3), prepared by the speaker on another occasion

CLIMATIC CHANGES IN EAST AFRICA
'od Po»l- PI uviol

TYPICAL SITES FOR
EVIDENCE

EAST AFRICAN CULTURE SEQUENCE
-MESOLI TH I C ·

ZEUNER'S THE CLIMATIC CLASSICAL STAGES IN ALPINE EUROPE SUCCESSION

EUROPEAN CULTURE SEQUENCE ACCORDING TO ZEUNER

·NEOLITHIC-

Dtiqhront Cliff ttc.

Cap* I ortC
Upptr K.nyo Caption 6

Stiilboy St. 11bay

Mainly o i today but with |qw» hollín, putwlut niHwml.

ICI. Ill i.ai. n

M«ad*l«nton Uppar Auriçnoclon

miti*l («cryvher« bet »«an foragoinç
and lor.rbtdi.
Bid ot Olorgtta,!.* Olduvai lowar port

Fauna v t r y score« Th< majority of I ha *p«cii» of in* «orlitr period brcomt mtinet a* lhay do nor rcoppcor in r u « tanct of dapo»it*.
Sangoón Prata-

irly olloli

Olduvm I f d I ond
Early Oldi Advam

Dtrnofhiriuwi.Archid'»hodl

H.ppppotomu» 92LS5d «
«·balow.bur with Pot Odón opptocinq and i th« torllcr form» tut A n o n u l dying our.

Efil. II 101. I

Abbcvillian

Cli

FIG. 1.--Proposed correlation of Quaternary deposits in eastern Africa, based on inferred climatic changes and on mammalian biostratigraphy, with proposed correlation with the Quaternary succession of Europe (after L. S. B.Leakey, Intern. Geol. Congress, Rept. 18th Session, Great Britain, 1948, Part IX,1950).
L. S. B. Leakey on the occasion of the 18th this year, shows ourcurrent understanding International Geological Congress in Lon- of the temporal relationships of rock-stratidon in 1948, shows a climatic-stratigraphic graphic units yielding early Hominidae in (and, in part, biostratigraphic) scheme for eastern Africa. Thecorrelations are made the post-Tertiary of eastern Africa. Its on thebasis of isotropic age determinations basic was assumed pluvial/interpluvial and biostratigraphic criteria. Overall, these paleoclimates. The second (Figure 2), pre- examples illustrate a trend away from as-

132
OLDUVAI AREA

KENYA RIFT

Howell
HOMA AREA

Social Biology

ALBERT RIFT

0M0 AREA

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

.BEDV-m ;.BED:n

·OLÓRGE·:SAILÏE.d
·.···..-.-·etc.

brown cloys
tilting t i
clays.-.'»--:
Is '·'·lim its tor« : greenish :' :'-V;'tütt».v:

SEMLIKI .'V-BEDS'.;: :(&;.EpiT·.Kai»o);.'.:

|(F¡sh.;B'edsÍ
·:L¿WER
laminated vclqys'-.«.'.Isiltttones

OMO BEDS

.'.clàys-.-:-.
·'; á's h- ;'« '.··;
:-.tuff : ;.'.'·

··'··· vi^-'V-:.'.KAISO :'·

··'·V;'';':'.'-.'.'

(fossil-''. ·-.be'dring)

·':-'-'-'.v'.vV
0^
FIG. 2.--Possible correlation of Quaternary fossil and artifactual deposits in eastern Africa; the vertical scale based on stratal thickness (after H. B. S. Cooke, Geol. Soc. o) So. Africa, Annex to Vol. 60, 1958).

Vol. 19, No. 2

Discussion'. Session I

Ag. my 0-r

SERENGETI Piran)

OMO BASIN EAST RUDOLF

(E*»t*i»)

(Kenyi)

TURKANA DISTRICT (Kwiyi)

BARINGO BASIN (Kanva)

133
KAVIRONDO GULF (Ktnyi)

2- · 3- -
5- ·

| «.NATO, | Q

¡(M)
0©

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

7- -

8-1-
FIG. 3.--Scheme of temporal relationships of Pliocene/Pleistocene fossiliferous localities yielding Hominidae in eastern Africa (after F. C. Howell, in Calibration of Hominoid Evolution, Scottish Academic Press, 1972).

sumption and inference to empiricism and demonstration through established scientific procedures.
The nature of these developments, with particular reference to the significance of work at particular localities, can be briefly outlined. In my opinion, they also delineate the direction of future interdisciplinary studies aimed toward an elucidation of the nature of early hominids and their world.
(a) Overall there has been a real advance in recent years in our knowledge of the distribution, structure, and history of the Rift Valley System of Africa. This has been accelerated by geophysical investigations of the earth's crust and upper mantle, and of course as a consequence of the intensified and expanding study of plate tectonics. As all the more important fossil localities of Neogene and most fossil localities of Quaternary age in eastern Africa are related, directly or nearly so, to this system,

its fuller comprehension is critical to many research areas.
(b) Over the past decade a number of major intensive research efforts have been focused on areas adjacent to the Eastern Rift Valley of Tanzania, Kenya, and Ethiopia. They have included: the Serengeti plains, as exposed at Olduvai Gorge and Laetolil (Tanzania); the Baringo area of the central Kenya rift; and several areas adjacent to the Rudolf Basin (Kenya and Ethiopia).
Olduvai was the first situation to afford a (still unique) stratified succession, radiometrically dated and related through volcanics and other sediments to the paleomagnetic time scale. It has yielded evidences of hominids, of multiple coexistent hominid taxa, and impressive evidences of hominid occupations and of culturally patterned behavior in an earlier Pleistocene time range, all quite unknown previously.

134

Howell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

In the later 1960's, a diversity of interdisciplinary studies were initiated in the lower Omo Basin of southern Ethiopia by participants of the Omo Research Expedition. The initial aim of the work was to document the pre-Olduvia time range, considered to be present in the Omo on the basis of vertebrate paleontological criteria. A long and continuous stratigraphie succession was established, its time span (from ~ 4.S m.y. to ~ 1.5 m.y.), and its subdivisions were soon extensively dated radiometrically (and are now being studied for its paleomagnetic aspects), and its several paleoenvironmental settings were established. An important invertebrate biostratigraphy has also emerged, one which is of importance for ascertaining post-hydrographic relationships with other parts of Africa, as well as local conditions of sedimentation and their change through time. The first palynological spectra from the Pliocene/Pleistocene of Africa are now also being elucidated in this succession. The richness of these sediments in remains of fossil vertebrates, including fish, amphibians, and reptiles and over a hundred species of mammals (identified so far), has afforded a unique, well-dated vertebrate biostratigraphy for a time range encompassing about three million years. Remains of hominids have been recovered from some 70 occurrences over the 3 to 1.5 million year time range, casting important light on the nature of coexistent hominid taxa, their affinities, frequencies, associations, and paleoenvironmental contexts. Evidence for culturally-patterned hominid behavior has been obtained in the 2 to 1.9 million year time range, also antedating the Olduvai sequence.
After the first major field season of the Omo Research Expedition, Richard Leakey initiated reconnaissance in the vast, previously almost unexplored area to the east of Lake Rudolf, in Kenya. Extensive fossilif-

erous deposits, a thousand times the extent of those at Olduvai and a hundred times the extent of those in the Omo, have since been found to occur there. As you have heard, splendidly preserved vertebrate fossils have been recovered in quantities, as well as hominid skeletal remains in unprecedented numbers, and often in unexpectedly well-preserved condition. To date, almost all derive from fluviatile and perilacustrine sediments which unconformably overlie a tuff reliably dated at ~ 2.6 million years. Comparative biostratigraphy indicates that the Ileret and the middle and upper Koobi Fora sequences fall within the ~ 2 to 1 million year time range. Hence, they are broadly contemporaneous with hominids, now some 35 in number, from Beds I and II of Olduvai Gorge, and with those from the younger part of the Omo succession. Older sediments outcrop in East Rudolf, and it is probably only a question of time before they too afford important remains of early Hominidae. Those at about 2.5 to 2.6 million years have already offered new evidence critical to the appreciation of the cultural capabilities of early Hominidae.
These discoveries in East Rudolf rank among the most important ever made in the history of human paleontology and are of immense importance for a fuller understanding of Hominidae during the earlier Pleistocene. There are repeated occurrences, in the same stratigraphie unit, of (at least) two demonstrably different hominid taxa. The most common is an Australopithecine comparable in morphology to that represented in abundance at Swartkrans (Transvaal, South Africa) and which is present also in Olduvai Beds I and II. In East Rudolf, it is represented by important, often quite complete, and morphologically distinctive postcranial parts, numbers of partial and ever more complete jaws, and several crania. From this material (robust)

Vol. 19, No. 2

Discussion: Session I

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Australopithecine variability, sexual dimorphism, and the distinctive pattern of dental, cranial and postcranial structure can be much more fully determined and critically evaluated.
Moreover, important hominid jaw parts, with dentition, and postcranial remains have been recovered from those same series of levels, and these manifestly represent another hominid taxon. All those skeletal parts known thus far differ from (robust) Australopithecine structure and are more like the structure of genus Homo. For most students of human paleontology, the contemporaneous coexistence in the earlier Pleistocene of multiple hominid taxa had been well-established previously (particularly at Olduvai Gorge, and at the cavefilling of Swartkrans in southern Africa). However, a few have continued to be skeptical. The hominid discoveries from East Rudolf have now established this conclusion repeatedly, and on the basis of excellent fossil remains. They have also documented the relatively late occurrence-- into the "middle Pleistocene" in conventional terms--of a (robust) Australopithecine, perhaps extinct only by about a million years ago, or so.
These studies of the past decade and a half in eastern Africa have clearly demonstrated the extensive results of persistent, intensive, and interdisciplinary researches pursued along the Rift Valley system. Such studies need to be continued in the very rewarding situations already known, and in other areas still only known for reconnaissance or from geological mapping activities, as well as in geologically favorable situations still wholly unexplored scientifically. The three to four million year time range is represented by fossil vertebrates in sev-

eral localities, but hominids, their skeletal parts and artifacts, are still unknown. However, the greater Rudolf basin (at Kanapoi) and the west Baringo area (at Chemeron) have demonstrated that hominids are to be expected in the four million year time range. Fortunately, both the lower Omo and the Kubi Algi area of East Rudolf have known fossiliferous exposures of this age. It is now very likely also that the middle and lower reaches of the Awash Valley, in eastern Ethiopia, will also afford valuable information from this, as well as rather younger ranges of time. And the provocative discovery of a hominid mandible fragment from the important mammal fauna locality of Lothagam, again in the southern extent of the greater Rudolf Basin, indicates that the five to six million year time span will ultimately afford us some surprises relevant to hominid evolution once extensive exposures are found and worked intensively. Some of the most promising areas for fossiliferous exposures of this as well as greater ages, extending back to some twelve million years ago, are known to outcrop along the extensive, illexplored Baringo-South Rudolf sector of the Kenya rift. In the future there is no doubt this area will prove to be critical for field researches directed toward unraveling hominid beginnings.
If we are to understand the origin and evolution of Hominidae, many different lines of research must be encouraged and actively pursued. It is especially important that fieldwork related to the recovery of primary data concerning human origins be encouraged. Without such primary data we will be forced to rely on the speculative and deductive reasoning of Charles Darwin, a century ago.

