Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The founding of the behavior genetics association, 1966­1971
Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne
To cite this article: Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne (1999) The founding of the behavior genetics association, 1966­1971, Social Biology, 46:3-4, 207-218, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1999.9989002 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9989002
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 8
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

The Founding of the Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

-r

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Richard H. Osborne" Barbara T. Osborne"

aEditor, Social Biology, 1961-1977, 1982-1999; Professor Emeritus, University of Wisconsin-Madison bTechnical Editor, Social Biology, 1968-1976; ManagingEditor, 1977-1999
1129 East Eighth Street, PortAngeles, WA 98362

The founding of the Behavior Genetics Association was one of several results of the Princeton Workshop Conferences held during the mid-1960s, sponsored by the American Eugenics Society and funded through Frederick Osborn. The First Princeton Conference (October 1617, 1964) was designed to bring together demographers and population geneticists. Its success led to the Second Princeton Conference (November 18-20, 1965) which was expanded to include anthropologists, animal behaviorists, psychologists and sociologists.
At the Second Princeton Conference in 1965 many exchanges took place on the different interpretations of "units of measurement" and what constituted a "trait." For many psychologists, a "trait" was an entity essentially devoid of variance in either its genetic or environmental components; their "units of measurement" dealt simply with labeled discontinuous entities. The scientists trained in biology and genetics viewed the interpretations of the psychologists as lacking biological validity and too simplistic to be credible in the study of human variation. It became clear why many psychologists were comfortable with Holzinger's formula for heritability estimates while the biologists and geneticists rejected it as innately flawed.
Many contentious exchanges took place, particularly about the scientific validity of psychometrics in measuring IQ scores of individuals and then comparing the variance within an arbitrary "racial" group with the variance within a second

arbitrary "racial" group (as if each group
were one individual) and inferring some
yet-to-be-expained biological causation for any differences found.1
The Third Princeton Conference (Oc-
tober 20-22, 1966) was an extension of
the second conference. Discussions con-
cerning the psychologists' problems with
"variance" and with concepts basic to bi-
ology and genetics were also continued.
Dobzhansky suggested that a Behavioral
Genetics organization including both
general psychologists and animal be-
haviorists like John Fuller, Benson
1The propensity for attempting "racial" measurements of "traits" was deeply rooted within certain circles in psychology from early in the twentieth century, prior to any knowledge of genetics. "Traits," "bloodlines," and "races" were vaguely defined, as were other "inherited characteristics," but nonetheless were measured "scientifically." As late as 1954, it was a Professor of Psychology, Henry Garrett of Columbia University, who testified at length before the Supreme Court about the "biological" inferiority of black people and the need to maintain segregation.
Many psychologists have fought ceaselessly against such racism within their discipline, including many AES and SSSB members. In particular, long-time society member Dr. Jerry Hirsch, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, was the founder in the 1960s of an academic program to expose the roots of racism within psychology and other disciplines. Dr. Hirsch is now on the Advisory Council of the Institute for the Study of Academic Racism founded in 1993 by SSSB member Dr. Barry Mehler.
The ISAR website (www.ferris.edu/isar) has a large respository of articles, bibliographies, and historical data on the inter-weaving of funding and racist research in the last half-century. Of particular interest, when browsing ISAR articles, is the educational background of the authors of articles geared toward proving biological inferiority for certain groups, particularly blacks. While some authors are highly trained in the fields of psychology, sociology, statistics, or economics (areas relying heavily on mathematical processing of data), none has had his primary advanced training in human biology or human genetics.

207

208

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Ginsberg, and John Paul Scott might be the answer. Frederick Osborn offered the necessary financial support. It was agreed that an exploratory questionnaire should be sent out to a fair sampling of scholars who had recently published in that area best defined as behavioral genetics, the purpose being to determine the level of interest in such an organization.
Richard Osborne prepared the questionnaire and also met with European

behavior geneticists in fall 1968 at a conference put together by Johann Huizinga at the Institute of Human Biology, State University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
The following pages reproduce the notices of the formation of the Behavior Genetics Association published in Social Biology and the First Presidential Address, given by Theodosius Dobzhansky in 1973.

Proposed Organization of an Association of Behavior Genetics1

[November 1967-September 1969]

At the 1967 Princeton Conference on Population Genetics and Demography an interested group of participants discussed

I agree with the general basis for organization of an association as outlined in the accompanying communication.

informally the possible organization of an Association of Behavioral Genetics.

Yes 44 No 1 I would consider giving support to an or-

The Consensus: Such an association could ganization stemming from the present or-

benefit the growth of this field if it pro- ganization effort.

moted communication between the various areas of interest at this early stage of its

Yes 44 No 1

development, thereby forestalling a further isolation of the relevant specializations. The aim of the association should be to bring together the active workers in both

Opinion was overwhelmingly in favor of the formation of an organization to represent behavioral genetics. Comments

animal and human behavior (normal and and suggestions most frequently offered by

abnormal) and theorists in anthropology, respondents were: an international mem-

ecology, evolutionary biology, genetics bership, an early dissemination of infor-

and psychology.

mation, and solicitation of support from

To determine the opinion of active workers in different aspects of behavioral genetics a ballot was circulated to 59 persons chosen to represent the various areas of interest. The poll was not an attempt to contact all persons interested in behav-

as large a group of interested persons as possible. A number of persons appended lists of names and addresses to their ballots. Further suggestions of names (including addresses) of persons to be placed on a mailing list may be sent to:

ioral genetics, but merely an attempt to obtain opinions from representatives of different areas of the field.
The results of the ballot are as follows:

Dr. Richard Osborne Box U154 University of Connecticut Storrs, Connecticut 06268

I favor the organization of an Association of Behavioral Genetics
Yes 44 No 1
'Reprinted from Social Biology, 1969, Vol. 16, No. 3, p. 217.

Plans for the initial stage of organization of an Association of Behavioral Genetics will be announced in the December [1969] issue of Social Biology.

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

209

Proposed Organization of an Association of Behavioral Genetics1
[November 8, 1969]

An informal meeting of participants at the 1969 Princeton Conference on Population Genetics, November 8, discussed further action in respect to organization of an Association of Behavior Genetics.
It was decided that a more extensive mailing to persons publishing in the field of behavioral genetics was desirable and that such a mailing should include a bal-
1Reprinted from Social Biology, 1969, Vol. 16, No. 4, p. 293.

lot for election of an Organizing Committee.
Drs. L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, Elving Anderson, and John Loehlin were requested to prepare this second mailing. The results of the ballot will be counted and discussed at an informal meeting of this group attending the AAAS meetings in Boston, December 30. The results of the ballot and further organizing plans will be announced in the March [1970] issue of Social Biology.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

210

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

Social Biology

Proposed Organization of an Association of Behavioral Genetics1
[December 28, 1969]

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

An informal meeting of persons interested in a behavioral genetics association was held in Boston on December 28 [1969] at the time of the annual meetings of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Present were Jack Bresler, Tufts University; Theodosius Dobzhansky, Rockefeller University; Jerry Hirsch, University of Illinois; Richard Osborne, University of Connecticut; Sheldon Reed, University of Minnesota; John Scott, Bowling Green State University; and John Streng, University of Texas.
The results of John Leohlin's fall mailout from the University of Texas to 152 people who had recently published in the field of behavioral genetics was discussed. Of the 82 respondents, only five expressed disinterest in the formation of an association, and three of these on the basis of the fact that they considered behavioral genetics to be peripheral to their
1Reprinted from Social Biology, 1970, Vol. 17, No. l,p. 63.

primary area of interest. All but 15 of the remaining 77 respondents expressed willingness to assist in the organization of such an association.
It was decided that a formal organizational meeting should be held, and Jerry Hirsch offered to host such a meeting at the University of Illinois, Urbana, on March 30, 1970. Letters of invitation were sent to the 62 respondents to the questionnaire who had indicated a willingness to work on an organizing committee.
On the nomination section of the questionnaire, 66 names had been proposed for the organizing committee with 26 of these receiving from 5 to 20 votes. To assure attendance of a group as representative of the field as possible, Frederick Osborn pledged financial support for transportation to the meeting in the name of the American Eugenics Society for those 26 individuals receiving the most votes. A report of the Urbana meeting will appear in the June [1970] issue of Social Biology.

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

211

Founding of the Behavior Genetics Association1
[March 30,1970]

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

The initial organizational meeting for an association of behavior genetics was held at the University of Illinois on March 30, 1970 with Jerry Hirsch as host and R. D. Bock and R. J. Rose assisting in the arrangement of an agenda.
As had been decided at the informal meeting in December in Boston, all persons who had indicated an interest in participating in the organization of the association were invited to attend the March meeting. Mr. Frederick Osborn pledged transportation for twenty people to Urbana. Travel expenses were offered preferentially to those who had received the highest number of nominations to an organizing committee for the association on an earlier questionnaire. For practical reasons, this was restricted to persons presently resident in the United States. Richard H. Osborne made arrangements for invitations and transportation expenses to the meeting.
A group of seventeen individuals participated in the organizational meeting at the Illini Union. Three others who had planned to attend were unable to do so because of airline strikes. Present were Gordon Allen, V. Elving Anderson, R. Darrell Bock, Jan Bruell, Arthur Falek, Irving I. Gottesman, J. P. Hegmann, Kenneth E. Henry, Leonard L. Heston, Jerry Hirsch, Arnold R. Kaplan, Seymour Kessler, John C. Loehlin, Richard H. Osborne, Richard J. Rose, Steven G. Vandenberg, and George Winokur. R. H. Osborne acted as informal chairman for the meeting.
1Reprinted from Social Biology, 1970, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 147-148.

The name of the proposed organization was discussed at length, as was the fact that it was important that the organization be open to behavior scientists who were biologically oriented but who were not geneticists in the narrow sense. Although other names were proposed, the name "Behavior Genetics Association" polled a strong majority of votes when a written vote was taken. Subsequently the seventeen members of the organizational group unanimously approved this choice as the name for the organization.
It was agreed that in addition to a constitution committee, committees should be formed to deal with issues of membership, program, communications, and public and professional affairs. It was suggested that a small group of individuals be invited to be charter members of the new organization and asked to contribute dues sufficient to provide initial operating funds for the organization. Invitation to charter membership would follow nomination by the provisional membership committee and approval of the executive council. Suggested criteria for membership were the possession of an advanced degree or professional position, active research activity, and demonstrated commitment to the purposes of the organization. International representation was desired.
It was decided that a provisional nominating committee was not necessary in that the organizing committee would function as a committee-of-the-whole, and the constitution could subsequently specify the function, nature, and membership of the nominating committee. For the present, an executive council was

212

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

created consisting of the chairmen of the five established provisional committees with Jerry Hirsch as an ex officio member. Richard H. Osborne was unanimously elected President-pro-tem.
Present at the organizational meeting were the editors of Social Biology, Behavior Genetics, and Animal Behavior. Gordon Allen pointed out that the organization could align with any or all of these publications rather than publish a separate journal. Examples of professional societies which have never had a journal were cited. The possibility of a newsletter to provide a service to the membership was discussed favorably by several individuals. I. I. Gottesman proposed that Social Biology continue as the communication medium for the organization for the coming year, and this proposal was unanimously approved by the organizing committee.2
The program committee proposed the Easter recess of 1971 as the time for the first meeting of the organization. Offers of a possible program site had been received from B. E. Ginsburg at the University of Connecticut, and also from J.
2Thisproposal was approved by the Board of Directors of the American Eugenics Society at their meeting on May 22, 1970.

R. Royce at the University of Alberta. Notice of the finalized program site and agenda will appear in a future issue of Social Biology.
The major work of the afternoon session was the specification of the charge to each provisional committee and designation of its full membership. The executive council and the committees with their chairmen and members are as follows: Executive Council, Richard H. Osborne, President-pro-tem, Gordon Allen, R. Darrell Bock, Irving I. Gottesman, Jerry Hirsch, Seymour Kessler, Richard J. Rose; Constitution Committee, R. Darrell Bock, Chairman, V. Elving Anderson, John C. Loehlin, R. C. Nichols, P. P. Scott; Membership Committee, Gordon Allen, Chairman, J. P. Hegmann, Leonard L. Heston, Jerry Hirsch, G. C. McClearn, V. A. McKusick; Program Committee, Seymour Kessler, Chairman, L. ErlenmeyerKimling, Benson Ginsburg, Kenneth E. Henry, J. R. Royce, David Rosenthal; Public and Professional Affairs Committee, Irving I. Gottesman, Chairman, Jan Bruel, J. C. Defries, Th. Dobzhansky, Arthur Falek, Gardner Lindzey, Sheldon Reed, George Winokur; Communication Committee, Arnold R. Kaplan, Lissy F. Jarvik, Delbert D. Thiessen, Steven G. Vandenberg.

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

First Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association1
[First Announcement, September, 1970]

213

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

The first scientific and business meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association will be held at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, April 7-8, 1971. A scientific session of invited papers is being planned for April 7 and the morning of April 8. A business meeting will take place the afternoon of April 8 for the adoption of a constitution and reports of the committees (for a listing of committees and their
1Reprinted from Social Biology, 1970, Vol. 17, No. 3, p. 232.

members, see Social Biology, June, 1970, p. 147-148).
The Research Foundation of the Graduate School, University of Connecticut, has provided $1,800 under the auspices of the Department of Biobehavioral Sciences to be used in support of the scientific session. Dr. Richard H. Osborne, President-pro-tem of the Association, will be in charge of administration. Dr. Seymour Kessler is Chairman of the Program Committee. A preliminary program will be presented in the December issue of Social Biology.

214 Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971
First Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association1
[Second Announcement, December, 1970]

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

The first annual meetings of the Behavior Genetics Association will be held April 7-8, 1971, in the Graduate Center, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut.
The program will open at 9:30 A.M. on Wednesday, April 7, with preliminary remarks and announcements by the President-pro-tem, Richard H. Osborne. Greetings from the University of Connecticut will be given by Benson E. Ginsburg, followed by the introduction of the program by Seymour Kessler. The morning session will be a round table discussion on "The Future of Behavior Genetics," moderated by Ernst Caspari with the following participants: John C. Belknap, John S. Cowen, James A. Diez, Daniel R. Hanson, R. Peter Johnson, Susan E. Nicol, Richard E. Paschke, Pauline Yahr, and Frank R. Yeatman. In the afternoon, the business meeting will be held, beginning at 1:30 P.M. Following the meeting, a cocktail hour and banquet will be held at the Faculty Center.
The scientific sessions resume at 9 A.M. on April 8, with the morning de-
1Reprinted from Social Biology, 1970, Vol. 17, No. 4, p. 329.

voted to "Trends in Human Behavior Genetics Research," moderated by Jerry Hirsch. Three papers will be presented and discussed: "The Effects of Blood Group Discordance in Dizygotic Twins," by R. Darrell Bock; "Perspectives for Genetic Analysis of Normal and Abnormal Behavior in Men," by Gilbert Omenn and Arno G. Motulsky; and "Current Trends in Psychiatric Genetics," by Leonard L. Heston.
The afternoon session, beginning at 1:30 P.M., will be devoted to "Trends in Animal Behavior Genetics Research," moderated by Gerald E. McClearn. Papers will be presented by: Delbert D. Theissen, "Genetic and Hormonal Regulatory Mechanisms in the Study of Territoriality: A Move Toward Species Specific Analyses in Behavior Genetics"; William Kaplan, "Single Gene Mutants Affecting the Motor System of Drosophila"; and Norman Henderson, "Some Applications and Limitations of Extensive Biometrical Genetic Techniques for Behavioral Research."
Persons interested in attending the meetings should contact Dr. Richard H. Osborne, U-156, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06268 for registration information and materials.

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

Report on the First Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association1
[April 7-8,1971]

215

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

The First Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association was held April 7-8, 1971, at the University of Connecticut, Storrs,2 with 65 participants from the United States, Canada, and The Netherlands.
The morning session on April 7 was devoted to a round table discussion by students moderated by Ernst Caspari on "The Future of Behavior Genetics." Dr. Caspari introduced the discussion with a
1Reprinted from Social Biology, 1971, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 315-318.
2The First Annual Meeting in 1971 was hosted at the University of Connecticut by Behavior Genetics Association President-pro-tem Richard H. Osborne, on leave from the University of Wisconsin-Madison 19691971, at the University of Connecticut.
3Until the time of the First Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association at Storrs, Connecticut, the SSSB and Behavior Genetics Association committee had focused on their European connections and had not been aware of a parallel effort taking place at Boulder, Colorado. With this awareness the Second Annual Meeting to take place March 24-25, 1972 was planned with and hosted by the Institute for Behavioral Genetics, University of Colorado, Boulder.

brief review of the origins of behavior genetics in work done in genetics, psychology, and biology.
The business meeting was held during the afternoon session with approximately 50 participants who heard reports from the committee chairmen: R. Darrell Bock, Constitution Committee; Richard J. Rose, Communication Committee; Gordon Allen, Membership Committee; Seymour Kessler, Program Committee; and Irving I. Gottesman, Public and Professional Affairs Committee. The proposed constitution was discussed and amendments offered from the floor. The amended constitution, now being prepared, will be submitted for approval to the charter membership.
On April 8 the morning session was devoted to "Trends in Human Behavior Genetics Research," moderated by Jerry Hirsch. The afternoon session was devoted to "Trends in Animal Behavior Genetics Research," moderated by James Wilson.

216

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

Social Biology

Behavior Genetics Association Symposium at the Fourth International Congress of Human Genetics1
[September 10,1971]

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

A symposium entitled "Methodologies in Human Behavior Genetics" sponsored by the Behavior Genetics Association was presented during the Fourth International Congress of Human Genetics in Paris on September 10, 1971. Papers were presented by Drs. Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza, Department of Genetics, University of Pavia, Italy and Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, California; David W. Fulker, Department of Psychology, University of Birmingham, England; Eiji Inouye, Institute of Brain Research, University of Tokyo, School of Medicine, Japan; and Marat E. Vartanian, Department of Human Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry, Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, U.S.S.R.
Dr. Cavalli-Sforza presented a paper on "Polygenic vs. One-gene Model of Schizophrenia." Dr. Fulker's paper was entitled "Biometrical-Genetic Approach to Intelligence and Schizophrenia." Dr. Inouye's presentation was "Some Considerations on the Methodology of Human
1Reprinted from Social Biology, 1971, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 439-440.
2See p. 297 of this issue for a listing of the 1971 Behavior Genetics Symposium papers and discussion published in Social Biology, 1973, Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 239-279.

Behavior Genetics." Dr. Vartanian discussed "Some Considerations of Concordance for Schizophrenia in Monozygotic Twins." The formal discussants of these papers were Drs. Irving Gottesman, University of Minnesota, and Robert Elston, University of North Carolina.
Other discussants included Drs. V. Elving Anderson, University of Minnesota; Darrell Bock, University of Chicago; Per Dalen, Psychiatric Research Centre, St. Jorgen Hospital, Goteborg University, Sweden; Gilbert Omenn, University of Washington, Seattle; John Rainer, New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University, New York; T. E. Reed, University of Toronto; Edith Zerbin-Riidin, Max Planck Institute, Munich, Germany; and Friedrich Vogel, Institute for Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
The meeting was chaired by Dr. Arthur Falek, Division of Human Genetics, Georgia Mental Health Institute and Department of Psychiatry, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia. The co-chairman was Dr. L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, Department of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York.
Plans are being made for the publication of the papers in the near future.2

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

217

Second Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association1
[March 24-25,1972]

The Second Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association will be held March 24-25, 1972, hosted by the Institute for Behavioral Genetics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.
Registration fees, including a dinner with invited speaker, will be $20. Student registration fees will be $10.
'Reprinted from Social Biology, 1971, Vol. 18, No. 4, p.439.

Further information may be obtained by writing Dr. Gerald E. McClearn, Institute for Behavioral Genetics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80302.2
2Plans for the Third Annual Meeting were developed at Boulder for an April 6-7, 1973 meeting in Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

218

Behavior Genetics Association, 1966-1971

Social Biology

Third Annual Meeting of the Behavior Genetics Association1
[April 6-7,1973]

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

The Third Annual Meeting of the Be-
havior Genetics Association will be held
April 6-7, 1973 in Chapel Hill, NC. On
Friday, April 6, the morning session will
be a symposium on "Measurement of
Genetic Contribution to Behavioral Vari-
ation in Breeding Populations." In the af-
ternoon, contributed papers will be pre-
sented and the business meeting will be
held. Friday evening there will be a dinner and the Presidential Address.2 Satur-
day morning will be devoted to workshops
1Reprinted from Social Biology, Vol. 19, No. 3, p. 306.
2The Presidential Address of incoming President Theodosius Dobzhansky given on April 6, 1973 in Chapel Hill, NC, is reprinted here on the following pages (219-227). Although given twenty-six years ago, Dobzhansky's Presidential Address stands the test of time, reflecting the values and perspective of those individuals founding the Behavior Genetics Association between 1966 and 1971 and also serving as officers of the American Eugenics Society in the 1960s and the Society for the Study of Social Biology in the 1970s.
Theodosius Dobzhansky's contributions to genetics and evolutionary theory are discussed by Francisco Agala and Timothy Prout on pp. 184-189 of this issue. In the by-laws of the Behavior Genetics Association, Article VII provides for the establishment of the Dobzhansky Award in his honor.

and contributed papers; the afternoon session will be a symposium on "Contributions of Invertebrate Systems to Behavior Genetics."
Each member of the association may make one contribution as author, coauthor, or sponsor of a paper. Nonmembers without a sponsor may submit abstracts for review by the program committee.
In the contributed paper sessions, fifteen minutes will be allotted to each paper with five minutes for discussion. Also scheduled are a number of "workshops" with a more informal structure than the standard paper-reading session. Workshop papers (full length) will have been circulated in advance among the participants so that the time allotment for presentation will be five minutes, and for discussion, fifteen.
A block of rooms has been reserved at the Carolina Inn where all sessions will be held. For further information, write Bruce K. Eckland, Department of Sociology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27514.

