Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Alcohol and heredity: Theories about the effects of alcohol use on offspring
Lawson Crowe
To cite this article: Lawson Crowe (1985) Alcohol and heredity: Theories about the effects of alcohol use on offspring, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 146-161, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988605 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988605
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 12
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

Alcohol and Heredity: Theories About the Effects of Alcohol Use on Offspring

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Lawson Crowe
Institute for Behavioral Genetics and Department of Philosophy, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado

ABSTRACT: Medical temperance writers throughout the nineteenth century and well into the first two decades of the twentieth century argued that alcohol use by parents caused hereditary disease in their offspring. In particular, it was believed that alcohol use was responsible for feeblemindedness, epilepsy, and various other nervous system disorders. In 1910, Karl Pearson and his associates at the Galton Eugenics Laboratory of the University of London published a statistical study seriously challenging the view that alcohol use was causally related to heritable disease in offspring. Although the study generated considerable controversy and had certain flaws by contemporary standards, the weight of the evidence was sufficient to discredit the theories of the medical temperance writers.

Medical temperance writers throughout the nineteenth century and well into the first two decades of the twentieth century argued that alcohol use by parents caused hereditary disease in their offspring (Warner and Rosett, 1975). In advocating this view they were expressing conventional wisdom based on observations made as early as Biblical and classical times. Samson's mother was enjoined by the angel to abstain from wine and "strong drink" while pregnant. Plato, Aristotle, Gillius, Plutarch, Cicero, and others commented on alcohol's effect on offspring in respect to both the propensity to drunkenness and the inheritance of other deleterious conditions. It was widely believed that intoxication of the parents at the time of conception produced deformed and stupid children. For most of the medical temperance writers of this period, the causal connection between parental al-

cohol use and inherited disease was an established fact.
From our present-day perspective, the evidence does not justify this conclusion. It will be noted that distinctions between teratogenic and mutagenic effects were not made by the medical temperance writers considered in this paper. Furthermore, it will be seen that in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century operational definitions of mental states or of relative states among alcohol users were not emphasized. Numerous classifications of mental deficiency, e.g., idiot, imbecile, epileptic, moral insanity, insanity, and so on, were freely used in this literature without much effort to distinguish them in any technical sense. The same can be said for such terms as "alcoholic," "alcoholist," "alcoholism," "drinker," "drunkard," and "teetotaler." For the medical temperance writers and many others, the only obvi-

146

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Alcohol and Heredity

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

ous significant distinction was between "abstainers" and "drinkers."
The so-called Gin Epidemic in England (1720-50) provided the first modern observations of what is now referred to as the "fetal alcohol syndrome." Various English physicians observed that babies born to drunken mothers were weak, sickly, and subject to sharply increased infant mortality. During the ensuing decades various studies appeared in England, on the Continent, and in America supporting the causal connection between alcohol use and inherited disease.
In 1848 Samuel Howe presented two reports on idiocy to the Massachusetts Legislature. He found that nearly half of the mental defectives studied in Massachusetts public institutions had intemperate parents (Howe, 1848). Among the most frequently cited later studies were those by Benedict Augustin Morel (1857), Auguste-Henri Forel (1893), and Dom. Bezzola (1901).
In the moralistic language of the times, Morel argued that parental drunkenness produced depravity, alcoholism, and degradation in first generation offspring. Through the fourth generation, when sterility set in and the line became extinct, the descendants were said to suffer ever more progressive deterioration. Morel said that Nature "compensates" by striking the drinker with early impotence and sterility. He is quoted in one of the later temperance works (Gustaphson, 1884) as saying, "There is no other disease in which hereditary influences are so fatally characteristic. Imbecility and idiocy are the extreme terms of the degradation in the descendants of drinkers" (p. 174).
Forel was Professor of Mental Diseases at the University of Zurich. In

1893 he wrote that the majority of men were still ignorant of the "simple truth" that alcohol in any form is a poison which causes pathological changes in body tissues and leads to what he described as "fatty degeneration." He held that the greatest damage is to the reproductive function. Alcohol, and all other narcotics, he wrote, poison the "germinative plasma." The offspring of alcoholists (sic) are especially disposed to mental degeneration and excessive drinking. They never achieve resistance to alcohol because alcohol has changed the "germ" of the parents. Forel noted the evolutionary debate over "acquired characteristics" (Lamarck) and natural selection (Darwin) and said that the tendency to degeneration was transmitted to the progeny through the injured germ cells of their parents: "It is already well known that inebriety . . . is transferred by the degeneration of the semen of the man and the ovaries of women to the progeny of the drunkard" (p. 219).
Forel was perhaps best known for his theory that alcohol use transmitted an "irresistible craving" for alcohol to the progeny. He had, in fact, his own version of the doctrine of acquired characteristics. He wrote: "It is especially important to note the hereditary translation of the irresistible craving on the children by a father or a mother, who themselves did not possess this craving, but were drinkers only by custom and sociability" (p. 219).
In addition to injury to the germ cells, Forel said that alcohol poisons the brain and the nervous system generally, that it paralyzes the finer senses, destroys free ,will, and leads to imprudent sexual behavior. He distinguished between acute and chronic alcoholism and described the latter condition as an "imperceptibly

148

Crowe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

graduated disease" of the mind. He claimed that drunkenness was, in fact, just another form of mental disease. Forel never offered any statistical or scientific evidence for his claims. He did refer to "statistical investigations of a most careful kind" done by others.
In 1901 a Swiss physician, Dom. Bezzola, published a statistical study purporting to demonstrate that alcohol was a major cause of "innate imbecility." Bezzola assumed the "fact" that alcohol injures the "human germs of procreation" and inferred that the injuries produced by parental exposure to alcohol were transmitted to the offspring.
In the anecdotal manner common to the period, Bezzola wrote that he had noticed how often the parents of imbecile children were notorious drinkers. Because there were conflicting theories about the etiology of feeblemindedness and imbecility--whether, for example, drinkers suffered from chronic nutritional disturbances or poisoning of the germ plasma--he undertook a study of the specific nature of the disease transmitted by alcohol use. Bezzola wished to determine whether or not intoxication of the parents during the time of conception was especially liable to produce epileptics and imbeciles. He speculated that if such proved to be the case moderation in alcohol use would not be acceptable "because by pure induction it could be proved that every drop too much of alcohol can undermine the healthy constitution of a child begotten under its influence" (p. 347).
Bezzola reasoned that variability in drinking customs in Switzerland from season to season should make it possible to tell if more imbeciles are born 40 weeks after times of plentiful alcohol use than 40 weeks after times of less

abundant use. For Switzerland he chose New Year's, Shrove Tuesday, the grape harvest, and April to June (because of frequent weddings) as times of abundant use. He chose July to September (when agricultural labor was heavy and when the upper classes were taking the "cure" for the excesses of the previous year) as times of reduced use. He acknowledged that conceptions producing defective children could occur at any time during the year, but he expected variations to be discernible if alcohol intoxication was a causal factor.
In the first study of his own community, he found that there were actually fewer births 40 weeks following the period of plentiful alcohol use. He attributed this reduced procreative capacity to drinking too much and said that the finding supported his hypothesis. In his subsequent study, he distributed all the births in Switzerland from 1880 to 1890 (934,619) over the respective months in which they occurred. Using an 1897 census of imbeciles from 1880 to 1890, he then identified 8,196 idiots and imbeciles whose exact birthdays could be established. He distributed their births over the respective months in which they occurred. He then compared what he called the "Normal Birth Curve" with the "Imbecile Birth Curve." Wherever he found variations, he attributed them to the abundant or reduced use of alcohol. He concluded that alcohol and imbecility were causally related and that the highest probability was that "with innate imbecility the injury that alcohol produces on the germs is that of direct poisoning" (p. 353). He seemed not to distinguish between the acute and chronic effects of alcohol use because he believed that his theory explained why drunkards sometimes beget intelligent

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Alcohol and Heredity

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

children. He said they do so because they occasionally conceive them while sober and free from the effects of alcohol.
Bezzola argued that the assumption of alcohol poisoning is even more persuasive when we consider how often first-born and illegitimate children are defective. He had in mind the role of alcohol at weddings and in sexual indiscretion. Along with many of his contemporaries, he believed that alcohol produced other hereditary defects such as moral imbecility (propensity to criminal acts), epilepsy, dementia praecox, dwarfed development, and early childhood morbidity and mortality.
A number of American authors made similar claims. F. C. Meyers (1898) said that heredity is the cause of the disease "alcoholism" and that derangements of the brain, nervous system, moral and will powers, and organs such as liver and stomach will be transmitted to offspring. T. D. Crothers (1887, 1890, 1901), a prolific medical temperance writer, said that the injury from alcohol to the cell and nervous tissue always reappears in the future in "some neurotic trouble, defect, or predisposition" (1887, p. 197). N. S. Davis (1898), writing about the "continued increase" in epilepsy, imbecility, and mental and moral insanity, said that from the beginning of its use alcohol produced a degenerating influence both physical and mental which steadily increased in proportion to the quantity and the length of time of its use. He said that these "perverting and degenerating effects" are perpetuated by hereditary descent from generation to generation. He cited various studies of prisoners, paupers, and criminals which show that more than half were alcoholic, that the

majority of criminals were under the influence of alcohol at the time the crime was committed, and that most had drinking fathers and mothers. A standard medical reference book (Buck, 1902), under the entry "Insanity: General Etiology," provides a summary of the views so far considered:
Even unto the third and fourth generation the effects of the poison may be traced in constitutional neuroses, psychoses, early mental breakdowns, and eventual imbecility and idiocy. Drunkenness on the part of the parents is represented by feeblemindedness and epilepsy in the offspring, while statistics show that intoxication in both parents at the moment of copulation induces a larger proportion of the lower grades of idiocy than any other single factor, (p. 34)
After 1900 medical temperance writers continued to elaborate the theme of hereditary disease as a consequence of parental drinking. The idea was, in fact, so powerful and exercised such a grip on their thinking that even the presence of other probable causes for defective children did not sway their convictions. W. A. Potts (1905) mentioned several cases where trauma was thought to have been the cause of birth defects. He rejected troublesome pregnancies, severe illnesses, exposure to drugs, "the midwife's forceps," and possible in utero insults to the fetus in favor of such "contributing causes" as alcoholism in the grandfather or other hereditary weaknesses. This is an interesting example of how commitment to a particular idea can obscure the significance of problematic data.
T. A. MacNicholl (1902,1907) wrote that by injuring the "germ protoplasm," alcohol weakens "the current of life at its source." His studies of New York City school children presented appalling

150

Crowe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

health statistics. He claimed that 46 per cent of 51,000 children surveyed were "deficient" and that significant percentages had diseases of the heart and spinal column, tuberculosis, and anemia. In a survey of 10,000 city school children, he found that 80 per cent suffered from some "neurosis." While he took account of poverty and poor living conditions and the fact that poor boys had to work long hours and attend school, he said that forces "inherent in the constitution" were more significant than any environmental conditions. Alcohol destroys the integrity of the nerve structure," launching "hereditary influences and . . . tendencies which a good environment may not hold in check." MacNicholl claimed that 90 per cent of drinking Americans had foreign-born grandparents and great-grandparents. His ethnic prejudices were evident:
A vast immigration of inferior peoples, attracted by our great material prosperity and the hope of political liberty, bring withlhem their vices as well as their virtues, augmenting our drinking classes, furnishing additional soil from which to propagate criminals, thereby increasing our burdens and movements which will alleviate and enlighten. (1907, p. 397)
Alcohol was seen by some as the major cause of ills for individuals and society. It was the panapathogen of its day. The catalogue of "diseases of degeneracy" attributed to alcohol was substantial. Infertility, shortness of breath, loss of abstract reasoning, premature senile decay, memory loss, metabolic malfunctioning, increased weight, arteriosclerosis, alcoholic egotism, loss of power of white blood cells, susceptibility to other diseases, intellectual stagnation, insanity, feeblemindedness, deafness, dumbness, blindness, juvenile delinquency, pauperism, suicide, criminal acts, func-

tional instability, convulsive systematized insanity, chorea, hysteria, and delusional states were all considered the results of hereditary degeneration through alcohol use (Maus, 1914), or, as one writer put it, "the first fruits of alcoholic parentage" (Lewis, 1906).
M. L. Maus (1914) wrote, "For this widespread national degeneracy we must look principally to the 'racial poison' alcohol which directly or indirectly is largely responsible for the majority of mental and physical wrecks brought into the world" (p. 104).
Although much was said about "heredity," few medical commentators described their view of how or exactly what was inherited. Some writers, for example, W. B. Lewis (1906), were aware that the process of inheritance needed explanation. Lewis wrote that acquired characteristics could not be transmitted through heredity and said that alcoholism as alcoholism was never transmitted. He believed that alcohol had a direct toxic effect on the germ cells and concluded that the altered "chromatin threads of the germ cell nucleus" transmitted a "predisposition to alcoholism."
T. J. Mays (1914) defined heredity as "racial memory" and said that the mechanism of heredity lay mainly in the brain and nervous system: "It appears that the mechanism which forms the basis of abnormal heredity has the power of changing one form of disease into another form from one generation to the next" (p. 8). This would explain how alcoholism in the parent could appear in the offspring as consumption, epilepsy, and feeblemindedness, and, indeed, account for the presence of "hereditary disease" in subsequent generations.
The proceedings of the First International Eugenics Congress, for the most

Vol. 32,No. 3-4

Alcoholand Heredity

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

part, sound similar themes. A report on admissions to the insane asylum for the City of Paris and the Department of the Seine from 1867 to 1912 (Magnan and Fillassier, 1912) showed that more than 20 per cent of these admissions were alcohol-related. The report cited the very high infant mortality rate for children of alcoholics--estimated at about 33 per cent for the first three years of life--and asserted that "among the survivors are counted many idiots, epileptics and a large number of degenerates, destitute of moral sense, instinctively perverted, impulsive, abnormal, miserable victims of their parent's alcoholism" (p. 379).
THE DISBELIEVERS
Enough has been said to indicate the moral fervor and the moralism of those who believed that parental alcohol use transmitted diseases to offspring. Not much has been said about the evidence offered in support of these views because, in truth, not much evidence was offered. Basically, the evidence was of two kinds: (1) anecdotes about drinkers and their offspring (these comprise a large portion of this literature); and (2) "statistics" about institutional inmates and their drinking habits as well "as the drinking habits of their parents and relatives. With some minor exceptions, medical temperance writers did not discuss the nature or mechanism of heredity and only rarely took note of the debate about the hereditary transmission of acquired characteristics. To the extent that the difficulty was noticed at all, the position taken was that alcohol was directly toxic to sperm and ova, and such injured sperm or ova were the means by which various diseases and other delete-

rious states, including alcoholism, were transmitted. For most, the hereditary process was unexplained but assumed to be fairly straightforward. Inheriting a disease was similar to or the same as inheriting property. A father passed on his land and titles to his children. In much the same way, he passed on his eye color, disposition, intelligence, and so forth.
So far as I know, the results of none of the early studies were tested for statistical significance, and no effort was made to account for the portion of the insane, epileptics, and imbeciles whose parents were not drinkers, or for that matter, the normal children born to parents who were. In many cases the data were incomplete or simply not reported, or the statistical methods were seriously deficient (Bezzola), or the results could not be replicated (MacNicholl). These circumstances probably reflected to a large degree the fact that modern statistical methods were not widely known or applied, that Mendel's laws were not rediscovered until 1900 and their significance not generally appreciated until later still, and that the doctrine of acquired characteristics was widely accepted.
Many thinkers of the period were skeptical of the medical temperance writers' views, and, to a large extent, their skepticism was based on their rejection of the doctrine of acquired characteristics. As early as 1873, Francis Galton expressed his doubts about the theory that drunkenness at the time of conception produced idiots and epileptics. In reply to a letter from Alphonse de Candolle in which Candolle had asserted this theory, Galton wrote, "Thank you for your interesting fact about impregnation under the effect of

152

Crowe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

alcoholism. One of course needs many such facts. . . ." (Pearson, 1924, p. 139).
Galton suggested some experiments with white mice that might support the "fact" and concluded with the playful comment that the Biblical story of Lot and his daughters, an instance of close inbreeding and alcoholism which produced no bad results, was a counter example to de Candolle's theory (Pearson, 1924).
In a paper published in the same year, Galton discussed the relationship between alcohol and heritable disease in the context of the transmission of acquired characteristics. "Both M. de Candolle and Dr. Carpenter have spoken of the idiocy and other forms of nervous disorders which beyond all doubt afflict the children of drunkards. Here then appears an instance based on thousands of observations at lunatic asylums and elsewhere in which an acquired habit of drunkenness, which ruins the will and nerves of the parent, appears to be transmitted hereditarily to the child. For my own part, I hesitatein drawing this conclusion, because thereis a simpler reason" (emphasis added) (Fortnightly Review, Vol. XIII, New Series, pp. 345-510, "On the Causes Which Operate to Create Scientific Men," as quoted in Pearson, 1924, p. 148).
Galton at this time was beginning to distinguish between the reproductive and the body cells. This distinction forced him to reject the doctrine of acquired characteristics and all such conventional notions as "maternal impressions" and "momentary states at conception." He came to believe that in order to modify heredity it was necessary to modify the reproductive cells themselves or at least to modify the em-

bryo at a very early stage (Pearson, 1924). He seemed to accept the view that alcohol might have such a directly modifying or toxic effect on the reproductive cells and possibly on the fetus in utero.
Galton found the "statistics" and anecdotes of the medical temperance writers unconvincing. He said, "We must not rely on the above mentioned facts [alcoholism in the parents and nervous disorder in the offspring] as evidence of a once acquired habit being hereditarily transmitted" (Pearson, 1924, p. 148).
In 1879 Galton expanded his views on the role of science in determining truth. He said:
General impressions are never to be trusted. Unfortunately, when they are of long standing they becomefixedrules of life, and assumea prescriptiverightnot to be questioned. Consequently, those who are not accustomed to originalinquiryentertain a hatred and a horror of statistics. They cannot endure the idea of submitting their sacred impressions to coldblooded verification." (asquoted in Pearson, 1924,p.297).
Galton's words proved to be prophetic. Thirty years later, subsequent to the founding of the Francis Galton National Eugenics Laboratory of the University of London (1907) and the organization of the Eugenic Education Society, a controversy erupted between those who were reluctant to submit "their sacred impressions to coldblooded verification" and those who developed and applied Galton's statistical methods to the problem of parental alcohol use and its effect upon offspring.
THE CONTROVERSY
In November 1909, Karl Pearson, the first Director of the Galton Eugenics

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Alcohol and Heredity

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Laboratory and Galton's follower, habits or occupation on particular indi-

wrote to Galton complaining about at- viduals, but, as eugenicists, to measure

tacks on the work of the Laboratory the effects of such occupation and habits

which had appeared in the British Jour- "on the racial [meaning "hereditary"]

nal of Inebriety. It was alleged that the qualities of future generations." As

resources of the Laboratory were being their several references to public policy

wasted on a "sterile logomachy" and and social reform show, however, it

that the Laboratory had made no effort seems clear that Elderton and Pearson

"to trace the origin of alcoholism or intended to challenge the theories of the

measure its influence on the offspring or medical temperance writers. They ar-

the individual." Pearson denied this gued from the outset that it was neces-

charge and said that the Laboratory sary to know whether it was heredity or

was, in fact, the only place where any ef- environment (including the toxic prop-

fort had been made to assess the relation erties of alcohol) that underlay "the

of alcoholism in parents to the mental great problem of alcoholism." They said

and physical condition of the children. that if further studies should confirm

He said that the Laboratory had also their preliminary results, it would be

studied the relation of alcoholism to necessary to consider other factors be-

crime and insanity and had worked out sides alcohol as sources of contempo-

its statistical correlations to environ- rary social problems.

ment and class. He also claimed that he and his co-workers had "seen what relation alcoholism has to feeblemindedness" (Pearson, 1930). He dismissed his critics' theories as "impressions," "opinions," and "rhetoric."

Elderton and Pearson thought that there might be three ways in which parental alcohol use could affect offspring: (1) They theorized that drinking might be a "somatic" mark of an existing mental defect in the parent that could be

Galton replied that the critics seemed transmitted to the child. In other words,

to be against statistical inquiry into the they suggested that drinking was a extent to which feeblemindedness was symptom of an underlying condition

transmissible and that he could make that was itself heritable. This could exnothing of the "sonorous" phrase "ster- plain, for example, how a child grew up

ile logomachy." The great irony, how- mentally and physically fit but became a

ever, was that the attacks on the Labora- drinker when an adult. Elderton and tory originated among members of the Pearson viewed such a possibility as "di-

Eugenics Education Society of which rect heredity," i.e., the direct transmis-

Galton was the Honorary President.

sion of a mental defect which manifested

This criticism of the Laboratory anticipated the publication in 1910 of a paper by Elderton and Pearson entitled A FirstStudy of the Influence of Parental Alcoholism on the PhysiqueandAbility of the Offspring. As the title indicated, the study attempted a statistical measure of the effects of parental drinking on offspring. The authors said that their purpose was not to study the effects of

itself in the same way in the child as in the parent. They also speculated that if alcoholism was a symptom or somatic sign of defective germ plasm in the parent or parents, it might manifest itself differently in the child. For example, through "cross-heredity" defective germ plasm in the parents might produce imbecility, epilepsy, or tuberculosis in the child. (2) Secondly, the authors

154

Crowe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

considered that alcoholism in the parents might not be caused by heredity at all. Thus, the effect on offspring might be through the "enfeeeblement of physique" of the drinking parent or possibly injury to the germ plasm from the toxic properties of alcohol. (3) Thirdly, parental alcohol use could be harmful to children by changing the economic and moral aspects of family life.
The authors thus distinguished three types of possible influence of parental alcohol use on offspring: "direct" and "cross" heredity; toxic effects of alcohol on the germ plasm; and environmental influences. They reasoned that "crossheredity" could be expected to produce a higher incidence of imbecility, epilepsy, and tuberculosis in the children of drinkers as compared to the children of nondrinkers. Because the subjects of this study were below-drinking-age school children, the authors could not study the "direct" heredity of alcoholism itself. In any event, they argued that the material available for study would make it difficult to differentiate between "cross-heredity," toxic influence, and environmental influence, but that such distinctions would be necessary only if a substantial correlation between alcoholism in the parent and defectiveness in the child could be demonstrated.
The study was based on two sets of data. The first was the Edinburgh Charity Organization Society Report which surveyed the homes of all the children attending a certain school in a relatively older, poorer district of Edinburgh. The second set of data was collected by a Manchester physician and subsequently arrayed in an unpublished manuscript by his associate. The Manchester data were not comparable to the Edinburgh data because they dealt only with fami-

lies that had children in the special schools of Manchester. The children in the special schools came from homes in which there was at least one mentally defective child. In respect to drinking, the Manchester data divided parents into "temperate" and "intemperate" categories and gave information about the health and, in most cases, the intelligence of the mentally defective child's brothers and sisters. More detail was given about parental drinking habits in the Edinburgh data, but, for the most part, teetotalers and "sober" parents (those who drank only moderately) were grouped together and compared to the parents who were thought to be heavier drinkers.
Elderton and Pearson sought some means to show a relationship between the physical and mental states of the children and the health of the parents. They needed to be certain that drinking parents were not themselves physically and mentally different from nondrinking parents. If this were the case, of course, the differentiation between their offspring might be a secondary consequence of heredity and not causally related to parental alcohol use. As the available data could not throw any light upon the relationship between physique, intelligence, and alcohol use of the parents, they attempted to determine the differences between drinking and nondrinking parents by an indirect method. They reasoned that the wages of the father were to some extent a measure of his health and intelligence, that a man physically and mentally unfit might be expected to earn less than if he were the opposite. They therefore expected to find the wages of a drinker to be less than those of a sober man. The Edinburgh data provided the wages in most

Vol.32, No. 3-4

Alcoholand Heredity

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

cases. On analysis, no significant difference was found between the average weekly wages of drinking and nondrinking parents, a shilling or so at most in favor of the sober man. Elderton and Pearson concluded that in respect to health and mentality, drinking and nondrinking parents were, on the average, equal, and that the slight differences that did exist would have no effect on the correlations between parental alcoholism and the health and intelligence of children.
They proceeded to work out the correlation coefficients between the drinking of parents and (1) the actual height and weight of their children; (2) their health; (3) their intelligence; (4) their eyesight and diseases of the eye; and (5) the child mortality rate. The results of these calculations were somewhat surprising.
In the Edinburgh data, they found practically no correlation between the father's drinking and the child's height and weight. There was only a small correlation between the mother's drinking and the child's height and weight, more so for girls than for boys. The latterfinding made it difficult to attribute this connection between mothers and daughters to the toxic properties of alcohol since the connection should have been the same for both boys and girls. Elderton and Pearson inferred that the effect was more likely the result of a poor home environment for the daughters of working mothers. It was the case that 46 per cent of the drinking mothers were employed as compared to 26 per cent of the nondrinking mothers.
Analysis of the Manchester data also produced surprising results. A larger percentage of children suffering from epilepsy and tuberculosis was found

among the children of "temperate" parents. Parental intemperance was not found to be associated with generally worse health in the children. A further analysis of the Edinburgh data revealed the same pattern. No significant relationship was found between the drinking of the parents and the health of the children. Similar results were found for intelligence and for eyesight and eye diseases. "The statement that intemperance in the parent causes mental defect in the children must be received with caution; it is not the case among the defectives in Manchester" (Elderton and Pearson, 1910, p. 13).
A positive association was found between the drinking of mothers and the child mortality rate, especially when the mother drank in so-called bouts. Elderton and Pearson attributed the higher death rate to accidents.
The results of the study were essentially negative so far as received opinion about the effects of parental drinking was concerned. In summary, the authors found: (1) a higher mortality rate among the children of drinking mothers; (2) no significant differences in height and weight between children of drinking and nondrinking parents; (3) no apparent influence of parental drinking on their children's health and intelligence; (4) no association between parental drinking and their children's eyesight or the presence of eye disease; and (5) slightly lower average weekly wages for drinkers, but a difference not great enough to suggest the mental and physical inferiority of the drinker.
Elderton and Pearson said that they undertook this study expecting to find hereditary and toxic effects of alcohol use. At the least, they expected to find significant environmental differences

156

Crowe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

between the children of drinking and nondrinking parents, but their data did not support their expectations. In words that were to arouse the wrath of the temperance forces and the defenders of conventional wisdom, they wrote:
No marked relation has been found between the intelligence, physique, or disease of the offspring and parental alcoholism in any of the categories investigated. On the whole the balance turns as often in favor of the alcoholic as the nonalcoholic parentage. . . . We do not attribute this to the alcohol but to certain physical and possibly mental characters which appear to be associated with the tendency to alcohol, (p. 32)
A summary of the paper appeared in The Times (London) in May of 1910. The Chairman of the Eugenics Education Society responded immediately. Montague Crackenthorpe wrote to The Timesto say that the results were "contrary to general experience." He said that "biometry" was "serviceable in its proper sphere," but that "a complex problem such as that of the relation of parental alcoholism to offspring is quite beyond its ken." He went on to say that "the biometrical method is based on the 'law of averages' which again is based on the 'theory of probabilities' which again is based on mathematical calculations of a highly abstract order" (Pearson, 1930, p. 406).
Mr. Crackenthorpe's apparent ignorance of statistics moved Francis Galton, now in the final year of his life, to write a characteristically restrained letter to The Times in which he described how statistical data are collected and organized and the meaning of "correlation." He defended the study of the effect of parental alcoholism on off-

spring as being entirely appropriate for statistical analysis.
Galton was evidently distressed that so much of the opposition to the paper came from prominent members of the Eugenics Education Society. He was at pains to show in letters to the British Journalof Inebriety and The Times that the Society and the Galton Eugenics Laboratory were independent entities, and that he fully supported the educational work of the Society on the one hand and the research of the Laboratory on the other.
A bitter controversy continued for more than a year both in the press and in professional journals. It was said that the staff members of the Laboratory were in the pay of the brewing industry (Pearson, 1930). In addition to Crackenthorpe, Sir Victor Horsley and his associate, Dr. Mary Sturge, authors of the popular book, Alcohol and the Human Body, John Maynard Keynes of Cambridge University, Dr. C. W. Saleeby, and many others criticized the First Study. The exchanges between Sturge and Horsley (1911) and Elderton and Pearson were punctuated by sarcasm, vitriol, and invective on both sides, along with corrections of various misstatements and demands for apology.
The main criticisms of the First Study were that (1) the samples chosen were not representative, and in particular the Edinburgh district studied was held to be "non-representative" and not "a fair average sample of the general population" (Keynes); (2) the wage comparison was said to be faulty because no account was taken of "irregularities of employment" (Keynes); (3) the grouping of abstainers with moderate drinkers hopelessly compromised the data and precluded any significant results (Sturge

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Alcohol and Heredity

157

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

and Horsley); (4) no attempt was made ceeded to show that MacNicholl's stud-

to determine whether the parents ies had no controls, employed untrained

started drinking before or after the birth workers to collect data, could not possi-

of the children (Saleeby, Sturge and bly have been based on representative

Horsley, and others); (5) there were no samples, and so on. In short, his studies

"controls" (Sturge and Horsley); (6) the suffered from similar and worse de-

groups studied--Edinburgh and ficiencies than theirs and, furthermore,

Manchester--were not comparable (Sa- produced wholly unbelievable results.

leeby); (7) the use of terms was unscien- As for Bezzola, analysis of his data

tific, particularly the term "sober" showed that they had no statistical sig-

(Sturge and Horsley); and (8) the study nificance at all, that the frequency of oc-

contained "contradictory statements," currences of defective births 40 weeks

namely that the health of the children of after abundant alcohol use fell within

drinkers seemed to be slightly better what would be expected due to chance.

than that of the children of nondrinkers, In a similar way, the authors analyzed

but that there was a higher child mortal- and discredited various other studies

ity rate among the former (Sturge and cited by their critics.

Horsley).

An editorial in Nature (Feb. 9,1911)

Pearson and Elderton vigorously de- added a closing note to the controversy

fended the First Study. Before the end of with a review of the Second Study. The

1910, with Pearson now as first author, editorialist said that the attacks of the

they issued the Second Study of the In- medical temperance writers were "re-

fluence of ParentalAlcoholism on the pulsed with considerable losses," that

Physique and Ability of the Offspring in many of the errors attributed by them to which they answered their medical crit- Pearson and Elderton were to be found ics and rebutted the evidence offered by in "aggravated form" in the studies cited them. They acknowledged the associa- against them, and that the evidence tion between extreme alcoholism and cited by their critics had been exposed as mental defect which their opponents ob- completely worthless. served in asylums and institutions for

the inebriate, but they said that the nature of the association was as yet un-

THE AFTERMATH

known, and that there was no basis for interpreting alcoholism as the causeof mental defect. It might just as well be that mental defectiveness was the cause of alcoholism or that both were separate manifestations of a defective inheritance.

As is usually the case, the controversy did not subside completely for some time. Part of the debate turned on the difficulty of distinguishing what was truly heritable from what was consequent upon environmental factors. Part of the debate centered on the difficulty

Pearson and Elderton noted that of explaining heredity without referring

there were no original investigations of to acquired characteristics. In April

the question in England and that their 1901, a committee composed of nine

critics based their views on Continental physicians had made a report to the So-

and American authorities such as Bez- ciety for the Study of Inebriety in which

zola, MacNicholl, and others. They pro- the various theories about parental aleo-

158

Crowe

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

hoi use and its effects on offspring were a group of unusually strong specimens.

considered. The Committee's cautious He believed that he had demonstrated

conclusion of the time, clearly at odds the possibility of an evolutionary effect

with the medical temperance writers, of alcohol (Stockard, 1922). He con-

was that the existing evidence did not cluded that alcohol affected prenatal de-

support the theory that characteristics velopment and that it was unlikely that

acquired by parental alcohol use could humans had ever injured or eliminated

be transmitted to the children (Pearson their normal germ cells through alcohol

and Elderton, 1910). It should be under- use. He suggested, in the light of the ani-

stood that Pearson and Elderton were mal experiment results, that alcohol

by no means alone in their views.

might have eliminated some defective

For a time it appeared that Charles human germ cells (Warner and Rosett, R. Stockard's breeding experiments 1975).

with guinea pigs might have supported In any event, the results of Stockard's

the temperance arguments. In 1910, he experiments and other animal experi-

began a series of experiments at the Cor- ments were inconclusive with respect to

nell University Medical College in New the inheritance of disease through pa-

York City. One purpose of the experi- rental alcohol use. Conklin (1920), Pro-

ments was to determine whether or not fessor of Biology at Princeton, acknowl-

spermatozoa could be injured by alco- edged that Stockard and other

hol treatment in such a way as to pro- investigators had been able to change

duce abnormalities in their offspring. embryonic development by exposing

Alcohol-treated male guinea pigs were spermatazoa and ova to X-rays, alcohol,

mated with normal, untreated females. and various other substances before fer-

The results were smaller litters, much tilization. He thought, however, that

higher mortality rates for the young, and these were not heritable changes and

a larger number of defective offspring as certainly did not demonstrate inheri-

compared to the untreated control ani- tance of acquired characteristics.

mals (Stockard, 1913, 1916; Stockard Rather, he argued that all developed

and Papanicolaou, 1916a,6). By 1922, characteristics were the result of the re-

however, Stockard found that succes- action of the "germinal organization" to

sive generations descended from these environmental stimuli. Mutilations, he

alcohol-treated males began to show im- said, are not inherited: "Wooden legs

provement. Only the strongest Fl ani- do not run in families, although wooden

mals survived to breed, the remainder heads do" (p. 229).

having high mortality rates, sterility, In 1921, Samuel Holmes, zoologist and other defects. The F2 animals were and eugenicist at the University of Calisimilar, but the constant elimination of fornia at Berkeley, reviewed the animal defective and sterile animals through experimental evidence. He concluded three generations produced F4 animals that the human fetus could be directly descended from alcohol-treated great- affected by alcohol in the mother's great-grandfathers which were superior blood, but that there was no evidence of to the control animals. Stockard attrib- any truly hereditary effect. The results uted the results to selection eliminating of animal experiments by various invesweaker animals and bringing out finally tigators strongly suggested that mature

Vol. 32,No.

Alcohol and Heredity

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

sperm were resistant to alcohol. While circumstances, poverty, and poor ma-

he conceded that the alcohol-treated ternal care, might account for a signi-

male guinea pigs in Stockard's experi- ficantnumber of defects in the children

ments may have passed on a true heredi- of alcoholics; and (3) proposed that a

tary effect, he was, for the most part, "neuropathic heredity" was the proba-

skeptical since there were other possible ble cause of parental alcoholism

explanations. He thought it was quite (Warner and Rosett, 1975). In his biog-

possible for alcohol to injure the fetus raphy of Galton, Karl Pearson said that

without producing a hereditary effect. he had followed Galton's dictum that

Holmes criticized studies that at- general impressions were never to be

tempted to establish a causal relation- trusted. Reflecting on the controversy

ship between alcoholism and inherited and the attacks by his fellow eugenicists,

disease simply by association. He said he wrote, "Our statistics were good for

that no amount of data showing a corre- the purpose we had in view" (1930, p.

lation between the alcoholism of the 405).

parents and the propensity toward alco-

holism in their offspring would be sufficient to establish a hereditary causal ef-

CONCLUSION

fect. Statistics showing alcohol use in successive generations do not establish a causal link between alcohol use and heredity nor do they indicate in which di-

Medical temperance writers and many others believed fervently that parental alcohol use was the cause of disease in offspring. This belief was so pow-

rection causality runs. Following the erful that those who held it discounted reasoning of Pearson and Elderton, other possible causes of feeblemindedHolmes said it was at least as probable ness, epilepsy, insanity, and similar disthat alcoholism is a symptom of an un- abilities. The preoccupation with heredderlying neuropathic weakness. In re- itary transmission of disease through viewing Pearson and Elderton's studies, alcohol use obscured the role of povHolmes concluded that their critics were erty, ignorance, poor nutrition, poor "unscientific" to berate them for finding sanitation, hazardous birth practices,

mainly negative results.

poor prenatal and neonatal care, and

After 1920, when American Prohibition went into effect, there was a sharp decline in medical writing about alcohol and its influence on offspring both in Britain and in the United States (Warner and Rosett, 1975). The advancing knowledge of genetics and statistics had made the old style of research obsolete. It is also probably true that Pearson and Elderton's studies contributed to this change. They had (1) discredited the studies on which the views of the medical temperance writers were

other factors in the production of diseased and defective children. It may also have relieved the social conscience and reinforced the moral complacency of the well-to-do in an age noted for its sentimentality and optimism on the one hand and its lack of compassion for human suffering on the other. It is possible that Pearson and Elderton, perhaps unknowingly, challenged more than the conventional wisdom that placed responsibility for their degradation on the poor themselves.

based; (2) suggested that sociological In any event, this controversy is an in-

160

Crowe

Social Biology

teresting example in our intellectual history of how a widely held, traditional idea can be tested, challenged, and eventually dispelled by a powerful method for establishing just what is the case. Negative results are often the most significant. As Pearson and Elderton pointed out in the Second Study, they expected, at the minimum, to reveal significant environmental differences between the children of drinking and

nondrinking parents. Suchfindings,or a finding of "cross-heredity" or "directheredity," would have been entirely compatible with their concerns as eugenicists. Their commitment to their method, however, was greater than their eugenic interests. Eventually their results, the inconclusiveness of the animal experiments, and the advance of genetic knowledge itself encouraged the consideration of other hypotheses.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BEZZOLA, D. 1901. A statistical investigation into the role of alcohol in the origin of innate imbecility. Quart. J. Inebriety 23:346-354.
BUCK, A. H. (ed.). 1902. A reference handbook of the medical sciences (rev. ed.), Vol. 5. William Wood and Company, New York.
CONKLIN, E. G. 1920. Heredity and environment in the development of men (3rd ed., rev.). Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
CROTHERS, T. D. 1887. Inebriety traced to the intoxication of parents at the time of conception. Medical and Surgical Reporter (Philadelphia) 56:549-551.
. 1890. Alcoholic heredity in diseases of children. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 15:531533.
. 1901. Report on heredity. Quart. J. Inebriety 23:194-203. DAVIS, N. S. 1899. Is there any causative or etiological relation between the extensive use of alcoholic drinks and the continued increase of epilepsy, imbecility, and insanity, both mental and moral, in all the countries of Europe and America? Quart. J. Inebriety 21:352-361.
ELDERTON, E. M., and K. PEARSON. 1910. A
first study of the influence of parental alcoholism on the physique and ability of the offspring (2nd ed.). Dulau and Company, London.
FOREL, A. 1893. The effect of alcoholic intoxication upon the human brain and its relation to the theories of heredity and evolution. Quart. J. Inebriety 15:203-221.
GUSTAPHSON, A. 1884. The foundation of death: A study of the drink question. Ginn, Heath and Company, Boston.
HOLMES, S. J. 1921.The trend of the race. Harcourt, Brace and Company, New York.

HOWE, S. G. 1848. Report made to the legislature of Massachusetts upon idiocy, Coolidge and Wiley, Boston.
LEWIS, W. B. 1906. Alcoholism, crime, and insanity. J. Mental SCi. LII, No. 217:203-219.
MACNICHOLL, T. A. 1902. Alcohol a cause of degeneracy. Quart. J. Inebriety 24:330335. . 1907. Alcohol and the disabilities of school children. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. February 2, p. 296-398.
MAGNAN, M., and A. FILLASSIER. 1912. Alco-
holism and degeneracy, p. 367-379. In Problems in eugenics: First International Eugenics Congress held at the University of London, July 25-30, 1912. The Eugenics Education Society, London.
MAUS, M. J. 1914. Alcohol and racial degeneracy. Med. Record (New York) 85:102-105.
MAYS, T. J. 1914. Alcoholism in relation to the heredity of epilepsy, consumption, and other nervous diseases. New York Med. J. 99:8-10.
MEYERS, F. C. 1898. Heredity as a causative factor of inebriety. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 31:1273-1274.
MOREL, B. 1857. Trait des dgnrescences physiques, intellectuelles, et morales de l'espEce humaine et des causes qui produisent ces varietEs maladives. Bailliere, Paris.
NATURE. 1911. Unsigned editorial, Feb. 9. PEARSON, K. 1924. The life, letters and labours
of Francis Galton, Vol. II. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
. 1930. The life, letters and labours of Francis Galton, Vol. IIIa. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
PEARSON, K., and E. M. ELDERTON. 1910. A
second study of the influence of parental alcoholism on the physique and ability of the

Vol. 32, No.

Alcohol and Heredity

161

offspring: Being a reply to certain medical critics of the first memoir and an examination of the rebutting evidence cited by them. Dulau and Company, London.
POTTS, W. A. 1905. Causation of mental defect in children. Brit. Med. J. October 14, p. 946-948.
STOCKARD, C. R. 1913, The effect on the offspring of intoxicating the male parent and the transmission of the defects to subsequent generations. Amer. Naturalist. XLVII, No. 563:641-682.
. 1916. The hereditary transmission of degeneracy and deformities by the descendants of alcoholized mammals. Interstate Med. J. 23:385-403.
. 1922. Alcohol as a selective agent in the improvement of racial stock. Brit. Med. J. 1922:255-259.

STOCKARD, C. R., and G. PAPANICOLAOU.
1916a. A further analysis of the hereditary transmission of degeneracy and deformities by the descendants of alcoholized mammals. Amer. Naturalist. L, No. 590:65-88.
. 1916b. A further analysis of the hereditary transmission of degeneracy and deformities by the descendants of alcoholized mammals. Amer. Naturalist. L, No. 591:144-147.
STURGE, M.D., and V. HORSLEY. 1911. On
some of the biological and statistical errors in the work on parental alcoholism by Miss Elderton and Professor Karl Pearson, F.R.S. Brit. Med. J., January 14, p. 72-82.
WARNER, R. H., and H. L. ROSETT. 1975. The
effects of drinking on offspring: An historical survey of the American and British literature. J. Stud. Alc. 36:1395-1420.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

