Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Kin relatedness and church fissioning among the "Nebraska" Amish of Pennsylvania
James P. Hurd
To cite this article: James P. Hurd (1983) Kin relatedness and church fissioning among the "Nebraska" Amish of Pennsylvania, Social Biology, 30:1, 59-66, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988516 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988516
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Kin Relatedness and Church Fissioning Among the "Nebraska" Amish of Pennsylvania

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

James P. Hurd
Department of Anthropology Pennsylvania State University University Park, Pennsylvania

ABSTRACT:A model of group fissioning, applied by Mange (1964) to a Hutterite population and by Chagnon (1975) to an Amazonian Indian population, is applied to the "Nebraska" Amish community in Central Pennsylvania. Genealogical data were collected on 228 living, married individuals and their known ancestors in two new churches resulting from the fission of a church in 1978. The acrimonious fissioning of the church produced increased levels of intrachurch genealogical relatedness in the two new churches formed, as compared to the level of relatedness in the original church, with a greater increase for male/male relatedness than for female/female relatedness. This general increase in relatedness, documented for three human populations and also for fissioning groups of rhesus macaques, conforms to predictions from kin selection theory.

The thesis of this paper is that when a During the course of my field work

kin-oriented society fissions, individuals among the "Nebraska" Amish of Cen-

tend to regroup with close relatives and tral Pennsylvania, the question arose as

separate from more distant relatives. to whether the fissioning of Amish

This thesis is based on a body of theory churches would be congruent with the

developed in evolutionary biology, par- theory of inclusive fitness and whether

ticularly theories of kin selection (Ham- fissioning would lead to higher within-

ilton, 1964; Maynard Smith, 1964). Kin group kin relatedness. The latter had

selection theorists predict that there is a been demonstrated for a Hutterite iso-

biological reason for cooperation be- late (Mange, 1964) and for the Yano-

tween related individuals, whatever the mamo of Venezuela (Chagnon, 1975).

additional cultural reasons may be. The Mange showed that R ("average genetic

Darwinian concept of individual fitness covariance," somewhat analogous to

is expanded to include the concept of in- Wright's Coefficient of Relationship as

clusive fitness. Inclusive fitness means used below) increased an average of 27

that individuals "weigh" the costs and per cent for males and 47 per cent for fe-

benefits of their behavior, considering males as the result of the fission of Hut-

not only their own survival and repro- terite colonies (Mange, 1964).

duction, but also that of their near rela- Chagnon developed a model to ex-

tives with whom they share a proportion plore the role of genealogical kinship

of genes identical by descent. There (putative or accepted genealogical

have been several attempts to test these links) in generating cohesion or "soli-

theories with respect to human social darity" in a Yanomamo village. Solidar-

behavior (e.g., Tiger and Fox, 1971; ity was defined as "the ability of mem-

Irons, 1979).

bers of a local group to live together with

59

60

Hurd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

a sufficient degree of amiability so they can settle their differences. . . and continue to remain a distinct local group" (Chagnon, 1975). The model is based on calculations of relatedness between pairs of individuals as discussed below and predicts that as a village grows in size, the closeness of genealogical relatedness among its members appears to decrease. After a village fissions, the relatedness (and presumably the "solidarity") in each of the daughter villages increases over what it was in the combined mother village. This increase in withingroup relatedness is an invariable aspect of newly-fissioned Yanomamd villages (Chagnon,1981).
A Yanomamo village is politically autonomous and has no effective higher level of authority to obey. An Amish church district has no higher religious authority to obey and is autonomous with respect to naming new ministers, disciplining errant members, and approving church rules. Just as Barnes suggested that African models of social organization seemed not to fit New Guinea data (Barnes, 1962), Chagnon argued that ecological models developed in New Guinea (Vayda, Rappaport) and applied to lowland South America (Harris, Ross, Gross) did not seem to fit as well as a biosocial model (Chagnon, 1980). Here, I argue that the model of fissioning applied to the Hutterites and to the Yanomamo can be applied to other groups, because it is based on a general biosocial propensity of human kinship groups.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Over 85,000 Amish individuals live in the United States and Canada. Along with the Hutterites and Mennonites, they share Anabaptist roots that reach

back to sixteenth-century Germany and Switzerland (Hostetler, 1980). The Anabaptists (represented today by the Amish, Hutterites, Mennonites, and Brethren), embraced pacifism, separation from the world, baptism of believing adults only, and a simple farming way of life. Today, the Mennonite churches are the most highly acculturated to the greater U.S. society. Hutterites live a more separated life on communal farms. The Amish have family-owned farms where they use agricultural machinery developed in the last century, with the horse providing the only traction power in the fields. The Nebraska Amish of Central Pennsylvania are the most faithful of all Pennsylvania Amish to religious tradition and custom and use technology simple even by Amish standards.
The Nebraska Amish church is so named because an Amish bishop from Nebraska organized the church in Mifflin County in 1880. Their communities are located in Mifflin, Centre, Snyder, and Union counties in Central Pennsylvania.
Figure 1 shows the geographic locations of the three present-day Nebraska Amish churches.
The three churches are designated CZA, SYA, and RYA to preserve a measure of anonymity. The church districtsare geographic entities and represent groups of families that meet for biweekly worship in the farm home of one of the members. The CZA church is composed of ML, WD, and PM church districts; the RYA church is composed of PR and WA church districts; and the SYA church is composed of LL, CL, and MC church districts.
The churches themselves are constellations of church districts that exchange ministers, share similar church rules,

Vol. 30, No. 1

Kin Relatedness

Counties -- Churches :
CZA RYA H 1---1 h SYA
0 5 10 km

~-- centre
Pi/

scale

--

/

union snyder

61
I \ \
/
I

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

PENNSYLVANIA ^

i

/X-^l

j

LL
FIG. 1.--The Nebraska Amish in Central Pennsylvania: CZA church (3 districts), SYA church (3 districts) and RYAchurch (2districts).

and form endogamous mating groups. to obtain a measure of kin relatedness,

Note that theboundaries of severalof or "solidarity," in the church. Themea-

the church districts almost coincide with sure used was themean Coefficient of

the boundaries of the districts of other Relationship (/?) between all possible

churches. Before 1933, the Nebraska pairs ofindividuals inthe old CZA

Amish constituted asingle church.An church. The same calculation was then

acrimoniousfissionin1933, and another made for all possible pairs of individuals

in 1978, produced the three churches within the two newchurches and all pos-

which exist at present, referred to in this sible pairs of individuals between

paper as the SYA, CZA, andRYA churches (i.e., where one member of

churches. This paper analyzes the fission the pair wasin one church and the other

that occurred in 1978 in the old CZA member wasin the other church). In or-

church, which resulted inthe establish- der to calculate thevalue of R, it was

ment of the present-day CZA church necessary to calculate first the Coef-

and the RYA church.

ficient of Inbreeding (F)(Wright, 1922):

In both the Yanomamo and theHut-

terite cases, fission involved a geo-

(1)

graphic separation, with part of the

group moving a distance away to found The value ofnl is the number ofgenea-

a newunit. In the case of the Amish, the logical steps from ego's first parent to

fissioningis sociological in that at the the common ancestor, nl is the number

moment ofthefissionthere wasnogeo- of genealogical steps from ego's second

graphic movement ofthe dissenting fac- parent to thesame common ancestor,

tions but rather a social reorganization and Fais the inbreeding coefficient of

of the worshipping group.

this common ancestor. The formula in-

In order to apply thefissioningmodel side brackets is applied to each different

to theNebraska Amish, itwasnecessary pathway through each common ances-

62

Hurd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

tor, and the results are summed, to give spring (real or hypothetical) of the two

F. The value of Fis based on the number individuals. The value of R is an index of

of ancestors common to both of ego's the proportion of genes any two individ-

parents, and their genealogical distance uals share in common.

from ego, and measures the probability For our purposes, R is a measure of

that alleles at the same genetic locus will how closely any two individuals are bio-

be identical by descent. The calculation logically related. Because pedigrees are

of Fis dependent on complete genealog- truncated at five generations, the value

ical trees going back five generations for of R will be less than if the pedigrees

each individual. For the Nebraska were deeper. However, the derived val-

Amish sample, these trees, or pedi- ues for R are entirely adequate for our

grees, are 91.1 per cent complete five purposes here since we are interested in

generations from ego.

relative, not absolute, levels of related-

The Coefficient of Inbreeding is cal- ness between individuals.

culated on genealogical relatedness, is During 1979-801 collected genealog-

dependent on the generational depth of ical and demographic data on all Ne-

the pedigree, and will be identical to bi- braska Amish individuals, including 228

ologicalrelatedness only insofar as puta- currently-married individuals in the old

tive genealogical relationships reflect CZA church. R was calculated for all

actual biological relationships. In the possible pairs of the 228 individuals.

case of the Amish these two types of re- These people are the independent

latedness are highly likely to be identi- decision-makers in Amish society and

cal. There is no divorce; all marriages would be the individuals who choose a

are monogamous; the group has strict new church at the time of a fission. Had

sexual mores; almost all couples marry children been included, the levels of re-

immediately if they conceive a child out latedness would have been even higher

of wedlock; and finally, the high degree because of the close relationships within

of personal interaction in the commu- the nuclear family. Finally, the mean re-

nity allows close monitoring of illicit liai- lationship of all pairs, or dyads, was cal-

sons. culated. This mean relationship ex-

The Coefficient of Relationship (R) presses how closely on average any two represents the probability that alleles at community members are related, and homologous loci in two individuals will thus it is an overall measure of the de-

be identical by descent (Wright, 1922). gree of relatedness in a group. For sim-

plicity I consider the 1980 population in

2F; the combined CZA and RYA churches (2) to be the same population that existed in the old CZA church in 1978 at the time

the church fissioned. There were fewer

F = Coefficient of Inbreeding (see For- than ten individuals who died, married, mula 1); i = the first individual in the or migrated between 1978 and 1980.

dyad; and/=the second individual. F; is

the first individual's Coefficient of Inbreeding; Fj is the second individual's

RESULTS

Coefficient of Inbreeding, and F,7 is the Before the fission, the old CZA

Coefficient of Inbreeding of the off- church was composed of 228 married in-

Vol. 30, No. 1

Kin Relatedness

63

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

dividuals. After fission, 142 (62.3 per ads that have at least one ancestor in cent) of the married individuals re- common, or alternatively, the average mained in the CZA church, 86 (37.7 per per cent of the population that each indicent) formed the new RYA church. No vidual is related to. Prior to thefission marriages dissolved as a result of the there were 25,878 possible dyads in the fission.The immediate consequence of sample. Of these dyadic pairs, 90.4 per thefissionwas that instead of all individ- cent were related. This high number of uals meeting in one farm home for bi- related pairs indicates a closed populaweekly church services, the two factions tion with few immigrants. Relatedness began meeting in separate farm homes. between pairs is complex. On the averThe fission did produce a strain toward age, a pair of individuals is related in five geographic relocation, because individu- different ways or via five different geneals who found themselves "displaced" alogical pathways. By measuring relattended to eventually move if they could edness between all possible dyads and locate suitable farmland nearer the cen- then averaging, we obtain a Mean Coefter of their worshipping community. The ficient of Relationship (/?) for the dyads fission also had the effect of segregating in general. This average measures the the gene pool, since subsequently mates probable relatedness between two indiwould be chosen primarily from within viduals drawn at random from the samthe boundaries of the new churches. ple. The mean relationship between all
Table 1summarizes the kinship infor- possible pairs is 0.0648. For comparimation before and after the fission. son, the relationship between first cous-
"Number of dyads" refers to all pos- ins is0.1250, and 0.0312 between second sible pairs of individuals. "Per cent of cousins. dyads related" is the per cent of all dy- The "after fission" part of the table

TABLE 1
COMPARISON OF ALL DYADS FOR 114 MARRIED MALES AND 114 MARRIED FEMALES BEFORE AND AFTER THE FISSIONING OF THE CZA CHURCH IN 1978

DYADS
All dyads No. of dyads % of dyads related Meancoeff. ofrelat. (7?) ,
Male/male dyads No. of dyads % of dyads related Meancoeff. ofrelat. (R) .
Female/female dyads No. of dyads % of dyads related Mean coeff. ofrelat. (R) .

BEFORE FISSION
25,878 90.4 0.0648
6,441 92.7 0.0690
6,441 88.3 0.0609

AFTER FISSION

Within-church Dyads

Between-church Dyads

13,666 92.2 0.0767

12,212 88.3 0.0514

3,388 94.4 0.0848

3,053 90.8 0.0515

3,388 90.6 0.0709

3,053 85.7 0.0499

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

64

Hurd

Social Biology

demonstrates the sorting ofindividuals mean value ofR forthese dyads fellto

into groups where they aremore closely 0.0514. Themean relatedness for all

related toindividuals within their new possible pairs within both new churches

church than they are toindividuals in the is 49.2 per cent greater than the mean re-

other new church. Thedifference is ap- latedness forallpossible pairs between

parent in thecomparison of all dyads churches. A f-test for the difference be-

within newchurches, as opposed to dy- tween twosample means demonstrates

ads that cross church boundaries. The this statistically significant difference

important fact is the increase inrelated- (r=23.096;/>r.<0.001).

ness within churches after the fission, Because the Amish are "patrifocal"

and the decrease inrelatedness between in their ideology andpractice, wewould

churches (see Fig.2).

expect that married males would havea

After the church fissioned, there disproportionate influence onchoice of

were 13,666 possible dyads between in- church membership at time of fission

dividuals in thesame church. Each indi- compared tomarried females. The bot-

vidual was related to an average of92.2 tom portion ofTable 1shows thesex dif-

per cent ofthe individuals inhis or her ferences with regard to relatedness.

new church, and asaresult ofthe fission, Both before and after the fission, males

the mean Coefficient of Relationship had slightly more relatives of the same

(R) between dyads rose from 0.0648to sex than females hadandwere more

0.0767.

closely related to these male relatives

12,212 possible dyads existed across than females were to their female relachurch lines, with each individual being tives. There were 6,441male/maledy-

related onaverage to 88.3 percent ofin- ads before fission, with amean Rvalue dividuals in the opposite church. The of 0.0690. After fission, the mean value

I I within churches \££t between churches

cc
z
IUJ

i

all

male/male

female/female

DYADS

FIG. 2.--Mean Coefficients ofRelationship (R)within and between churches after the 1978fissionof the CZA church.

Vol. 30, No. 1

Kin Relatedness

65

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

of R for 3,388 male dyads within filiations are not contiguous geographic

churches rose to 0.0848, 64.7 per cent entities. Indeed, each affiliation has

higher than the mean R for all between- church districts in two separate areas,

church male/male dyads (0.0515). A t- and six of the eight church districts are

test demonstrated, the statistical substantially overlapped with church

significance of this difference districts of another affiliation.

(/= 14.478, /?r.<0.001). There were 6,441 female/female dyads before fissionwith a mean R value of 0.0609. After fission, the mean value of R for

In addition to the overall patterns of relatedness, there were striking differences between male/male and female/ female relatedness. Male/male related-

within-church female/female dyads rose ness within the new churches was

to 0.0709. The mean R for these dyads absolutely and relatively higher than

was 42.1 per cent higher than the mean was female/female relatedness, reflect-

R for between-church female/female dy- ing the "patrifocality" of Amish society

ads (f=9.53,/>r.<.001).

(Fig. 2). To the extent that genealogical

The significant fact here is the com- kinship reflects group solidarity or coheparison between male and female pat- sion, this method allows us to measure

terns of relatedness after fission. solidarity in a group where genealogical Whereas the mean R for females was kinship is an important factor in individ-

42.1 per cent greater within than be- ual behavior. The increased levels of re-

tween churches, the mean R for males latedness in the new churches, and the was 64.7 per cent greater within than be- male bias in this relatedness, lead us to

tween churches (see Fig. 2). These data believe that "patrilineages" of brothers

suggest that males preferentially re- may be the cohesive groups that remain group with other close male relatives at together at the time of Amish church

the expense of females regrouping with fission.Hutterite fissioning presents an their female relatives--a reflection, and interesting contrast in that, although

perhaps measure, of the "patrifocality" Hutterite postmarital residence is patri-

of Amish society (see Chagnon, 1981, local, at the time of community fission for similar findings on the patrilineal the relatedness of wives increases more

Yanomamo). These findings contrast than that of husbands (Mange, 1964).

with the Hutterite data, where at time of The increased relatedness in the new

fission, female within-group relatedness Nebraskan churches can be seen as a

rose more than that of the males tendency for individuals to "circum-

(Mange, 1964).

scribe" (defined by Chagnon, 1968) a

group of close kinsmen within a social

DISCUSSION

boundary (in this case, the worshipping community), and, by default, exclude

The analysis demonstrates that, after less-closely-related kin. This worship-

thefissionof the CZA church, individu- ing, kin-related group that forms and re-

als were more highly related to mem- forms as a result offissionsin the Amish

bers of their new church than they were church gives us a clue to the success and

to members of the old combined church. survival of the Amish way of life.

It is clear that the basis of church fission The study of macaque social groups

is not geographic. An examination of by Chepko-Sade and Olivier (1979)

Figure 1reveals that the three church af- demonstrates the same increase in

66

Hurd

Social Biology

group relatedness after fissioning. The discovery of the same kin behavior in three human societies and in macaque social groups is striking and conforms to predictions from kin selection theory. This mode of fissioning produces two distinctive gene pools whose genetic characteristics and evolutionary careers may be quite different. It may also suggest a mechanism of evolutionary change pervasive in ancestral hominid populations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research for this paper was supported by a grant from the Hill Foundation for Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University, anda NEH grant to J. A. Hostetler, who provided valuable counsel during the field-work process. I amindebted to Thomas Melancon, Pennsylvania State University, for designing a computer program to allow tracing and linking of these pedigrees for each pair of individuals in the sample, and for help in the analytical process. For constructive comments on the text I thank C. Clogg, R. Eckhardt, andT. Baker.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BARNES, J. A. 1962. African models in theNew HAMILTON, W.D. 1964.Thegenetical evolu-

Guinea highlands. Man2:5-20.

tion ofsocial behavior. II. J. Theoret. Biol.

CHAGNON, N. A. 1968. The culture-ecology of

7:17-52.

shifting (pioneering) cultivation amongthe HOSTETLER, J. A. 1980. Amish society. The

Yanomamö Indians. In Proceedings of the Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

Eighth International Congress of Anthro- HURD, J. 1981.Mate choice among the Ne-

pological and Ethnological Sciences. Sep- braska Amish of central Pennsylvania.

tember. Tokyo, Japan.

Ph.D. dissertation. Pennsylvania State

. 1975. Genealogy, solidarity, and relat- Univ., University Park.

edness: Limits to local group size and pat- IRONS, W. A.1979. Cultural andbiological suc-

terns of fissioning in an expanding popula- cess, p. 257-272. InN. A.Chagnon and W.

tion. Yearbook ofPhys. Anthrop., Vol. 19. A. Irons (eds.), Evolutionary biology and

. 1980. Highland New Guinea modelsin human social behavior: An anthropological

the South American lowlands. In R. Hames perspective, Duxbury Press, North Sci-

(ed.), Studies in hunting and fishing in the tuate, Mass.

neotropics, Issue No. 2 (K.Kensinger,se- MANGE, A. 1964.Growth and inbreeding ofa

ries editor, Working papers on South Amer- human isolate. Hum. Biol. 36(2):104-133.

ican Indians). Bennington College, Ver- MAYNARD SMITH, J. 1964. Group selection and

mont.

kin selection. Nature 20(4927):1145-1147.

. 1981. Terminological kinship, genea- MELANCON, T. F. 1981.Marriage and repro-

logical relatedness, and village fissioning duction among the Yanomamö Indians of

among the Yanomamö Indians, p.490-508.

Venezuela. Ph.D. dissertation. Pennsylva-

In R.D. Alexander andD.W. Tinkle (eds.),

nia State University, University Park.

Natural selection andsocial behavior:Re- TIGER, L., and R. Fox. 1971.The imperial ani-

cent research andnew theory. Chiron Press, mal. McClelland and Steward Ltd., To-

New York.

ronto.

CHEPKO-SADE, B. D., and T. J. OLIVER. 1979. WRIGHT, S. 1922. Coefficients of inbreeding

Coefficient of genetic relationship and the and kinship. Amer. Natur. 56:330-338.

probability of intragenealogical fission in

Macaca mulatta. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.

5:263-278.

