Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Son preference among Filipino Muslims: A causal analysis
William F. Stinner & Paul Douglas Mader
To cite this article: William F. Stinner & Paul Douglas Mader (1975) Son preference among Filipino Muslims: A causal analysis, Social Biology, 22:2, 181-188, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988163 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988163
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Son Preference Among Filipino Muslims: A Causal Analysis

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

William F. Stinner and Paul Douglas Mader
Department of Sociology and Population Issues Research Office, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania; and Department of Sociology and Anthropology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama

The begetting of sons has occupied a prominent position in a number of Asian religious systems and, as such, has served to reinforce large family-size norms in societies faced with high and variable mortality. For example, in Hinduism, sons, through religious intervention, are seen as potential saviors for the father and the ancestral past (Fagley, 1967, p. 78). In Buddhism, sons are viewed as potential religious functionaries, i.e., prospective candidates for the Buddhist monkhood, thus earning additional merit, not only for themselves, but also for the parents who gave them life (Ling, 1969, p. 55). Among Muslim populations, sons are viewed as having religious utility through their religious intervention before and after death (Kirk, 1966, p. 568).
However, these religious considerations are often intertwined with other economic and sociological considerations among the peasant constituencies of these various religious systems. For example, sons in peasant societies are considered to have economic utility in terms of assistance in agricultural production and provision of security in parental old age (Freedman, 1963, p. 230; Kirk, 1966, p. 568; ElHamamsy, 1972, p. 353). Similarly, in

these societies where kinship looms important and stress is placed on the continuity of the kinship lineage, the presence of sons is seen as insuring the perpetuation of the family name and the continuation and extension of the kinship lineage (Kirk, 1966, p. 568; El-Hamamsy, 1972, p. 353). Moreover, within the patriarchal patrilocal complex, the status and prestige of women is directly linked to the reproductive function and specifically the bearing of male children (El-Hamamsy, 1972, p. 354). In sum, it becomes difficult to disentangle those effects on son preference emanating from religious considerations from the constellation of folk mores characterizing the social system of peasants in general (see, for example, El-Hamamsy, 1972; Kirk, 1966, p. 568-569).
The foregoing points are aptly stressed when we consider reasons advanced for son preference among Muslims, to wit, lineage continuation, female subordination, kin strength in village conflict, the nature of the inheritance system, economic security, and religious interventon before and after death (see Kirk, 1966, p. 568; El-Hamamsy, 1972, p. 353-354). As can be seen, this listing contains items from a number of institutional domains such as

181

182

Stinner and Mader

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

the economic system, kinship structure, and female roles, over and above strictly religious considerations. Alternatively, it remains problematic as to whether son preference pervades all subgroups within Muslim society.
This analysis represents an exploratory attempt to gain a better appreciation of the relative efficacy of several of these analytical dimensions in explaining relative son preference, i.e., the preference for sons as opposed to daughters. The investigation focuses on the Muslim population residing in the southern islands of Mindanao and Sulu in the Philippines. In a previous study, we found that Filipino Muslims tended to exibit a greater relative preference for both more sons and more sons than daughters than other subgroups in the Philippine population (Stinner and Mader, 1975). This research aims at evaluating the extent to which son preference varies among subgroups within the Filipino Muslim population.
Five major questions are addressed in this investigation. First, is there an association between religious integration and son preference? In other words, are women who are more integrated into the Muslim religion more likely to exhibit a greater degree of son preference than less integrated women? Second, is there a relationship between household economic status and son preference? Do females from high economic status families opt for sons as opposed to daughters more so than females from low economic status families, for example, to consolidate the high economic status of the family? Conversely, does the precarious economic situation of low income Muslim females provide a motivational base for son preference to enhance prospects for economic mobility? Third, is there an association between female educational status and son preference? Would we anticipate that the higher

the educational status of Muslim females the less likely they would be to view their household status as predicated on the bearing of more sons than daughters? Likewise, it could possibly be argued that more highly educated Muslim women would specify preferences as to the sex composition of children more on an individual basis divorced to some degree from the preferences of the broader kinship structure. Fourth, to what extent do each of these three factors retain independent effects on son and daughter preference when considered simultaneously? Fifth, how do son and daughter preference mediate between the above three factors and total ideal family size?
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The data used in this study are drawn from a nationwide survey of 9,234 evermarried Filipino women conducted in May and June of 1972 by the Philippine Bureau of the Census. This present exploratory research focuses on a subsample of these women, namely 1S3 ever-married Muslim women aged 20-34 residing in rural households on the southern Philippine Islands of Mindanao and Sulu.
The preference data are derived from an initial question with subsequent probes. The initial question was: "If you could start married life all over again up to the time you reach 49 years of age, how many children would you want to have?" If respondents answered with such comments as "up to fate, God, chance," the following question was asked: "Many people feel as you do, but still they have some idea of what they would want God (or fate or chance) to send them. How about you? How many children would you have liked to have?" These qestions were followed by: "Among these children, how many boys and girls would you want to have?"
Repondents were then given the oppor-

Vol. 22, No. 2 Son Preference Among Filipino Muslims

183

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

tunity to list the number of boys and girls There are two phases to the analysis.

they preferred or whether they were "in- The first phase consists of an assessment

different." Of the original 207 eligible of differentials in the number of sons and

respondents, S3 were eliminated from the daughters preferred for each of the three

sample because .they specified "indiffer- independent variables. This section is

ence." This response could be construed followed by a path analysis setup. First,

as no preference or, perhaps, resignation total family size preferences are decom-

to the will of Allah. Only one woman was posed into the son and daughter compo-

eliminated because of nonresponse.

nents. Second, the relative effects of the

Sex preference is related to three inde- three exogenous variables, i.e., religious

pendent variables derived from our three, integration, household economic status,

constructs, i.e., religious integration, house- and female educational status, on son and

hold economic status, and female educa- daughter preference, respectively, are as-

tional status. Religious integration is sessed. The three exogenous variables are

judged by the number of times respon- treated as dichotomous dummy variables,

dents attend religious services. This indi- with the same breaking points used as in

cator is the only "religiosity" related item phase one above. Third, an investigation

included in the survey; therefore, we are of the means by which the three exogenous

forced to live with it, although with full variables transmit their impact on total

recognition of its inchoate nature. House- family size preferences (i.e., via son pref-

hold economic status is measured by the erence or daughter preference) is con-

annual income (in pesos) of the family ducted.

from all sources. Finally, female educa-

tional status is evaluated by the number

RESULTS

of years of formal educational attainment Table 1 contains the mean number of

achieved by the woman.

children, sons, and daughters preferred by

TABLE l
MEAN NUMBER OF CHILDREN, SONS, AND DAUGHTERS PREFERRED BY RELIGIOUS INTEGRATION, HOUSEHOLD ECONOMIC STATUS, AND FEMALE EDUCATIONAL STATUS: EVER-MARRIED MUSLIM WOMEN, AGED 20-34, RESIDING m RURAL AREAS OP MINDANAO AND SULU

SELECTED
CHAEACTEEISTICS
Religious integration Religious service attendance Once per week or more Less than once per week Ratio (High/Low)
Household economic status Annual household income in pesos 3,000 pesos or more Less than 3,000 pesos Ratio (High/Low)
Female educational status Years of formal schooling Four years or more Less than four years Ratio (High/Low)
Total

MEAN NOMBEE or CHILDREN

Total Children

Sons

Daughters

5.86 3.15 2.67 4.56 2.28 2.28 1.28 1.38 1.17

5.89 3.19 2.70 5.31 2.81 2.50 1.11 1.14 1.08

4.83 2.48 2.35

5.83 3.15

2.68

0.83 0.79 0.88

5.51 2.94 2.57

RATIO (SONS/ DAUGHTERS)

No. or
RESPONDENTS

1.18 117 1.00 36

1.18 53 1.12 100

1.07 48 1.23 105
1.18 153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

184

Stinner and Mader

Social Biology

women who gave a specific numerical response to the question. As the table shows, higher religious integration and household economic status and lower female educational status are associated with larger family-size preferences. More specifically, Muslim women with high religious integration enunciated total family size preferences 28 per cent higher than women with low religious integration (5.86 vs. 4.56) and women residing in high income households stated preferences 11 per cent higher than women in low income households (5.89 vs. 5.31). The overall family-size preferences of Muslim women with high educational status, however, were 17 per cent less than those women with low educational status (4.83 vs. 5.83).
When we examine mean number of sons and daughters preferred, the same patterns observed for overall family-size preferences are in evidence, i.e., an increase with increased religious integration and household economic status and a decline with higher levels of female educational attainment (see column ratios). Nevertheless, the degree of change is greater for son preference than for daughter preference. Higher religious integration results in a 38 per cent increase in number of sons preferred compared to a 17 per cent increase in the number of daughters preferred. Higher household economic status produces a 14 per cent increment in the

number of sons preferred as opposed to an 8 per cent increase in the number of daughters preferred. Finally, higher levels of female educational attainment generate a 21 per cent decline in number of sons preferred contrasted to a 12 per cent decrease in number of daughters preferred.
The relatively greater increase of sons as opposed to daughters preferred with high levels of religious integration and household economic status results in a higher differential between sons and daughters preferred, whereas the relatively greater decline of sons as opposed to daughter preference with higher female education results in a contraction of the son-daughter differential (see row ratios). The level of son preference is 18 per cent higher than daughter preference for high religious integration women compared to no difference among women with low levels of religious integration. The differential is 18 per cent for women in high income households compared to 12 per cent for women in low income households. Alternatively, the differential is but 7 per cent for Muslim women with high levels of educational attainment contrasted to 23 per cent for women with .low levels of educational attainment.
We now proceed to a multivariate analysis of son and daughter preference among these Muslim women. Table 2 contains an intercorrelation matrix inclusive of all variables in the analysis. The

TABLE 2
MATRIX OF BIVARIATE CORRELATIONS*

VARIABLES
XI--Religious integration X2--Household economic status X3--Female educational status X4--Sons X5--Daughters X6--Total family size

XI
0.177 --0.123
0.232 0.131 0.207

X2
0.159 0.114 0.071 0.10S

X3
--0.197 --0.119 --0.179

· Total number of cases = 15J.

X4

XS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No.2 SONS

SonPreference Among Filipino Muslims

185

0.664

TOTAL FAMILY SIZE

DAUGHTERS
Fie. 1.--Decomposition of total family-size preferences.
path diagram illustrated in Figure 1 sons andthepreference for daughters, i.e., contains the decomposition of total family- as the number of sons preferred increases size preferences and the respective stan- so does the number of daughters (r = dardized regression coefficients. Consider- 0.644). ing the decomposition of total family size Figure 2 consists of the hypothesized first, we note that son preference has a relationships among the various model higher direct effect on total family size variables and the respective standardized preference than does daughter preference regression coefficients andresiduals. I t can (0.614 vs. 0.487). In other words, the be gleaned from this figure, as well as preference forsons contributes more to the Table 3, that the exogenous variables, explanation of variation in total family- namely, religious integration, household size preferences than does the preference economic status, and female educational for daughters. Furthermore, it can be status have differing effects on son and pointed out that there is a high degree of daughter preference, respectively. relationship between the preference for Religious integration has a significant
RELIGIOUS INTEGRATION

-0-123

HOUSEHOLD ECONOMIC STATUS

'TOTAL FAMILY SIZE

·FEMALE EDUCATIONAL
STATUS
0.983 ' ·Significant standardized regression coefficients (at least twice the standard error).
FIG. 2.--Path diagram for complete model.

0.952 0.629

186 Stinner and Mader

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
TOTAL AND DIRECT EFFECTS OF RELIGIOUS INTEGRATION, HOUSEHOLD ECONOMIC STATUS, AND FEMALE EDUCATIONAL STATUS ON SONAND DAUGHTER PREFERENCE

VABIABLES
Sons Religious integration Religious service attendance Household economic status Annual household income in pesos Female educational status Years of formal schooling
Daughters Religious integration Religious service attendance Household economic status Annual household income in pesos Female educational status Years of formal schooling

R2 = 0.094 R2 = 0.033

Total

EFIECTS*

Dirpct

0.232 0.114 --0.197

O.189f 0.111 --0.191f

0.131 0.071 --0.119

0.104 0.071 --0.118

* Total effects are equivalent to the zero-order correlations. The direct effect is the standardized regression coefficient. t Standardized regression coefficients which are at least twice their, standard errors.

positive effect on son preference (0.189), whereas female educational status has a significant negative impact (--0.191). Although household economic status is related positively to son preference (0.111), the effect is not statistically significant. In sum,high religious integration and low female educational status produce strong preferences for sons. None of the exogenous variables has a statistically significant effect on daughter preference. Thus, although the prior tabulations suggested an increase in daughter preference with high religious integration and household economic status and low educational status, we find these differences to be of no major import.
The combined effect of the three exogenous variables on son and daughter preference still leaves a substantial amount of variance unexplained. In terms of son preference, 95 per cent of the variation can be attributed to residual factors, whereas for daughters the residual component amounts to 98 per cent. Thus, the three exogenous variables account for

slightly more of the variation in son preference than daughter preference. Finally, it can be seen that the three exogenous variables account for a minimal part of the correlation between son and daughter preference. The partial correlation fsD-BBF is equal to 0.629, only 0.015 less than the bivariate correlation between mean number of sons and mean number of daughters preferred (r = 0.644).
We can evaluate the extent to which son and daughter preference intervene between the three exogenous variables and total family-size preference by means of the following equations.1
(1) Religious integration:
>"TJt -- pT8?8B -f" pTD^DR-
0.206 = 0.142 -f 0.064.
(2) Household economic status: fTB = pTSr8B - j - pTDrDE0.105 = 0.070 -f 0.035.
1R = religious integration; E = household economic status; E = female educational status; S = son preference; D daughter preference; T -- total family-size preference.

Vol. 22, No. 2 Son Preference Among Filipino Muslims

187

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

(3) Female educational status:
TIE -- pTS^SE + pTDfDS--0.179 = --0.121 + --0.058.
The striking fact emerging from the above equations is that the effects of the three exogenous variables on total familysize preference are transmitted primarily via son preference and only secondarily via daughter preference. Slightly more than two-thirds of the total effect of each of the exogenous variables on total family size preference is transmitted via son preference.
CONCLUSIONS
The initial phase of this analysis pointed to an increase in both the number of sons and daughters preferred with higher levels of religious integration and family economic status. On the other hand, higher levels of female educational attainment resulted in lower numbers of sons and daughters preferred. For both religious integration and family economic status, the increase in the number of sons preferred was greater than that for daughters, this being especially the case for religious integration. In addition, the relative decline in the number of sons preferred with higher educational status was somewhat greater than the decline in the number of daughters preferred. Among less religiously integrated and more highly educated women, we can note a tendency toward preferences for a balanced family, whereas among more religiously integrated and less educated Muslim women the stress is decidedly in the direction of sons as opposed to daughters. However, among women from both high and low economic status households, relative preference for sons as opposed to daughters is evident, although this is more the case with high economic status women than low economic status women.
The relatively greater impact of reli-

gious integration and female educational status on son preference as opposed to daughter preference became evident in the second phase of the analysis. Whereas religious integration and educational status had significant effects on the number of sons preferred, they did not have significant effects on the number of daughters preferred. Household economic status exhibited no significant effect on either the number of sons or daughters preferred. Moreover, the influence of our three exogenous variables on total family-size preferences was markedly transmitted via son preference rather than daughter preference.
It can perhaps be argued that the strong effect of religious integration on son preference as opposed to daughter preference reflects theological considerations. Highly integrated Muslim women could be considered to be more integrated into Muslim ritualism in general; thus, they would view sons as having definitive religious utility through religious propitiation for the family and ancestral past (see Kirk, 1966, p. 568).
It is noteworthy that similar effects on family sex composition preferences were not obtained for economic status and female educational status. This finding suggests that these two components of socioeconomic status need to be kept analytically distinct. The possibility that sons have economic utility in both high and low economic status households could be seriously entertained. In high income households, sons may be viewed as necessary to consolidate and perpetuate the high economic status of the household, whereas among low income households, given their precarious economic situation, sons could be viewed as essential to the maintenance of even a minimal economic standard of living or perhaps even necessary for economic mobility.
Given the previous conclusion, we can

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

188

Stinner and Mader

Social Biology

argue that lowered son preference is not a function of higher economic status but rather a function of changes in the educational status of Muslim women. With the upgrading of the status of Muslim women, the strong patriarchal complex could be weakened. Social mobility could provide alternative sources for status and prestige other than through the reproductive nexus. Similarly, social mobility could enhance the prospects for a more individualized orientation to sex composition preferences divorced from the social control of the broader kinship structure.
Several final points should be stressed. First, in none of the subgroups was there in evidence a preference for fewer than two sons. This finding could imply that, even in the situation of a balanced family sex composition pattern, son preference is still evident. However, this finding would then reflect the preference for a minimal number of sons and not necessarily a strong preference for more sons than daughters. Second, approximately onequarter of the total potential sample of women enunciated no preference as to the sex composition of their families. These women tended to be less religiously integrated, of low economic status, and of low educational status. In essence, higher religious integration, household economic sta-

tus, and female educational status are associated with defined preferences as to family sex composition. I t may be that among these women the rational notion of utility becomes salient, although the preceding findings suggest that the various dimensions of utility are not of similar importance in the determination of sex composition preferences.
A third point that should be mentioned is that these respondents were women, and it may very well be that responses would have been different if the respondents had been Muslim men. I t would be interesting to speculate whether the same significant negative effect of female educational status on son preference would be evident hadwe been able to allocate responses of thehusband within the categorization of female status.
In conclusion, the preceding analysis demonstrates the importance and potential benefits of both decomposing overall family-size preference into its son and daughter components as well as of beginning to disentangle more systematically the array of characteristics generally associated with son preference. Only with such systematic approaches will a more comprehensive understanding of the interchanges between the normative milieu and reproductive behavior be obtained.

REFERENCES

EL-HAMAMSY, LAILA SHUKRY. 1972. Belief sys- ceedings of the Royal Society B, Vol. 159,

tems and family planning in peasant societies, No. 974. Royal Society, London.

pp. 335-337. In Harrison Brown and Edward KIRK, DUDLEY. 1966. Factors affecting Moslem

Hutchings, Jr. (eds.), Are our descendants natality, pp. 561-579. In Bernard R. Berelson

doomed? Technological change and population et al. (eds.), Family planning and population

growth. The Viking Press, New York.

programs. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

FAGLEY, RICHARD. 1967. Doctrines and attitudes
of major religions in regard to fertility, pp. 7884. In World Population Conference, 1965. Vol. II. United Nations, New York.

LING, T. O. 1969. Buddhist factors in population growth and control: A survey based on Thailand and Ceylon. Pop. Stud. 23:53-60.
STINNER, WILLIAM F., and PAUL DOUGLAS MADER.
1975. Sons, daughters, or both?: An analysis

FREEDMAN, RONALD. 1963. Norms for family size of family sex composition preferences in the

in underdeveloped areas, pp. 220-240. In Pro- Philippines. Demography 12:67-79.

