Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Religious identity and attitudes toward contraceptives among university students in Nigeria
Ikponmwosa Owie
To cite this article: Ikponmwosa Owie (1983) Religious identity and attitudes toward contraceptives among university students in Nigeria, Social Biology, 30:1, 101-105, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988520 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988520
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Brief Reports
Religious Identity and Attitudes Toward Contraceptives Among University Students in Nigeria

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Ikponmwosa Owie
Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City, Nigeria

ABSTRACT: This study aimed at identifying subtle differences in attitudes toward the use of contraceptives of university students from the various religious groups in Nigeria. Major and significant differences were observed among Moslems, Christians, and indigenous religious groups. The Moslem group appeared to have internalized more negative attitudes toward contraceptives than did the other two groups. However, a considerable number of respondents from all groups possessed negative attitudes toward contraception. In each religious group a majority of respondents agreed with the statement, "Contraception is an unnecessary interference with nature."

The purpose of this study was to in- ranged from 15 to 45, with higher scores

vestigate the influence of religious af- being indicative of more positive atti-

filiationupon the attitudes of Nigerian tudes.

university students toward the use of Positive attitudes were seen as posi-

contraceptives. Very little is known tions indicative of desires to use or to en-

about differences in attitudes toward courage others to use contraceptives.

contraception as a function of religious Eight items were favorable to the use of

identity among populations in the devel- contraceptives; the other seven ex-

oping countries. This study attempts to pressed opinions that were unfavorable.

partially close this gap.

All items were designed by the author

after a search of the literature. The in-

ventory was pilot-tested with a group of MATERIALS AND METHODS students at a college of education in

A fifteen-item inventory was constructed to assess differences in attitudes of Nigerian university students toward the use of contraceptives. Religious affiliation was the independent variable. Responses were solicited via a three point Likert-type scale with the re-

Benin City, Nigeria, in order to enhance face validity, content validity, and identification of non-plausible distractors. A reliability coefficient of 0.83 was computed following this pilot study using Kuder Richardson co-ef (KR-20). The inventory is provided in Table 1.

sponse positions of "agree," "unde- The sample consisted of 300 ran-

cided," and "disagree." Each response domly selected university students. The

position was weighted 1, 2, and 3, re- sample represented three basic religious

spectively. With 15 items, the scores sects: 107 were Moslems, 101 were

101

102

Owie

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
INVENTORY OF FIFTEEN ITEMS RELATING TO CONTRACEPTION

1. Contraception is an unnecessary interference with nature. 2.1 would use contraceptives to maintain a desired number of offspring. 3. Those who trade in contraceptives are criminals. 4. Uncontrolled distribution of contraceptives might tend to increase female disloyalty and unfaithful-
ness. 5. Contraceptive services should be a part of the school programme. 6. Sex education related to family planning should be a part of the school programme. 7. I would encourage the government to de-emphasize the need for contraceptives among my people. 8. I would discourage my friends from using contraceptives. 9. All decent and religious people should oppose the use of contraceptives.
10. There should be a free access to contraceptive devices by those in the childbearing age. 11.1 do not see anything morally wrong in encouraging a family to use contraceptives. 12. I would not encourage contraceptives even if they are proved to be very safe. 13. Contraceptives help families to raise healthy children. 14. There is nothing against life in contraceptives. 15. I cannot see anything terribly bad in using contraceptives or encouraging others to do so.

Christians, and 92 indicated affiliation to indigenous religious groups. Students were not delineated as to their respective age groups but 97 per cent of them were between the ages of 20 and 30. University students were used in order to control for the influence of education and, to some extent, socioeconomic status among religious groups. There were 213 males and 87 females.
The null hypothesis tested was that there is no significant difference among the various religious groups in their attitudes toward the use of contraceptives. One-way analysis of variance was used to test the significance of the differences at a critical level of 0.05. Groups' means were further evaluated using orthogonal comparison at the same critical level. Respective items were discussed in terms of simple proportions.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Findings from the analysis of data suggest significant differences in attitudes toward the use of contraceptives among the different religious groups. These differences were of such magnitude that it appears appropriate to reject

the null hypothesis as stated. Observed F-value is significant at the 0.05 level (F=3.83,d.f.=293,P<0.05).Table2is a summary of the analysis of variance that tested the significance of the difference. Table 3 is a summary of the orthogonal comparison of the significance of the differences between the means of the groups.
A considerable number of respondents in each of the three groups possessed negative attitudes toward contraception. Sixty-five per cent of Moslems, 51per cent of Christians, and 59per cent of indigenous groups agreed with the
TABLE2
ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE FOR DIFFERENCES IN ATTITUDES TOWARD CONTRACEPTION AMONG
RELIGIOUS GROUPS
Df Ss Ms F-Va!ue
SS A 2 46 23 3.83*
SS
w 297 1,784 6 ss
T 299 1,830
"Significant at the 0.05 level.

Vol. 30, No. 1

Brief Reports

103

TABLE 3
ORTHOGONAL COMPARISON OF GROUPS' MEANS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Comparison
X.vs.X,

Christian
1

Indigenous 72 = 28
0

Moslem ^3 = 27
-1

Diff
4

S.E. (-Value
48 8.33*

XiVs.X2

1 -1

0 3 0.5 6.00*

"P< 0.001

TABLE4
PER CENT OF MEMBERS OF RELIGIOUS GROUPS AGREEING WITH SELECTED STATEMENTS

Items
1. Contraception is an unnecessary interference with nature
2. I would use contraceptives to maintain a desired number of offspring
3. Those who trade in contraceptives are criminals
4. Uncontrolled distribution of contraceptives might tend to increase female disloyalty and unfaithfulness
5. Sex education related to family planning should be a part of the school program

Moslems
65% 33% 63%
33%
18%

Christians
51% 52% 44%

Indigenous
59% 29% 54%

29% 31%

30% 15%

statement, "Contraception is an unnecessary interference with nature."
Most respondents disagreed with the statement, "Uncontrolled distribution of contraceptive devices might lead to increased female disloyalty and unfaithfulness." Disagreement was expressed by 67per cent of the Moslems. This finding is the reverse of what the investigator had expected. It seems to indicate that the majority of respondents were not opposed to contraception for fear of female promiscuity following the liberalization of contraceptive information, materials, or techniques.
Evidence from Table 4 suggests that the differences between the Christian and the Moslem groups were significant even at the 0.001 level (; = 8.33,

d.f. = 297, P < 0.001). A significant difference {t=6, d.f. = 297, P < 0.001) was also observed between the Christian and the indigenous group. Apparently, the Christian group tended to have more favorable attitudes toward contraception than either the Moslem or the indigenous group.
The majority of the respondents disagreed with the statement, "Sex education related to family planning should be a part of the school program." Of the Moslems, 82 per cent indicated disagreement; of the Christians, 70 per cent; and of the indigenous religious group, 85 per cent. Thus, these groups did not see any need for contraceptive services or sex education in the school system. Since these people are relatively

104

Owie

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

highly educated, one would have expected a much different response. Table 4 further summarizes some of the findings.
CONCLUSIONS
Since the various religions have subtle dogmatic differences, one would not expect them to exert the same type of influence upon the lives of people. The differential effect of these dogmas may be reflected in peoples' attitudes toward family planning, hence contraceptives. The question which this paper investigated therefore was whether the different ideational structures of the various religions posit varying attitudinal constructs relative to contraceptives.
Collected data indicated that a considerable number of respondents harbored negative attitudes toward contraception. Based on statistical evidence, the null hypothesis that no significant differences existed among the religious groups in their attitudes toward contraception was rejected in favor of the alternate that significant differences did exist. The general pattern seemed to be that the Moslems possessed more negative attitudes than did the other two groups. Evidence to support this statement can be observed in the groups' means of 27, 28, and 31 for the Moslems, indigenous group, and Christians, respectively.
Under a social setting in which powerful groups can veto a given measure merely by virtue of ideational opposition, even in the absence of a logical alternative, the plight of a society can grow steadily worse while the various groups congratulate themselves on the ability to maintain the purity of their ideational structure. One cannot merely rule out the consistent opposition to

family planning by some powerful religious groups as "emotive" or lacking essential cognitive basis. The emotive orientation, if this is the case, of the opposition of some religious groups to contraception may be as relevant to our situation as our cognitively based argument for increased use of contraceptives.
It would be tempting here to delineate the stubborn opposition of the various religious groups to contraception into authentically held religious ideation, institutional survival, or ideational self defense. This would be a mere academic exercise since these are rather difficult to delineate from each other. Nonetheless, there is a high likelihood that the generality of opposition to contraception on the part of these groups may reflect a pervasive conservatism aimed at strengthening member cohesiveness and special control upon which the powers of the various sects are anchored. Most religious institutions in this part of the world are reticent to see anything really new implemented, since new things have a tendency to upset the status quo--a threat to those in positions of power.
If religious institutions are actually interested in the population problem, they must look for ways to help. The various religious institutions have at times been in the forefront of movements for social justice, such as the civil rights movement in the United States and the abolition of slavery in Europe. Calling on these institutions to reassess their positions toward contraceptives with a view to encouraging their use among group members would serve as a reminder of the traditional role of these institutions in fostering social harmony.
In trying to identify particular groups that need special attention in motivating

Vol. 30, No. 1

Brief Reports

105

members for positive attitudes toward more easily attain its goal if the intimate international family planning efforts, psycho-emotional influence which the the various religious groups should be various religious dogmas have upon the seen as potential candidates to be given lives of the people with whom they came serious consideration. It seems logical to in contact is not only recognized but insuggest that any program designed for tegrated into the program. the international community would

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

