Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
To cite this article: (1990) Book notes, Social Biology, 37:3-4, 272-274, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988767 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988767
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

THEORETICAL BIOLOGY. EPIGENETIC AND

Stanford, 1990. 198 pages. $29.50,

EVOLUTIONARY ORDER FROM COM-
PLEX SYSTEMS: Edited by B. Goodwin

hardbound; $7.95, paper.

and P. Saunders. Edinburgh. 228

pages. Hardbound.

What should an informed person know about the theory of evolution?

In Mexico in 1987, an international This clear, candid book is written for the

conference was held to develop the open-minded reader who does not un-

work initiated by C. H. Waddington in derstand the technical issues of evolu-

his 4 volumes of Towardsa Theoretical tion, but would like to. It tells how sci-

Biology (Edinburgh University Press). ence proceeds, what evolution is, how

This is a collection of some of the papers science knows that it has occurred and

from that meeting. Together, they pro- continues to occur, and what biologists

vide a broad-based yet coherent enquiry can point to, in fossils and in the living

into biological processes, which is based world, as hard evidence of evolution.

on the search for organizing principles For its content and foundations, the and rules in different areas of the sub- book draws on zoology, botany, genetject. ics, embryology, geology, geophysics,

Major topics are: self organization in cosmology, astronomy, astrophysics,

complex systems; order and adaptability history, religion, and science

in genetic networks; and development education--in a manner that enables

and evolution. The link with physics and the general reader without a science

mathematics is highlighted in many of background to understand the argu-

the papers.

ment.

The distinguished team of contribu- The book concludes with a discussion

tors includes R. Thorn, E. C. Zeeman, of science education, a refutation of par-

F. Varela, S. Kauffman, B. Huberman, ticular creationist claims, and a brief his-

M. Savageau, P. C. W. Davies and G. tory of court challenges posed by crea-

Cocho. B. Goodwin is Professor of Biol- tion "science." Some 50 helpful and

ogy at the Open University, Milton interesting illustrations supplement the

Keynes. P. T. Saunders is Professor in text.

the Department of Mathematics at The author is Professor of Zoology at

King's College, London.

The Ohio State University at Mansfield

and is a vertebrate zoologist.

EVOLUTION AND THE MYTH OF CREATIONISM. A BASIC GUIDE TO THE FACTS IN THE EVOLUTION DEBATE: By Tim
M. Berra. Stanford University Press,

X-LINKED TRAITS: A CATALOG OF LOCI
IN NONHUMAN MAMMALS: By James R. Miller. Cambridge University

272

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Book Notes

273

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Press, Cambridge, 1990. 198 pages. Hardcover.
Comparative studies among species play a vital role in many biological disciplines, but they have not been a conspicuous feature of mammalian genetics until quite recently. The reason for this is clear: There was little to compare with ease and certainty until spectacular advances in molecular biology revealed details of the genetic structure of many mammalian species.
Now the volume of information in comparative aspects of mammalian genomes is such that it is difficult to keep abreast of the flood. The information is scattered in a variety of journals specializing in basic sciences--molecular biology, developmental biology, cell biology, biochemistry, genetics, and cytogenetics--and clinical disciplines in human and veterinary medicine.
There is no single place where information on apparently true homologies or suspected homologies, often based on similarity of phenotypes, is brought together and compared. The present volume is an attempt to remedy this situation and to treat mammalian X-linked traits in such a comprehensive manner.
EVOLUTION AND ITS INFLUENCE: Edited by Alan Graffen. Oxford University Press, New York, 1989. 130 pages. $35. Hardbound.
This book originated as a series of Herbert Spencer Lectures, given at Oxford University, whose purpose was to survey the influence on various disciplines of the Darwinian view of evolution by natural selection.
Six eminent scholars--A. J. Cain, W. G. Runciman, R. J. Herrnstein, Maurice Godelier, Bernard Williams,

and E. H. Gombrich--discuss a wide range of topics under this heading: the historical background to Darwin's contribution; the concept of evolution in sociology, philosophy, and psychology; reinforcement theory; kinship and incest prohibition; evolutionary epistemology and ethics; and the analogy that can be drawn between changes in art forms and biological evolution.
What emerges is a stimulating reminder of the enormous impact of Charles Darwin's great intellectual revolution of the nineteenth century on subsequent thought.
SPECIATION AND ITS CONSEQUENCES:
Edited by Daniel Otte and John A. Endler. Sinauer Associates, Inc., Sunderland, MA, 1989. 679 pages. $50, hardbound; $29.95, paper.
Speciation and its Consequences illustrates how different patterns of speciation and differentiation have occurred among diverse taxa. Its 25 chapters by prominent researchers elucidate the extreme diversity of concepts and viewpoints on the subject, considering the ecological, paleontological, and classification consequences of speciation. Of interest to students and professionals interested in ecology, evolutionary biology, biogeography, and classification, this book will encourage discussion and reassessment of both data and theory and should ultimately contribute to a new synthesis in this rapidly evolving field.
The chapters are divided among six headings: Concepts of Species, Genetic Structure of Species Boundaries, Effects of Population Structure on Speciation, Biogeography and Ecology of Speciation: Background and Theory,

274

Book Notes

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Biogeography and Ecology of Speciation: Empirical Studies, and Evolutionary Consequences of Speciation. Part Seven, Conclusion, is an essay by John A. Endler on "Conceptual and Other Problems in Speciation."
The volume has extensive author and subject indexes. Editor Daniel Otte is with the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, and John Endler is with the University of California, Santa Barbara.
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES ON SEXUAL
DIFFERENCE; Edited by Deborah L. Rhode. Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1990. 315 pages. $25, hardbound.
This book offers a unique study of the nature, origins, and consequences of sexual difference. Leading scholars in history, philosophy, law, literary theory, biology, sociology, psychology, political science, and anthropology explore the difference difference makes. They focus not only on the differences

between men and women, but also on the differences among women, and on the ways in which those differences mediate gender relations and social change.
Several traditions of feminist response to difference are reflected in this volume. One approach has been to challenge the long-established tendency to mischaracterize culturally influenced gender differences as biological or psychological imperatives. A second strand of feminist work has sought to challenge not the significance of gender differences but the importance society has attached to them. A third strategy attempts to dislodge difference by challenging its centrality and its organizing premises, thus recasting the debate about gender relations. With its wide range of distinguished scholarship, this volume deepens our perceptions of both the gendered nature of theory and theories about gender.
Deborah L. Rhode is professor of law and director of the Institute for Research on Women and Gender at Stanford University.

