Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Genetic consequences of cultural decisions in the realm of population
Garrett Hardin
To cite this article: Garrett Hardin (1972) Genetic consequences of cultural decisions in the realm of population, Social Biology, 19:4, 350-361, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9988008 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9988008
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 31 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

Genetic Consequences of Cultural Decisions in the Realm of Population

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Garrett Hardin
Department of Biological Sciences University of California Santa Barbara, California

At the centenary of Darwin's Origin of Species, H. J. Muller (19S9) published an essay entitled "One Hundred Years Without Darwinism Are Enough." Muller's principal point was that elementary and secondary schools (and to a lesser extent, colleges) were pussyfooting about evolution, particularly the evolution of man.
Today, at the centenary of Darwin's second most influential book, The Descení of Man, the title of Muller's essay is still appropriate. The evolution of man from "lower" forms is (perhaps) a bit more accepted now (though my own state of California is backsliding at the moment), but the essential thrust of Darwin's work is still almost universally ignored. This thrust is the ubiquity and inescapability of natural selection, an idea that should be as much built into everyone's thought patterns as is the concept of universal gravitation.
To suppose that evolution was the principal idea in Darwin's head is to go far astray. Morse Peckham (1959), a student of English literature, has called our attention to the fact that Darwin did not even use the word "evolution" until the fifth edition of the Origin (published ten years after the first), "and then he appears to have used it with some hesitation, almost as

if he did not quite know what he was talking about" (Peckham, 1959, p. 23).
Well, what was Darwin talking about? In the historically important letter he wrote to Asa Gray on September 5, 1857, a bit more than two years before the publication of the Origin, Darwin discussed his bookin-embryo with these words (F. Darwin, 1898, Vol. I, p. 480) : "I think it can be shown that there is such an unerring power at work, or Natural Selection (the title of my book), which selects exclusively for the good of each organic being." For more than two years he clung to the title Natural Selection, changing it to the Origin of Species only at the last moment, for reasons that are not clear. Even then he kept the phrase "Through Natural Selection" in the title (F. Darwin, Vol. I, p. 507-508). When his publisher objected to the inclusion of the auxiliary term, rather than surrender Darwin amplified the subtitle: "by Means of Natural Selection/ or the/ Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life."
But it was no use. The general public, sensitized by Robert Chambers' uncritical Vestiges of Creation published fifteen years earlier (see Millhauser, 1959), supposed that they were being confronted with just

350

Vol. 19, No. 4

Cultural Decisions and Population

351

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

one more work on "evolution" or "development" (the terms were used interchangeably). This was clearly not the author's opinion, as is evident from a passage in his autobiography (F. Darwin, Vol. I, p. 71):
It has sometimes been said that the success of the 'Origin' proved "that the subject was in the air," or "that men's minds were prepared for it." I do not think that this is strictly true, for I occasionally sounded out a few naturalists, and never happened to come across a single one who seemed to doubt about the permanence of species. Even Lyell and Hooker, though they would listen to me, never seemed to agree. I tried once or twice to explain to able men what I meant by Natural Selection, but signally failed.
Blame for the misdirection of the public's attention can be laid partly on Darwin, whose writing was often complex and obscure (though no more so than the work of those two other great movers and shakers of the nineteenth century, Malthus and Marx). But we should not make too much of the author's shortcomings in transmitting his message, for there were even greater deficiencies at the receiving end. The Victorian mind was somewhat prepared for the idea of evolution, shocking though it was, but not at all prepared for the idea of an inescapable selection process. I am afraid that the minds of most of today's so-called "intellectuals" are little better prepared.
EVOLUTION AS HISTORICISM
Why, in spite of the initial shock, was the idea of evolution so rapidly accepted by Victorian intellectuals? The answer, I think, is quite simple. The word "evolution" implied then--and still implies to many--a pre-existing program, a plan for change. In the mind of Robert Chambers the word "development" implied an identity of evolutionary change and embryological development. As a frog's egg develops into a tadpole and the tadpole into a frog, so did a Silurian fish develop into a Devonian

amphibian. Modern biologists say that the program for embryological development is written into the DNA of the frog's egg. Chambers, if he were alive today, would say that the program for evolutionary development must also be written down somewhere.
This was not Darwin's idea; he never supposed that there was any pre-established program for evolution. In fact, the basic concepts of evolutionary "convergence" and "divergence" necessarily imply the nonexistence of a program; a species becomes whatever selective forces dictate it should. No true Darwinian ever supposes that the first true mammal that ran on the earth had written into its DNA a message dictating that some of its descendants should someday "make like a bird" and become bats.
Popper (1957) has called our attention to the fact that history has no program and has categorized as "historicism" the belief that the future is already rigidly determined by the present. Marx was a historicist. Darwin, meditating upon the larger history we call paleontology, was not. What happens depends on opportunities and forces, not identifiable programs. We must accept our powerlessness to predict either history (in the ordinary sense) or the special form of history we call evolution.
The rejection of historicism has an important ethical corollary: We cannot predict history but we can make it; and we can make evolution. An even stronger statement can be made: We cannot avoid making evolution. Every reform deliberately instituted in the structure of society changes both history and the selective forces that affect evolution (though evolutionary change may be, in fact generally is, completely absent from the minds of reformers) .
We are not free to avoid producing evo-

352

Hardin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

lution; we are only free to close our eyes to what we are doing.
THE PARABLE OF THE SILURIAN FISH
A major puzzle for historians of science is this: Why do a few conceptual discoveries have to be made over and over before they finally become incorporated into the conceptual framework of science? I don't know the answer; and there may be no general answer. But I call your attention to a remarkable instance of this class, the so-called "Baldwin effect." This simple corollary of Darwin's theory was first promulgated by J. M. Baldwin (1896). It has since been rediscovered, independently I think, by perhaps a dozen biologists whom I will not bother to name; but its hold on men's minds is still tenuous. This is a pity, because once you understand the thrust of the "Baldwin effect," most of the arguments between hereditarians and environmentalists about the relative importance of culture and genetic change in determining human evolution become rather pointless.
The "Baldwin effect" may be briefly stated thus: Cultural change and genetic change are mutually reinforcing elements of a circular process. Such a statement has been made many times by many people, but with little effect. The statement is too abstract. Something with more impact is needed. As one more attempt to get across the meaning of the "Baldwin effect," let me resort to a parable--reminding you that though the manifest content of a parable is fiction, its latent content (if it is a good parable) is true.
The scene is the last day of the Silurian. Two fish, Joe and Julia, are chatting. Joe Fish says: "This water's a drag, kid. Whataya say we get outa here?" Like neurotics generally, Joe Fish tries to solve his problems by fleeing to a new environment. You should know that Joe had a very unhappy childhood, and he is now,

poor fellow, psychologically maladjusted to piscine society. Julia Fish finds him fascinating, because she's a bit weird herself, which fact illustrates the principle of "assortative mating" that makes evolution proceed faster than it might otherwise. The phenomenon is not unknown among human beings.
"Okay," says Julia, and the two Silurians climb out onto land, and the Devonian day begins. Their adaptation to land is lousy, of course; but they can just barely make it, and that's all that's required. Lacking competition, they survive and follow the Biblical admonition to "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish1 the earth."
As the land-dwelling population increased, mutation and recombination created genetic variation; and natural selection went to work and produced Devonian vertebrates that were really adapted to the land. The initial change from water to land required only one "decision," and you may call it a cultural one, if you wish; but the consequences of this inevitably called forth a veritable cascade of thousands of further "decisions"--natural selection operating on a repertoire of mutations, producing changes that were genetic--for which we need suppose no further change in either culture or environment.
To the environmentalist who clutches the primacy of culture to his bosom like a security-blanket we can, for the sake of argument, grant everything for the first step. We can grant that Joe and Julia Fish were neurotic solely because of their unhappy childhood, and that they chose the aberrant environment of the land solely for cultural reasons. But having done so these pioneers set in motion a veritable avalanche of genetic changes which "they" (i.e., their
1 Why replenish? That's what it says in Chapter I of Genesis. Was the supposed beginning really a repeat performance? . . . How many mysteries there are in the Bible to which Fundamentalists are resolutely blind!

Vol. 19, No. 4

Cultural Decisions and Population

353

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

descendants) were powerless to stop. Joe and Julia were (if you wish) land-dwellers first by cultural choice; their descendants became land-dwellers--and much better ones--by genetic selection.
What we are, we become. This, in brief, is the essence of the "Baldwin effect." Nonbiologists have occasionally glimpsed some such idea, through a glass darkly. I have been told that Hegel once said: "Man, in so far as he acts on nature to change it, changes his own nature." And from Sartre we have the aphorism: "Man makes himself." This is the sort of intellectual Urschleim from which the evolutionary principle may have evolved.
MAN MAKES HIMSELF
But the past is prologue. We want now to know about the future. What is man going to make of himself in the days to come? For the foreseeable future the most important man-generated genetic changes will unquestionably be unintentional. Can we, as a purely intellectual exercise, foresee some of the genetic consequences of cultural decisions? To enter a particularly important realm, what about population control? We are moving closer to the day when population will be deliberately controlled by human institutions. Can we foresee the genetic "side-effects" of population control? This is certainly not an easy task; but Bajema (1971) has made a good beginning on it, which I will try to carry further.
One fact is crystal clear: Voluntary population control selects for its own failure. This truth is an inescapable consequence of Darwinian selection, and so it seems rather fitting that it should first have been emphasized by Darwin's grandson, Charles Galton Darwin, at the centenary of the Origin (see Tax, 1960):
If I may be permitted so to put it, by the invention of contraception, the species

Homo sapiens has discovered that he can become the new variety "Homo contracipiens", and many take advantage of this to produce a much reduced fraction of the next generation. We have found out how to cheat nature. However, it would seem likely that in the very long run nature cannot be cheated, and it is easy to see the revenge it might take. Some people do have a wish for children before they are conceived . . . . There will be a tendency for such people to have rather more children than the rest, and these children will inherit the wish to an enhanced extent, and these will contribute a still greater proportion of the population. Thus the direct wish for children is likely to become stronger in more and more of the race and in the end it could attain the quality of an instinct . . . . It may well be that it would take hundreds of generations for the progenitive instinct to develop in this way, but if it should do so, nature would have taken its revenge, and the variety Homo contracipiens would become extinct and would be replaced by the variety Homo progenetivus.
This observation provoked amusement when it was made, and that was about all. The insight rapidly leached out of the public consciousness, as mankind began a second century without Darwinism. The idea of natural selection, as it affects man, seems to be under a bit of a taboo.
I tried to break this taboo when I wrote my essay on "The Tragedy of the Commons" in 1968, calling attention to the political implications of C. G. Darwin's insight. I think I may in small measure have been successful. My essay has since been reprinted in some two dozen different anthologies, and a committee of the National Academy of Sciences (1971 p. 4) has damned the conclusions: "We base our first recommendation on the ethical premise that freedom and knowledge should be extended so that people can act in their own best interest--both individually and collectively. It seems quite contrary to society's highest aspirations for man to assume, as some do, that their salvation can be accomplished only through coercion."
Well, hurray for high aspirations; but

354

Hardîn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

selection renders them impotent. The Aca- Selection for overbreeding will occur

demicians have not come to grips with the even if there are no differences between

logic of "The Tragedy of the Commons," people's reproductive wishes--and even if

of Darwin's Origin or Descent, or of a coercive system is accepted--if there are

Olson's Logic of Collective Action (1965). differences in the methods chosen for con-

The reality of Darwinian selection is trolling births. Consider, for instance, the

evidently something that an Establishment selective consequences implicit in Roman

body cannot bear to face at the present Catholic theology. (Realistically, we recog-

moment in history. After a year of study, nize that the vast majority of today's

our Commission on Population Growth and Catholics reject their official theology

the American Future (1971) issued an in- [Birmingham, 1964] ; but it is an interest-

terim report of 49 pages. On page 26 the ing exercise to note what the selective

following passage occurs:

consequences would be if contemporary

A key consideration for population policy Catholics were to obey Pope Paul VI. I is the current level of unwanted childbear- pursue these consequences in detail solely

ing. This information is necessary to deter- to develop a general model of competitive

mine how much movement toward the cessation of population growth might ulti-

breeding behavior.)

mately result simply from preventing un- Suppose literally everybody, Protestant

wanted births. The sum of individuals' real preference may in fact coincide with the

and Catholic alike, agreed to try to restrict

·welfare of society as a whole [this author's their families to exactly two children each.

italics].

Suppose, further, that all Protestants used

The sentence italicized above is the only the pill and all Catholics used rhythm; and

statement in the entire report that bears that nobody was sexually continent. What

even remotely on the issue of selection, and would be the selective and genetic conse-

that (be it noted) only by omission. Even quences of this difference in the choice of

in its explicit content it is a weak sentence. methods?

The use of the word "may" puts almost The contraceptive pill is so effective that

any predication beyond attack. More im- pill-using women desiring completed fami-

portantly, by using the word "sum" the lies of two children would produce only

Commission clearly indicates that the about 2.3 children each during their fertile

framework of its discussion is strictly anti- years. In contrast, rhythm-committed

Darwinian.

women would produce about 6 children

When there are individual differences-- each. (These are only rough figures, the

and there always are--the sum or the aver- calculation of which involves various as-

age is of only transitory importance. In a sumptions--e.g., the duration of post-

heterogeneous society, as time passes, partum semi-sterility--that are not worth

Homo progenitivus will outbreed Homo pursuing here.) In a pluralistic society

contracipiens, giving new pungency to the hypothetically committed to zero popula-

population problem. In a voluntary system tion growth, such a difference in methods

this result is inevitable, regardless of chosen would result in the rhythm section

whether the breeding differences between trebling its numbers in each generation,

human beings are wholly cultural or wholly while the pill-takers remained nearly con-

genetic, or any intermediate mixture of the stant. In a finite world, indefinite continu-

two (Hardin, 1968). The idea of selection ation of this process would result in the

is broader than biology; but most non- replacement of pill-takers by rhythm-

biologists are selectively blind to it.

followers (Hardin, 1960). However, this

Vol. 19, No. 4

Cultural Decisions and Population

355

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

would take a long time by ordinary human standards (long enough, no doubt, for other historical influences to enter in and cause unforeseen changes of perhaps quite a different sort).
The rate of selection would be accelerated by a predictable biological change. The rhythm method of birth control depends on precise time-relationships between ovulation and menstruation. But we know that some women are arhythmic. Why? Heredity or environment? We don't know. The conservative assumption is a bit of both (in unknown proportions). In a population restricted to the rhythm method of birth control, if even the smallest portion of arhythmicity were due to heredity, selection would cause a continuous increase 'in the proportion of irregular women. Irregular women would, in time, replace regular ones (Hardin, 1963). If any principle touching on birth control deserves the name "Natural Law," it is surely the principle of selection. (What a pity the Vatican hasn't heard of it! Or has it? Is this the "hidden agenda" of the encyclical Humanae Vitae? Personally, I refuse to follow this line of thought further; that way lies paranoia!)
We can extract still more meat from our hypothetical example. If the degree of reproductive isolation of the two populations is nearly complete, the selection that occurs will select not only for high fertility but also for whatever other traits distinguish the fertile group. Even a slightly deleterious trait can increase in frequency in the total population. So severe a defect as hemophilia will not increase; but a relatively benign, medically correctible trait like diabetes can increase if it is initially more common in the faster reproducing group.
By the same line of reasoning a desirable trait, if initially more common among the fast-breeders, will also increase in frequency in the total population (and at an even

faster rate). I suppose that a "doctrine of insufficient reason" would justify our assuming that the eugenic consequences of differential breeding are, on balance, neutral in value for the roster of all traits other than fertility itself. I dwell on the problem for this reason: to call attention to the fact than an over-all increase in the frequency of a trait in a heterogeneous population is no evidence that the trait is, ipso facto, of positive selective value. When the conditions of this model are met, it is possible for a slightly disadvantageous trait to increase in frequency in the total population for a long time. (Ultimately, as the slowbreeders become rare, the frequency falls.) Many slightly adverse genetic traits can "ride piggyback," as it were, on the trait of high fertility in a reproductively heterogeneous population.
A favorite last-ditch defense of social scientists who fear the intellectual and practical implications of Darwinism is the argument that though natural selection may once have been important for mankind, it no longer is because "culture has replaced natural selection." This is wrong on at least two counts. First, there is the "Baldwin effect" alluded to earlier, i.e., cultural change evokes new forms of selection. Second, when the fall in average reproductivity of human families is accompanied by an increase in reproductive heterogeneity (as has been the case during the last two centuries; see Crow, 1966), there is an actual increase in the "opportunity for selection," as Crow (19S8) conservatively calls the phenomenon. News of this counter-intuitive effect seems not yet to have reached sociology. Its important social implications surely deserve to be explored.
The 3-to-l ratio in reproductive rates assumed in our model may seem extreme. In the real world, how great are the actual differences, and what is the prospect of

356

Hardin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

their continuance in the future? Certainly the rate difference between American Catholics and American Protestants is now trifling and seems to be disappearing. On the other hand, the difference between Hutterites and other North Americans is greater than that postulated in the model (Eaton and Mayer, 1954) ; but the Hutterites are numerically still only a small minority, and perhaps their religiousreproductive beliefs will be corrupted by the time they have undergone a few more doublings in population size. Then there are the Mormons who, while not reproducing as fast as the Hutterites, do reproduce at a higher rate than the general populace. There are two million Mormons-- one per cent of the United States population. They, too, must be subject to corruption by the contraceptive ideals of their neighbors; but we have no hard figures for the rate of change in attitude. Beyond these particular and inconclusive examples there is the general practical and moral problem of survival in a world afflicted with tribalism (Hardin, 1971a)--or of finding an acceptable way to eliminate tribal loyalties and competitive, tribally oriented behavior.
INTERNATIONAL PROBLEMS
Potentially serious though tribalism may be, I suspect that we in the United States will not soon take up the policy implications of domestic tribalism for a very simple reason. We rightly hesitate to unleash a "self-fulfilling prophecy" (Maclver, 1948, p. 62; Hardin, 1961). We prudently acquiesce to a taboo. We let sleeping dogs lie.
Given the continued, indefinite growth of the human population, I cannot believe that we can forever shut our eyes to the implications of different rates of growth among competing population units. We will probably set aside the taboo on discussion

in the international area first, as we realize what a small, and shrinking, minority of the world's population we Americans are. As of 1970, only one person out of 18 was an American. If present rates continue, Americans will be reduced to 1 out of 24 in the year 2000 A.D., and 1 out of 46 in 2070 A.D. (Hardin, 19716). While the American population increases at one per cent per year, the peoples of the poor countries (euphemistically called "developing"; see p. 16 of Paddock, and Paddock, 1964), are increasing at three per cent per year. This gives exactly the ratio used in our model, extreme though it may have seemed when it was introduced.
The genetic consequences of differential reproduction on the international scene will include a relative increase in whatever genes statistically distinguish the rapidly breeding poor of the world from the slowly breeding rich. In such a competitive system, as we have seen, "good," neutral, and moderately "bad" genes can all "ride piggyback" on the high fertility traits (be they cultural or genetic). In other words, whatever genetic characteristics there are that distinguish the poor but rapidly breeding populations of the world from the rich will increase in frequency with the passage of time, relative to the genetic characteristics of the rich and slowly breeding populations. Is this good or bad?
Two centuries ago Western scholars would have answered such a question with little hesitation. No more; we now know the word "ethnocentrism," and fear it may be applied to anything we say. Only the mythical Man from Mars, afflicted with no earthly prejudices, could objectively inquire into the situation. Methodological inhibitions prevent us earthlings from embarking on a rational inquiry of certain things happening here on earth.
I think there is a way around this apparent impasse. A world divided into rich

Vol. 19, No. 4

Cultural Decisions and Population

357

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

nations and poor nations, and into rich and poor castes or tribes within nations, is a world subject to "disruptive selection" which, given sufficient genetic isolation for a long enough time, leads to the formation of races. The selective forces operating on poor people and rich must be different in some respects. It will not be easy to discover the exact differences because what we are calling "poor" and "rich" people differ in many ways, some of them very subtle. Poor nations are less industrialized, more bound by tradition, less gripped by a sense of time, less future-oriented, more envious, and more at the mercy of "fate"--the list goes on and on. The intellectual and cultural environment of such people surely has selective effects.
How complete is the genetic isolation of poor people from rich? I suspect it is greater than most Americans would like to believe. We are bemused by the legends of Horatio Alger and tend to assume a rather large amount of social mobility. Even in the United States the genetic interchange between classes is probably far less than we wishfully assume; and in very old and long-settled countries like India, social mobility is minuscule, and has been for thousands of years--quite long enough to permit visible genetic differentiation between classes and castes.
Moreover (and this is a point often overlooked), social mobility does not necessarily preclude genetic differentiation between classes; it may even enhance it. When an individual moves from one class to another, he takes his genes with him. If his desire or ability to move is even in part genetically determined, then his moving may increase, rather than decrease, the genetic differentiation of classes. The human variety made evident within a class by genetic recombination may be diminished by selective social migration (Watson and Samora, 1954), a process strongly

reminiscent of the chemical process of solvent partitioning whereby differentiation and differences are increased. Social mobility can, in fact, generate and exaggerate genetic differences between classes; it is held in check principally by the fear of envy (Schoeck, 1969, p. 57).
Our thinking about the life situation of poor people has been much hindered in the past by a narrowly economic frame of reference, of which we have been largely unconscious. We have tended to think of poverty exclusively as a lack of wealth, as a point somewhere near zero on a one-dimensional scale of money. This is surely a dangerous simplification of the facts of human existence.
The anthropologist Oscar Lewis (1966) shook us out of this shallow way of viewing things when he introduced the concept of "the culture of poverty." Lewis said (p. 20):
The culture of poverty is not just a matter of deprivation or disorganization, a term signifying the absence of something. It is a culture in the traditional anthropological sense in that it provides human beings with a design for living, with a ready-made set of solutions for human problems, and so serves a significant adaptiye function. This style of life transcends national boundaries and regional and rural-urban differences within nations. Wherever it occurs, its practitioners exhibit remarkable similarity in the structure of their families, in interpersonal relations, in spending habits, in their value systems and in their orientation in time.
Those who live in the culture of poverty, said Lewis (p. 23) show to a remarkable degree "a strong present-time orientation with relatively little disposition to defer gratification and plans for the future." Such an orientation is no doubt both cause and effect of poverty. A true circular process is set up, and poverty becomes culturally stable.
In Lewis's view, the culture of poverty "is endemic to the free-enterprise, prewelfare-state stage of capitalism" (p. 23),

358

Hardin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

to which he thinks it is largely confined. Though he might not approve, I suggest that we broaden the definition so as to avoid this restriction. Any impoverished community, the majority of whose members can (in principle) trace their lineage in a nearly unbroken line back through many generations of impoverished ancestors, will be living in some sort of "culture of poverty" (even if it not the classical Oscar Lewis sort). It is this broadened definition that I shall work with from this point on.
In the genetic, as well as in the cultural sense, it is essential to recognize that poverty is not merely a negative attribute. It takes positive attributes to survive in poverty. The selective pressures impinging on the sidewalk-sleepers of Calcutta must be significantly different from those to which the home-owners of Grosse Point, Michigan must adjust. The type of genetic toughness needed to survive in abject poverty generation after generation is undoubtedly less common among American suburbanites than it is among poor Indians. On the other hand, whatever traits are required for successful adjustment to a life of wealth (which is also competitive, though in different ways) must be commoner in Grosse Point than in Calcutta.
It is pointless to ask which form of fitness is "intrinsically" better. The question is: What kind of a world do we want to create? Carp as we may at the deficiencies of Suburbia, are there any among us who sincerely believe that a life on the streets of Calcutta is preferable to Suburbia? There cannot be, for if there were such a person he would have already given up all his worldly goods and fled to join his soulmates on the streets of Calcutta--from which lowly vantage point he would now be unable to make his voice heard. Suburbia is not heaven, God knows, and the suburban life may need to be radically re-

structured; but abject poverty is surely worse. This, I think, is our best reply to those who, by accusing us of ethnocentrism, would reduce us to impotence in the face of problems that desperately need to be solved. With rare exceptions, poverty is praised only by those who cling to the creature comforts of life, one of which (for them) is the pleasure of indulging in a rich fantasy life of enjoying poverty.
Man makes himself. In so far as we can control the destiny of Homo sapiens, do we want to create men and women who are maximally adapted to the rigors of poverty? Or should we create people of a different sort who, freed of the particularly rigorous selective pressures of poverty can evolve contrasting traits that are better suited to the life we call "civilized"? Knowledge gained from animal and plant breeding tells us that markedly contrasting goals are, practically speaking, mutually exclusive. The Jersey cow is a splendid animal for producing milk; the Hereford is fine for beef. So-called "multipurpose" cattle exist, but all of them are compromises. For statistical, and often physiological reasons as well, it is practically impossible to combine all the traits desired into a single breed.
It is hardly conceivable that the situation is any different in humans. The essential unity of man and other animals must be our invariable working hypothesis in this Darwinian world. The burden of proof lies on those who deny it, who say that it is possible to create a Superman who includes simultaneously the best of all possible adaptations to all environments, e.g., a single genetic type who is maximally adapted both to poverty and to life at the highest levels of wealth and sophistication. That remains to be proved; in the meantime, given that we must choose, what shall we choose to be?

Vol. 19, No. 4

Cultural Decisions and Population

359

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

THE GENETIC COST OF CHANGING
ENVIRONMENTS
Let's look once more at the parable of Joe and Julia Fish. When these mythical creatures first came out on land they were miserably adapted to it; but their descendants rapidly improved their adaptation as a result of random mutation and selection among the mutants. Land-adapted genes displaced water-adapted ones. We can put the matter another way. We can say that the first land forms (Joe and Julia) had a heavy genetic load of unfavorable genes (i.e., unfavorable in the new environment). The concept of "genetic load" we owe to Muller (19S0) and Morton, Crow, and Müller (1956). It poses profound problems for would-be social reformers, of which they seem to be completely unaware.
Whenever a population is moved into a new environment in which survival is possible but initially difficult, the population by the very act of moving is saddled with a large genetic load. The greater the environmental change, the greater is the genetic load that is produced by the change.
Leaving parables aside as we enter the real world, consider the experiences of microbiologists. Pathogenic bacteria freshly isolated from sick animals invariably grow less rapidly than do long-maintained laboratory cultures of the "same" species, and less rapidly than they themselves will after many weeks (i.e., hundreds of cell-generations) of laboratory culture. How do we account for such facts?
We can verbally "explain" them with such words as "training," "acclimatization," "adaption," "acculturation," and "domestication"; but what is behind the words? The most reasonable view is that the laboratory conditions are significantly different from the wild conditions; that some of the wild-type individuals cannot

grow at all on the laboratory media; that those that can, can only barely multiply because of a heavy genetic load; and that the descendants of the original wild-type cells, numbering in the millions of millions, undergo mutations; and that natural selection selects those mutants that are better suited to laboratory conditions, thus reducing the genetic load in the whole population of cells, many generations later.
Individuals in a human culture of poverty also vary, and there must always be selective losses of those who are poorly adapted to the life of poverty. The maladapted disappear from the culture in two different ways, one group dying (or not reproducing), the other socially promoting themselves out of the community and into higher economic classes. Both processes result in an improvement of the adaptation of the residue population to the rigorous demands of the culture of poverty. The "Baldwin effect" is brought into play. A culture of poverty, long continued, produces a genetics of poverty. Genetically related people who have been culturally poor for centuries must surely be genetically adapted to a life of poverty.
In some measure, genetic adaptation to poverty precludes, or at least makes uncommon, genetic adaptation to the contrasting condition of prosperity. Consider what this implies for reform efforts.
If we were to succeed in bringing instant cultural prosperity to a population that was genetically adapted to poverty, by that very act we would create a genetic load on the otherwise fortunate nouveaux riches. If our reform stopped at this point and if, following the fashion of the world before the welfare state, we permitted natural selection to take its course, the genetic load would be rapidly reduced.
But those who work for economic reform also support the welfare state. Achieving

360

Hatdin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

instant cultural prosperity in a welfare state would produce a large wealthy class with a fantastically great genetic load. How would one reduce such a genetic load in a state that operates under "humanitarian" rules? This question should certainly give pause to those reformers who yearn to bring instant prosperity to the world's twenty-five-hundred million poor people. (That number is, of course, a conservative estimate.)
We would do well to recall what John Stuart Mill (1848) said about the relatedness of population control and the ideals of the welfare state more than a century ago: "Society can feed the necessitous, if it takes their multiplication under its control; or (if destitute of all moral feeling for the wretched offspring) it can leave the last to their discretion, abandoning the first to their own care. But it cannot with impunity take the feeding upon itself, and leave the multiplying free" (Mill, 1848, p. 365). The deeper analysis made possible by Darwin's insight puts Mill's stricture on an even sounder basis.
Poverty has been with us for millennia; our generation did not, contrary to what the radical left would have us believe, invent poverty. It is essential that we keep always in mind the distinction between relative poverty and absolute poverty. Relative to Mr. Rockefeller I am a pauper; but I am certainly not absolutely poor. The street-sleepers of Calcutta are both relatively and absolutely poor. They compete with scrawny cows in combing over piles of garbage for their daily food; this is surely absolute poverty.
I t may some day be possible to eliminate absolute poverty (though not, I think, relative poverty). However, if it is, the act of elimination will pose serious problems, and these are connected with the rate of achieving success. The longer we take to eliminate poverty, the greater the number of people

there will be, in both relative and absolute terms, who are well adapted to the life of absolute poverty and ipso facto poorly adapted to a more civilized life. We can put the matter another way. The longer we take to achieve the goal of universal prosperity (given the present differential in fertility of rich and poor people), the greater will be the genetic load of prosperity-unfit genes that must be coped with somehow once the change in the economic environment has been achieved.
Realizing the dream of eliminating absolute poverty necessarily implies a metamorphosis of poor men into rich men. The metamorphosis will follow the Baldwin path: cultural change first, followed by a slower genetic, evolutionary change. The transition will surely be a dangerous one. If the process takes too long, metamorphosis will never catch up with the multiplication of the population of paupers. But if it takes place rapidly, will the multitude of culturally-rich but genetically-poor people tolerate the necessity--or even the thought--of selective genetic change? Or will they, perceiving the lack of fit between themselves and the corridors of wealth into which they have suddenly been propelled, seek to pull down the structure of civilization, for their comfort's sake?
These are deep waters--deep scientifically, deep ethically. We need more knowledge. In discussing the possible differentia between poor people and rich people, I have clearly gone beyond the bounds of certain fact. Conservatism would seem to dictate that we "do nothing" until our data-base is absolutely secure. Unfortunately, the option of "doing nothing" is not open to us. While we "do nothing" the supply of poor people increases every three years by an amount equal to the total population of the United States. It is very difficult to see what positive action we might take, given the

Vol. 19, No. 4

Cultural Decisions and Population

361

political realities. But at least we can refrain from doing anything that might make it possible for poor populations to grow still faster; and we should try to help them stop growing at all--for their sake, for our sake, and for the sake of the greatgrandchildren of all mankind. In any case, we should never adopt any proposed reform until its probably selective consequences have been thoroughly explored.
Political policy has evolved during the

first century after Darwin completely untouched by the knowledge that selection processes are ubiquitous and inescapable. If we are to survive in dignity this selective blindness cannot be tolerated much longer. We must train ourselves to ask, automatically, of each new reform proposed, "What will be its selective effects?" When we do that--and then only--it can be said that we have moved, at last, into the Age of Darwin.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BAJEMA, CARL JAY. 1971. The genetic implications LEWIS, OSCAR. 1966. The culture of poverty.

of population control. BioScience 21:71-75.

Seien. Amer. 215(4):19ff.

BALDWIN, J. M. 1896. A new factor in evolution. MACTVER, R. M. 1948. The more perfect union.

Amer. Natur. 30:441-336.

Macmillan, New York.

BIRMINGHAM, WILLIAM. 1964. What modern MILL, JOHN STUART. 1848. Principles of political

Catholics think about birth control. NewAmerican Library, New York.

economy. 1965 printing. August M. Kelley,New York.

COMMISSION ON POPULATION GROWTH AND THE MILLHAUSER, MILTON. 1959.Just before Darwin.

AMERICAN FUTURE. 1971. An interim report to Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, Conn.

the President andthe Congress. Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D.C.

MÜLLER, H. J. 1950. Our load of mutations. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 2:111-176.

CROW, J. F. 1958. Some possibilities for measur-

. 1959. Onehundred years without Dar-

ing selection intensities in man. Hum. Biol. 30:1-13.
. 1966.The quality of people: Human evolutionary changes. BioScience 16:863-867.
DARWIN, FRANCIS. 1898. The life and letters of Charles Darwin. D.Appleton, New York.

winism are enough. The Humanist 19:139-149.
MORTON, N. E., J. F. CROW, and H. J. MÜLLER.
1956. An estimate of the mutational damage in man from data on consanguineous marriages. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei.42:855-863.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1971. News

EATON, JOSEPH W., and ALBERT J. MAYER. 19S4.
Man's capacity to reproduce; the demography of a unique population. Free Press, Glencoe, 111.
HARDIN, GARRETT. 1960. The competitive exclusion principle. Science 131:1292-1297. . 1961. Three classes of truth: Their implications for the behavioral sciences. ETC. 18: 5-20. -. 1963. A second Sermon on the Mount. Persp. Biol. Med. 6:366-371.
1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162:1243-1248.
J. U-r.ba1n97L1aa.wPo4p8:u5l6at3i-o5n7,8b. iology, and the law.

Report 21:4,6.

,

OLSON, MANCUR, JR. 1965. The logic of collective

action. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge.

PADDOCK, WILLIAM, and PAUL PADDOCK. 1964.

Hungry nations. Little, Brown and Co., Boston.

PECKHAM, MORSE. 1959.Darwinism and Darwin-

isticism. Victorian Studies 3:19-40.

POPPER, KARL R. 1957. The poverty of historicism.

Beacon Press, Boston.

SCHOECK, HELMUT. 1969. Envy. Harcourt, Brace

and World, New York.

TAX, SOL. 1960. Evolution after Darwin. Univ.

of Chicago Press, Chicago.

WATSON, J. B., and J. SAMORA. 1954. Subordinate

-. 1971Í». The survival of nations andcivilization. Science 172:1297.

leadership in a bicultural community. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 19:413-31.

