Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
To cite this article: (1990) Book notes, Social Biology, 37:1-2, 142-145, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988754 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988754
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

DYNAMIC STRUCTURES IN BIOLOGY: By
B. Goodwin, A. Sibatani, and G. Webster (eds.). Columbia University Press, New York. 1989. 259 pp. $68.50 (hardbound).
Contemporary biology is dominated by functionalist and historical principles of explanation, which stem from Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection. This work challenges the explanatory adequacy of that theory and sets out to articulate a structuralist perspective in biology.
Structuralism in biology seeks to explain how distinctive biological forms and patterns are generated. The traditional explanatory themes of genetic variation and natural selection are supplemented by generative principles of space-time order that are characteristic of living processes. These are revealed in development, behavior, taxonomy, speciation, biogeography, and evolutionary dynamics.
The book is based on a workshop held in Japan in 1986 and features contributions from an international team of experts including R. Thorn, H. Paterson, L. V. Beloussov, G. Sermonti, D. Labert, M.-W. Ho, and A. Lima-deFaria. The papers range over the whole biological realm, from the ordering principles at the level of the genome to those operating in the processes that link biology, geography, and geology.

CONCEPTION TO BIRTH. EPIDEMIOLOGY OF
PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT: By Jennie Kline, Zena Stein, and Mervyn Susser. Oxford University Press, New York. 1989. 433 pp. $55 (hardbound).
Published as Volume 14 in Monographs in Epidemiology and Biostatistics, this book aims to convey the unique contribution of epidemiology to the understanding of prenatal development, through all of gestation from conception to birth.
The volume is divided into five sections: I. Disorders of development: Weighing the evidence for environmental causes; II. Conception and early gestation; III. Later gestation; IV. Age and parity; V. The physical environment, reproduction, and surveillance.
The first section guides readers in evaluating observed associations between suspected teratogens and developmental outcomes. The second and third sections draw an epidemiological map of development. The fourth section explores maternal age and gravidity, and the fifth section takes up the public health challenge of detecting and controlling environmental hazards to reproduction.
With their longstanding interests in prenatal development, the authors review, synthesize, and reformulate epidemiological data and concepts in the

142

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

Book Notes

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

hope that they will (p.v) "stimulate the scientific imagination as well as the critical faculties" of their readers. A bibliography of 76 pages as well as author and subject indexes add to the usefulness of the volume.
SELECTED READINGS IN THE CULTURAL, SOCIAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DETERMI-
NANTS OF HEALTH: By John C. Caldwell and Gigi Santow (eds). Health Transition Centre, National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National University, Canberra. 1990. 303 pp. $14.95 (paper).
The Health Transition Centre of The Australian National University is carrying out a major research program on the cultural, social, and behavioral determinants of health in the Third World, funded by the Rockefeller Foundation. This volume, the first in a projected series, brings together a representative selection of the best work in this new field. Contributions range from global studies that place historical morbidity and mortality decline in perspective to reports of small-scale anthropological investigations. The volume indicates the general directions of needed research and will be of value to health professionals, policymakers, and researchers andan essential textbook for students in this area.
THE EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL SYSTEMS: By
John Paul Scott. Monographs in Psychobiology: An Integrated Approach, Vol. 3. Gordon and Breach Science Publishers. 1989. 355 pp. $90 (hardbound). $49 (paper).
In this volume J. P. Scott for the first time combines genetic theories of evolution, systems theory, and theories of be-

havioral evolution to explain the evolution of social behavior and organization. He proposes that caregiving has evolved from self care, to care of fertilized eggs, to developing embryos, to hatchlings. Care may then be extended to adult offspring, collateral relatives, and to unrelated others. Húmans, Scott shows, are unique in the degree to which caregiving behavior is extendable to nonrelated humans, other animals as pets, and even to plants. He concludes that social organization is based on caregiving as well as processes such as unconscious physiological cooperation, site attachment, sexual behavior, defensive behavior, competition, and conflict. Competition is thus not the sole mode of evolution. This view challenges some of the conventional sociobiological theories of the evolution of altruism. The book's broad interdisciplinary scope and social relevance has significant import for the general reader as well as for researchers and students.
SKULL SHAPES AND THE MAP. CRANIO-
METRIC ANALYSES IN THE DISPERSION
OF MODERN HOMO: By W. W. Ho-
wells. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Volume 79.1989.189 pp. (paper).
This distinguished scholar presents a painstaking survey of present-day regional skull shapes, viewed in a special way. From 28 good-sized cranial samples (26 in the female series), 18were selected in order to represent six main geographic areas by using three independent series from each area. Fifty-seven measurements, taken on all individuals, were standardized to control size within each sex and to make shape comparisons easier. Inspection at

144

BookNotes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

this point showed some special shape trends for each area. For example, Europeans expectedly show relative retraction of the alveolar region together with a prominent nasion and a face that is narrow and pulled back at the size. Qmode factor analysis confirmed these limited regional distinctions.
Analysis also suggested that recent humanity is relatively homogeneous in cranial shape. Within the limits of the evidence, no support is apparent for tracing the perceived distinctions any considerable distance into the past (i.e., to a Homo erectus level), and no distinctions of sub-Saharan Africans suggest that they are parental to other modern populations.
CREATED FROM ANIMALS: THE MORAL
IMPLICATIONS OF DARWINISM: By
James Rachels. Oxford University Press, New York. 1990. 245 pp. $19.95 (hardbound).
Since the Origin of Species was first published, Darwinism has been attacked for undermining traditional morality. Darwin's remarks on morality and religion are often treated as irrelevant to his strictly scientific project. This book argues that, on the contrary, Darwin should be seen as a systematic thinker whose views on all these subjects are closely related. In so doing, it provides an introduction to the whole of Darwin's life and thought.
Rachels goes on to survey the controversies that followed in Darwin's wake, ranging from Social Darwinism to sociobiology and discusses how the work of such intellects as Descartes, Hume, Kant, T. H. Huxley, Henri Bergson, B. F. Skinner, and Stephen Jay Gould has contributed to, or been overthrown by, evolutionary science.

Western philosophy and religion, Rachels argues, have been shaken by the implications of Darwin's work, most notably the idea that humans are simply a more complex kind of animal. Rachels assesses a number of studies that suggest how closely humans are linked to other primates in behavior, and then goes on to show how this idea undercuts the work of many prominent philosophers. What we need now, Rachels contends, is a philosophy that does not discriminate between different species, one that addresses each being on an individual basis. Rachels lays the foundations for an enlightened ethnic regarding both the value of human life and our treatment of nonhuman animals. The book's detailed presentation of this new ethnic includes its specific consequences for such matters as suicide, euthanasia, and animal rights.
GENES, CULTURE, AND PERSONALITY.
A N EMPIRICAL APPROACH: By L. J.
Eaves, H. J. Eysenck, and N. G. Martin, with contributions by R. Jardine, A. C. Heath, L. Feingold, P. A. Young, and K. S. Kendler. Academic Press, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers, New York. 1989. 465 pp. $32.50 (hardbound).
The diversity of human behavior is one of the most fascinating aspects of human biology. What makes our individual attitudes, lifestyles, and personalities different has been the subject of many physiological and psychological theories. In this book the emphasis is on understanding the genetic and environmental causes of these differences.
As the authors state (p. v/7): "The main purpose of the book is to give the reader a clearer idea of the state of knowledge, and ignorance, about the

Vol. 37, No. 1-2

Book Notes

145

causes of individual differences in personality and attitudes, a good feeling for the kinds of data on which such inferences are based, and a sense of the methods of data analysis that are appropriate for answering basic questions about the role of biological and cultural inheritance in human populations. As a consequence, parts of the book are more technical than is often the case; there are many more tables and more than usual caution in circumscribing our less than certain conclusions. By providing much of the original data, we have

allowed the reader scope to develop and test his/her own ideas and models and to retrace our steps, at least in some of the simpler cases."
Genes, Culture, and Personality is an expansive account of the state of current knowledge about the causes of individual differences in personality and social attitudes. Based on almost two decades of research, the book makes a significant contribution to the debate on genetic and cultural inheritance in human behavior.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

