Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Physiognomic Homogamy: A test of physical similarity as a factor in the mate selection process
Victoria J. Chambers , John R. Christiansen & Phillip R. Kunz
To cite this article: Victoria J. Chambers , John R. Christiansen & Phillip R. Kunz (1983) Physiognomic Homogamy: A test of physical similarity as a factor in the mate selection process, Social Biology, 30:2, 151-157, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988529 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988529
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 18
View related articles
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Physiognomic Homogamy: A Test of Physical Similarity As a Factor in the Mate Selection Process

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Victoria J. Chambers, John R. Christiansen, and Phillip R. Kunz
Department of Sociology Brigham Young University Provo, Utah

ABSTRACT: This study tests the hypothesis that physiognomic similarity is a factor in the process of mate selection. Judges asked to match photographs of males and females who looked most alike actually paired engaged and newlywed couples to a significant degree. This study highlights the possible importance of similar physical appearance as a factor in the formation of interpersonal relationships.

The physical characteristics of those health, and level of physical attraction;

with whom face-to-face interactions and when Spuhler (1968) compared

take place are often noted in conversa- body measurements of married couples,

tion and in written communications. In his data also indicated homogamy

spite of the frequency with which the among married couples for several dif-

physical description of individuals ap- ferent body measurements. Homogamy

pear in various types of communica- in terms of level of attractiveness has

tions, the influence that those character- also been established by Murstein

istics have on the formation of (1972) and Shepard and Ellis (1972).

interpersonal relationships has been One study reported by Griffiths

largely overlooked in sociological re- (1970) and Griffiths and Kunz (1973)

search. For example, Stone (1962) appears unique in that it tested the hy-

points out that Mead, Cooley, and other pothesis that married couples may tend

symbolic interactionists, while devoting to look alike, either at the time of mar-

much time and explanation to gestures, riage as a result of the selection process,

overlooked the importance that physical or as a result of a process of growing to

appearance plays in nonverbal com- look more alike as the years passed. In

munication.

that study judges (college students)

One area of human interaction in were asked to try to match correctly picwhich physical appearance might seem tures of individuals who were married. to be an important factor is that of mate The pictures were divided into groups of selection. Researchers in the field of five married couples each, based on mate selection, however, have tended to length of time married. Their results concentrate on indications of psycholog- failed to support the hypothesis that ical, personality, or role comparisons; married couples tend to grow to look and, with some notable exceptions, more alike over time, but for the couples have largely ignored physical appear- that had been married for only a few ance as a factor. Burgess and Wallin years, the judges were able to correctly (1944) reported positive homogamy in match them to a significant degree. Grifcouples for height, weight, state of fiths (1970, p. 55) questioned whether

151

152

Chambers, Christiansen, and Kunz

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

this was an indication that people "(1) seek out those who look like themselves; or (2) that, if the engagement period is of any length, the process of physiognomic homogamy has already started." Other than these studies, very little has been done by professionals on the subject.
Among nonprofessionals, however, the importance of appearance in mate selection seems to surface frequently. In referring to engaged or married couples, such statements as "they look enough alike to be brother and sister," or "people married for a long time always seem to look alike," are commonly heard.
There may be a generalized belief, moreover, that people ought to have about equal amounts of "good looks." Comments are commonly made about couples notably unequal in attractiveness. With a paucity of scientific data on the subject available, and in view of common beliefs on the subject, it was decided to test the hypothesis that physiognomic homogamy is a factor in the mate selection process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
To test the hypothesis that people tend to select mates who look like themselves it is necessary to define the concept "looking alike," and to consider more than one variable. The study reported by Griffiths and Kunz involved the judging of black and white pictures that included only the face of the subjects; however, Spuhler's (1968) study indicated physiognomic homogamy not only for certain physical features of the face and head, but also for various other body measurements. This indicates the possibility of a homogamous factor for body build. Moreover, the probable im-

portance that coloring assumes for people is illustrated by expressions in common usage such as "blonds have more fun," or "I like them tall, dark and handsome." Our popular songs are loaded with references to coloring, in titles such as "Green Eyes," and "The ·Strawberry Blond," or lyrics of "five feet two, eyes of blue," and "tall and tan and young and lovely" in describing the "girl from Ipanema."
The decision was made, therefore, to use the technique of asking judges to try to match correctly pictures of couples, but to consider general body build and coloring of the hair, skin, and eyes as well as facial characteristics only.
To control for the remote possibility that married couples may grow to look alike over time, a group of engaged couples was included as well as a group of married couples, and the married subjects were limited to couples who had been married for one year or less. Groups of ten couples each were used. More than ten couples in a group is too difficult to judge and would quickly discourage the judges altogether.
A list of names of couples who were engaged and couples who had been married less than one year was obtained by contacting students in several sociology classes at Brigham Young University. Students were not informed of the study's purpose, but asked only to submit names of appropriate couples that they knew, themselves included.
A random sample of ten couples was drawn from each of these groups. These subjects were contacted, a brief explanation of the purpose of the study given, and they were asked if they would agree to participate by coming to a central location on campus to have their pictures taken. AH of those contacted were willing to cooperate except for one instance.

Vol. 30, No.2

Physiognomic Homogamy

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Another couple was randomly chosen as corded, resulting in two scores for each

a replacement. Allof those who showed judge, or a total of fifty-six scores in all.

up to be photographed were of apparent Thejudging was conducted both dur-

Caucasian background except for one ing the Fall 1978 semester (fourteen

Mexican-American couple. Since this judges) and the Winter 1979 semester couple's appearance might provide a (fourteen judges). At each of the two

hint for matching they were replaced by times, there were eight female andsix

the random selection of another couple, male judges. They ranged inage from 18

One engaged couple consistently failed to 33. Age appears not to be a factor in

to show up for the picture-taking, which the results because of the narrow age

left nine engaged and ten married coup- band selected. les. To keep the sample sizes equal the Frequency tables of the scores were

couple which had been married for the made and these data were compared

longest period of time was eliminated, with scores that would be expected to be

The total of 36 subjects ranged in age obtained by chance. The expected fre-

from 18 to 28years.

quencies were computed by using the

At the picture-taking sessions, each formula given by Feller (1968, pp. 107-

subject was photographed individually 108):

using the same camera, film type, flash ^ = m] r 1 / 0 ! - l / l ! +1/21-1/3!

attachment, and background. In order

, _ -+-i/fA/-iVl

to get an impression of general body

build the subjects were photographed The probability for 0 to 9 correct

from thewaist up. Theresulting pictures matches being made randomly among

were submitted to various judges who were recruited primarily from upper division and graduate sociology and family development classes.

nine matched pairs is given in Table 1. The expected frequency for a score of eight is zero, as, in matching pairs, if eight are matched correctly then the

The judging was accomplished with ninth will also be matched correctly, each judge working alone while making his or her decisions. Each judge was

asked to match thepictures of those sub-

TABLE 1

jects that he felt looked most alike, matching male to female. The judges

PROBABILITIES OF CORRECTLY MATCHING
0TO 9OF 9 MATCHEDPAIRS*

were first presented with the pictures of

=

the engaged subjects, the pictures having been laid out on a table in random fashion. A preliminary check was made j
prior to each judging to be sure that the 2 judge wasnot acquainted with the sub- 3 jects. In no case did this become a fac- 5 tor. After the judge had finished with 6 this first group, the pictures of the mar- ? ried couples were placed on thetable in 9

COJC°ML^S ..................

Probability
0.367879 0.367882 0.183929 0.061343 0.015278 0.003125 0.000463 0.000099 0.000003

a similar random manner. The scores,
Which r e p r e s e n t e d the n u m b e r Of COr^
matches for each grOUp, Were re-

, ,Theexpectedfrequencyfora5COreofeighliszer0

asin

matching nine pair. If eight are matched correctly, the ninth

will also be matched correctly. Theexpected frequency for a

score ofeight is therefore not included inthe table

154

Chambers, Christiansen, and Kunz

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

The expected frequency for a score of

TABLE 2

eight is therefore not included in the ta- RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBSERVED AND

ble. EXPECTED FREQUENCIES OF CORRECT

Because the expected frequencies for

MATCHES FOR ENGAGED COUPLES, BOTH

matching three or more couples cor-

EMESTERS

rectly are all less than 0.1, the cells for
, ., ,
three or more matches are grouped together in Tables 2-4, giving four groups for each table. In these tables the first column lists the number of correct

=^
Number of
correct
choices
0 *

==^
obs. Freq-
l
3

=^
Obs. %
3.57 10.71 25.00

=^==
Exp. Exp. Freq. %

10.30 10.30 5.15

36.79 36.79 18.39

choices for each row. The second and 3 an'd'

60.72 2.25 8.03

third columns show the raw scores (ob- above ... 17 100.00 28.00 100.00

served frequency) and per cents (ob- Totals ... 28

served per cent) of correct matches re-

spectively. The last two columns show the expected frequency for correct

·A*=iio.92,df=3.P= <0.001.

matches (fourth column) and the corres-

TABLE 3

ponding expected per cent of correct

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBSERVED AND

matches (fifth column).

EXPECTED FREQUENCIES OF CORRECT

,-,,. , .,
Chi-square was chosen as the appropriate statistical test to determine if the scores obtained by the judges were significantly higher than they would be expected to achieve by chance. Because this is a fairly well controlled experimental design and because a stringent test of significance was desired to avoid accepting the hypothesis if it were not true, the level of significance was set at 0.001. With the degrees of freedom (k-1) being 3, the region of rejection is 16.266.

MATCHES FOR MARRIED COUPLES, BOTH

SEMESTERS*

No. of

Correct

Obs. Obs. Exp. Exp.

Choices

Freq.

%

%

0 5 17.86 10.30 36.79 1 7 25.00 10.30 36.79 2 8 28.58 5.15 18.39
3 and
above . . . 8 28.56 2.25 8.03

Totals . . . 28 100.00 28.00 100.00

·A2 =2O.O6,df=3./7 = <0.001.

TABLE 4

RESULTS
Table 2 indicates the total scores obtained for both semesters for the engaged group only. The number of correct matches greatly exceeds the number to be expected by chance. Out of a total of twenty-eight scores, eight had three correct matches, seven had four correct matches and two had five correct matches. The chi-square for Table 2 is 110.92, statistically significant at the 0.001 level.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBSERVED AND EXPECTED FREQUENCIES OF CORRECT MATCHES OF MARRIED COUPLES, FIRST SEMESTER

No. Correct Choices
0 1 2 3 and above . . .
Totals . . .

Obs. Freq.
2 6 3
3
14

Obs. %
14.29 42.85 21.43
21.43
100.00

Exp. Freq.
5.15 5.15 2.58
1.12
14.00

Exp. %
36.79 36.79 18.39
8.03
100.00

Table 3 lists the data for both semes-

·X2=5,3, df=3.

Vol. 30, No. 2

Physiognomic Homogamy

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

ters for the married subjects only. Although the number of correct matches exceeds those expected by chance, there are not as many correct matches for the married group as there are for the engaged subjects. The chi-square, nevertheless, is still significant at the 0.001 level.
In checking all chi-squares, those for each semester separately as well as those combined, the only value not statistically significant at the 0.001 level is that of the married subjects only for the Fall semester (see Table 4). Although the number of correct matches exceed the number that would be expected by chance matching, it is not a significant difference.
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE
If a tendency for physiognomic homogamy does exist, as these data indicate, then the question arises as to what theoretical explanation there might be for such a phenomenon. Speculating on this question it can be noted that such a tendency might be explained from several different perspectives.
A perhaps obvious explanation is that most of us have narcissistic tendencies. Freud (1957, p. 88) states:
We say that a human has originally two sexual objects--himself and the woman who nurses him--and in doing so we are postulating a primary narcissism in everyone, which may in some cases manifest itself in a dominating fashion in his objectchoice.
Thus, Freud asserts that all individuals have a tendency to direct their libidinal energy toward those who resemble themselves, and the love object of the individual may well be chosen to satisfy this narcissistic need.
There are also other theoretical ex-

planations for a tendency to physiognomic homogamy in mate selection. There is often a pronounced look-alike factor among members of a family, especially between parents and their offspring. Is it possible that what is really happening is that people tend to be attracted to others who resemble some family member, possibly a parent, and that in choosing a mate who resembles a parent that the result is a significant number of look-alikes among married couples? If this is what is occurring then there are two or three additional theoretical perspectives that might explain the phenomenon.
One might take the position that it is the functioning of the Oedipus complex as described by Freud, in which it is asserted that growing children, under normal conditions, ultimately form sexual attachments to the parent of the opposite sex. In mate selection then, the attraction will be toward an individual who, in both personality and physical characteristics, resembles the opposite sexed parent.
Perhaps, rather than being caused by subconscious psychic factors, the tendency is explained in more sociological terms. A social learning theory perspective might state that one learns to associate positive experiences and rewards with the stimulus of the physical appearance of those who provide these rewards, primarily with the parents from whom one has received love, nourishment, and physical care. Perhaps when an individual meets someone who has a physical resemblance to a parent from whom he has received such positive treatment, the appearance acts as the stimulus by which he associates the behavior and somehow expects the same kind of rewards.
Being attracted to those who physi-

156

Chambers, Christiansen, and Kunz

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

cally resemble a parent could also be explained as the result of a basic interaction process. It is probable that individuals would be inclined to have an initial positive reaction to other individuals who physically resemble those, such as their parents, with whom they have shared their most intimate and intense interactions--people who, by their appearance, evoke a sense of familiarity and confidence, those who have particular physical characteristics which are associated in the mind of the observer with certain positive familiar personality characteristics.
These theoretical perspectives, though purely speculative, do offer possible explanations for the occurrence of a tendency toward physiognomic homogamy in mate selection.
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
The results of this study support the hypothesis that there is a tendency for people to choose mates who physically resemble themselves. Out of the six chisquares, all but one is significant at the 0.001 level.
Since the subjects in this study were recruited from a student population the question of generalizability to the population as a whole is a legitimate one (see Kerckhoff, 1974, pp. 72-73). It is to be noted, however, that in Griffith's study his subjects were not drawn from a student population and yet, among his newlywed subjects, the data indicated a significant degree of physiognomic ho-

mogamy, giving a second source of support to the hypothesis.
One rather surprising finding is that engaged couples are matched correctly more often than are the married couples. This is interesting since among any group of engaged couples it may be assumed that some will terminate their engagement and not follow through to marriage. We would have expected that the number of "look alike" couples should have been higher among the married group. One explanation may be that people initially choose partners who look like themselves but that in time, during courtship, other factors of personality or role incompatibility may cause termination of the relationship. In these instances the individuals involved, now presumably older and wiser, may consciously seek a partner who is perceived as being similar in terms of these personality or role factors and put less emphasis on physical appearance. Additional work needs to be done to determine whether or not this explanation is correct.
Further replications of this study are of course necessary to establish the validity of the hypothesis, and many refinements are needed to confirm the applicability of any one general theoretical perspective. It does appear that this is an area of research that invites investigation, particularly as it helps to emphasize a factor that has generally been overlooked, that of the effect that physical characteristics of others play on our associations, our actions and reactions, and ultimately in the shaping of human behavior.

Vol. 30, No. 2

Physiognomic Homogamy

157

REFERENCES

BURGESS, ERNEST W., and PAUL WALLIN. 1943. GRIFFITHS, R. WAYNE, and PHILLIP R. KUNZ.

Homogamy insocial characteristics, Amer.

1973. Physiognomic homogamy. Soc.Biol.

J. Sociol., Vol. 49(Sept):109-124.

20:448-453.

FELLER, WILLIAM. 1968. An introduction to MURSTEIN, BERNARD I. 1972. Physical attrac-

probability theory andits applications, Vol. tiveness and marital choice. J. Personal.

1, p. 107-108. John Wiley, New York.

Soc. Psychol. 22:8-12.

FREUD, SIGMUND. 1957. On narcissism: An in- SHEPARD, J. W., and H. D. ELLIS. 1972. Phys-

troduction, p. 88.Inthe standard edition of

ical attractiveness and selection ofmarriage

the complete psychological works of

partners. Psychol. Rep.,Vol. 30.

Sigmund Freud, Vol. 14. Translated from SPUHLER, H. H. 1968.Assortative mating with

German by James Stackey (gen. ed.). Ho- respect to physical characteristics. Eugen.

garth Press, London.

Quart. 15:128-140.

GRIFFITHS, R. WAYNE. 1970. Assortative mat-
ing: A study of physiognomic homogamy. Master's Thesis, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

STONE, GREGORY G. 1962. Appearance and the
self. In Arnold M. Base (ed.), Human behaviour and social processes. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

