Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Comment on "methodological options in measuring illegitimacy and the difference they make," by Berkov and Sklar
Stephanie J. Ventura
To cite this article: Stephanie J. Ventura (1976) Comment on "methodological options in measuring illegitimacy and the difference they make," by Berkov and Sklar, Social Biology, 23:4, 349-353, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988249 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988249
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Comment on "Methodological Options in Measuring Illegitimacy and the Difference They Make," by Berkov and Sklar

Stephanie J. Ventura
Division of Vital Statistics National Center for Health Statistics Rockville, Maryland

In the article "Methodological Options and Sklar believe that a strictly legal def-

in Measuring Illegitimacy and the Differ- inition, whereby all children born to mar-

ence They Make," which appeared in the ried women--regardless of whether or not

Winter 197S issue of Social Biology (Vol. they are separated--are considered to be

22, No. 4, pp. 356-371), Beth Berkov and legitimate, is not appropriate. They feel

June Sklar raise two principal meth- tha separated women should be included

odological issues: (1) the use of inferred in the denominator used for calculating

illegitimacy data in preparing national es- illegitimacy rates since they are exposed

timates of the incidence of illegitimacy, to the risk of de facto out-of-wedlock

and (2) the inclusion of separated women childbearing.

in the denominator used for calculating In this communication, we will discuss

illegitimate birth rates.

the problems involved in aggregating in-

The authors contend that the method ferred illegitimacy data for some states

used in California to infer the legitimacy with the data that are actually reported for

status of births from a comparison of sur- other states. We will also comment on the

names on the birth record is valid and factual basis for the position taken by

therefore that "national estimates [of il- Berkov and Sklar with respect to the ap-

legitimate births] incorporating inferential propriate population denominator for il-

data are preferable to estimates based sole- legitimacy rates and explain why we find

ly on the experience of reporting states in the evidence thus far insufficient to sup-

the same geographical area" (pp. 363, port their position.

365), which is the method used by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). The NCHS method assumes that the nonreporting states in a given geographical division have the same proportion of illegitimate births as the reporting states in that division.
With regard to the denominator used for calculating illegitimate birth rates, Berkov

Berkov and Sklar base their reliance on inferential legitimacy data on what they believe to be reliable and complete data for California, a state for which the only available means of measuring the extent of illegitimacy is the use of inferred data. The criteria developed for inferring the legitimacy status of California births have evidently been carefully and completely eval-

349

350

Communications

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

uated by the California Department of Health and by the authors, and we have no reason to question these evaluations. However, this is not the case for the criteria used to infer legitimacy status in other states.
In the Berkov-Sklar study, all inferred data from the other 11 nonreporting states have admittedly been aggregated and utilized without questioning or evaluating the criteria employed. We believe such an evaluation should be a major component of a study to infer illegitimacy in order to produce national illegitimacy data. The use of inferential data may result in better national estimates, but this assumes that the inferential data are themselves accurate. We also believe that a complete evaluation of inferential data would require that the inferential criteria that are employed to produce illegitimacy data for the nonreporting states yield data for the reporting states that are fairly compatible with what are actually being reported. A thorough evaluation of inferential data is thus essential to help ensure that we are combining comparable data when data based on the legitimacy status item in the reporting states are aggregated with data derived from inferring legitimacy status in the nonreporting states.
Our concern about the comparability of the illegitimacy data from the two sources is based on two facts. First, the states differ widely in their regulations concerning the entry of the father's surname and the appropriate surname for the child on the birth certificate of a child born out of wedlock. Since inferred legitimacy status is usually based on a comparison of surnames of the father, mother (current and maiden surnames), and child, obviously the laws or regulations in effect in any state with respect to entry of these names can have considerable impact on the successful implementation of an inferential procedure. For example, California is one

of only 4 states, among the 12 not now requiring the reporting of legitimacy status, that have virtually no restrictions on the entry of the father's name and the child's surname in the case of an illegitimate birth. In California, the mother of an illegitimate child is permitted to enter the father's name without his permission, and she is permitted to give any surname she wishes to her child. Maryland, Ohio, and Vermont have similar unrestrictive policies. Most of the other nonreporting states permit the father's name only if there is a paternity statement by the father or court order; in some states, the father's name is prohibited in all cases where the birth is illegitimate.
The second factor which gives us concern about the comparability of the illegitimacy data from the reporting system with that based on inferential procedures is that the nonreporting states which do themselves infer legitimacy status utilize widely varying criteria in inferring the legitimacy status of infants born in their states. The criterion most often used for inferring that a birth is illegitimate by the 11 states other than California which do not have a legitimacy item on the birth record is the absence of the father's name. In fact, this criterion is the only one used in two states. A paternity statement attached to the birth record is a second common indicator that a child is illegitimate. Two other states use this criterion together with absence of the father's name. In New York State, the single criterion used is absence of the father's age from the birth record. Thus, if one is to conduct a national study of illegitimacy using inferred data where legitimacy status is not reported, one has two choices--either to use the data as they are inferred by each individual state or to devise a common set of guidelines that would be applicable to all the states. It is not clear that the criteria presently used by all

Vol. 23, No. 4

Communications

351

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

the nonreporting states are as complete as basis for making national estimates of il-

they should be to yield an accurate count legitimacy.

of illegitimate births. For example, one The other major point of difference in

might question the single criterion em- methodology between the Berkov-Sklar

ployed in New York State.

paper and the procedures employed at the

A study now underway in the National NCHS is the inclusion in their study and

Center for Health Statistics is designed to the exclusion by NCHS of separated

determine if it is feasible to devise a few women from the denominators used in

simple methods for inferring legitimacy calculating illegitimacy rates. The authors

status in the nonreporting states that will make a good case that a strictly legal def-

yield estimates superior to those obtained inition of legitimacy status may not be ap-

by the present method. This study indi- propriate when trying to determine the

cates that no single set of criteria could be number of children born into single-parent

employed to adequately deal with the legal family circumstances. After all, the study

situations encountered in the various of illegitimacy usually focuses on the likely

states. As the agency responsible for pro- social, economic, and health consequences

ducing national data on illegitimacy, it faced by illegitimate babies in comparison

would be necessary for the NCHS to de- to the more favorable situations for babies

vise guidelines that would not vary so born in relatively secure two-parent fami-

much from state to state so as to be pro- lies.

hibitive from a data-processing stand- The fact remains, however, that there is

point.

a legal aspect to this problem. As the au-

We believe that the real options avail- thors correctly observe, "separated women

able to NCHS on the matter of using in- are married, and their children are pre-

ferred legitimacy data to make national sumed to be legitimate" (p. 365). In fact,

estimates have not been fully presented in for a large number of states, it is required

the Berkov-Sklar paper. Indeed, the very that the name of the husband be entered

fact of the widely differing regulations in on the birth record as the father unless or

the various states with respect to entering until there is a court order determining

the father's name and options for the paternity to be otherwise. Furthermore,

child's surname is only slightly alluded to most states have adopted the concept that

in their paper. The authors should really a child is legitimate if he or she was con-

focus prominently on this point for it may ceived or born during lawful wedlock, re-

have had a profound effect on their data. gardless of whether or not the woman's

We recognize that there are major prob- husband was the child's biological father.

lems in measuring illegitimacy and that Thus, the child's reported or inferred

the data we now have need improvement. legitimacy status in these states is based on

We are trying to develop better procedures the mother's marital status. NCHS is re-

for making national estimates. Mean- stricted to the information on the birth

while, we are hopeful that as a result of record which is essentially a legal docu-

the replacement of the legitimacy status ment, and we must follow the legal proce-

item on the current birth certificate by a dures observed by the states. It is possible,

question on the mother's marital status in as Berkov and Sklar suggest, that some

the 1978 revision of the U. S. Standard people completing birth certificates do not

Certificate of Live Birth, some additional follow state laws, but no one knows the

states may adopt the revised item, thus extent to which this may be done.

providing NCHS with a more accurate However, even if we forget about the

352

Communications

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

legal aspects of reporting legitimacy status, we believe that the evidence cited in the Berkov-Sklar paper is not sufficient or adequate to support inclusion of these women in the denominator used for calculating illegitimate birth rates. The most critical point is that the data in Table 7 (p. 367) refer only to illegitimate births to separated women. We feel that it is important to secure data on legitimate births to separated women as well. That is, while a certain proportion of separated women may have babies by men other than their husbands, it is essential to know what proportion of separated women having babies by men other than their husbands choose specifically to list the legal husband rather than the biological father as the father on the birth certificate, thus virtually assuring that their babies are considered legitimate. Additionally, there are probably separated women who have babies fathered by their legal husbands. If these latter proportions were found to be relatively high, then it would not be correct to assume that separated women should be included in the denominator used for computing illegitimacy rates.
The real issue is the need to solve the practical problem of securing comparable data for the numerator and denominator of the illegitimacy rate. The authors concede the desirability of knowing the legitimacy status of births to separated women. Simply because they feel that the number of legitimate births to separated women is small, based only on their experience with selected California data, does not justify the conclusion that all separated women should be included in the denominator used for calculating national illegitimate birth rates.
With respect to the data specifically cited in support of their position by Berkov and Sklar, we believe that the sample selected tends to exaggerate the effects of including separated women in the de-

nominator. First of all, the data in Table 7 refer to only three hospitals in the San Francisco Bay area and to a total of only 324 illegitimate births. The data are certainly not representative of illegitimate births in San Francisco with respect to the distribution by race. Even national data on illegitimacy--either NCHS data or data from the Berkov-Sklar estimates--do not reflect such a preponderance of Black births. Secondly, the data are not representative with respect to age composition. The data in their table show a much larger proportion of women aged 20 and over than do NCHS national data. It is Black women and older women who are more likely to be separated.
Finally, the data in Table 7 for separated women actually refer to very few women--only 22 in total, 4 white and 18 Black (estimated from the per cents shown). These figures seem to us to be inadequate to sustain their argument that "there seems little question that, at least in California, separated women having children by men other than their husbands are being included in the counts of illegitimate births and therefore that separated women cannot be excluded from the denominators that are used to calculate illegitimate birth rates" (p. 366). Perhaps this is true for California, but we feel that the sample of hospitals would have to be much larger and more representative to be sure.
Furthermore, from our knowledge of the practices in other states and from other studies (Cutright, 1972, pp. 432-433) we are not at all sure that this situation is common for them and believe that it is quite risky to assume this without more adequate data. We practicularly wonder, as does Cutright, how many separated women would go to the trouble of listing a man other than her husband as the father of her child, thus ensuring that the child will be registered or inferred as illegitimate. If a substantial proportion of sep-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 4

Communications

353

arated women do not take this step, then we certainly could not justify the inclusion of all separated women in the denominator.
We recognize that there are problems with the conventional definition of the illegitimacy rate. In our future analytical reports, we will be showing the effect of a change in the denominator so as to include (permanently) separated women. However, before we could consider making a change in the way illegitimacy rates are routinely defined and computed, we would need to have more data--data which at present are simply not available. One essential piece of information, as we have just suggested, is a classification of all births to separated women by legitimacy status. If we were to find, for example, that most births to separated women (fathered by men other than their husbands) are actually reported as having been fathered by the women's husbands (and thus considered legitimate), it would be inappropriate to include separated women in the denominator of the illegiti-

macy rate, since their births are not in the numerator. Clearly, more research is needed on this aspect of the definition of the illegitimacy rate before any changes could be made.
As we have already stated, there are many problems involved in the measurement of illegitimacy. We in the NCHS are the first to recognize that the present methods of counting illegitimate births for national estimates and of measuring the risk of illegitimacy may well need revision. We are presently engaged in an extensive research project which has the goal of developing better methods of making national estimates of illegitimacy. We are also hoping to develop methods to ascertain more precisely the exact population at risk of bearing illegitimate children. Not only is better understanding and agreement of the practical and analytic uses of the data needed, but also of the practical problems associated with producing these data. We welcome the advice of anyone who would like to work with NCHS toward these goals.

REFERENCE CUTRIGHT, P. 1972. Illegitimacy in the United States: 1920-1968. In C. F. Westoff and R. Parke (eds.),
Demographic and social aspects of population growth. Commission on Population Growth and the American Future. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

