Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Psychological features of Huntington's disease and the problem of early detection
Robert S. Wilson & David C. Garron
To cite this article: Robert S. Wilson & David C. Garron (1980) Psychological features of Huntington's disease and the problem of early detection, Social Biology, 27:1, 11-19, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988399 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988399
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 6
View related articles
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Psychological Features of Huntington's Disease and the Problem of Early Detection

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Robert S. Wilson and David C. Garron
Department of Psychologyand SocialSciences,Rush University, and Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center,Chicago, Illinois

ABSTRACT: Huntington's disease (HD) is a chronic degenerative neurologic disorder inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Symptom onset typically occurs at about age 40, and considerable effort has been expended in attempts to diagnose the disorder prior to the childbearing years. We review attempts to use psychological tests in early diagnosis. Specifically, we identify variables that show promise as early markers of the disorder, review evidence that a prodromal phase may exist, analyzethe few prospective studies of persons at risk for HD, and consider the logical and methodological problems involved in early detection research.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a chronic degenerative neurologic disorder which is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Its cardinal manifestations include a progressive movement disorder, typically chorea but occasionally akinesia and rigidity, as well as progressive cognitive and emotional changes. The most characteristic neuropathologic finding is a loss of neurons in the corpus striatum (Bruyn et al., 1979). Cerebral atrophy is often present as well, particularly in the frontal lobes. Imbalances in a variety of neurotransmitters, amino acids, and peptides have been noted (e.g., Enna et al., 1977). These alterations, however, probably reflect pathological changes in specific brain regions (e.g., corpus striatum) rather than the sort of pathway-specific changes seen in Parkinsonism (Barbeau, 1979).
The age at which symptoms become apparent is variable but typically occurs in middle age. Various epidemiologic studies suggest a mean age of symptom onset of about forty with a standard deviation of about ten years (Myrianthopoulos, 1966). Thus, symptoms are not typically apparent until after the childbearing

years. Considerable scientific interest has been focused on ways of detecting the disease before the childbearing years, at least ten to twenty years earlier than is now possible.
The purpose of this paper is to review attempts to use psychological tests in the early detection of HD and to discuss some of the logical and methodological problems these attempts have encountered. We will not cover the ethical issues involved in early detection. Excellent discussions of these issues exist elsewhere (e.g., Stern and Eldridge, 1975).
Attempts at early identification of HD gene carriers may be broken into two categories. Presymptomatic or premorbid detection properly refers to attempts to diagnose affected individuals prior to symptom manifestation. Such a procedure would presumably be based upon detection of some byproduct of the mutated gene. It was this sort of procedure that the Commission for the Control of Huntington's Disease and its Consequences (1977) had in mind in outlining criteria for the ideal predictive test: a safe, reliable laboratory procedure to detect a specific protein or enzyme, for example, resulting

11

12

Wilson and Garron

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

from the mutated HD gene. Such a proce- interest in dementia and the development

dure might be implemented at birth or of neuropsychological tests. In the past,

even prenatally.

however, there was considerable interest

Early detection, on the other hand, re- in early changes in personality and in pre-

fers to attempts to detect the symptoms of choreic signs of psychopathology. We will

the disease earlier than is now possible. discuss these two kinds of change sepa-

These approaches are essentially attempts rately although many of the points we

to refine the way in which the disease is make apply to both.

diagnosed. A variety of instruments and Butters and his co-workers (Butters et

procedures have been and are being used al., 1978) compared two groups of pa-

in such efforts, including electroencepha- tients differing in years since diagnosis.

lography (Chandler, 1966), computerized The chronic patients showed a variety of

tomography (Neophytides et al., 1979), deficits: intellectual deterioration, pri-

tremometry (Falek, 1969), and levodopa mary and secondary memory changes,

loading (Klawans et al., 1970). Psycholog- and a nonsignificant trend toward a nam-

ical testing also falls into this category. ing disturbance. In contrast, the recently

These approaches all assume the presence diagnosed (within the past year) patients

of a prodromal stage in HD, a period prior showed a relatively isolated defect in sec-

to the onset of frank symptoms during ondary memory. The patients had

which subtle but detectable signs exist. difficulty forming enduring memories.

For these approaches to be effective, this Their IQ's were in the normal range and

prodromal phase must begin at least ten language skills remained intact. Caine,

years before obvious symptoms become Weingartner, and their colleagues have

manifest.

taken a slightly different approach to this

problem (Caine et al., 1978; Weingartner

EARLY PSYCHOLOGICAL CHANGES

et al., 1979). Given the difficulty in pinpointing the age of symptom onset in this disorder, they have simply chosen to study

Huntington's disease is a progressive patients without disabling cognitive or

disorder. Descriptions of behavior in HD psychiatric symptoms. These are patients

are unlikely to be illuminating without ref- who would be classified as stage one or

erence to the disease stage with which two on Shoulson's five point clinical stagthese behaviors are associated. Late in the ing scale (Shoulson and Fahn, 1977).

course of the disease patients often show rather widespread cognitive and emotiona^disturbances (Wilson and Garron, 1979). The behavior changes early in the course of the disease, however, are somewhat circumscribed. From the standpoint of early detection, it is these early changes that are of interest.

These minimally affected, patients are described in terms quite similar to those used by Butters. That is, the patients show a rather circumscribed memory deficit. IQ's are in the normal range and language skills are intact. They also appear somewhat apathetic and complain of difficulties in initiating and organizing behavior.

Two kinds of early psychological Although future research on such pa-

change may be distinguished. These are tients may reveal additional deficit areas,

cognitive changes on the one hand, and the work to date suggests that memory is

psychopathological changes on the other. affected early in the course of the disease

Currently, cognitive changes are empha- and that memory may be impaired while sized, in keeping with the contemporary other cognitive functions remain intact.

Vol. 27, No. 1

Huntington's Disease

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Clearly any attempt to use neuropsycholo- tives (Garron, 1973). While systematic

gical tests to identify those persons at risk ratings of behavior might make interstudy

for HD who are actually afflicted must be comparisons more reliable, the few

weighted heavily with memory tests.

studies which do use standard instruments

tend to use self-report scales such as the

EARLY PERSONALITY CHANGES

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). The use of self-report scales

A wide variety of early personality in a condition marked by impaired insight

changes have been described among per- may be questioned (Wilson and Garron,

sons with HD. According to reports, these 1979).

changes seem to be coincident with the oc- In any event, there are four reports of

currence of chorea and dementia in about relatively systematic, formal personality

one-third of the cases (Dewhurst et al., testing of patients with HD. It may be in-

1969). These changes tend to cover the ferred from these reports that the patients

spectrum of psychopathology, and it is were examined relatively early in the

difficult to determine whether there are course of the disease and were not inca-

some manifestations typical of HD. Two pacitated by dementia. Unfortunately,

broad classes of personality change are frequently described, however (Garron, 1973). First, there are changes involving emotional states and emotional lability including extremes such as euphoria, apathy, and irritability. Second, there are even more extreme changes involving inappropriate sexual behavior, preoccupation with the sexual misbehavior of others, delusions of persecution and/or grandiosity, and hallucinations. These manifestations often lead to diagnoses of mania, psychotic depression, paranoia, or schizophrenia.

the samples total only 42 persons and are of unknown representativeness. In addition, the results are often characterized briefly or summarized, rather than detailed. Goodman et al. (1966, 1969), for instance, report four persons with HD and characterize them as depressed, hostile, relying on denial and repression, and sensitive to their disability based on interpretations of the MMPI, Rotter Incomplete Sentences, and Draw-A-Person tests. Boll et al. (1974) report a comparison between nine HD patients and "brain damaged" patients matched for cognitive disability

This variety of early behavioral change on the Halstead Impairment Index. A

may reflect the actual symptomatic he- comparison of MMPI profile indicators of

terogeneity of HD. The reports are con- degree of psychopathology did not dif-

tradictory, however, rather than simply ferentiate the two groups. Norton (1975)

varied. For instance, some report that compared MMPI's from six HD patients

schizophrenic behavior is most common and five otherwise undescribed brain dam-

(Brothers, 1964), some report few cases of aged patients matched for age and educa-

schizophrenia (Minski and Guttman, tion. There were no differences on an

1938; Heathfield, 1967), some specifically MMPI measure of severity of psycho-

deny schizophrenia syndromes (Dewhurst pathology. Finally, Fedio et al. (1979)

et al., 1969), and some report affective disorders as characteristics (McHugh and Folstein, 1975; Folstein et al., 1979). The contradiction may well also reflect reliance on simple observation of patients or on unreliable characterizations by rela-

compared ten patients with HD and twenty-eight considerably younger normal persons. The tests were the MMPI, a problem checklist (Mooney and Gordon, 1950), a test of emotionality (Plutchik and Kellerman, 1968), and the IPAT Anxiety

14

Wilson and Garron

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Scale (Cattell and Scheier, 1963). HDpa- one study (Dewhurst et al., 1969) theclini-

tients had significantly elevated MMPI cal histories of 68patients were examined.

profiles, in particular on the Sc, D, andPt About 85 per cent were said to have un-

scales, and on experimental scales indica- dergone a prodromal phase beginning on

tive of emotional lability, anxiety, and so- the average of ten years prior to the point

cial disability. Theresults of the other self- of diagnosis and consisting largely of

report scales were essentially similar, nonspecific psychiatric complaints. Un-

reflecting patients' concern about emo- fortunately, the authors did not specify

tional lability and increased anxiety.

.precisely what information was collected,

That these HD patients were able to how it was gathered, or what sort of be-

take a variety of self-report scales, and havior subsequently unaffected siblings

that few were described as showing more were exhibiting during the same time pe-

schizophrenic and other psychotic signs, riod. In another study (James et al., 1969)

may indicate that they were not ade- the hospital records of 33 VA patients

quately representative of all persons with were examined. Of particular interest

the condition. Nevertheless, the consis- were the records of 18 patients who were

tent self-descriptions of emotional labil- initially misdiagnosed and whose charts

ity, anxiety, and concern about self- made no mention of HD. These patients

control, in conjunction with similar began to complain of symptoms an

descriptions in the clinical surveys, sug- average of about seven years prior to the

gest that self-report scales may be more point of diagnosis. The most frequent

useful in early detection than previously complains were of poor memory and de-

thought and that signs of affective distur- pression. Despite their methodological

bance may be more general indicators shortcomings, these two studies add some

than schizophrenic or other psychotic credence to the clinical hypothesis that the

signs.

frank symptoms of HD, particularly the

movement disorder, may be preceded by

EVIDENCE FOR A PRODROMAL PHASE

years of subtle, perhaps detectable, behavior changes.

Evidence that recently diagnosed or minimally affected patients exhibit anisolated memory disorder is one thing. Evidence that this memory disorder is present, for example, ten years before the point of diagnosis is quite another thing. Although hard evidence for such a prodromal period is lacking, some suggestive evidence does exist.
First, there are numerous case reports of individuals exhibiting various cognitive and/or psychiatric symptoms years before the onset of a movement disorder (e.g., Lion and Kahn, 1938; Van Putten and Menkes, 1973; Winn, 1955). More convincing evidence for a prodromal phase comes from two retrospective studies. In

EARLY DETECTION STUDIES
To date there have been three prospective neuropsychological studies of persons at risk for Huntington's disease. One of these is essentially completed (Lyle and Gottesman, 1977; Lyle and Quast, 1976), one in progress (Wexler, 1974,1979), and one just recently begun (Fedio et al., 1979).
In the 1950's Pearson (Pearson et al., 1955) began systematically evaluating the offspring of known HD patients. A total of 632 subjects were invited to enter the study and 156 agreed to participate. These subjects were given a battery of rather standard psychological tests including

Vol. 27, No. 1

Huntington's Disease

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Wechsler intelligence scales and a test requiring subjects to draw nine BenderGestalt geometric designs from memory. Lyle was able to contact 88 (56 per cent) of the original at-risk sample, 28 of whom had developed frank symptoms of HD in the intervening 15to 20 years. When compared with the asymptomatic risk subjects, those who had developed the disease showed a deficit in recall of designs (Lyle and Quast, 1976) and in the Wechsler IQ (Lyle and Gottesman, 1977). The IQ difference was nearly one standard deviation (15 points).
The results of this study provide the best evidence for the existence of a prodromal phase in HD. At the same time, the study raises questions and points to some of the problems involved in early detection. First, over 40 per cent of the original sample was lost on follow-up, a figure which must raise some concern about the representativeness of the final sample. Second, some of the asymptomatic subjects in the at-risk group may still develop HD. Lyle and Gottesman (1977) calculated that only one more asymptomatic subject should actually have the disease given (1) the age distribution of the sample at the initial testing point and (2) certain assumptions about the mean and variance of onset ages in the population. Nonetheless, the possibility that several currently asymptomatic subjects may yet develop the disease cannot be discounted. Current evidence indicates that age of symptom manifestation is inversely related to severity of symptoms (e.g., Wilson and Garron, 1979). Thus, it is at least possible that, should a number of Lyle's still normal subjects develop HD symptoms, the original test differences might be considerably diminished. Third, it is somewhat surprising that an IQ test should be sensitive to these prodromal changes. The previously cited work on recently diagnosed patients found IQ's in

the normal range. Finally, as Lyle and Gottesman (1977) are careful to point out, these IQ test scores are of dubious value for individual prediction, particularly given the desirability of maintaining a low false alarm rate.
Wexler (1974, 1979) examined 35 atrisk subjects and 15 normal controls in 1974 and again in 1979. Subjects were interviewed and given a battery of cognitive and perceptual-motor tests. The age range of the risk subjects at the initial testing was 20 to 36, close to the age of highest risk for symptom onset. Nonetheless, no differences were found between the at-risk and normal control subjects at either the initial or follow-up testing. Wexler's sample is small and the study is far from complete, but the results to date must be somewhat sobering to those who advocate the use of neuropsychological tests in early detection of HD.
The study by Fedio and his colleagues (Fedio et al., 1979) consists at this point simply of an initial evaluation of 47 at-risk and 28 normal control subjects. It remains to be seen whether this sample will be systematically followed. A further concern is the fact that control and risk subjects were initially matched on the Wechsler Memory Scale. This is a clinical memory scale on which relatively intact, recently diagnosed patients show rather striking deficits (Butters et al., 1978). The authors do not explicitly state whether this match was fortuitous or intentional. If intentional, the match may have served to exclude subjects showing prominent prodromal symptoms. If fortuitous, one must again be concerned about the lack of group differences between risk and normal subjects in an area, memory, that holds the most promise for early detection.
There are also three prospective studies of persons at risk for HD using tests of psychopathology. One of these is com-

16

Wilson and Garron

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

pleted (Palm, 1973), and the other two are in progress, as described previously (Fedio et al., 1979; Wexler, 1979).
In 1952, Palm (1973) tested 24 persons at risk, all of them the descendants of the same index case. None of the 24 had any signs of HD at the time. They were given an MMPI and a Rorschach test. Two of the MMPI's were regarded as invalid, and two were incomplete. Inspection of the set (Palm, 1973, Table 2, p. 318) indicates that only three persons had any MMPI scales in the pathological range (T score > 70); the scales involved were Hs for one, Ma for one, and Pd and Pa for one, respectively. Eight of the Rorschach's were considered abnormal, and five as borderline, based on various criteria. The MMPI and Rorschach did not necessarily identify the same persons as abnormal. In 1972, one member of the group was known to have developed chorea. She was originally tested at age 53, was diagnosed at age 56, and died at age 66. She had not completed the MMPI when tested, but her incomplete profiles did not suggest psychopathology, and her Rorschach test results were not regarded as abnormal or borderline. None of the other persons had developed HD, although ascertainment cannot be regarded as complete after twenty years. In any event, the variability of the psychological test results and the failure to predict within a twenty-year period are discouraging.
The study in progress by Fedio et al. (1979) has been described. It includes 47 persons at risk and 28 controls matched for age, education, IQ, and Weschsler Memory Quotient. Comparison of the Problem Checklists, MMPI, Emotion Profile Index, and IPAT Anxiety Scale indicate that the persons at risk, as a group, resemble the normal control subjects more than the HD patients. Wexler (1979) in a study also described above, included 35 persons at risk and 15 controls matched

for age, education, and socioeconomic status. Although Wexler apparently did not use standard tests of personality or psychopathology, she did use a "Traditional Indicator Rating Scale," involving criminality, psychiatric disorders, alcoholism, job instability, divorce, promiscuity, and an otherwise undescribed assessment of psychological stability. The at-risk subjects did not differ from the normal controls on this scale.
In general, then, scores on tests of personality or psychopathology do not seem to be promising in the early detection of HD among persons at risk. Relatively few persons at risk have clearly abnormal scores prior to the onset of more diagnostic signs, and the variability in personality characteristics is similar to that seen in the general population.
DISCUSSION
The studies reviewed here are far from definitive; yet some tentative conclusions may be drawn. The evidence now suggests the existence of a prodromal period in HD, a period prior to the onset of frank (i.e., choreatic) symptomatology during which subjects undergo subtle behavioral changes. The precise nature of these changes remains to be demonstrated. Mnemonic changes appear to be part of this prodromal phase (Butters et al., 1978; Caine et al., 1978; Lyle and Quast, 1976). Emotional changes may also be present (e.g., Dewhurst et al., 1969) although the evidence in this area is somewhat more problematic. Other subtle changes may be present as well (Fedio et al., 1979). At what point in the disease and in what proportion of patients this prodrome occurs remains to be seen. Answers to these two questions must await further prospective research on at-risk cohorts. The outcome of these studies should ultimately settle the value of psychological testing in early

Vol. 27, No. 1

Huntington's Disease

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

detection. At present, however, the use of neuropsychological tests in the search for cognitive deficits may be more rewarding.
In the absence of such a body of data, it is possible to pinpoint some problems with the use of neuropsychological tests as predictive tools. First, the specificity of the deficit is unknown. Is the deficit pattern the same in all patients? Are some patients mentally normal? Further, it is clear that the isolated mnemonic deficit seen early in the course of HD is not a unique pattern. Alzheimer's patients, for example, often present with an isolated memory disorder (e.g., Miller, 1977). Second, neuropsychological assessment can be quite stressful for persons at risk to develop a chronic, disabling, and fatal disease. The effect of this stress on test performance is not well understood and is probably variable across patients. Third, and perhaps following from points one and two, neuropsychological tests are imperfect. Not all the variance in test performance is likely to be due, for example, to the presence or absence of the HD gene. In the best of circumstarices, neuropsychological test batteries are probably only 75 to 80 per cent accurate in the identification of persons with subtle brain damage (Spreen and Benton, 1967). The value of a predictive test which falls considerably short of perfection is not immediately apparent.
In summary, logical considerations suggest that neuropsychological testing "is unlikely to provide a good solution to the problems of early detection, particularly by the criteria outlined by the Commission for the Control of Huntington's Disease and its Consequences (1977). On the other hand, neuropsychological testing

continues to be of considerable value in making the diagnosis of HD and will undoubtedly continue to be used on a clinical basis. We endorse such use but urge caution at the same time. Indeed, our lack of knowledge about the prodromal stage makes a conservative approach to the interpretation of psychological tests data in HD mandatory. A final point needs to be made. We have argued here and elsewhere (Wilson and Garron, 1979) for the need for prospective research on persons at risk for HD. Such research will probably be less valuable in its ultimate contribution to the problem of early detection and more valuable in teaching us about the onset and early developmental course of generalized dementing illnesses. Considerable effort has been expended on high risk research on schizophrenia (e.g., Mednick and Schulsinger, 1968). Dementia, when thought of as a symptom of a variety of neurologic disorders, is much more prevalent than schizophrenia. It is also chronic and disabling and therefore a costly public health problem. Huntington's disease, because of its mode of inheritance and relatively late age of onset, is an accident of nature that provides us with a unique opportunity to study precisely how behavior breaks down early in the course of dementing illnesses. Such knowledge would be of great value in patient management, in understanding the factors which influence adaption to the disease, and in identifying persons for future neuropharmacological intervention.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
An earlier draft of this paper was presented at the Behavior Genetics Association meetings, June, 1980, Chicago, Illinois

18

Wilson and Garron

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BARBEAU, A. 1979.Update on the biochemistry of Huntington's chorea, p. 449-461. In T.

logy, Vol. 23: Huntington's disease. Raven, New York.

Chase, N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.), GARRON, D. 1973. Huntington's chorea and schi-

Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington's

zophrenia, p. 729-734. In A. Barbeau, T.

disease. Raven, NewYork.

Chase, and G. Paulson (eds.), Advances in

BOLL, T., R. HEATON, and R. REITAN. 1974.
Neuropsychological and emotional correlates

neurology, Vol. 1: Huntington's chorea, 1873-1972. Raven, New York.

of Huntington's disease. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. GOODMAN, R., C. HALL, L. TERRANGO, G. PER-

158:61-69,

RINE, and P. ROBERTS. 1966. Huntington';s

BROTHERS, C. 1964.Huntington's chorea in Victoria andTasmania. J.Neurol. Sci. 1:405-420.
BRUYN, G., G. BOTS, and R. DOM. 1979.

chorea: A multidisciplinary study of affected parents and first generation offspring. Arch. Neurol. 15:345-355.

Huntington's chorea: Current neuropatholo-

. 1969. Aclinical approach to theearly rec-

gical status, p. 83-94. In T. Chase, N. Wexler,

ognition of Huntington's chorea, p.517-528.

and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neuro-

In A. Barbeau andJ. Burnette (eds.), Pro-

logy, Vol. 23: Huntington's disease. Raven,

gress in neurogenetics. Excerpta Medica

New York.

Foundation, Amsterdam.

BUTTERS, N., D. SAX, I. MONTGOMERY, and S. HEATHFIELD, K. 1967. Huntington's chorea: In-

TARLOW. 1978. Comparison of the neuropsy-

vestigation into prevalence inN.E. Metropol-

chological deficits associated with early and

itan Regional Hospital Board area. Brain.

advanced Huntington's disease. Arch.

90:203-233.

Neurol. 35:585-589.

JAMES, W., R. MEFFERD, and I. KIMBALL. 1969.

CAINE, E., R. HUNT, H. WEINGARTNER, and M.
EBERT. 1978. Huntington's dementia: Clinical

Early signs of Huntington's chorea. Dis. Nerv. Syst. 30:558-559.

and neuropsychological features. Arch. Gen. KLAWANS, H., G. PAULSON, and A. BARBEAU.

Psychiat. 35:377-384.

1970. Predictive test for Huntington's chorea.

CATTELL, R., and I. SCHEIER. 1963. Institute for
personality and ability testing: Anxiety Scale Questionnaire. IPAT, Champaign, Illinois.

Lancet. ii:1185-1186.
LION, E., and E. KAHN. 1938. Experiential as-
pects of Huntington's chorea. Amer. J.Psy-

CHANDLER, J. 1966. E E G in prediction of

chiat. 95:717-727.

Huntington's chorea: An eighteen-year fol- LYLE, O., and I. GOTTESMAN. 1977. Premorbid

low-up. Electroenceph. Clin. Neurophys.

psychometric indicators of the gene for

21:79-84.

Huntington's disease. J. Consult. Clin.Psy-

COMMISSION FOR THE CONTROL OF HUNTINGTON'S

chol. 45:1011-1022.

DISEASE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES. 1977. U. S. LYLE, O., and W. QUAST. 1976. The Bender Ges-

Department of Health, Education, and

talt: Use of clinical judgment versus recall

Welfare. Bethesda, Maryland.

scores in prediction of Huntington's disease.

DEWHURST, K., J. OLIVER, K. TRICK, and A. Mc-

J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 44:229-232.

KNIGHT. 1969. Neuropsychiatric aspects of Huntington's chorea. Confin. Neurol. 31:258-268.
ENNA, S., L. STERN, G. WASTEK, and H. YAMA-
MURA. 1977. Neurobiology and pharmacology

MCHUGH, P., and M. FOLSTEIN. 1975. Psychiatric
syndromes in Huntington's chorea, p. 267-286. IN D. Benson and D. Blumer (eds.), Psychiatric aspects of neurologic disease. Grune and Stratton, New York.

of Huntington's disease (Minireview). Life MEDNICK, S., and F. SCHULSINGER. 1968. Some

Sci. 20:205-212.

premorbid characteristics related to break-

FALEK, A . 1969.Preclinical detection of Huntington's chorea, p. 529-533. In A. Barbeau and J. Brunette (eds.), Progress in neurogenetics. Excerpta Medica Foundation,

down inchildren with schizophrenic mothers, p. 267-291. In D. Rosenthal and S. Kety (Eds.), The transmission of schizophrenia. Pergamon, London.

Amsterdam.

MILLER, E. 1977. Abnormal aging: The psycho-

FEDIO, P., C. COX, A. NEOPHYTIDES, G. CANALFREDERICK, and T. CHASE. 1979. Neuropsy-

logy of senile andpresenile dementia. John Wiley & Sons, London.

chological profile of Huntington's disease:Pa- MINSKI, L., and E. GUTTMAN. 1938. Huntington's

tients and those at risk, p. 239-255. In T.

chorea: A study of thirty-four families. J.

Chase, N. Wexler, andA. Barbeau (eds.),

Ment. Sci.84:21-96.

Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington's MYRIANTHOPOULOS, N. 1966.Huntington's cho-

disease. Raven, New York.

rea. J. Med.Genet. 3:298-314.

FOLSTEIN, S., M. FOLSTEIN, and P. MCHUGH. MOONEY, R., and L. GORDON. 1950. Problem

1979. Psychiatric syndromes in Huntington's

checklist. Psychological Corporation,New

disease, p. 281-280. In T. Chase, N. Wexler,

York.

and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neuro- NEOPHYTIDES, A., G. Di CHIRO, S. BARRON, and

Vol. 27,No. 1

Huntington's Disease

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

T. CHASE. 1979. Computed axial tomography in Huntington's disease andpersons at-risk for Huntington's disease, p. 185-192. In T. Chase, N. Wexler, andA. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington's disease. Raven, New York.
NORTON, J. 1975. Patterns of neuropsychological test performance in Huntington's disease. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 161:276-279.
PALM, J. 1973. Longitudinal study ofa preclinical test program for Huntington's chorea, p. 311-324. In A. Barbeau, T. Chase, and G. Paulson (eds.), Advances in neurology, Vol. 1: Huntington's chorea, 1872-1892. Raven, New York.
PEARSON, J., M. PETERSON, J. LAZARET, H.
BLODGETT, and I. KLEY. 1955. An educational
approach to the social problem of Huntington's chorea. Proc. May Clin. 30:349-357.
PLUTCHIK, R., and H. KELLERMAN. 1968. Emo-
tions profile index. Western Psychological Services, LosAngeles.
SHOULSON, I., andS. FAHN. 1977. Clinical staging of Huntington's disease. Paper presented at the seventh Huntington's Disease Workshop, Leiden.
SPREEN, O., and A. BENTON. 1967. Comparative
studies of some psychological tests for cerebral damage. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 140:323-333.

STERN, R., and R. ELDRIDGE. 1975. Attitudes of
patients and their relatives to Huntington's disease. J. Med.Gen.12:217-223.
VAN PUTTEN, T., and J. MENKES. 1973.
Huntington's disease masquerading as chronic schizophrenia. Dis.Nerv. Syst. 34:54-56.
WEINGARTNER, H., G. CAINE, and M. EBERT.
1979. Imagery, encoding and the retrieval of information from memory: Some specificencoding-retrieval changes in Huntington's disease. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 88:52-58.
WEXLER, N. 1974. Perceptual-motor, cognitive, and emotional characteristics of persons at risk for Huntington's disease. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan. . 1979. Perceptual-motor, cognitive,and emotional characteristics ofpersons atrisk for Huntington's disease, p. 257-271. In T. Chase, N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington's disease. Raven, New York.
WILSON, R., and D. GARRON. 1979. Cognitive and
affective aspects of Huntington's disease, p. 193-201. In T. Chase, N. Wexler, and A. Barbeau (eds.), Advances in neurology, Vol. 23: Huntington's disease. Raven, New York.
WINN, J. 1955. Case reports: Chronic progressive chorea masquerading as afunctional disorder. New York State J. Med.55:110-112.

