Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Reply to Reid's observations on "a reexamination of the heritability of fertility in the British peerage"
B. J. Williams & L. A. Williams
To cite this article: B. J. Williams & L. A. Williams (1975) Reply to Reid's observations on "a reexamination of the heritability of fertility in the British peerage", Social Biology, 22:3, 287-288, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988180 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988180
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Vol. 22, No. 3

Communications

287

REFERENCES

CROW, J. F., and M. KTMTJRA. 1970. An intro-
duction to population genetics theory. Harper and Row, New York.
FISHER, R. A. 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection. 19S8 ed. Dover, New York.

Lr, C. C. 1955. Population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
WHXIAMS, L. A., and B. J. WILLIAMS. 1974. A.
re-examination of the heritability of fertility in British peerage. Soc. Biol. 21:225-231.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Reply to Reid's Observations on "A Re-examination of the Heritability of Fertility in the British Peerage"
B. J. Williams and L. A. Williams
Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles, California; and World Fertility Survey, International Statistical Institute, London,England

We are in agreement with most of the points made by Reid. We differ in our conclusions as to the utility of treating fitness measures as phenotypes in demonstrating the action of selection.
The major point of our earlier article (Williams and Williams, 1974) was to demonstrate that Fisher's (1930) estimate of the heritability of fertility was in error. The correlations he used in making his estimates were due largely or perhaps totally to secular changes in fertility. Our minor point was that, on a priori grounds, we do not expect the heritability of fertility to differ much from zero. It is this second point which Reid quotes and explores further.
The heritability estimates used by Fisher were based on correlations between lineal descent categories and therefore dealt only with the additive component of variance in fertility. Selection on an additive component is directional and will act to keep this component low. In the usual situation, we would expect the additive component of fitness to be low enough that, as a practical matter, it could not be shown to dif-

fer from zero. This was the reason Fisher's estimate needed reinvestigation.
Reid's demonstration is in accord with the view that the additive variance should remain low. Reid goes further and suggests that a dominance component in fitness may be revealed by studies of the heritability of fitness (if heritability is now defined in the broad sense). We agree; but we point out that such a dominance component has not been successfully demonstrated in human populations. Studies reporting heterosis effects in fertility are few and suffer from the problem of uncontrolled social variables to an even greater extent than is the case with secular change in fertility.
Franz Boas studied the fertility of the offspring of Indian-white marriages and compared it to that of Indian and white controls (Boas, 1894). He found the "hybrid" mothers to have more children than Indian mothers living in the same villages (a mean of 7.9 compared to S.9). Problems with this study include the fact that only one parental control (Indian) was present. Also, his environmental control was simply

288

Communications

Social Biology

that the two sets of families compared were living in the same villages with approximately the same life style.
Frederick Hulse, in a study of Italianspeaking Swiss in both Switzerland and the United States, found that village endogamous unions produced more children than did village exogamous unions, whether in Switzerland or in the United States (Hulse, 1957). Similarly, Bresler reported that among New England whites fetal loss increased with the number of countries represented in the great-grandparents' genera-

tion (Bresler, 1970). The results of these two studies are in the opposite direction to that of Boas. The Hulse and Bresler studies suffer most obviously from the fact that age at marriage is uncontrolled. We know that those people who marry further out tend also to marry at a later age. This fact alone could explain the findings.
In short, while it may be true that a significant dominance deviation exists for fertility in some populations, a study with adequate controls to demonstrate such a finding has not been done.

REFERENCES

BOAS, FRANZ. 1894. The half-blood Indian. Pop. Sci. Month. 45:761-770.
BRESLER, JACK. 1970. Outcrossings in Caucasians and fetal loss. Soc. Biol. 17:17-25.
FISHER, R. A. 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection. 1958 ed. Dover, New York.

HULSE, FREDERICK. 1958. Exogamie et heterosis. Arch. Suisses Anthropol. Gener. 22:103-125.
WILLIAMS, L. A., and B. J. WILLIAMS. 1974. A
re-examination of the heritability of fertility in the British peerage. Soc. Biol. 21:225-231.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

The Mindel C. Sheps Award in Mathematical Demography

Nominations are requested for the Min- as a tribute to a demographer who is end-

del C. Sheps Award in Mathematical ing an active professional career. There

Demography, to be presented for the second are no specific requirements as to age,na-

time in 1976 and every second year thereafter. The award has been established by the Mindel C. Sheps Memorial Fund and is sponsored by the Population Association of America and the University of North Carolina School of Public Health. I t is given in recognition of outstanding contributions to mathematical demography or demographic methodology.
Individuals should be nominated for this award on the basis of important contributions to knowledge, either in the form of a single piece of work or a continuing record of high accomplishment. The award is in-

tionality, or place of residence, nor is the award restricted to members of the Population Association of America.
The award is named for Mindel C. Sheps who, at her death in January, 1973, was Professor of Biostatistics at the University of North Carolina School of Public Health and Second Vice-President of the Population Association of America. She enjoyed a distinguished career as physician, biostatistician, and demographer, applying mathematics and statistics to studies in these areas.

tended to honor an individual whose future The recipient of the Mindel C. Sheps

research achievements are likely to con- Award will be selected by a committee ap-

tinue a past record of excellence rather than pointed by the President of the Population

