Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Discussion: Mortality and morbidity of blacks
Paul B. Comely
To cite this article: Paul B. Comely (1971) Discussion: Mortality and morbidity of blacks, Social Biology, 18:4, 384-386, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987945 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987945
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

Discussion: Mortality and Morbidity of Blacks

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Paul B. Comely
Department of Preventive Medicine Howard University Washington, D.C.

The paper presented by Dr. Gordon F. Sutton is one which is particularly pertinent at this moment of time and is provocative for all of us. I believe he makes a convincing case that presently ethnic differentials cannot be considered without the application of refinements in social and economic factors; yet these are not available. We do not have adequate definitions of poverty; occupational information is hard to come by; and what is even more important, the quality of community life is not available since, as he states, where white infant mortality is low, nonwhite mortality is comparatively low and vice-versa.
When we turn to morbidity data, we find our problems are compounded because of the inadequacy of the available data. Nevertheless, where an effort has been made to refine it, the socioeconomic correlation appears to be more important than color, particularly as it applies to hospital days and bed days as well as activity restriction or physical limitation. This is of particular interest because all of us realize that even income levels in this country are not adequate measures since the quality of life for a white and a nonwhite person with the same income, let us say under $3,000, is not the same.

The linkage of morbidity and mortality is mentioned in the paper, but not discussed. It is well to remember that during the 1940's and 1950's when the mortality from tuberculosis was S to 6 times higher in the nonwhite than in the white population, it was assumed that the morbidity would also show this degree of difference. However, when X-ray screening programs became common it was almost shocking to public health workers to discover that the prevalence of the disease was the same or lower than white individuals. Again, socioeconomic factors were the determinants of the force of mortality.
This paper is provocative in a number of directions, and therefore I would like to raise a few questions. The first one, of course, would have to be why an enlightened country such as ours continues to publish vital statistics according to white and nonwhite categories when these terms actually have no relevance. The census bureau, for instance, admits that in the nonwhite category it includes Negroes, Indians, Japanese, Chinese and others, while in the white group, Puerto-Rican and Mexican-Americans are included. What the logic is of this, it is indeed rather difficult to evaluate. The National Center for Health Statistics should obtain support

384

Yol. 18, No. 4 Discussion: Mortality and Morbidity of Blacks

385

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

from organizations such as this one so that there will be a termination of racial comparisons for mortality and morbidity which really have no real value programmatically but which makes possible their continued use by certain elements in the population to support the thesis that nonwhite individuals are inferior.
Sutton has certainly emphasized in this paper that what is needed is the development of social and economic insights and refinements which would make it possible for comparisons other than race that would have much more meaning for future improvement of the health and welfare of our society. Every effort should be made to push for analysis of health statistics in relationship to economic level, education, employment, and availability of health services facilities. This would appear to be a large order, but it appears that a beginning has to be made and must be made now.
The second point is that if this country persists in having health statistics according to racial groups, then an effort must be made to get valid statistics for the racial groups that are separated. For instance, Dr. Sutton stated that no official life tables exist for the black population. Another example is the fact that when morbidity data is compiled for the population all too often much of the data for blacks is obtained from public clinics as contrasted with the white population. The racial differences that are noted are not valid, and everyone is well aware of this. I have on a number of occasions stated that racism exists in the analysis of health data in our country. This is seen not only in the nature of the racial comparisons that are published, but also in the fact that the USPHS with its mammoth research capabilities has devoted very little to studies which show racial differences, whether they be adverse or favorable. It

is only within recent months that the Administration took cognizance of the problem of sickle cell anemia, a disease common among blacks, and asked that ten million dollars be set aside for investigations in this area. I am quite sure that this was more politically than altruistically motivated.
A third consideration, which has very little to do with the specific subject of Dr. Sutton's paper, but which is somewhat related, is the need for us all to seek measures of health and the quality of life other than mortality and morbidity. These are indeed negative measurements and do not actually reflect the positive health attributes and vigor of either an individual or a community. At a recent conference at Harvard University it was suggested that there was need for the development of at least three kinds of indicators. One would have to do with the kinds of measurements which could be combined to give an indication of the position that an individual holds on a hypothetical health scale. A second formulation might be the measure of the health reserve of an individual. All of us are well aware of changes in visual acuity which takes place with age; on the other hand very few realize that with sedentary jobs and progressive age the muscles of the legs lose their strength and the functioning of the knee joint is compromised. Yet these muscles can be maintained at a high level of efficiency by cycling or gardening or jogging. Respiratory reserve can certainly be measured. Immunization to certain diseases wanes with time but can be enhanced by booster doses. Thus, a selected group of these measurements could be chosen to serve as an index of the health reserve or safety of individuals. It is possible that measurements of health reserve and health spectrum could be combined into one index. The third kind of indicator has to do

386

Comely

Social Biology

with community, neighborhood, or population morale. It has been noted that high temperature with overcrowding and poor sanitary services in a ghetto will provide the spark for civil disturbance. By the same token, does the provision of a primary medical care center, a recreational facility, or improved emergency care favorably affect the behavior of a population group? Could such improvements be reflected by decline in petty crime and vio-

lence, better attendance at the elementary school level, an increase in the sanitary quality of a community, decrease in vandalism of buildings, or increase in the cooperation in various health programs which have been previously neglected? It would appear that the development of such measurements will need the combined intelligence of medical care people, social planners, environmental scientists, and demographers.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

