Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Androstenedione, testosterone, and free testosterone concentration in women of various occupations
Frances E. Purifoy & Lambert H. Koopmans
To cite this article: Frances E. Purifoy & Lambert H. Koopmans (1979) Androstenedione, testosterone, and free testosterone concentration in women of various occupations, Social Biology, 26:3, 179-188, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988376 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988376
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 15
View related articles
Citing articles: 61 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Androstenedione, Testosterone, and Free Testosterone Concentration in Women of Various Occupations

Gil!
k-< a i t i

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Frances E. Purifoy and Lambert H. Koopmans
Departmentof Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico; and Departmentof Mathematics and Statistics,University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico

ABSTRACT: Serum androstenedione (A), testosterone (T), testosterone-binding globulin (TBG), and free testosterone concentration (FTC) were correlated with occupational status in fifty-five normal females. With some variation among age groups, A, T, and FTC were positively associated with occupation, mean levels being higher in students and professional, managerial, and technical workers compared to clerical workers and housewives. Aand FTC also associated significantly with the degree ofjob complexity in relation to people, whereas T significantly correlated with the degree ofjob complexity in relation to things. These data most likely reflect biological and environmental causes in a hormone-behavior feedback relationship. The genetic potential for increased androgen secretion may affect certain personality characteristics related to career-orientation in females, i.e., those labeled "masculine" by this culture, such as assertiveness and independence. Moreover, the positive or negative stress associated with an occupation could stimulate or inhibit androgen secretion.

In many cultures, males and females differ statistically in a number of behavioral characteristics which show consistent mean differences but overlapping ranges of values (Archer, 1976). Maccoby and Jacklin (1974) present a comprehensive review of sex differences in behavior and conclude that there probably exist constitutional differences between the sexes that predispose them to learn certain behaviors. Boys have consistently been found to be more aggressive and intrusive upon the environment than girls; girls are more often compliant to the demands of an adult, passive and dependent, accommodating to environmental impositions, and affiliative socially (Freedman, 1974; Kagan and Moss, 1962; Maccoby and Jacklin, 1974).
Hormone-behavior research often attributes "male behavior" to the effects of

testosterone (T) and "female behavior" to estrogen effects. Both sexes, however, produce androgens, estrogens, and progestogens, albeit in differing relative amounts. Studies suggest that T contributes to aggressive behavior in animals, especially males (Kling, 1975; Leshner, 1978), and the female offspring of monkeys given T during pregnancy exhibit male-like play behavior, i.e., increased play fights and threats and increased rough-and-tumble play (Phoenix, 1974). In human adrenogenital-syndrome females, increased adrenal androgen secretion during prenatal development results in "tomboyish" behavior, i.e., increased motor activity and an interest in athletics and in career over marriage (Money and Ehrhardt, 1972). The offspring of mothers given estrogens during pregnancy, which might inhibit androgen

179

180

Purifoy and Koopmans

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

secretion or compete for common recep- tion in "masculine" or "feminine" behav-

tor sites, exhibit group-dependent, con- iors might circumvent this problem.

forming, passive behavior in contrast to Studies have found correlations of

offspring of mothers given androgenic serum T with dominance rank in nonhu-

progestins who are independent, assert- man primates (Kling, 1975; Rose et al.,

ive, and self-confident (Reinisch, 1977). 1971). A similar measure of rank in hu-

Moreover, androgenic hormones given to mans for use in hormonal studies might be

those deficient result in positive effects on occupational status, which confers privi-

mood, energy level, self-confidence, and lege and material wealth on the individual

self-assertiveness (Herrmann and Beach, as well as providing a measure of self-

1976; Marie, 1963). Thus, it appears that worth and self-esteem. Since the women's

relatively higher levels of T in males pre- liberation movement has encouraged fe-

natally or in adulthood may be responsible males to leave the home and assert them-

for some sex differences in learning selves in extra-domestic activities, some of

thresholds for certain behaviors.

which are traditionally masculine, occupa-

Male-female differences are, however, tion may be an especially useful measure a statistical finding, and individual varia- of variation in female behavior which may tion within a sex is often as great or greater be hormone-related. Researchers have, in

than statistical differences between the fact, linked career orientation in females

sexes (Archer, 1976). Though learning thresholds may differ statistically between the sexes, individual plasticity allows for environmental influences on the learning

with masculine or androgynous personality characteristics (Block et al., 1972; Hennig and Jardim, 1978; Kagan and Moss, 1962; Rand, 1968, the same quali-

of sex-typed behaviors. Due to differing ties distinguishing adrenogenital-

socialization practices, the modal man syndrome females and the female

and woman of a society could conceivably vary from extreme masculine and extreme feminine to equal combinations of each (Freedman, 1974). Such flexibility in be-

offspring of progestin-treated mothers (Money and Ehrhardt, 1972; Reinisch, 1977). These studies suggest that those females with high masculine or androgynous

havior of human societies would contrib- scores on personality tests are more likely

ute to cultural evolution and adaptation (Wilson, 1975).
Personality characteristics labeled "masculine" or "androgynous," i.e., independence, assertiveness, athleticism, ambition, analytical ability, dominance,

to pursue careers of higher occupational status than typically "feminine" females. Although environmental antecedents of behavior are important, researchers often ignore constitutional factors which an individual brings to the learning situation.

competitiveness, and individualism, have been shown to be well within the spectrum of normal behavior for a large percentage of U.S. females (Bern, 1976). The large differences in sex hormone levels which contribute to many noncontinuous morphological differences between males and females often complicate the study of hormone-influenced behavior differences between the sexes. However, the study of hormonal correlates of within-sex varia-

One possible source of biological factors affecting one's personality are hormones present during critical periods of development and/or in adulthood. Because androgens have been studied primarily for their effects on males, their role in normal female behavior is not well established. Interest in this relationship prompted the present analysis of variation in androgen levels in a group of normal females from different occupations.

Vol. 26, No. 3

Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC

181

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

MATERIALS AND METHODS edition of the Dictionary of Occupational

Titles,published by the U.S. Employment

Subjects were 55 normal healthy fe- Service, as a guide for categorizing occu-

males aged 20 to 87 from Albuquerque, pations, which fell into the following

New Mexico. Each had intact ovaries, groups: Professional, Managerial, and

uterus, and adrenals, and a history of nor- Technical (Group 1, N=26); Clerical and

mal menstrual cycles; none were on any Sales (Group 2, N=13); and Service

medications or hormonal therapy. The (Group 3, N=2). In addition to the three

majority were Caucasian of heteroge- paid work groups, Housewives (iV=ll)

neous European background; five were and Students (N=3) each formed a sepa-

Spanish-American, one was black, and rate category. Those women who were re-

one was American-Indian. If subjects tired were included in the appropriate cat-

were premenopausal, time of cycle was egory according to past occupation. Again

noted. Student's Mest showed no using the Dictionary of Occupational Ti-

significant differences between follicular tles, we assigned each paid occupation

and luteal phases, and the majority of pre- (thereby excluding Students and House-

menopausal subjects fell into one of these wives) a three-number Worker Function

two categories.

Rating (WFR), which is a measure of the

A single blood sample was drawn on degree of complexity involved in the relaeach subject between 8 and 10 A.M.; tionship of an employee to DATA, PEO-

serum was separated and frozen within PLE, and THINGS.

one hour. Hormone assays were done by Other variables were given number rat-

Darrel M. Mayes of Endocrine Sciences ings according to the subject's response to

Laboratory, Tarzana, California as a re- interview question. EXERCISE was a

search project to establish normal labora- self-rating of 0-2 in response to the ques-

tory control values. Determinations in- tion, "Approximately how much physical

cluded serum androstenedione (A), exercise do you get in a week? (check one)

serum T, testosterone-binding globulin (1) sedentary job, no regular exercise

(TBG), and free testosterone concentra- (rated 0); (2) regular exercise or physical

tion (FTC), which is the best available in- labor 2-3 times a week (rated 1); or (3) ex-

dicator of T's biologic activity (Clark et ercise or physical labor more than 3 times

al., 1970). Per cent free testosterone was a week (rated 2)." ACTIVITY was a 0-2 determined by equilibrium dialysis; H3- rating assigned each subject based on her

testosterone, obtained from New England recreational and volunteer activities, i.e.,

Nuclear, was purified by paper chroma- nonpaid, nondomestic activities: 0 = little

tography in a Bush A system, and TBG or no activity; 1= moderate activity level:

was used to purify the label (D.M. Mayes, and 2 = high activity level. RESPONSI-

personal communication). FTC was de- BILITY was a 1-10 self-rating of the sub-

rived from the product of serum T and per ject in response to the question, "How

cent free steroid determined by dialysis. would you rate the amount of responsibil-

TBG was determined by a saturation tech- ity you are required to deal with on the

nique similar to that described by Rosner average? How much do you assert your-

(1972). Interassay coefficients of variation self, for example, in dealing with other

for A,T, FTC, and TBG were 7.4, 9.0, people, with situations and problems re-

10.9, and 10.2 per cent respectively.

quiring decisions on your part? (1 = lowest

Since it was recently revised to elimi- rating)."

nate sex-biased items, we chose the 1977 Statistics included analysis of variance

182

Purifoy andKoopmans

Social Biology

TABLE 1
DUNCAN'S MULTIPLE RANGE TEST FOR THREE AGE GROUPS FOR SERUM ANDROSTENEDIONE (A), TESTOSTERONE (T), AND FREE TESTOSTERONE CONCENTRATION (FTC)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

HORMONE

ACE <35
Mean* N ot

Androstenedione . . . .
Testosterone
Free Testosterone Concentration

A 209 A B A 173 B B C 137 C
c 120
A 50 A B A 38
B B C 23
C C 21

3 8 1 7 3 8 1 7

A 5.5 3 A B A 3.7 7

S 1 H 2
s
1 H 2
s
1

'C 2.1 7 2 C
C 1.8 1 H

AGE 35-50
Mean N o
B A 161 9 1 B B C 145 3 2
C C 118 4 H

B c 32 9 1

BC

B C 30 3 2

B B

cc

27

4

H

B B

cC

D D

3.0

9

B C D 2.9 4

BCD

B C D 2.6 3

1 H 2

AGE>50
Mean N o

D 88 D D 80 D D 79 D D 60

B A 36

BA

C B A 35

cc

B B

29

c

c 15

81 6H 23 32 81 23 32 6H

B A 4.9 BA B A 4.4
BA B A 3.6

2 3 7

3 2 1

D 1.7 6 H

·Means with thesame letter are notsignificantly different; alpha level = 0.05. t O = Occupation: 1 = Professional, Managerial, and Technical; 2 = Clerical; 3 = Service;S = Students; H = Housewives.

for steroid levels versus age and the fol- significant relationship with TBG. This

lowing variables: occupational categories, occupational effect was seen regardlessof

WFR's, EXERCISE, ACTIVITY, AND whether the woman was retired or still

RESPONSIBILITY. In addition, Dun- working. Duncan's multiple range test

can's multiple range test examined steroid showed that for those aged 20-34, Stu-

levels byoccupational category for the age dents andGroup 1hadsignificantly higher

groups 20-34,35-50, and50. A p value of A and T than Group 2, with Housewives

0.05 was considered significant, but, due intermediate (Table 1). Students and

to thefact that this was arbitrarily chosen, Group 1also exhibited significantly higher

exact p values will be given when availa- FTC when compared to Group 2 and

ble. Housewives, who did not differ signifi-

cantly from each other.

RESUI TS

^ o r t n o s e a8ec* 35-50, A was significantly higher for all paid workers when

Analysis of variance revealed a compared to housewives, but T and FTC

significant relationship of occupational did not differ significantly among catego-

category to variation in A (p< 0.05), T ries. For women >50, those who had

(p< 0.005), and FTC (p< 0.05), but no worked in the past or were working out-

Vol. 26, No. 3

Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC

183

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

side the home at the time of the study had were higher in students and professional,

significantly higher T and FTC than those technical, and managerial workers when

who were Housewives. Although nonsig- compared with clerical workers and

nificant, A levels tended to be higher in housewives. This observation is intrigu-

Group 1, with Group 2 exhibiting the low- ing, but the cause-effect relationship

est A in this age group.

needs to be explored. Studies suggest that

Analysis of variance of WFR and ster- a feedback relationship exists between the

oid levels revealed differing relationships endocrine system and behavior, wherein

of A, T, and FTC with DATA, PEOPLE, hormones affect behavior, which, in turn,

and THINGS. For those assigned a WFR, may influence hormone levels (Leshner,

PEOPLE contributed significantly 1978). Let us first examine possible bio-

(p = 0.02) to variation in A; those occu- logical causes of occupation-related be-

pations with high PEOPLE ratings were havior and then consider what effects oc-

professions, i.e., college professor, M.D., cupation might have on steroid levels.

D.O., social worker, administrator, and The occupational distribution of wo-

therapist. Occupations with low PEOPLE men in 1973 included 5 per cent female

ratings included clerical workers, nurses, workers in the category "Managers and

and medical technologists.

Administrators" and 15per cent who were

T correlated significantly (p = 0.005) professional or technical workers, many

with THINGS, and, though nonsignifi- of whom were employed as semiprofes-

cant, a trend toward an association of T sionals, such as nurses and medical tech-

and DATA (p = 0.07) was also seen. nologists. In contrast, the largest paid-job

Those occupations with high THINGS category in this country today is clerical

ratings include medical technologists, work, homemakers being the largest un-

therapists, M.D., D.O., tailor, cook, and paid female occupation (Seidman, 1978).

typists; those with high DATA ratings The professions require a protracted pe-

were M.D., D.O., college professor, riod of training (Theodore, 1971); and, al-

therapist, administrator, social worker, though the semiprofessions require less

administrative assistant, and special serv- time-consuming preparation than the pro-

ices representative. Relationship of FTC fessions, they demand more training than

was significant with PEOPLE (p =0.004), clerical work or homemaking. Since the

and, though nonsignificant, a trend to- majority of working women in this coun-

ward an association of FTC with THINGS try must combine career or job with the

(p = 0.08) was also observed.

tasks of homemaking and mothering, and

Analysis of variance of steroid levels many fail to acquire job skills before preg-

versus other interview variables revealed nancy, females often are forced into jobs

a significant negative association of TBG which require a minimum amount of train-

with ACTIVITY, a trend toward a re- ing or experience (Kipnis, 1976). Skills

lationship of T and EXERCISE such as those required for clerical or office

(p =0.10), and a significant (p = 0.005) work are the most accessible to such wo-

positive association of A with RESPON- men (Davies, 1975). Those who do obtain

SIBILITY.

the formal education or training required

by the professions may have certain per-

DISCUSSION

sonality characteristics which enable them to succeed, i.e., greater drive, persist-

Although there was variation among ence, self-confidence, assertiveness, and

age groups, in general, A, T, and FTC interest in career over marriage. The

184

Purifoy and Koopmans

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

higher A, T, and FTC levels observed in Students and Group 1 might be related to such qualities.
Relatively higher androgen secretion might also influence a female's disposition to conform to cultural norms; those with increased levels might choose nontraditional careers whereas those with relatively lower levels would be more likely to accept the traditional female role. The latter may be more compliant to the demands of authority and thus more readily conform to sex-role typing. Twenty-five female executives interviewed by Hennig and Jardim (1978) report that as children they preferred boy's activities, i.e., competition and sports, but did not reject all aspects of femininity, just those they felt were confining. They noted as little girls the inconsistencies inherent in female role definitions and questioned rather than accepted them. Likewise, adrenogenitalsyndrome females exhibited "tomboyish" behavior as children in contrast to a control population of girls who were more typically feminine in interests (Money and Ehrhardt, 1972).
Thus, increased relative A, T, and FTC in early development and/or in adulthood might lower one's threshold for learning masculine or androgynous behaviors and promote those aspects of personality related to career- rather than homemakingorientation in females. Although the relationship of adult steroid levels to early secretion is not known, they may reflect a genetic potential commencing early in development. Of course, hormonallyinfluenced learning thresholds must interact with socialization practices to produce sex-typed behaviors.
The age-cohort differences for A, T, and FTC (Table 1) are interesting and deserve closer examination. Only for the youngest age group did A, T, and FTC differ significantly among occupational categories, Students and Group 1 being

higher than Group 2, with Housewives intermediate. For those aged 35-50, only A was significantly higher for all paid workers compared with Housewives. Many of the women in this group were near menopause and had decreased T and FTC compared to both younger and older women (Purifoy et al., in press). Thus, physiological processes associated with menopause could have obscured any occupational effect on T or FTC. For the oldest age group, all paid workers had significantly higher T and FTC than Housewives. Most of the women in the last two groups grew up in a period when it was less common than now for women to work, much less pursue professional careers. Some of these same women growing up today might choose to follow professional careers due to better opportunities which are now available for women.
The overall age trends for FTC and T are also of interest. We found that FTC and T tend to rise after age 60 in females, in contrast to declining estrogen and A levels (Purifoy et al., ms.). Considering the effects of T on dominance and aggressive behavior in animals (Kling, 1975; Leshner, 1978), one should perhaps look for behavioral correlates of a relative increase in T in older females. Increases in aggression have been noted in elderly female langurs, who fight to defend the troop from invaders and protect infants from infanticidal males (Hrdy and Hrdy, 1976). Furthermore, ethnologists have reported an increase in assertiveness and political activity among older females in some societies (Murphy and Murphy, 1974; Tiger and Shepher, 1975).
Researchers have traditionally considered A to be merely a precursor to T, but A and T correlated independently with WFR's. Since it is commonly reported that females exhibit greater interest in social affiliation than males, whereas males are more interested in things and manipu-

Vol. 26, No. 3

Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC

185

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

lation of the environment (Freedman, strates and in mediating fear-mediated

1974; Tyler, 1974), it is intriguing that A, adaptive behavior in times of "fight or

secreted in greater amounts by females flight," researchers have neglected to in-

(Horton and Tait, 1966), is most vestigate a possible role for the adrenal

significantly associated with PEOPLE, anabolic steroids, such as A and dehy-

whereas T, the major androgen secreted droepiandrosterone, in the adaptation re-

by males, is most highly associated with sponse. The positive association of A with

THINGS. Curiously, however, FTC, PEOPLE and RESPONSIBILITY sug-

which is the biologically active portion of gests a relationship between adrenal an-

T, correlated significantly with PEOPLE drogens and positive social stress. Where-

and nonsignificantly with THINGS. as the corticosteroids are necessary for

Clearly, more research is needed to deter- short-term metabolic homeostasis, the

mine differential effects of these steroids adrenal androgens may be involved in a

on sex-related interests and abilities.

long-term feedback relationship promot-

Since TBG showed no significant relationship with A, T, or FTC, the observed negative association of TBG with ACTIVITY is surprising and deserves reexamination. TBG reflects estrogen-androgen balance (Anderson, 1976) and could be an indirect measure of estrogen as well as androgen production. Many of those with high ACTIVITY ratings were older retired women who had more time available for recreational and volunteer activities. Some of these same women had decreased TBG secondary to lowered estrogen production postmenopausally. The observed correlation of TBG with ACTIVITY may thus be spurious and due to the age effect

ing behavior beneficial for social adaptation, i.e. self-confidence, assertiveness, and independence. Social interaction may, in turn, affect adrenal androgen secretion. Prolonged negative stress, i.e., fear or anxiety, lowers androgen secretion via ACTH potentiation of corticosteroid relative to androgen output (Kolanowski et al., 1975; Parker and Odell, 1977). Thus, positive stimulation could theoretically raise androgen levels relative to corticosteroids. Those careers which offer a greater degree of responsibility in dealing with other people and thus a higher level of positive social stimulation might stimulate adrenal androgen secretion.

on both these variables. The trend toward Although women in the work force

a relationship of T with EXERCISE also might experience more competitive and

needs reexamination using a more objec- thus negatively stressful situations than

tive measure of physical activity.

those not competing in the "man's

The positive association of A with RE- world," studies have found the opposite

SPONSIBILITY and with PEOPLE sug- (Feree, 1976; Gove, 1976; Shaver and

gests that those women who are actively Freedman, 1976). Working married wo-

engaged in a complex relationship with men complain of fewer symptoms usually

the social environment, or at least per- associated with stress, (i.e., headaches,

ceive that they are, have higher average insomnia, depression, anxiety) than

A. Researchers (Leshner, 1978; Mason, housewives (Shaver and Freedman,

1975; Selye, 1976) have confirmed the im- 1976), and isolation from a meaningful so-

portance of the adrenal corticosteroids in cial network is an important factor con-

an organism's response to stress and as a tributing to many housewives' dissatisfac-

reflection of social interaction. While they tion with their roles (Feree, 1976).

have emphasized the role of the catabolic However, among those women who work

adrenal steroids in providing energy sub- outside the home, traditional women's

186

Purifoy and Koopmans

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

jobs (i.e., clerical, sales, and service work) are the most stressful for women in terms of mental health and heart disease (Ehrenreich, 1979).
Since relatively lower A, T, and FTC were observed in clerical workers and housewives, one might speculate that traditional female occupations which offer low prestige and monotonous conditions inhibit androgen secretion in some individuals. Such jobs are either low-paying or nonpaid, perhaps fostering decreased selfesteem, and conditions are often conducive to repetition and boredom (Howe, 1977). The higher A, T, and FTC levels in Students and Group 1 might reflect greater job complexity, allowing for mental and physical stimulation. However, this association was seen for retired women as well as for those who were still employed. Moreover, people differ in their abilities to adapt to varying levels of stimulation and in the amount of stimulation preferred. The steroid levels observed in this study are within the range of normal for females and do not suggest abnormal environmental circumstances. In order to assess the effects of stress on a person's steroid levels, intra- rather than interindividual studies should be done, as each subject's stress reactions may differ.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Data analysis revealed positive associations of A, T, and FTC with occupational status in a group of normal females. Moreover, A was significantly associated with the degree of job complexity in dealing with people and with a responsibility rating, whereas T was associated significantly with the degree of job complexity in dealing with things. Unfortunately, these statistics tell nothing of cause-and-effect relationships. Considering the available evidence, however, one might conclude

that the observed correlations reflect biological as well as environmental causes. An individual may have a genetic potential for androgen secretion which manifests itself in early development and continues into adulthood, affecting learning thresholds for behaviors related to occupational interests, abilities, and drives. In particular, androgens may affect those characteristics usually designated as "masculine" or "androgynous" in this culture, i.e., independence, assertiveness, competitiveness, and individualism, the same qualities associated with careerorientation in females. A and T may also differentially affect individual interests and abilities. A, secreted in greater amounts by females, may be related to social interests, whereas T may stimulate interest in things and manipulation of the physical environment.
The activities or occupation that an individual chooses may, in turn, stimulate or inhibit androgen secretion. The observed correlations may thus mirror both processes in interaction. Such correlational data are, however, only suggestive, and the interpretations offered here require substantiation by future studies. Followup measurement of basal A, T, and FTC before and during employment in individuals of various occupations would be useful, as would studies of the effects of positive and negative stress associated with different jobs on female androgen secretion. Housewives starting paid employment for the first time, business women receiving promotions, or workers nearing retirement would be likely candidates for longitudinal studies. Age-related changes in hormone secretion must, of course, be considered in any long-term study. Hormonal profiles measuring the various androgens, estrogens, and perhaps progesterone and corticosteroids might be correlated with personality profiles, such

Vol. 26, No.3

Androstenedione, Testosterone, and FTC

187

as the Bern SexRole Inventory (Bern, 1976), or with occupational interestand ability tests.
Although the exact nature of the association between androgens and female be-

havior is not clear, the data described here suggest that these steroids are not only important "male hormones" but may well play asignificant role in normal female behavior.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ANDERSON, D. C. 1976. The role ofsex hormone HORTON, R., and J. F. TAIT. 1966. Androstene-

binding globulin in health and disease. In V. dione production and interconversion rates

H. T. James, M. Serio, and G. Giusti (eds.), measured in peripheral blood andstudies of

The endocrine function of the human ovary.

the possible site of its conversion to testos-

Academic Press, San Francisco.

terone. J. Clin. Invest. 45:301-313.

ARCHER, J. 1976. Biological explanations of psy- HOWE, L. K. 1977. Pink collar workers. G.P.

chological sex differences. In B. Lloyd and J.

Putnam's Sons, New York.

Archer (eds.), Exploring sex differences. Aca- HRDY, S. B., and D. B. HRDY. 1976. Hierarchial

demic Press, San Francisco.

relations among female hanuman langurs (Pri-

BEM, S.L. 1976. Probing the promise of psychological androgyny. In A. G. Kaplan and J. P.

mates: Colobinae, Presbytis entellus). Science 193:913-915.

Bean (eds.), Beyond sex role stereotypes. Lit- KAGAN, J.,and H. A.Moss. 1962. Birth to matu-

tle, Brown and Co., Boston.

rity. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

BLOCK, J., A. VON DER LIPPE, and J. H. BLOCK. KIPNIS, D. B. 1976. Intelligence, occupational

1972. Sex-role and socialization patterns:

status, and achievement orientation. In B.

Some personality concomitants andenviron-

Lloyd and J. Archer (eds.), Exploring sex

mental antecedents. J.Consult. Clin. Psychol.

differences. Academic Press, San Francisco.

41:321-341.

KLING, A. 1975. Testosterone and aggressive be-

CLARK, A. F., S. MARCELLUS, B. D E LORY, and C.
E . BIRD. 1975. Plasma testosterone free index: A better indicator of plasma androgen activ-

havior inman and nonhuman primates. In B. E. Eleftheriou and R. L. Sprott (eds.), Hormonal correlates of behavior. Plenum Press,

ity? Fert. Steril. 26:1001-1005.

New York.

DAVIES, R. 1975. Women and work. Hutchinson KOLANOWSKI, J., M. A. PIZARRO, and J. CRABBÉ.

and Co., London.

1975. Potentiation of adrencortical response

DICTIONARY OF OCCUPATIONAL TITLES. 1977. 4th
ed. U.S. Dept. of Labor, Employment and

upon intermittent stimulation with corticotropin in normal subjects. J. Clin. Endocr. Me-

Training Administration, Government Print- tab. 41:453-465.

ing Office, Washington, D.C..

LESHNER, A. I. 1978. Anintroduction to behav-

EHRENREICH, B. 1979. Is success dangerous to ioral endocrinology. Oxford Univ. Press, New

your health? Ms. Magazine, May, p. 51-101.

York.

FEREE, M. M. 1976. The confused American MACCOBY, E. E., and C. N. JACKLIN. 1974. The

housewife. Psychol. Today 10:76-80.

psychology of sex differences. Stanford Uni-

FREEDMAN, D. G. 1974. Human infancy: An evo- versity Press, Stanford, Calif.

lutionary perspective. John Wiley and Sons, MARIE, M. 1963. A new anabolic agent (stanozo-

New York.

lol): Clinical evaluation inthe aged. J. Amer.

FURUYAMA, S., D. M. MAYES, and C. A. NUGENT.

Geriat. Soc. 11:440-456.

1970. A radioimmunoassay forplasma testos- MASON, J. W. 1975. Emotion asreflected in pat-

terone. Steroids 16:415-428.

terns of endocrine integration. In L. Levi

GOVE, W. R. 1976. The relationship between sex

(ed.), Emotions: Their parameters and

roles, marital status, and mental illness. In A. measurement. Raven Press, New York.

G. Kaplan and J. P.Bean (eds.), Beyond sex- MONEY, J., and A. A. EHRHARDT. 1972. Man and

role stereotypes. Little, Brown and Co., Bos-

woman, boy and girl. Johns Hopkins Univer-

ton. sity Press, Baltimore.

HENNIG, M., and A. JARDIM. 1978. The manage- MURPHY, Y., and R. F. MURPHY. 1974. Women of

rial woman. Pocket Books, New York.

the forest. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

HERRMANN, W. M., and R. C. BEACH. 1976. Psy- PARKER, L. N., and W. D. ODELL. 1977. Control

chotropic effects of androgens: A review of

of adrenal androgen secretion by a new pi-

clinical observations and new experimental

tuitary factor: Cortical androgen stimulating

findings. Pharmakopsych. 9:205-219.

hormone (CASH). Clin. Res. 25: 299.

188

Purifoy and Koopmans

Social Biology

PHOENIX, C. H. 1974. Prenatal testosterone in the ROSNER, W. A. 1972. A simplified method forthe

nonhuman primate and its consequences for

quantitative determination of testosterone-

behavior. In R. C. Friedman, R. M. Richart,

estradiol-binding globulin activity in human

and R. L. Vande Wiele (eds.), Sex differences

plasma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 34:983-988.

in behavior. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
PURIFOY, F. E., L. H. KOOPMANS, and R. W. TA-
TUM. Steroid hormones andaging: Free testosterone, testosterone and androstenedione in normal females aged 20-87 years. Human

SEIDMAN, A. (ed.). 1978. Working women: A study of women in paid jobs. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
SELYE, H. 1976. Stress in health anddisease.But-

Biology, in press.

terworth, Inc., Boston.

RAND, L. 1968. Masculinity or feminity? SHAVER, P., and J. FREEDMAN. 1976. Your pursuit

Differentiating career-oriented and home-

of happiness. Psychol. Today 10:26-75.

making-oriented college freshman women. J. Counsel. Psychol. 15:444-450.
REINISCH, J. M. 1977.Prenatal exposure of human foetuses to synthetic progestin and oestrogen affects personality. Nature 266:561562.
ROSE, R. M., J. W. HOLADAY, and I. S. BERN-
STEIN. 1971. Plasma testosterone, dominance

THEODORE, A. 1971. The professional woman. Shenkman Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.
TIGER, L., and J. SHEPHER. 1975. Women in the
kibbutz. Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, New York.
TYLER, L. E. 1974. Individual differences. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.

rank, and aggressive behaviour in male rhesus WILSON, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology. Belknap

monkeys. Nature 231:366-368.

Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

