Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The effect of mutations under conditions of reduced selection
Milford H. Wolpoff
To cite this article: Milford H. Wolpoff (1969) The effect of mutations under conditions of reduced selection, Social Biology, 16:1, 11-23, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1969.9987795 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1969.9987795
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 11
View related articles Citing articles: 16 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

The Effect of Mutations under Conditions of Reduced Selection

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Milford H. Wolpoff
Department of Anthropology Case Western Reserve University Cleveland, Ohio

C. L. Brace has recently formulated a model of the mechanisms underlying structural reduction under conditions of reduced or suspended selection. His model consists of two distinct parts: (1) a consideration of the most probable effect of genetic mutation upon the size and form of the related phenotypic structure; and (2) a consideration of the nature and direction of the non-adaptive evolutionary change resulting from these effects in a population.
I propose to review and modify this model, and to discuss some of the criticisms leveled against it (Brues, 1966; Bailit and Friedlaender, 1966; Holloway, 1966; Prout, 1964; Wright, 1964). In addition, I intend to support the model, as well as the implications of its application for interpreting hominid evolution. However, it is first necessary to review and clarify the various formulations of Brace's proposals (1963; 1964a; Brace and Montagu, 1965) so that the basis of their modification and defense can be achieved.
ORIENTED EVOLUTION
Brace originally claimed that his model is concerned with "reduction of structures for which the selective importance has

changed" (1963, p. 39). However, its range of applicability must be made more specific. We find it necessary to restrict this range to structures for which selection has been reduced (or relaxed). I t has long been recognized that such structures exist (Mayr, 1963); vestigial structures represent the extreme case. I would suggest that the same model applies to any reduction in selection, and that vestigial structures are probably the least important instance.
With reduction of selection, variability of the structure concerned inevitably increases (Simpson, 1953, p. 75). Factors responsible for this increase include both the variability already present in the gene pool (Mayr, 1963, p. 176), and the accumulation of additional mutation in the gene pool when such mutation is no longer selected against (Simpson, 1953, p. 76; Brace and Montagu, 1965, p. 57). Brace's model proposes that the accumulation of random mutation will eventually lead to the reduction and simplification of the structure concerned. There is some empirical evidence which motivates this proposition. Vestigial structures, an extreme result of relaxed selection, are always smaller and less complex than are their adaptive counterparts (Huxley, 1932;

11

12

Wolpoff

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Van Valen, 1960). This reduction and simplification is certainly a possible consequence of reduced selection. The important question is a necessary, or even frequent, orientation of the nonadaptive evolutionary change which occurs when selection is relaxed.
The major set of problems to be considered concern the orientation of evolutionary change when selection is reduced. What, if not natural selection, orients the direction of such change? Is such an orientation an inevitable consequence of reduced selection (in the same sense that adaptation is an inevitable consequence of selection [see Simpson, 1953])? What is the frequency and evolutionary importance of any observed orientation?
THE "PROBABLE MUTATION EFFECT"
Brace has proposed that when selection is reduced, the direction of evolutionary change is oriented by the structured nature of genie action. Reduced selection allows a greater number of mutations to accumulate in the gene pool, and Brace has developed a model of genie action in order to predict the most probable effect of mutations upon the phenotype. This genie model is motivated by the observation that most mutations produce a "deleterious" net phenotypic result (Brace, 1963; Dobzhansky, 1955, 1962; Fisher, 1930; Stern, 1960; Wright, 1929). However, the matter is more complex than this implies (Mayr, 1963, pp. 168-176). "Deleterious" does not characterize the effect of mutation upon the phenotype, but rather characterizes the effect of mutation upon the relation of the phenotype to the environment.
It may seem paradoxical that the effect of a random process--mutation--is nonrandom. However, this apparent paradox is easily resolved. Mutations are random changes in the developmental foundation of a very highly organized and structured system. For changes in these foundations to

be interpretable within such a system, they must have interpretable, and thus nonrandom, results. Were random mutations not interpretable within the organism system, they would not affect the growth and development of the system. We are thus motivated to look for structure and organization in the effects of mutation. We already have the observation that mutation affects the relationship between the phenotype and its environment in a nonrandom (deleterious) manner. We should expect the effect of mutation upon the phenotype itself to also be nonrandom. We may also look within this structured system for the basis of the orientation of nonadaptive evolutionary change.
How can we then characterize the actual morphological, physiological, or behavioral effect of a genetic mutation upon the phenotypic expression--the so-called "trait"? In his original formulation, Brace claimed that the probable result of mutations is the reduction, simplification, or elimination of the phenotypic traits developmentally related to the mutated genetic material. Mutations have the immediate effect of amino acid substitution or deletion (Ingram, 1957; Jacob and Monod, 1961; Perutz, 1958)--except in those cases when mutation in a nucleotide triplet leads to a redundantly equivalent expression of the same information (i.e., amino acid) (Crick, 1966). This exception accounts, in part, for the observation of seemingly different mutation rates at different "loci." Otherwise, amino acid substitution or deletion will prohibit the altered protein from performing as it was coded to do in its developmental chain. Should this be the case, the chain will either terminate or continue only in altered form.
Even at this level, the effect of random mutation is highly structured. Brace contends that the alteration or termination of a developmental chain will lead to the eventual failure of its phenotypic "result" to develop completely, if at all. Thus, he claims that

Vol. 16, No. 1

Mutations and Reduced Selection

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

the most probable result of mutation is the reduction, simplification in complexity, or elimination of the phenotypic expression in question. He has termed this phenomenon the "probable mutation effect."
When selection for a structure is reduced, the genetic basis of the structure is left free to vary and random mutations can accumulate. However, the effect of these mutations is structured, and it is this structure which provides the orientation for the direction of the resultant nonadaptive evolutionary change.
CRITICISMS RAISED BY BAILIT AND FRIEDLAENDER
Several authors have criticized portions of this reasoning. Bailit and Friedlaender (1966, p. 667-668) make three points in their discussion of Brace's model. First, they point out that reduction, or even complete termination, could lead to increase, or over-development in the phenotype if the mutated genetic material influences an inhibitory process. This stands in apparent contrast to Brace's prediction of reduction. Jacob and Monod (1961) have established the existence of genetic bases for such inhibitory processes. Second, citing Waddington (1962), they point out that any significant increase or decrease in a field system (presumably a result of genetic mutation) leads to changes in structural detail as well as changes in structural size. Lastly, they conclude that "The accumulation of random mutation . . . would affect the final phenotype by causing wide variations in form as well as size" (p. 668).
The first criticism raises the question of inevitability. Is structural reduction an inevitable consequence of reduced selection? Brace's statement is unequivocal: "If the structure controlled by the locus in question has no adaptive significance, then it will be reduced in the course of time" (1963, p. 45). Perhaps much of the expressed negative reaction to the model actually represents a

reaction to the unequivocal nature of this particular statement and its implications. Bailit and Friedlaender have adequately demonstrated that reduction is indeed not the inevitable result of alteration or termination in all developmental chains. Even without their arguments, mutations leading to structural increase, or to the development of new structures, have long been recognized. Prout (1964) also questions this inevitability and its implication of a necessary orientation to nonadaptive evolutionary change. Clearly, then, there seems sufficient reason, both theoretical and empirical, to rule out so invariant a prediction.
On the other hand, I doubt that mutations which lead to the increase in size or complexity of a structure under reduced selection will be, with great regularity, selectively neutral. Indeed, whether due to the accumulation of mutations, or the positive effects of selection against increased size or complexity, or for that matter the selective disadvantage of maintaining an unimportant structure, I suspect that reduction is the most likely result of reduced selection.
The second criticism raised by Bailit and Friedlaender really agrees with Brace's conclusion that "the structure in question should be free to vary" (1963, p. 43). The genie model does predict variation in both size and detail. There is no conflict between their conclusions and Brace's predictions in this respect.
THE CRUCIAL EVIDENCE
Even though structural reduction is not an inevitable result of mutation accumulation, no one has questioned its occurrence as a possible result. The important question is thus one of significance, rather than one of existence. It follows that any information concerning the frequency or evolutionary importance of structural reduction under conditions of reduced selection is crucial. This is precisely what Bailit and Friedlaender have concluded: "When it comes to

14

Wolpoff

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

the determinants of alteration in the size or gest two ways in which the model is not to

shape of developing organ systems, or their be used: (1) Reduction is not an inevitable

component parts, biologists are still very result of reduced selection; and (2) reduced

much at the level of description of empirical- selection is not the unique cause of struc-

ly observed phenomena" (p. 667). There- tural reduction. Holloway (1966) and Prout

fore, our best data consist of experimental (1964) point out the many causes of reduc-

or observational evidence on the frequency tion, as well as the multiple effects of re-

and evolutionary importance of structural duced selection, and I am in complete agree-

reduction and simplification under condi- ment with their observations.

tions of reduced selection. Fortunately, the literature abounds in such evidence (Breder, 1944; Emerson, 1961; Huxley, 1932, 1942; deBeer, 1958; Gregory, 1951; Neel and Post, 1963; Post, 1962a, b, 1963a, b, 1964a, b, 1965, 1966a, b; Simpson, 1951,1953;Tuttle and Rogers, 1966; Van Valen, 1960).

On the other hand, far from rendering the concept useless, this view allows the use of the model as a testable explanation of oriented evolutionary change under conditions of reduced selection. I t is from the testability of this more limited hypothesis that its usefulness is derived. A trend toward struc-

USE AND TJSELESSNESS OF THE MODEL

tural reduction in a series of fossils is observable, whereas reduced selection in such a series is not.

The model described here deals with the We would like to be able to test which

mechanisms of genie action. Mutations in instances of structural reduction in evolu-

the nucleotides of the DNA strand have tion are due to the accumulation of muta-

highly structured effects upon the resultant tions, and thus are taking place under con-

developmental processes. Thus, the ultimate ditions of reduced selection.

effects of such mutation upon the phenotypic expression is structured, as is the effect

TAUTOLOGICAL OR TESTABLE?

upon the relation between the phenotype Holloway (1966, p. 10) contends that

and its environment. When selection for a Brace's original application of the model to

particular structure is reduced, changes in it historical phenomena is tautological; struc-

are less likely to be selected against and tural reduction is used as the criterion for

mutations occurring in. its genetic basis claiming that selection has been reduced,

allowed to accumulate. The structuring of and then the presence of reduced selection

the effects of mutation provide an orienta- is used as an explanation of the structural

tion to the direction of change of the struc- reduction. Holloway goes on to say: "We

ture. Reduction in size and complexity is need guidelines to avoid entanglement

one of the possible orientations.

with this possible tautological framework"

From this standpoint, we may best use (p. 10).

this model to describe a mechanism to ex- Such guidelines can be, and indeed have

plain reduction or simplification when it been, developed from this consideration of

occursas a result of reduced selection. I would the model. I t is quite possible to test the

like to hold this view in contradistinction to hypothesis that a particular instance of

Brace's original claim that reduction is an reduction is the result of reduced selection.

inevitable consequence in structures for The model predicts that when reduction

which the selective importance has been occurs as a result of reduced selection, there

reduced (1963, p. 39).

will be a concomitant increase in the varia-

Perhaps the view suggested here is less bility of the structure in question. Increased

general than that proposed by Brace. I sug- variability has long been associated with

Vol. 16, No. 1

Mutations and Reduced Selection

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

vestigial structures (Simpson, 1953, p. 75). The model predicts an increase of variability associated with any degree of selection relaxation.
For instance, were reduction the result of selection for reduced size (see Prout, 1964, pp. 242-243), there would instead be no concomitant increase in variability. Indeed, of all the possible mechanisms which can orient the direction of evolutionary change (Holloway, 1966; Prout, 1964; Simpson, 1953), only the accumulation of random mutation is accompanied by an increase in variability.
Therefore, we have a means of testing the hypothesis that a particular instance of structural reduction is the result of reduced selection.
MUTATION BALANCE AND UNIVERSAL PLEIOTROPY
Some authors have questioned whether a relaxation in selection will even allow the accumulation of sufficient mutations in a population to result in reduction (Prout, 1964; Wright, 1929,1931). Their arguments are based on two separate assumptions: (1) Recurrent forward-backward mutations will lead to a balance of the alleles concerned, rather than to an eventual loss of genetic material; and (2) universal pleiotropy never allows selection to actually be reduced at any particular locus, although it may be reduced at the level of the phenotype. Let's take each assumption in turn.
The so-called "mutation balance formula" (Li, 1955, pp. 243-244; Prout, 1964, pp. 246-248; Wright, 1964, p. 131) assumes a genetic system of two or more alleles, with recurrent mutations from each allele to each other. In such a system, each allele is interpretable as a polymorph. However, the assumption that small mutations on the level of the DNA base will always lead to an interpretable change in genetic information is now open to serious question.
According to Crick (1966), there are now

known to be two normal types of small mutations. On the one hand, there are base substitution mutations which involve the changing of one base on the DNA molecule into another. This type of mutation is reversible, as no genetic material is actually lost (that is, the position for the original base is still present, although a different base occupies it), and the opposite base change can, and presumably does, occur. Thus, the base substitution mutation is the DNA level analogue of the situation which Wright (1931) mathematically analyzed. Experimental evidence indicates that this type of mutation will only lead either to an equivalent coding of the same information, or to a change of no more than one amino acid (Fraenkel-Conrat, 1964). It is easy to see why so small a change can often be interpreted as a polymorph on the phenotypic level.
On the other hand, the second normal type of mutation, the phase-shift mutation, involves an addition to, or a deletion from, the genetic material. The reading of the genetic message is then thrown "out of phase." With this type of mutation, a forward-backward mutation balance is much less likely. The lost genetic material can only be regained by a phase-shift mutation of the opposite sort at the same place, either adding or deleting the same material. Most phase-shift mutations are "corrected" by the occurrence of another opposite phaseshift mutation at another place, throwing the reading of the genetic code back into phase except for the section between the two mutations (Crick, 1966). There is, thus, an excellent chance that any genetic information lost or gained by a phase-shift mutation will remain respectively lost or gained. However, the extremely low probability of correction at the same place makes the creation of a forward-backward mutation balance based on phase-shift mutations extremely unlikely.
Because of the existence of two different

16

Wolpoff

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

types of mutation, it is quite possible that the genetic material responsible for some aspect of the phenotype which is not being maintained by selection can actually be lost. Furthermore, a mutation balance between the loss and gain of such material is, in many cases, improbable. Out of phase reading due to phase-shift mutation is most likely to be corrected by another phase-shift mutation at some other point along the DNA molecule. Only the genetic material between the two mutations remains affected. By limiting the amount of genetic material affected, the pleiotropic effects of the change are reduced, if not eliminated. In this manner, the chances of selection against the mutations are decreased.
The mechanisms whereby genetic material can be irrevocably lost through mutations are now understood in some detail. When selection is reduced, an increasing number of DNA level mutations responsible for reducing or simplifying the trait in question will not reduce the fitness of the population. Eventually, such mutations could accumulate in the gene pool until the structure was either reduced to the point where any further reduction would be selected against, or until the structure was entirely lost.
Some mutations lead to an increase of size or complexity, and even to the development of new structures. However, such mutations have a proportionately low frequency (Jacob and Monod, 1961). Of even greater importance, increase in size or complexity would probably be disadvantageous, even in a structure for which selection is reduced. Thus, there is a good possibility that mutations leading to an increase in size or complexity would be selected against. For this reason, I suggest that in most instances of reduced selection, the prevailing orientation will be toward reduction of the structure in question.
In sum, the possibility of mutation balance does not argue against the applicability

of this model, but rather must itself be viewed with suspicion.
Referring to the question of universal pleiotropy, several authors have suggested that selection can never be reduced at any particular locus because of the pleiotropic effects which every locus exhibits (Prout, 1964; Wright, 1929, 1931, 1964).
Their argument is based upon the assumption that every locus has at least some pleiotropic effects. Given this assumption, certain conclusions can be shown to follow. Any mutation would have more than one effect upon the phenotype. If selection were reduced for the maintenance of a structure, there would be no reduction of selection for the genetic basis of the structure, but rather a shift in the balance of selective pressures acting upon this genetic material. Selection could only be relaxed for the genetic material if selection were concomitantly reduced for the maintenance of all phenotypic effects of this material. The probability of reduced selection occurring for all of these otherwise unrelated structures is close to zero. Thus, it is concluded that selection can never be relaxed with respect to the genetic material, mutations can never accumulate, and there is no nonadaptive orientation to evolutionary change. However, there are reasons to question both the applicability of this argument and the assumption of universal pleiotropy upon which it is based.
Even if the existence of such widespread pleiotropy is assumed, a completely different argument can be developed from it. As Brace (1964a) has pointed out, a change in selection acting upon one trait in a pleiotropically connected system can result in genetic changes which are random with respect to the other traits in the system. Thus, when there is any change in the direction or intensity of selection for one trait, the resultant changes in the genetic material will affect the other traits in the system in exactly the same manner as would a muta-

Vol. 16, No. 1

Mutations and Reduced Selection

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

tion. Were the selection for one trait re- apparently results in the conclusion that

laxed, any change in selection acting upon selection could only rarely lead to an adap-

the other traits in the system could, through tive change for any particular trait. Such a

changes in the common genetic material, conclusion bars the possibility of evolution

lead to the eventual reduction of the struc- ever occurring!

ture in question. On the observational level, The purpose of this discussion is not to

such reduction could not be distinguished discredit the concept of pleiotropy, for

from reduction due to random mutation un- pleiotropic relations have been often ob-

less the pleiotropic relations within the sys- served and experimentally verified (Dob-

tem were known. Brace (1964a) has sug- zhansky, 1955, 1962). I would suggest,

gested that reduction due to changes in the however, that the notion of pleiotropy

genetic material of a pleiotropic system due cannot be applied to the smallest bits of

to shifts in selecting acting upon the other meaningful genetic information (nucleotide

traits in the system may well be more com- bases), but rather must apply only to larger

mon than reduction due to the accumulation units. Even a large amount of pleiotropy at

of mutations.

the level of proteins and enzymes does not

However, an even more damaging point necessarily imply a large degree of plei-

can be raised against the assumption of otropy for the constituent amino acids.

universal pleiotropy itself. As Wright (1929, Indeed, we can judge how little pleiotropy

p. 227) characterizes universal pleiotropy: exists at the DNA level by how readily

"In general, every given gene has at least evolution occurs.

some effect on nearly all parts of the or- This interpretation allows the possibility

ganism." If this were actually the case, it of variation in part of the genetic material

would be difficult to see how any change, occurring without affecting more than one

adaptive or nonadaptive, could occur at all. part of one trait, and thus describes a sys-

If we interpret Wright's statement more tem in which evolution can take place.

loosely, and simply consider the claim that However, this system also allows the pos-

every unit of genetic material ultimately sibility that selection can be reduced, or

influences the expression of more than one even suspended, with respect to some of the

trait, the same problem arises. How could an genetic material. Selection permitting, ran-

adaptive change occur for one structure if dom mutations can indeed accumulate in

selection acts upon the genetic material the genetic material and orient the direction

through many structures? Prout (1964) has of nonadaptive change. In this respect,

made this point in the context of nonadap- the model proposed here has a firm theoreti-

tive change, but the same arguments apply cal basis.

to the question of adaptive change. If the existence of such widespread pleiotropy is assumed, the chances of a change in the ge-

EVOLUTIONARY IMPORTANCE OF PLEIOTROPY

netic material being advantageous for one There is, I believe, a great evolutionary

trait, and at the same time not being dis- advantage to the development and main-

advantageous for all other traits in the plei- tenance of multiple genie effects. This can

otropic system (which, if we take Wright's be seen from the results of an experiment claim literally, is the entire organism) are recently conducted by Hirsch at the Univernil! sity of Illinois (1963).

The assumption of pleiotropy for each Hirsch reported a geotaxic (gravity ori-

genetic unit, even if it is not truly universal, ented locomotion) experiment with Dro-

18

Wolpoff

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

sophila. A strong artificial selection (0.92) selection acts to restore the original opti-

for the ability to distinguish " u p " was mum fitness.

applied to the flies. A vertically oriented This explanation raises a number of ques-

two-branch maze with 15 nodes was used. tions. What allows the homozygous reces-

The optimum response resulted from 15 con- sives to accumulate? In what sense are the

secutive upward turns through the maze. newly favored genes in "disharmony" with

After fifteen generations of selection, the the remainder of the genotype? However,

mean number of upward turns for the select- the most puzzling question arises from

ed group was significantly greater than for Hirsch's results: How can natural selection

the wild population. Selection was then act three times as fast as artificial selection relaxed, and the mean number of upward with an intensity of 0.92?

turns for the experimental population re- Rather than viewing genetic homeostasis

turned to the original value in one-third the as a separate phenomenon and attempting

time of the experimental selection. Dobzhan- to discover its underlying mechanisms, I

sky (1967) suggests genetic homeostasis as believe that it can best be explained in terms

the explanation of this rapid return to the of already known mechanisms, as a logical

original behavioral phenotype when experi- extension of the pleiotropic nature of much

mental selection is relaxed.

genetic material and the polygenic back-

Other experiments show the same phe- ground for most phenoypic traits.

nomenon for morphological traits (Mather When selection acting upon one trait

and Harrison, 1949). In general, when a changes, there are two possible results.

population is experimentally exposed to a When genetic changes take place in plei-

severe artificial selective pressure for a par- otropic material, the changes are random

ticular phenotypic trait, and selection is with respect to the other pleiotropically

then discontinued, the phenotypic trait will rapidly return to the original condition (Mayr, 1963). Lerner (1954, p. 174) first suggested genetic homeostasis as the explanation for this rapid return, defining it as "the property of the population to equilibrate its genetic composition and to resist

connected traits, and the fitness of the organism will probably be reduced. On the other hand, if the changed genetic material is not pleiotropic, no other traits will be affected. Because not all of the nucleotide bases are pleiotropic, both possibilities can occur.

sudden changes."

I suggest that in wild populations under

This "explanation" itself requires an natural conditions with low levels of selec-

explanation (Waddington, 1957; Lewontin, tion acting upon the organism as a whole,

1957). For instance, Mayr (1963) interprets selection would act against changes in plei-

the phenomenon in terms of fitness. Because selection has already led to maximum fitness in a naturally occurring phenotype, selection for a new phenotype will presumably

otropic genetic material because of their overall effect on the organism. Thus, most adaptive changes are the result of genetic changes in nonpleiotropic material.

change the "integrated genotype" and re- On the other hand, if selection is extreme,

sult in lower fitness. According to Mayr (1963, p. 288), the lowering of fitness is the result of "either an accumulation of homozygous recessives or a disharmony between the newly favored genes and the remainder of the genotype." When selection for the new phenotype is discontinued, natural

as in the artificial selection of Hirsch's geotaxic experiment, changes in the selective value of the organism as defined by the experiment outweigh any concomitant lowering of fitness resulting from changes in pleiotropic genetic material. Thus, under conditions of intense artificial selection for

Vol. 16, No. 1

Mutations and Reduced Selection

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

only a few traits, advantageous changes can

THE EVIDENCE ON RECORD

occur in all the genetic material. When such selection is relaxed, selection for the pleiotropically connected traits should act to increase the fitness to its original level, reestablishing the original gene frequencies and phenotypic form of the trait in question. The later selection should be rapid because it acts through many traits.

It only remains for us to demonstrate the existence in nature of a nonadaptive orientation toward reduction and simplification when selection is reduced. Reduction in size or complexity is the most probable, although not unique, result of the accumulation of mutations when selection is reduced. Reduction under these conditions

Selection, then, acts only to affect plei- can be distinguished from reduction due to

otropic genetic material under artificial direct selection, correlated adaptive change,

laboratory conditions where only a few meiotic drive, genetic drift (and other

traits, rather than the entire organism, de- sampling errors), and functionally corre-

fines the direction and intensity of the selec- lated change (see Holloway, 1966; Prout,

tive process. I suggest that genetic home- 1964; and Simpson, 1953, for further dis-

ostasis is a laboratory artifact and would cussion of reduction not due to the accumu-

only be rarely observed in wild populations. lation of mutations). The distinguishing

It is, rather, the effects of pleiotropy which criterion is variability. Only mutation accu-

protect the population from the short-term mulation, when selection is reduced, results

effects of vacillating changes in selection. in a concomitant increase in population

I believe that this function is the funda- variability with respect to the structure

mental evolutionary importance of plei- concerned.

otropy.

Through the application of the criteria

PLEIOTROPY AND REDUCED SELECTION

discussed above to the data collected from fossils or modern populations it is possible to determine whether or not any reduction

We have come to view pleiotropy as one which has occurred is the result of relaxa-

possible limitation to the amount of reduc- tion of selection, without invoking tauto-

tion that can occur when selection is re- logical arguments. With this determination,

laxed (Huxley 1932; Wright 1929), rather we can bring evidence to bear upon the

than as a factor barring its occurrence. crucial questions of the frequency and im-

A nonadaptive structure which is main- portance of this postulated evolutionary

tained as the result of selection acting upon orientation.

pleiotropic expressions of the genetic ma- A large body of zoological literature

terial should be highly variable, as most supports several contentions relevant to

vestigial structures are (Simpson, 1953, the discussion above. It has been predicted

p. 148; Huxley, 1932; Van Valen 1960). that in instances of reduction due to relaxed

However, if a reduced structure is main- selection, the structures undergoing reduc-

tained by direct selection acting against any tion should tend to be more variable than

further reduction, one would not expect those either maintained by, or reduced as a

unusual variation since the genetic basis for result of, selection. This phenomenon of

the larger or more complex polymorphs increased variability in structures under-

formerly selected for will eventually be going reduction has been consistently ob-

lost. This later phenomena may character- served in such varied organisms as termites

ize several trends observable in human evo- (Emerson, 1961); cave fish (Breder, 1944);

lution (Brace, 1962, 19646; Dahlberg, 1964; frog tadpoles (DeBeer, 1958); horses (Simp-

Garn, 1964; Brace and Montagu, 1965). son, 1951); certain snakes (Gregory, 1951);

20

Wolpoff

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

hind limbs of the whale (Huxley, 1932); functionless teeth in Hoplopkoneus and Ptilodus (Simpson, 1953). It has been shown in respect to colorblindness, visual acuity, auditory acuity, breast cancer and other diseases of lactation, and the nasal septum in living human beings (Neel and Post, 1963; Post, 1962a, b, 1963a, b, 1964a, b, 1966a, b). For almost every case mentioned, the investigator has suggested that reduction occurred when a formerly maintained selective pressure was relaxed. In addition, there are many reports in the literature, such as the study of orangutan hallucal reduction conducted by Tuttle and Rogers (1966), in which reduction associated with increased variability is observed and possible selective factors are mentioned. I suggest a closer examination of the postulated selective factors in the light of the observed variability.
Thus, there is widespread confirmation of the predictions generated by the model of genie action discussed here already present in the literature. These instances present data which are incompatible with the interpretation that direct selection, or any other possible orientation other than that of relaxed selection allowing the accumulation of mutations, has caused the reduction (see Emerson, 1961; Van Valen, 1960).
In Post's work we can find an additional confirmation of reduced selection. The distribution of visual and auditory acuity shows the most reduction, and the greatest variability, in precisely those populations which have not required these abilities for their survival over the longest period of time. The distribution of lactation abnormalities and breast cancer indicates the same pattern of distribution. Thus, there is an even more direct confirmation of reduced selection.
SUMMARY
While there are many causes of structural reduction in evolution, the accumulation of

mutations when selection is relaxed is a differentiable mechanism. Such reduction is terminated by (a) the eventual loss of the structure in question, along with the loss of some of the genetic material responsible for it, (b) the maintenance of the structure in a reduced form with a high degree of variability, due to selection acting upon the pleiotropic effects of part of the genetic material this is the so-called "vestigial structure" or (c) the maintenance of the structure in its reduced or simplified form as a result of positive selection against any further reduction. Some evidence indicates the third possibility as the most common one (Brace and Montagu, 1965).
A consideration of the studies of structural reduction in evolution already present in the literature shows reduction due to the accumulation of mutations to be widespread and common. Reduced selection is thus not a rare evolutionary phenomena.
APPLICATION TO HUMAN EVOLUTION
While we have answered the question of frequency, we must yet consider the importance of this nonadaptive evolutionary orientation. One would expect that this phenomenon would be particularly characteristic of human evolution. There has been an increasing capacity of culture to act as man's major adaptive mechanism. The course of human evolution has been largely oriented by increasing selection for man's capacity to be an effective culture-bearing creature. With this orientation has come an associated relaxation of the selective pressures acting upon those morphological features whose function has been supplemented or replaced by behavioral or technological cultural innovations.
Post's studies of selection relaxation in recent populations adequately demonstrate this point. Cultural innovations have increasingly reduced selection for the maintenance of visual and auditory acuity. I suggest that the same results can be found in

Vol. 16, No. 1

Mutations and Reduced Selection

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

the analysis of any abnormality for which there is a cultural compensation.
Peering further into the past, this interpretation has been applied to the reconstructed evolutionary history of many morphological traits. Perhaps the most highly criticized application has been in the interpretation of the observed trend toward dental reduction (Brues, 1966; Bailit and Friedlaender, 1966). The hypothesis that this trend is the result of reduced selection for a larger dentition due to the increasingly efficient replacement of the teeth as tools or weapons by culture has been proposed by many authors in addition to Brace (1962, 1964J), even without considering why reduced selection might result in size reduction (Dahlberg, 1964; Gam, 1964; Hooton, 1931).
If relaxed selection is to be proposed as the cause of hominid dental reduction without invoking tautological reasoning, an associated increase in dental variability must be shown for at least the period of reduction. The period of reduction varies for different portions of the dentition and among different populations. However, Dahlberg (1964, p. 22) observes relaxed selection for molar and premolar crown grinding area in some extant populations.
Brace (1964; Brace and Montagu, 1965) finds the beginnings of the reduction of selection resulting in the current degree of dental reduction to be in the technological innovations following the development of Upper Paleolithic blade-burin industries, I think this hypothesis may be modified. The transitional and unusually variable nature of the skeletal material at Mount Carmel (Brothwell, 1961; McCown and Keith, 1939) and Broken Hill (Clark et al., 1950; Pycraft, 1928), and the cultural associations of these materials with Middle Paleolithic industries (Garrod, 1962; Garrod and Bate, 1937; Higgs, 1961; Clark, 1960; Clark et al., 1950) indicates a reduction of selection originating in the more

advanced facies of the Middle Paleolithic. In any event, Dahlberg (1964) observes the most extreme dental reduction in those populations that have been associated with an Upper Paleolithic blade-burin industry for the longest period of time (p. 21). Both the earliest and subsequently the greatest dental reductions can be found among populations in the Near East and Europe (p. 20) --areas in which the earliest Upper Paleolithic industries have been found (Garrod, 1962; Howell, 1959; Pradel, 1966; MullerBeck, 1966).
In spite of the suggestive nature of these observations, I feel compelled to point out, contrary to Brues (1966) and Bailit and Friedlaender (1966), that the information necessary either to corroborate or to refute this interpretation has not been gathered or correctly utilized. Bailit and Friedlaender base their conclusions on population averages and ranges for dental dimensions not even corrected for body size. They claim a lack of relation between tooth size and body size. However, there is not a study in the literature which, in attempting to find a relation between tooth size and body size, holds constant factors causing independent variation of these traits. Their claim of no relation is unfounded, and reasonable doubt may be cast upon their conclusions. Brues, on the other hand, suggests selective factors which could be responsible for dental reduction. I suggest that the question of whether or not reduced selection was responsible for any particular trend toward reduction can only be answered by examining the nature of the data, and not by postulating possible, but untestable, selective pressures. As Holloway concluded, this procedure can only lead to tautological reasoning (1966, p. 10).
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
Population averages and ranges are not sufficient for testing this model. Estimates of population variability are of crucial im-

22

Wolpoff

Social Biology

portance. Factors which can cause the independent variation of the traits studied must be controlled or isolated. Most of these data are already available, but many must be regathered so that we may be able to adequately test the model.
We need not stop with the testing of population data. A computer simulation of the Watson-Crick DNA model could be of crucial importance. We could test the degree of mutation accumulation associated with various amounts of pleiotropy at the nucleotide base level, and various reductions of selection for the phenotypic traits.
A well-grounded and potentially useful evolutionary mechanism has been found in this development of Brace's "probable mu-

tation effect." Specific criteria for the test-
ing of the model have been generated. I
hope that the appropriate data will be test-
ed, and further light thus may be shed upon
the factors which have oriented the direction
of human evolution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to acknowledge my sincere indebtedness to Dr. Arthur H. Rohn of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Illinois for the very great amount of help extended to me in the preparation of this work, and to Dr. C. L. Brace of the University of Michigan for our conversations which have inspired many of the ideas developed here. Responsibility for the contents of this paper is solely my own. This study was supported in part by United States Public Health Service Grant 5 Fl GM-30, 854-03.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BAILIT, H. L., and J. S. FRIEDLAENDER. 1966. Tooth
size reduction: A hominid trend. Amer. Anthropol. 68:665-672. BRACE, C. L. 1962. Cultural factors in the evolution of thehuman dentition, p.343-354. M.F. Ashley Montagu (ed.), Oxford, NewYork.
. 1963. Structural reduction in evolution. Amer. Natur. 97:39-49.
. 1964a. Theprobable mutation effect. Amer. Natur. 98:453-455.
. 1964b. The fate of the "classic" Neanderthals: A consideration of hominid catastrophism. Curr. Anthropol. 5:3-43, 7:204-214.
BRACE, C. L., and M. F. ASHLEY MONTAGU. 1965.
Man's evolution: An introduction to physical anthropology. Macmillan, NewYork. BREDER, C. M. 1944. Ocular anatomy and light sensitivity studies on the blind fish from Cueva de los Sabinos, Mexico. Zoologica 94:131-143. BROTHWELL, D. R. 1961.Thepeople of Mount Carmel. Proc. Prehist. Soc. 27:155-159. BRUES, A. M. 1966. "The probable mutation effect" and the evolution of hominid teeth and jaws. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 25:169-171. CLARK, J. D. 1960. Further excavations at Broken Hill, Northern Rhodesia. J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst. 89:201-231.
CLARK, J. D., K. P. OAKELY, L. H. WELLS, and
J. A. C. MCCLELLAND. 1950. New studies on Rhodesian man.J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst. 77:732.
CRICK, F. H. C. 1966.The genetic code III. Sci. Amer. 215:55-62.
DAHLBERG, A. A. 1964.Dental evolution andculture, p. 19-31. In S. M. Garn (ed.), Culture and the direction of human evolution. Wayne State, Detroit.
DEBEER, G. R. 1940.Embryology and taxonomy, p. 365-393. In J. S. Huxley (ed.), The new systematics. Clarendon, Oxford.

. 1958.Embryos and ancestors. Clarendon, Oxford. DOBZHANSKY, T. 1955. Evolution, genetics, and man. Wiley, NewYork.
. 1962. Mankind evolving. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.
. 1967.Lecture given at the 36th meeting of the_ American Association of Physical Anthropologists. EMERSON, A. E. 1961. Vestigial characters of termites, andprocesses of regressive evolution. Evolution 15:115-131. FISHER, R. A. 1930. Thegenetical theory of natural selection. Clarendon, Oxford. FRAENKEL-CONRAT, H. 1964. The genetic code of a virus. Sci.Amer. 213:55-67. GARN, S. M. 1964. Culture and the direction of human evolution, p. 3-18. In S. M. Garn (ed.), Culture and the direction of human evolution. Wayne State, Detroit. GARROD, D. A. E. 1962. The middle paleolithic of the Near East and the problem of the Mount Carmel man. J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst. 52:232259.
GARROD, D. A. E., and D. M. A. BATE. 1937. The
stone age of Mount Carmel, Vol. I. Excavations at the Wady El-Mughara. Oxford, New York. GREGORY, W. K. 1951. Evolution emerging: A survey of changing patterns from primeval life to man. 2 vols. Macmillan, NewYork. HIGGS, E. S. 1961.Some pleistocene faunas from the Mediterranean coastal areas. Proc. Prehist. Soc. 27:144-154. HIRSCH, J. 1963.Behavior genetics and individuality understood. Science 142:1436-1442. HOIXOWAY, R. L., JR. 1966. "Structural reduction" through the probable mutation effect. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 25:7-11. HOOTON, E. A. 1931. Up from the ape. Macmillan, New York.

Vol. 16, No. 1

Mutations and Reduced Selection

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

HOWELL, F. C. 1959. Upper pleistocene stratigraphy

. 1963a. "Colorblindness" andrelaxed selec-

and early man in the Levant. Proc. Amer. Phil. tion. Eugen. Quart. 10:84-85.

Soc. 103:1-65.

. 1963b. "Colorblindness" in Britain, France,

HUXLEY, J. S. 1932. Problems of relative growth. and Japan: Areview with notes onselectionre-

Methuen, London.

laxation. Eugen. Quart. 10:110-118.

. 1942. Evolution, the modern synthesis.

. 1964a. Hearing acuity among Negroes and

Allen, London.

whites. Eugen. Quart. 11:65-81.

INGRAM, V.M. 1957. Genetic mutations in human

. 1964b. Appraisals of civilized man and

haemoglobin: Thechemical difference between savages. Eugen. Quart. 11:168-169.

normal and sickle-cell haemoglobin. Nature 180:

. 1965. Jews, genetics, and disease. Eugen.

326-328.

Quart. 12:162-164.

JACOB, F., and J. MONOD. 1961. On the regulation of

. 1966a. Breast cancer, lactation, and genet-

gene activity. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on ics. Eugen. Quart. 13:1-29.

Quantitative Biology 26:318-356.

. 1966b. Deformed nasal septa and relaxed

LERNER, I. M. 1954. Genetic homeostasis. Oliver selection. Eugen. Quart. 13:101-112.

and Boyd, Edinburgh. LEWONTIN, R. C.1957. The adaptations of popula-
tions to varying environments. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology 22:395408. Li, C.C.1955. Population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
MCCOWN, T., and A. KEITH. 1939. The stone age of
Mount Carmel, Vol. II. The fossil human remains from the Levalloiso-Mousterian. Oxford, New York.
MATHER, K., and B. J. HARRISON. 1949. The mani-
fold effects of selection. Heredity 3:1-52, 131-

PRADEL, L. 1966. Transition from the Mousterian to the Perigordian. Curr. Anthropol. 7:33-50.
PROUT, T. 1964. Observations onstructural reduction in evolution. Amer. Natur. 98:239-249.
PYCRAFT, W. P. (ed.). 1928. Rhodesian man and associated remains. British Museum, London.
SIMPSON, G. G. 1951. Horses. Oxford Univ. Press, New York. . 1953. The major features of evolution. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.
STERN, C. 1960. Principles of human genetics. 2nd ed. W. Freeman, San Francisco.

162. MAYR, E. 1963. Animal species and evolution.
Belknap, Cambridge. MULLER-BECK, H. 1966. Paleohunters in America:
Origins and diffusion. Science 152:1191-1210.
NEEL, J. V., and R. H. POST. 1963. Transitory
"positive" selection for colorblindness? Eugen.

TUTTLE, R. H., and C. M. ROGERS. 1966. Genetic
and selective factors in reduction ofthe halluxin Pongo pygmaeus. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 24:191-198. VAN VALEN, L. 1960. Nonadaptive aspects of evolution. Amer. Natur. 94:305-308.
WADDINGTON, C. H. 1957. The strategy ofthe genes.

Quart. 10:33-35.

Allen and Unwin, London.

PERUTZ, M. F. 1958. Some recent advances inmo-

. 1962. New patterns ingenetics and develop-

lecular biology. Endeavour 17:190-203.

ment. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

POST, R. H. 1962a. Population differences in red and WRIGHT, S. 1929. Fisher's theory of dominance.

green color vision deficiency: A review anda Amer. Natur. 68:274-279.

query on selection relaxation. Eugen. Quart.

. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian populations.

9:131-146.

Genetics 16:97-159.

. 19626. Population differences in vision

. 1964. Pleiotropy in the evolution of structur-

acuity: A review with speculative notes on selec- al reduction and of dominance. Amer. Natur.

tion relaxation. Eugen. Quart. 9:189-212.

98:65-69.

