Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Biosocial factors influencing women to become prostitutes in India
Molly Chattopadhyay , S. Bandyopadhyay & C. Duttagupta
To cite this article: Molly Chattopadhyay , S. Bandyopadhyay & C. Duttagupta (1994) Biosocial factors influencing women to become prostitutes in India, Social Biology, 41:3-4, 252-259, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1994.9988876 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1994.9988876
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 24
View related articles
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

Brief Reports
Biosocial Factors Influencing Women to Become Prostitutes in India

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

aMolly Chattopadhyay, aS. Bandyopadhyay, and bC. Duttagupta
aSociological Research Unit, bBiochemistry Research Unit and Biometry Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 700 035, India

ABSTRACT: Based on materials collected during a study of risk factors associated with cervix cancer among prostitutes in Domjur, Howrah, West Bengal, this report explores various biosocial factors which may lead women to prostitution. When family and marital ties fail or disintegrate for various reasons, the life situations which a woman encounters may themselves generate a "process" of anchorlessness. The failure of family support along with the lack of ability to provide for themselves due to poverty and illiteracy were key factors why the women in this study had adopted prostitution.

An exploratory study on the risk factors associated with cervical cancer is underway in a semi-industrial township of Domjur, Howrah, India. The purpose of the study is to determine whether there is any relationship between various biosocial factors (e.g., sex behavior, other demographic and environmental characteristics) and cervix cancer among females who are prostitutes. For the purpose of the study, a prostitute is defined as a female who offers her body for sexual intercourse in exchange for cash or goods as her source of livelihood.
The present communication analyzes information on the biosocial backgrounds and behaviors of the prostitutes collected in the course of the cervical cancer study. An important point to be noted is that the analyses were made through continuous interaction among the biologists and sociologists on the study team and also with the prostitutes. The presentation

will focus on the variables in a "process" which has led these women to accept their present life. Earlier studies on Indian prostitution (Duttagupta, 1964; Punekar and Rao, 1961;Joarder, 1964) did not direct attention to the processes by which a woman eventually found herself making her livelihood through prostitution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Selection of Subjects.--In this population-based study, we intended to interview all prostitutes in Ghoshpara. In reality, this mission was difficult to execute. Both screening for the detection of cervix cancer and the collection of background information are sensitive in nature. Several prostitutes refused to discuss their profession with an outsider. However, for the clinical intervention arranged by the project leader with the cooperation of Bagha Jatin State General Hospital at Jadav-

252

Vol. 41, No. 3-4

Brief Reports

253

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

pur (Calcutta), rapport with the prostitutes had been painstakingly established.
The study was also limited by other factors. There was no specific time when the interviewers could find the study subjects free to talk with them. Often the interview was interrupted and could not be pursued further. Also the prostitutes' neighborhood was further disturbed by the work of a nongovernmental voluntary organization on a "detection of AIDS" program. The prostitutes perceived the AIDS program as threatening the disruption or end of their only source of livelihood. Our study then was also seen as a threat. As a result, out of total number of approximately 300 prostitutes, 60 allowed us to make some kind of contact with them, and 33 finally participated in the study. The rest refused to talk.
Techniques of Data Collection.-- For the collection of data, we used a structured questionnaire and in-depth case histories. Socioeconomic, demographic, and general information was collected through structured questionnaires. Information concerning their profession and background was obtained by in-depth case histories.
Location of Study. --The survey was confined to the Ghoshpara Block Panchayat of Domjur, Howrah District, West Bengal, located in a central region of the town and easily accessible by trains and buses.
The data were collected by interviews with the prostitutes. While the facts that they reported could not be verified, for reasons of financial and time constraints, the qualitative and quantitative data were cross-checked several times during the study period

for their internal consistencies. The data generated in the course of the study have been used to formulate a few hypotheses, since there is a paucity of analytical investigation in this area.
RESULTS
The findings are presented in three parts: the background of the prostitutes; the reasons why they became prostitutes; and their living conditions, including their health.
BACKGROUNDS OF THE PROSTITUTES
Place of Birth.--The prostitutes of Ghoshpara are mostly from rural areas. Only 3 per cent are from the local area. Those who were "forced" into prostitution have been shifted to places far from their homes for reasons of anonymity as well as of there being less chance of their being recognized and rescued. In the case of women who are voluntarily participating in prostitution, anonymity is also sought, perhaps for more complex reasons of feelings of the social indignity they know is attached to their profession.
Religion and Sect. --The respondents are mostly Hindus (84.8 per cent). Among the Hindu respondents, 72.7 per cent are of lower castes.
Literacy. --Only 2 prostitutes are literate, and the remaining 31 are without any formal education. Thisfinding makes a strong case for compulsory education for girls, not with a view to make them merely "literate," but to enable them to educate themselves about the realities of adult life and to enable them to earn an independent living if required at a time of crisis.
Last OccupationBefore Becominga Prostitute. --Information on the full

254

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

occupational histories of the prosti- "no one to marry," "do not want to get

tutes could not be obtained. Only their married," etc.

last occupation was given. Among Entering Into Prostitution.--Over

these occupations, working for domes- half of the prostitutes took on the pro-

tic services, as a casual laborer, and as fession by the time they were 25 years

a farm laborer were repeated often. A of age. The modal age group was 20-

variety of reasons was given by the re- 25. One-third had engaged in some

spondents for leaving the last occupa- form of illicit sex before entering into

tion. The most frequent reason was the profession. Two-thirds had become

that they had to provide sexual services prostitutes without such an intermedi-

at their work place. Under these situ- ary stage.

ations, they chose to adopt prostitution Reaction of the Respondents'

directly as providing better pay for Relatives. --The majority reported that

what they had to do anyway.

their relatives had no knowledge that

Family Relations. --A number of they had become prostitutes at the be-

prostitutes maintain contact with their ginning of their professional life. How-

family by visiting their relatives at least ever, nearly one-fourth of the prosti-

once a year. Respondents seem to have tutes later had relatives visit them

recognized the value of family relations despite their knowledge of the wom-

after initially having drifted away from an's profession.

their families and entered into their profession.
Marital Status.--Of the 33 respon-

REASONS WHY THE WOMEN BECAME PROSTITUTES

dents, 21 have been married, and 12 There is a widespread belief that

never married. Three of the previously prostitution in India is adopted as a

married respondents had premarital means of earning a living because of

sexual exposure.

poverty. Poverty may be an important

Age of Marriage. --The respondents factor, but the fact remains that all

were mostly married within their own poor women are not prostitutes. Thus,

communities and to men of their own prostitution as a livelihood must be

social and economic levels. About 36 adopted as part of a process that in-

per cent of the respondents were mar- cludes a number of factors. While it is

ried by the age of 12-14. It appears difficult to isolate contributory factors,

that more than 50 per cent of the mar- we attempted to identify such factors

riages were solemnized, disobeying the among the respondents in the present

provisions of the Child Marriage Re- study. It was possible to sort out a few

straint (Amendment) Act, 1978, which major causes which either precipitated

makes the age of 18 years the youngest a woman's entry into prostitution or

age of marriage for a girl. About 10 per made her vulnerable to accepting the

cent of the married respondents were life of prostitution.

married before they attained puberty. The interaction of various life

Unmarried Respondents. --Various events and the women's reactions to

reasons were given by the unmarried them fall into two main categories,

respondents for not getting married, each of which has two subcategories

for example, "no money for dowry," (see Table 1). Type I comprised

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Types
Type I: Forced (a)
(b)
No Type II: Chosen
(a) (6) No Total No

TABLE 1
CONDITIONS LEADING WOMEN IN GHOSHPARA DOMJUR, WEST BENGAL TO PROSTITUTION

CONDITIONS

Predisposing Condition

Initiated by

Contributory Cause

Aggravating Situation

Catalytic Factor

Sudden personal or familial crisis (Becoming a widow)
Oppressive intrafamilial environment after marriage

Death of principal provider, e.g., husband
Recurring illtreatment by husband and/or in-laws

Inability to support No economic

by in-laws or paren- provision for sur-

tal family

vival

Refusal of parental family to take back due to poverty

Looking for a job

Deception by a male acquaintance
(1) Sexual exploitation at place of work (2) Rape

Self-initiated uncontrolled life Sexual urges

Desire for easy life
Sexual usage and curiosity ...

Impact of local neighborhood ...
...

None None ...

None None

No. OF
PROSTITUTES
17
1 21
3 9 12 33

f

256

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

women who were either (a) widowed or (b) abused by husbands and in-laws, which left them without social or economic support. Type II is comprised of women who chose prostitution (a) as an easy way to support themselves or (fe) because of their own sexual urges and curiosity.
Type I (a)--Critical situations arose for 17 women when their husbands died, and no family members or friends came to their aid. At that vulnerable moment, they were influenced or deceived by local males, which was the intervening factor that led them into prostitution. An example is the case ofM.
M was married at the ageof 16 andlived with her husband for five years. She had two children. Herhusband passed away. She was not working, and none of her family members came to her support. While she was in this vulnerable position, a male approached her with the pretext of finding her a job. In actuality, he "sold" her, which eventually landed her in the prostitute's quarter.
Type I (b)--Ill-treatment by husband and in-laws led 4 women into prostitution. Instead of finding protection in marriage, many young married girls are beaten, forced to starve, and abused. In 3 cases, ill-treatment plus family poverty led to prostitution; in the fourth case, ill-treatment plus rape were the precipitating factors.
A's case exemplifies the types of situations in which 3 women found themselves.
A's father died when she was a child. The family lived in Bangladesh. Being the eldest daughter, she had to assume responsibility for her mother and three brothers and sisters. She was married against her will and faced ill-treatment from her husband. She left her husband

and went back to live with her mother where she worked as an agricultural laborer. To earn more money, she came to India and worked as a mason.
A boyfriend took herto Delhi, promising to marry her. There shediscovered that he was already married. Thereafter, he arranged a job as a housemaid for her. She was sexually exploited here again by the landlord and became pregnant. Shewent back to Bangladesh, had an abortion, and came back to India in search of jobs.
A friend told her about the sex profession and about this locality. Sheentered into the profession on her own. She was clear in her mind that nobody had forced her into prostitution. She felt that if she had to provide sexualservices at her workplace, it was better to become a paid prostitute where she could earn money for her future. She sends money to her mother. Twoofher sisters are staying at a "family residence" (grihastha-bari) next to herlane. She also has taken responsibility for their welfare.
In the fourth case, ill-treatment in
marriage and later rape and abduction
contributed to P becoming a prostitute.
P wasmarried in Benaras. Her brotherin-law and mother-in-law used to beat her on anypretext. Shecarries a scar on her right hand as a mark of the in-laws' torture. Her husband always sided with "his family," i.e., his mother and brother. She left the house, came to Shibpur, Howrah, and worked as adomestic maid. Oneday,at the time ofreturning home from her work, shewas raped and landed in a hotel. She serviced the hoteliers for a few months, then came to the prostitutes' quarter on her own.
Type II (a)--In 9 cases, a view of
prostitution as an easier life than the
alternatives influenced the women. For
S, the absence of physical labor in the

Vol. 41, No. 3-4

Brief Reports

257

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

life of a prostitute was the major at- Economic Situation.--Prostitution

traction, accompanied by other envi- is as unpredictable and fluctuating a

ronmental influences.

business as any other, depending upon

several socioeconomic factors. Thefig-

S never liked to work from the time she was a child. She belonged to a very poor family. Her father was unable to get her married into a well-off family. Environmental influences imbuedvin her mind

ures discussed here are based on the usual income of the respondents. The largest number of prostitutes earn a monthly income of about Rs. 1000/-.

the idea that prostitution could provide They report more competition these

her with an easy life without much hard . days, since there are too many women

work. She came to this quarter on her own. She has the approval of her father, as is evident from his frequent visits to

in the profession. Also, living conditions in general have become more ex-

see his daughter.

pensive, and not many men can afford

to spend money visiting a prostitute.

Type II (b)--Having failed to con- Number of Clients Per Day.--

trol their sexual urge, as expected by Approximately 66 per cent of the pros-

the society, and influenced by various titutes entertain a maximum number of

other factors (such as being raised in five clients per day. Three of the 33

a brothel, etc.), 3 respondents chose prostitutes have entertained as many as

prostitution as their way of life. Sexual* 7-8 clients per day on a regular basis.

urge was a major predisposing factor in The rate ranges from RS.20/-to 150/-

the case of PB.

depending on the client's duration of

PB was brought up in a prostitutes' quarter. Her parents were running a brothel. Later, she became a prostitute. Her parents did not find any stigma at-

stay.
House Rent. --A majority of the respondents spend RS. 80/- to Rs. 100/per month toward house rent. In this

tached to their daughter's adopting the situation, the prostitutes pay 25 per

profession. She had a steady boyfriend who was holding a job and wanted her to give up prostitution. She had decided not to give it up because sexual variation was very important to her.

cent of their income as commission to the landlady. Besides income, gifts by the customers are also valued in terms of cash, and 25 per cent of the gift value is commission. The other system of

PRESENT LIFE OF THE PROSTITUTES

payment is to pay rent of Rs. 350-400/per month and no other commission to

Length of Time. --Almost one-fifth the landlady.

of the respondents had been prosti- Remittance to Families.--Most of

tutes for over 15 years. These prosti- the respondents said that they regu-

tutes seem to have put in fairly long larly send remittances to their families.

years in the profession. This finding Many of them have their children

deviates from the popular belief that living with their families.

the professional life of prostitutes is Social Ties.-- During the years in

usually short.

the profession, about 50 per cent of the

Age Structure. --More than half of respondents have maintained cordial

the respondents are above 30 years relations with their native places.

of age.

These respondents visit their native

258

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

places at least once in a year just to becomes an expensive affair, and they

visit, in addition to trips made because simply can not afford it.

of their own illness, the illness of rel- Under the current program, the

atives, and during festivals (e.g., prostitutes were persuaded to go to a

Durga Puja, Jamaisasthi, etc.) when State General Hospital where they

they also usually visit their native were examined and treated, particu-

places.

larly for STD's. Adequate treatment

Food Habits. --The respondents could be achieved because the prosti-

were selective in their food habits. An- tutes were aware that the doctor at the

imal proteins (i.e., fish, egg, meat) are hospital knew their profession and

consumed frequently. Leafy vegeta- therefore could make all necessary rel-

bles, pulses and legumes, roots and tu- evant queries about potential health

bers are nonfrequent items. Intake of problems. Furthermore, the doctor's

alcohol is regular. Usage of tobacco is sympathetic outlook gave the prosti-

mostly as tooth powder.

tutes faith in and respect for the treat-

Interrelationships. --The prostitutes ment. All the prostitutes who were gave the general impression that girls treated admitted that for the first time in the same quarter maintain cordial the right questions had been asked of relations amongst themselves and have them and also the right treatment had "fellow feelings." During illness or been prescribed.

pregnancies or when unable to earn Perception of the Future. --A large

money for other reasons, they were majority (70 per cent) of the respon-

supported and looked after by other dents said that they wanted to leave the

prostitutes in their neighborhood.

profession. In fact, many women had

Health Care. --Usually health care planned to marry and settle down with

is the most neglected aspect in these the man with whom they had been liv-

prostitutes' lives. Often, they are in- ing for a number of years. But the grim

fected with sexually transmitted dis- reality was that at the juncture of their

eases (STD). However, visiting a doc- actually leaving the profession, the

tor is a problem for them for any man married someone else, leaving

number of reasons. Firstly, knowing them with the darkness of the same

the prostitutes' real identities, the pri- life.

vate doctors were at times very mean

and rude. In addition, the current

AIDS campaign has led a number of the respondents to hide their identities,

DISCUSSION

and thus their real medical problems The prostitutes included in the study

were not revealed to the doctors. Sec- had largely unsatisfactory lives. In be-

ondly, the requirements of their busi- tween their initially "normal" lives and ness is such that the prostitutes can not the present, they passed through a dis-

be away from their quarters for a long organized, drifting state where they

time which is often needed if they try to were neither part of the normal orgause any government hospital outdoor nized society nor part of the prosti-

services. Thirdly, treatment in itself tutes' world.

Vol. 41, No. 3 - 4

Brief Reports

259

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

The general assumption thatpov- some married females that weakened

erty is themain cause of prostitution the ties holding them into a norma-

for women is partially supported by the tively ascribed pattern ofsocial behav-

current study. Ourobservations sup- ior. However, inthe largest number of

ports a finding that poverty in combi- cases (17 of 33), it was therefusal by

nation with other factors leads women in-laws or inability byparental family

to become prostitutes.

to provide help and support atthe time

In the cases ofthe never-married fe- of a husband and provider's death that

males, we found that prostitution was rendered the women vulnerable toex-

"deliberately" chosen asa way of life, ploitation andeventually led them to

because itsuited the goals and interests accept prostitution asa source oflive-

of particular individuals under the cir- lihood.

cumstances. We usetheword "delib-

erately" because most of these girls

chose prostitution because they saw it as an easy and lazy way of life. How-

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ever, in thecourse of the life process The authors express their heartful grat-

that ledthem to prostitution, mostof the women have become easy going and canno longer think of beingengaged in the hard work that any other life would require, although they are

itude to Dr. Niranjan Bhattacharyya, Bagha Jatin State General Hospital for caring for the prostitutes, treating them for their diseases, andguiding them to build confidence andto become aware of their health status. Theauthors also acknowl-

certainly aware ofthe shame and grimness associated with prostitution.
It was repeated post-marital abuse in the in-laws' families experiencedby

edge the help of Ms. T. Vanitha for helping in interviewing and Sipra Chakrabortyfor preparing the manuscript. The Apex club of Domjur is also thankfully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

DUTTA GUPTA, BELA. 1964. Contemporary so-
cial problems in India. Vidyodaya Library, Calcutta.
JOARDER, BISWANATH. 1984. Prostitution in his-
torical and modern perspectives. InterIndian Publications. New Delhi.

PUNEKAR, S. D., and KAMALA RAO. 1962. Study
of prostitutes in Bombay. Allied Publication, Bombay.

