Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Attitudes toward and knowledge of sociobiology among college science professors
Ben Cathey & Frankie Brown
To cite this article: Ben Cathey & Frankie Brown (1986) Attitudes toward and knowledge of sociobiology among college science professors, Social Biology, 33:1-2, 148-152, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988633 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988633
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

Attitudes Toward and Knowledge of Sociobiology Among College Science Professors

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Ben Cathey and Frankie Brown
Department of Natural Science Michigan State University EastLansing, Michigan

ABSTRACT: It appears that there is currently a great deal of renewed interest in the area ofsociobiology. It therefore seemed appropriate to assess the attitudes and knowledge of collegescience professors who are primarily charged with disseminating information in thisfield.To this end, the present study was undertaken to determine the concepts and opinions held by scientists in various disciplines at the university level. Information wasgathered from 79.3% of the 111 sample questionnaires sent out (i.e., 88 questionnaires returned). Respondents were familiar with one or more sociobiologists and felt that sociobiology was indeed a science, although a highly controversial one. Amajority expressed the opinion that this scienceappliesto other organisms, but has very limited application to the human species.

Is sociobiology a credible science? Should it be taught in colleges and universities? This topic has caused much discussion in the past, and debate has been vigorously renewed in recent years. According to Harvard zoologist E. O. Wilson, the leading proponent of sociobiology, it is a well-established discipline of biology and has been for over 25 years. The general public, however, and even most scientists have not been aware of its stature and growing influence until the last few years.
Since the major thesis on the subject, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis was published in 1975 by E. O. Wilson, he and others have outlined basic definitions and descriptions of sociobiology which suggest that much human behavior is programmed in genes we have inherited from other primates. According to Wilson (in a 1978 Smithsonian Debate with Harris, Professor of Anthropology at Columbia University), sociobiology involves the inheritance of all aspects of social behavior in all kinds of organisms. He believes that the behavioral characteristics of modern man con-

tinue to evolve and are passed on from generation to generation. There have been several interpretations or modifications of Wilson's definition. However, all of these involve the systematic study of the biological basis of all social behavior and, more specifically, the relationships between genes and culture. To paraphrase Lumsden and Wilson's (1981) work, this area of study is all about genes, culture, and evolution. Ray Bohlin (1981, p. 17), has noted that the understanding of sociobiology could be based on three concepts:
"First, human social patterns are said to be shaped by evolutionary processes acting on genes. Put another way, our genetic make-up influences our behavior and that behavior is subject to natural selection just as physical characteristics may be. Second, we must grasp what sociobiologist Robert Wallace, in his 1979 book, The Genesis Factor, calls areproductive imperative. This imperative implies that the ultimate goal of any organism, including the human organism, is to produce as many offspring as possible. Within the evolutionary system, the species strives to avoid extinction. It accomplishes this through survival and repro-

148

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

duction. The third concept is that, within Trivers (1977) further proposes that

evolutionary time, the individual ismeaningless. This is because species, not individuals, evolve. The individual reproduces and dies, but its genes persist into the next generation. Therefore, the genes

many cultural disciplines may be affected. He says that sooner or later political science, law, economics, psychology, and anthropology will be branches

become the driving force of the reproduc- of sociobiology. Conversely, and as ex-

tive imperative.

pected, there are numerous opponents

of sociobiology who denounce what

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

they call "so-so-biology" as a reactionary political doctrine disguised as sci-

In spite of the lack of widely disseminated information on the topic of sociobiology, those individuals professing some knowledge in this area are not without strong opinions. These opinions most often appear to center around the long-standing "nature vs. nurture" controversy or the roles played by heredity and environment in determining human behavior. According to Bohlin (1981), those who stress the biological factor (heredity) are often referred to as biological determinists. In 1851, Herbert Spencer suggested that starvation and

ence. Criticisms as summed up by biologist Roger Lewin (1981) and shared by others call attention to "a disturbingly loose fit between the model and the world it is meant to reflect." William Irons (1978), an anthropologist at Northwestern University, is very skeptical about whether culture can be modeled as a particulate phenomenon. He points out that people move between societies and change their behavior radically, which conflicts with the idea that their behavior is genetically guided in any important way.

poverty were nature's way of cleansing Because of these varying points of

society of the unfit and, in 1940, the Ger- view, it seemed appropriate to ascertain man writer Konrad Lorenz used his the- the knowledge of and opinions about so-

ories to call for eliminating certain parts ciobiology among college science proof the society deemed "undesirable." fessors who may have the major respon-

The environmentalists, on the other sibility for disseminating information in hand, of whom an extremist would be this area.

B. F. Skinner (1938), see human beings In the present study, a survey on so-

as extremely malleable. He maintains ciobiology was conducted at Michigan

that we need only to determine the kind State University. Professors in the de-

of society we desire and then create an partments of Anthropology, Social Sci-

environment that will foster it. Thisview ence, Sociology, Psychology, Natural

contrasts sharply with sociobiology. Science, and Zoology were sampled.

However, Lumsden and Wilson (1981), These departments were chosen be-

as principal proponents of sociobiology, cause of their closer relationships to so-

have alternately suggested that culture ciobiology. One hundred eleven ques-

can be viewed as a particulate phenome- tionnaires were sent out; 88 were

non with units called "culturgens" (e.g., returned, representing approximately

particular marriage customs, a religious an 80 per cent return rate. Individuals

belief, preference for sweet vs. bitter were requested to respond to ten ques-

tastes, etc.). These culturgens, they be- tions.

lieve, are under the influence of natural selection.

Table 1 is a summary of responses to the survey.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

QUESTION 1.
QUESTION 2. QUESTION 3. QUESTION 4. QUESTION 5. QUESTION 6.

TABLE 1
SURVEY ON ATTITUDES TOWARD AND KNOWLEDGE OF SOCIOBIOLOGY

Dr. E. O. Wilson's definition of sociobiology isthat itis astudy of allaspects of social behavior in allkinds of organisms up to and includinghuman beings. It is not aspecific theory about humanbehavior. The inheritance of these behavioral characteristics of modern man continues to evolve andpasses these characteristics from generation to generation.
1. Agree--15 (51) = 29.41% 2. Disagree--22 = 43.14% 3. Strongly agree--0 4. Strongly disagree--9 = 17.65% 5. Have no opinion or not sure--5 = 9.8%

Do you thinksociobiology is ascience, a discipline within biology?
1. Yes--31 (59) = 52.54% 2. No--19 = 32.20% 3. Not sure--9 = 15.25%

Do you thinksociobiology isa controversial area of study,asit applies to humans?
1. Yes--32 =72.73% 2. No--8 = 18.18% 3. Not sure--4 = 9.09%

List the names of prominent scientists withwhom you arefamiliar,whoare associated with sociobiology.
Responses generated a listing of 39 individuals. As expected, Wilson received most responses (22). A number of professors (13) did not know any prominent scientists in the field. Responses were such that, in most cases, only a few (approx. 1 to 2) professors listed the same scientists associated with sociobiology.

Do you believe the studyof sociobiology can be applied to humans,as it applies to other organisms, such as insects and birds?

1. Yes--19 = 39.58% 2. No--6 = 12.5% 3. Undecided--5 = 10.42% 4. To some extent--5 = 10.42%

5. Probably--5 = 10.42% 6. No comment--4 = 8.33% 7. Genetically determined--2 = 4.17% 8. Perhaps--2 = 4.17%

Do you know of any "humandata"which hasbeen compiled thatwould support sociobiology? If yes, please list the sources.
Most individuals did not know of any human data supporting sociobiology or very little or nonspecific. Those responding affirmatively suggested the data collected on birds, mammals, social insects, etc. may be analogous to humans. Furthermore, it was felt by 5 of the respondents that data on twins, physical and chemical alterations, including drugs and electrical stimuli, may support sociobiology.

E

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

QUESTION 7. QUESTION 8. QUESTION 9. QUESTION 10.

List any level(s) of social organization that islare similarfor humans andother animals. What level(s) of social organization would be different?
Most suggested that man shows some social grouping similar to other animals such as distinct territories, dominance, hierarchies, family units, tribes, cultural, religious, or political units. Some respondents didn't know of any levels or had no comment, while a few (5) respondents thought there were too many to list.
Do you think "innate" behavior iscommonin humans? In otherprimates?
Half of the respondents were neutral or did not know. Another large proportion was either very skeptical or did not think it applies to humans. A small number thought there are innate behavior forms such as sexual, protective, and maternal behavior, and that this idea of innate behavior may be a worthwhile concept if it can be experimentally demonstrated.
Do you think altruism exists in allprimates?
A major number of respondents agree that altruism exists to some degree in all primates. A number of individuals also felt that altruism is a human value. Some said that altruism could not be demonstrated in humans and others did not know if it could be demonstrated in primates at all.
Doesthe gene theory influence your ideas andconcepts of inheritance ofbehavior?
Most respondents said yes, the gene theory had some influence on their ideas of inheritance of human behavior. According to some, it provides very little, if any, evidence in humans or in higher primates. Very few responded by saying that the theory had no influence on human behavior.

i
I

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

152

BriefReports

Social Biology

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION numbers of responders who maintained

While over half (54.5 percent) of the respondents felt that sociobiology is alegitimate scientific discipline in biology, although controversial (72.7per cent), close to half of them (43.1 percent) disagreed with Wilson's actual definition of sociobiology. Reasons for the disagreement were not immediately clear, as a majority ofthe respondents felt that this concept could be applied to humans, at

that altruism is a human characteristic versus half who felt that this trait could not really be demonstrated in humans. Perhaps oneof the problems of altruism involves the inability to recognize this activity asa product of conscious behavior. Some humans mayhave a concept of aiding ailing individuals (both conspecific or not). Are other animals conscious of their "altruistic behavior"?

least to some extent, although for the Clearly, we have much tolearn about

most part they were not familiar with genetic factors affecting animal and so-

data on humans which would support cial behavior. David Barash (1982, p.

sociobiological ideas. There seemed to 86) says "there is not, at present, a sci-

be such ambivalence about innate be- ence of human sociobiology." Research

havior, since half were neutral or did not in this area is barely beginning, hesays,

know while a few thought "maybe" for and the results "tend to support the bi-

sexual, protective, and maternal behav- ases of those who doit."In his view, so-

ior. ciobiology allows scientists togobeyond

the nature-nurture controversy, since by

Similarly, responses about altruism now, everyone knows that both nature

were also mixed. While many felt that and nurture play important roles in de-

this individual self-sacrificial behavior velopment and ask why nature and nur-

that benefits the population as a whole ture interact the way they do (cited by

probably exists inall primates, aswellas Maya Pines, 1978).

in other species, there were about equal

REFERENCES

BARASH, D. 1982.Genes and destiny. Science Digest, March, p. 86.
BOLIN, R. 1981.Sociobiology: Cloned from the gene cult. Christ. Today 25: 15-19.
EVANS, R. I. 1975.Konrad Lorenz: Theman and his ideas. Harcourt-Brace Jovanovich, New York.
HARVEY, P. et al., 1947. Readings in sociobiology. W. H. Freeman & Co. San Francisco.
IRONS, W. G. et al., 1978. Evolutionary biology and human social organization. Duxbury Press, Scituate, Mass.
LEWIN, R. 1981. Cultural diversity tied togenetic differences. Science 212:908-10.
LUMSDEN, C. J., and E. O. WILSON. 1981.
Genes, mind, andculture. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
PINES, MAYA. 1978. Is sociobiology all wet? Psychol. Today, May, p. 23-24.

SKINNER, B. F. 1938. The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. AppletonCentury Company, New York.
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTE. 1978. Radio debate between E. O. Wilson and Marvin Harris; Ann Carroll, moderator. New York Times, February 26, 1978, p. 18.
SPENCER, H. 1851. The comparative psychology of men. Carnegie Institute, Washington, D.C.
TRIVERS, R. L. 1977. Why do you do what you do? Sociobiology: A new theory of behavior. Time Magazine, p. 38-42.
WALLACE, R. 1979.The genesis factor. Morrow, Inc., New York.
WILSON, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The new synthesis. Harvard University Press, Cambridge. . On human nature. Chap. 7. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

