Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Formation of the international association for statistical computing, an open association of the international statistical institute
To cite this article: (1977) Formation of the international association for statistical computing, an open association of the international statistical institute, Social Biology, 24:3, 253-253, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1977.9988291 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988291
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 24, No. 3

Communications

Formation of the International Association for Statistical Computing, an Open Association of the International Statistical Institute

253

This notice is to announce the formation of the International Association for Statistical Computing (IASC), a section of the International Statistical Institute. IASC will be open to membership to those interested in promoting the theory, methods, and practice of statistical computing. The objectives of the Association will be to foster interest and knowledge in effective statistical computing through international contacts among statisticians, computing professionals, organizations, institutions, governments, and the general public in different countries of the world.
The Association will pursue its objectives throughout the world with special attention to developing countries. It will promote collaborative efforts with international, national, regional, and other organizations and institutions having similar aims; it will foster evaluations of statistical computing techniques and programs and

will facilitate the exchange of computer programs and their documentation. The Association will arrange programs and meetings, particularly in conjunction with sessions of the International Statistical Institute. Many statisticians and computer experts have been working on an international cooperative basis toward the founding of the IASC, which will formally come into existence and have its inaugural meeting in December, 1977, during the 41st Session of the International Statistical Institute in New Delhi, India.
For further information, including details of membership, contact: International Statistical Institute, 428 Prinses Beatrixlaan, Voorburg, Netherlands. Annual individual member's dues structure is: (1) members from developed countries, $15 per year; and (2) members from developing countries who request a reduced rate, $7 per year.

Call for Papers for Open Peer Commentary Treatment in The Behavioral and Brain Sciences

The Behavioral and Brain Sciences (BBS), a new quarterly journal beginning publication in 1978, will provide open peer commentary treatment for appropriate submitted papers from any area of psychology, neuroscience, behavioral biology, or cognitive science. Modeled on Current Anthropology, the journal will circulate accepted papers to 50 commentators chosen by the referees and editors

from among the Board, Corresponding Associate Commentators, and appropriate specialists not affiliated with BBS, including those recommended by the author. Publication will consist of the joint appearance of the article, commentaries, and author's response. Any continuing commentaries and replies will appear in subsequent issues of the journal.
BBS is now calling for papers, as well as

