Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Phases in coping: The hypothesis and its implications
Arthur Falek & Sharon Britton
To cite this article: Arthur Falek & Sharon Britton (1974) Phases in coping: The hypothesis and its implications, Social Biology, 21:1, 1-7, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988084 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988084
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 15
View related articles Citing articles: 46 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Phases in Coping: The Hypothesis and Its Implications

^

tmm '

aeaa
MM

,

mJ

Arthur Falek and Sharon Britton
Human and Behavioral GeneticsResearch Laboratory, GeorgiaMental Health Institute, Atlanta, Georgia, and Departments of Psychiatry and Anatomy, Emory University, Atlanta,Georgia

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Huntington's disease is a dominantly inherited neurological disorder with a mean age of onset in the early 40's and progressive deterioration leading to death approximately 10 to 20 years following onset. The disease is inherited as an autosomal dominant with complete penetrance, so that each child of an affected parent has a SOper cent chance of inheriting the illness. Since there is no definitive method at present for the early detection or control of this disorder, all children of an affected parent are at risk. When such at-risk individuals observe the onset of the illness in near relatives, many display characteristic anxieties concerning their own potential for developing the disease.
Close work with families of patients with Huntington's disease in our laboratory, as well as the report by Pearson (1972), indicates that affected individuals display a complex pattern of coping similar to that observed in terminally ill cancer patients (Kubler-Ross, 1969). The similarity of these patterns of coping first led us to believe that the behavior displayed by persons affected with Huntington's disease was an attenuated form of the coping pattern observed in persons aware of their own imminent death.

Perusal of the literature reporting reactions to many forms of stress revealed that in addition to that evoked by imminent self-death, a consistent pattern of coping is exhibited by individuals in response to many stress-producing situations (Aldrich, 1963; Averill, 1968; Bard, 1952; Bozeman et al., 1955; Brewster, 1952; Chodoff et al., 1964; Fisher, 1960; Fried, 1963; Hamburg and Hamburg, 1953; Janis, 1958; Kennell et al., 1970; Kubler-Ross, 1969; Lifton, 1954; Lindemann, 1944; Parkes, 1965a, b; Solnit and Stach, 1961; Sutherland, 1952; Visotsky et al., 1961; Wiener, 1970; Wolfenstein, 1957; Wretmark, 1959). It is our purpose in this paper to describe this commonly observed pattern of coping responses and to propose a hypothesis based on the maintenance of a psychological steady state to explain its occurrence.
It must be recognized at the outset that an individual's reaction to a stress-producing situation will depend upon a constellation of interrelated variables including: age; sex; initial psychological stability; education; social and economic level; type, degree, and duration of the stress; simultaneously occurring stress situations; prior experience in coping with stress; and avail-

1

2

Falek and Britton

Social Biology-

ability of resources for dealing with the but appear to be general adaptation re-

stress. Thus, a good deal of diversity is actions to any situation of severe stress.

found in the literature describing responses In addition, the individual experiencing

to stress due to innumerable environmental the stress is often observed to experience

and biological variables.

all four responses and in the order given

However, in the midst of this diversity, (Bard, 1952; Bozeman et al., 19SS; Cogs-

four clearly identifiable response patterns well, 1967; Kennell et al., 1970; Lifton,

to stressful situations emerge. The four re- 1954; Parkes, 1965a), to repeat the pro-

sponses most commonly observed in studies gression in cyclic fashion with diminishing

of individuals under stress are: (1) shock intensity upon each repetition, or to fiuc-

and denial, (2) anxiety, (3) anger and/or tuate between two or more responses

guilt, and (4) depression. Studies surveyed (Cogswell, 1967; Kennell et al., 1970;

which report these responses are summa- Kubler-Ross, 1969; Parkes, 1965a). How

rized in Table 1. As can be seen in the does one explain these strikingly consistent

table, the basic emotional reactions of observations?

denial, anxiety, anger and/or guilt, and We propose that this sequence of cop-

depression occur in situations of self-dying, ing responses so often described in the

the death or loss of a loved one, severe literature is the phenotypic expression of

physical injury or illness, and environ- psychological mechanisms attempting to

mental stress. These basic response patterns reestablish the dynamic steady state. De-

seem not to be particular to the trauma, scriptions of psychological mechanisms of

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
REACTIONS COMMON TO VARIOUS STRESS-PRODUCING SITUATIONS

COMMONLY OBSERVED REACTIONS

TYPE or STRESS

Denial Anxiety Anger Depression Grief*

Self-dying

Dynamics of grief as applied to the dying; Schilder, 1951

Dynamics of grief as applied to the dying; Aldrich, 1963 . . X

Terminal cancer patients; Kubler-Ross, 1969

X

Bereavement Loss of loved ones in fire; Lindeman, 1944 Separation from therapist; Brewster, 19S2 Loss of child with leukemia; Bozeman et al., 19SS Birth of defective child; Solnit and Stach, 1961 Bereavement in psychiatric patients; Parkes, 1965a,6 Death of newborn infant; Kennell et al., 1970 Loss of chad with fatal illness; Wiener, 1970

X
X X X

Physical trauma Radical mastectomy; Bard, 19S2 Extensive cancer surgery; Sutherland, 19S2 Severe burn; Hamburg and Hamburg, 1953 Loss of hand; Fisher, 1960 Severe poliomyelitis; Visotsky et al., 1961 Rehabilitation with paraplegia; Cogswell, 1967

X X X X X X

Environmental trauma War-time imprisonment; Lifton, 19S4 Natural disasters (tornado); Wolfenstein, 19S7 Loss of home; Fried, 1963

X

... ... ...

... ... X

Xf X

X

... ... ... ... ... ... XX X
XX X XX X XXX

XX ... X XX
XX ... X

X X X X X X

XX XX ... ...

X X X

X X
X X X X
X

* The "grief response" is a commonly observed mourning reaction described by Lindemanf 1944, and Parkes, 1965a, which incorporates denial, anxiety, anger, and depression.
t Observed, but not reported as a separate stage.

Vol. 21, No. 1

Phases in Coping

3

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

adjustment and coping in terms of homeostatic or steady state mechanisms are now common in the literature (Engel, 19S3, 1960, 1962; Grinker, 1967; Menninger, 1954). The studies surveyed portray the behavioral expression of such mechanisms in real-life situations.
In order to function adequately, an individual must maintain a carefully balanced psychological and physiological system. Any disturbance in either of these systems creates a disturbance in the other and results in stress in the total organism. In this paper, we are only concerned with disruption to an individual's psychological system. An individual's psychological system consists of such factors as his self-concept, body image, social relations, occupational status, economic level, material belongings, physical environment, and so on. Disruption of any one of these factors disturbs the psychological equilibrium that has been established, and triggers mechanisms designed to reestablish the steady state.
However, before any behavioral adjustment can take place, the new information from the environment must be received and incorporated on both a cognitive and an emotional level. The individual must cognitively recognize that there is a disequilibrium which requires behavioral change. He must then emotionally experience himself as somehow different as a result of the change in his equilibrium. The four-part coping sequence described above is the behavioral expression of the ongoing process of cognitive and emotional incorporation of the trauma leading to readjustment.
Consider now the person experiencing the stress. In order to avoid any sudden and severe disruption of the psychological equilibrium which may destroy or incapacitate the system, the most immediate recourse is for the individual to maintain

the status quo by denial. The first response of the coping mechanism is shock and disbelief. Psychological mechanisms attempt to maintain the integrity of the personality by simply denying the stressful situation. Since the individual does not acknowledge the stress at either the cognitive or emotional level, he is not motivated at this point to initiate behavioral changes necessary to adjust to the new reality.
Denial may take many behavioral forms. The individual may appear temporarily stunned or dazed, refuse to accept the information given, insist there is some mistake, not comprehend what has been said, and so on. The denial mechanisms act as "shock absorbers" to reduce the impact of a sudden trauma and prepare the individual for cognitive acceptance of the situation. The duration of the denial period depends upon the individual and the circumstances, but is usually shortlived as reality-testing forces cognitive awareness upon the individual. In fact, this "shock phase" may often be so brief as to be missed in ordinary clinical observation, or it may be absent in situations where the trauma is introduced gradually rather than suddenly.
The second stage of the coping sequence is the reception of the cognitive input of the trauma and attempts to deal with the new situation on an intellectual level. It is in this stage that we see the various behavioral manifestations of anxiety and anger. The individual now perceives the change produced by the stress, but since he has not yet adjusted to this new reality, he experiences realistic fear. This fear is manifested as anxiety in one or more of its many forms: generalized nervousness, overactivity, irritability, headaches, fatigue, insomnia, loss of appetite, somatic complaints, and so on. In the stage of cognitive awareness the individual is distraught and may become panic-stricken. His anxiety is

4

Falek and Britton

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

a response to the fear of the cognitively perceived change in his psychological equilibrium, but he has not yet experienced his psychological equilibrium as changed on an emotional level. The stressful event has been incorporated on a cognitive level only.
During this period, the individual initiates intellectual activities directed toward reestablishing equilibrium. In his search for alternatives, he may, for example, seek new information which will help him to understand or perhaps to undo the new predicament. Basically, the individual is motivated to relieve anxiety, and in spite of the cognitively perceived change he hopes to return to the old status quo. He is striving for adjustment on an intellectual level.
Without the necessary emotional acceptance, such attempts at readjustment will result in failure. Frustration is experienced as intellectual maneuvers prove unsuccessful, and the individual becomes bitter and hostile. We now have an angry individual who sees his misfortune as the act of a cruel and uncaring world. In such a state, a person will openly exhibit hostility to those around, including friends, relatives, and medical personnel, without a rational basis for his antagonism. The anger may also be directed inwardly resulting in feelings of guilt. Both the guilt-ridden and the angry individual are attempting to resolve their conflict and frustration by seeking a responsible agent.
Up to this point, the individual has maintained the hope of returning to the formerly established steady state. As attempts at resolving the problem at the cognitive level repeatedly fail, hope diminishes and the individual is faced with the emotional burden of the trauma. Russell Davies (1964) describes depression as habituation to repeated frustration and reports a behavioral sequence from anxiety to depression observed in individuals frus-

trated in an experimental task. In a similar sense, the individual attempting to resolve this stress on an intellectual level only will experience repeated frustration as reinforcement is not received. As habituation occurs, the typical symptoms of depression appear. The individual appears sad, withdrawn, and may exhibit a lack of interest in his environment and usual activities. As with denial, anxiety, and anger, depression is a normal phase of the coping sequence necessary for eventual readjustment. Experiencing the change in psychological equilibrium at the emotional level ushers in the beginnings of more appropriate behavioral change.
Since the normal person cannot function in a continued state of depression and recognizes that his old patterns will not resolve the problem, he will begin trying new behaviors in an attempt to adjust to his current situation. He is now approaching a realistic adjustment since his behavioral changes emanate from an emotional as well as a cognitive realization of the stress. For stressful events of minimal intensity, adjustment to a steady state will require only a small degree of behavioral change. For events of greater intensity, it is probable that initial behavioral changes will only approximate the necessary behavior for the establishment of a new psychological steady state. The individual may experience temporary frustrations as he tries out his new behavior and revert back to an earlier phase such as denial or anger. He may repeat the entire coping sequence a number of times or fluctuate between two predominant phases. The characteristic pattern an individual displays will depend largely upon his previous coping experiences.
As the individual makes closer approximations to the behavior necessary for the establishment of a steady state, the intensity and the length of time spent in each

Vol. 21, No. 1

Phases in Coping

5

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

of the coping phases will diminish. As the sequence is repeated with diminishing intensity, the individual is eased into a new psychological equilibrium which can then be maintained because it has been gradually incorporated on an intellectual and emotional level. This is the protective function of the steady-state mechanism in the psychological system, that is, to allow the individual to gradually establish new equilibriums in his constant adjustments to the stresses of life. The application of the steady-state hypothesis to clinically observed coping reactions in individuals under stress explains the consistent appearance of the denial, anxiety, anger, and depression sequence in such individuals, and the phenomena of cycling and fluctuating between these responses with diminishing intensity.
The coping sequence as described in this report is basically similar to the "grief process" as first reported by Lindemann (1944) and later fully delineated by Averill (1968) as an evolved biological adaptive mechanism. Many of the studies reported in Table 1 indicated that the individuals under observation exhibited a reaction to stress that was similar to the "grief process." The "grief process" has been commonly accepted in the literature as the typical reaction to the death or loss of a loved one. More recently, research in the subareas of the general field of grief and bereavement has led to the idea of a "separation reaction" as being the more general phenomenon in which grief or bereavement reactions are but one type (Volkart, 19S7).
It can be argued that the coping sequence, as described here, is the more general phenomenon in which separation or grief reactions are but one type. It is probable that the coping sequence is more readily observed in situations of separation or bereavement because of the more uni-

form and universal nature of this particular form of stress. It is our opinion that the coping sequence, as described here and as explained by the steady-state hypothesis, is a universal reaction to any change in the established steady state great enough to produce stress in the organism and occurs from infancy through adulthood in response to minor as well as major traumas.
The basic and applied research implications which can be formulated from this coping sequence-steady state hypothesis, are potentially unlimited. From the viewpoint of mental health, an understanding of the sequence of emotional responses that psychologically normal individuals exhibit in coping with new, infrequently met, as well as recurrent daily situations, will help medical personnel, psychologists, social workers, clergymen, and others involved in counseling situations to understand the responses in individuals going through trauma-induced coping sequences.
An evaluation of the coping sequence in persons with specific diagnoses will be useful in order to determine whether their disorder is a consequence of an inability to progress through the coping sequence in a normal manner. It may be that an inability to progress after a period of time from one stage to another is the pattern of the psychotic individual. Psychosis may develop gradually after repeated accumulation of minor stresses for which psychological equilibrium was not reestablished as well as suddenly following the failure to reestablish equilibrium after a major trauma. If an inability to progress through the coping sequence is a biological function that shows hereditary variability, it would lend further support for the genetic basis of specific mental disorders (Gottesman and Shields, 1972; Kallmann, 1953; Rosenthai, 1970). An ability to progress through these stages, but an inability to establish satisfactory new behavioral pat-

6

Falek and Britton

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

terns, may well be characteristic of the neurotic.
From a developmental point of view, it is interesting to note that Spitz (1946) observed a syndrome which he called "anaclitic depression" in 6 to 9 month old infants separated from their mothers. His syndrome bears a remarkable resemblance to the "grief process." From an evolutionary point of view, Kaufman and Rosenblum (1967) and Harlow et al., (1971) noted that when monkeys were separated from their mothers, they exhibited a pattern of behavior similar to Spitz's "anaclitic depression." There is ample evidence for the occurrence of grief-like reactions in apes and monkeys (Averill, 1968). If a similar response pattern to stress is exhibited by human infants and primates other than man, the question arises as to whether the coping sequence is triggered by a genetically controlled innate behavioral mechanism. AverilPs (1968) astute analysis of grief supports such a possibility. The steady-state hypothesis allows for such a possibility, and as such is support for Skinner's (1971) hypothesis that the behavioral functions of man are programmed.
Comparative studies of concordance rates between monozygotic and dizygotic twins coping with similar traumatic situations may be useful in identifying the hereditary component. Investigation of the length and type of response for each phase of the coping sequence in a series of twin partners coping with a similar stressful event should be of value in a detailed genetic investigation of this newly identified behavioral response pattern. Experimentally induced stressful situations similar to those conducted by Davies (1964) and Korchin and colleagues (1960) should also be employed in twin studies to further help in the identification of the hereditary component as well as elucidate some of

the physiological correlates of the observed behavioral and emotional responses.
Checklists or self-report inventories may be useful in more naturalistic settings. For example, a checklist of emotional responses as part of a patient's hospital record would enable the investigator to more closely observe coping patterns in a variety of illnesses. It should also be noted that while all studies (Table 1) report observations so similar that we are able to draw conclusions of a common coping sequence in spite of the diversity of the stress situations reported, there are individuals who may vary from the specific pattern presented here. Studies need to be conducted to investigate the bases for such differences.
The application of the steady-state hypothesis to clinically observed coping reactions in individuals under stress explains the consistent appearance of denial, anxiety, anger, and depression in such individuals, and the phenomena of cycling and fluctuating among these responses with diminishing intensity. We should like to stress that the universality of this hypothesis and the possibility of its genetic basis makes it a valuable area for research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank J. H. Bruell, University of Texas; R. Craddick, Georgia State University; S. Einstein, Jerusalem; L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling and J. Zubin, New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University; J. L. Fuller, State University of New York, Binghampton; S. T. Ginsberg, S. Jaffee, D. G. Miles, and F. A. Quadfasel, Georgia Mental Health Institute; B. C. Holland and R. S. Ward, Emory University; J. S. Pearson, Witchita Clinic; and J. P. Scott, Bowling Green State University.
The coping pattern as a response to everyday stresses was first recognized when one of the authors (AF) observed the sequence of reactions to events of major proportions displayed by his son James in dealing with suddenly remembered homework for elementary school one Sunda" evening after a weekend during which its existence was often denied.

Vol. 21, No. 1

Phases in Coping

7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ALDRICH, C. K. 1963. The dying patient's grief. KORCHIN, S. J., and M. HERZ. 1960. Differential

J. Amer. Med.Assoc. 184:329.

effects of "shame" and "disintegrative" threats

AVERILL, J. R. 1968. Grief: Its nature and sig- on emotional and adrenocortical functioning.

nificance. Psychol. Bull. 70:721-748.

Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 2:640-651.

BARD, M. 19S2. Thesequence of emotional reac- KUBLER-ROSS, E. 1969. On death and dying.

tions in radical mastectomy patients. Publ. Macmillan, New York.

Hlth. Rep. 67:1144.

LIFTON, R. J. 1954.Home by ship: Reaction

BOZEMAN, M. F., C. E. ORBACH, and A. M. patterns of American prisoners of war repa-

SUTHERLAND. 1955. Psychological impact of triated from North Korea. Amer. J. Psychiat. cancer and its treatment. III. The adaptation 110:732. of mothers to the threatened loss of their chil- LINDEMANN, E. 1944.Symptomatology and mandren through leukemia. Part I. Cancer 8:1-19. agement of acute grief. Amer. J. Psychiat.101: BREWSTER, H. 19S2. Separation reaction in psy- 141.

chosomatic disease and neurosis. Psychosom. MENNINGER, K. A. 1954.Psychological aspects of

Med. 14:154.

the organism under stress. Part I. Thehomeo-

CHODOFF, P., B. FRIEDMAN, and D. A. HAMBURG. static regulatory function of the ego. J. Amer.

1964. Stress, defenses and coping behavior: Psychoanal. Ass. 2:67.

Observations in parents of children with malig- PARKES, C. M. 1965a. Bereavement and mental

nant disease. Amer. J. Psychiat. 120:743.

illness. Part I. A clinical study of the grief of

COGSWELL, B. 1967. Rehabilitation of the para- bereaved psychiatric patients. Brit. J.Med.

plegic: Processes of socialization. Soc. Inq. 37: Psychol. 38: 1. 11. . 19656. Bereavement and mental illness. DAVIES, E. B. (ed.). 1964. Depression. Proceed- Part II. A classification of bereavement reac-

ings of the Symposium held at Cambridge, tions. Brit. J. Med. Psychol. 38:13.

September 22-26, 1959. Cambridge University PEARSON, J. 1973. Behavioral aspects of Hunt-

Press, Cambridge.

ington's Chorea. In A. Barbeau, T. N. Chase,

ENGEL, G. L. 1953. Homeostasis, behavioral ad- G. W. Paulson (eds.), Advances in neurology, justment andtheconcept of health and disease. Vol. I. Raven Press, New York. In R. Grinker (ed.), Mid-century psychiatry. ROSENTHAL, D. 1970. Genetic theory and abnor-

Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill.

mal behavior. McGraw-Hill, New York.

. 1962. Psychological development in health SCHILDER, P. 1951. Psychotherapy. W. W. Norton,

and disease. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.

New York.

FISHER, S. H. 1960. Psychiatric considerations of SKINNER, B. F. 1971.Beyond freedom and dig-

hand disability. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehab. 41: nity. A. A. Knopf, New York.

62. SOLNIT, A., and M. H. STACH. 1961. Mourning FRIED, M. 1963. Grieving for a lost home. In and birth of a defective child. Psychoanal.

L. J. Duhl (ed.), The urban condition. Basic Stud. Chid. 16:523.

Books, New York.

SPITZ, R. A. 1946. Anaclitic depression: An in-

GOTTESMAN, I., and J. SHIELDS. 1972. Schizo- quiry into the genesis of psychiatric conditions

phrenia and genetics. Academic Press, New in early childhood. II. Psychoanal. Stud. Chid.

York.

2:313.

GRINKER, R. R. (ed.). 1967. Toward a unified SUTHERLAND, A. 1952. Psychological impact of

theory of human behavior. Basic Books, New cancer surgery. Publ. Hlth. Rep. 67:1139-1143.

York.

VISOTSKY, H. J., D. A. HAMBURG, M. E. GROSS,

HAMBURG, D. A., and B. HAMBURG. 1953. Adap- and B. Z. LEBOVITS. 1961. Coping behavior

tive problems and mechanisms in severely under extreme stress. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 5:

burned patients. Psychiatry 16:1.

423.

HARLOW, H. F., M. K. HARLOW, and S. J. SUOMI. VOLKART, E. H. 1957. Bereavement and mental

1971. From thought to therapy: Lessons from health. In A. H. Leighton, J. A. Clausen, and

a primate laboratory. Amer. Sci. 59:538.

R. N. Wilson (eds.), Social psychiatry. Basic

JANIS, IRVING. 1958. Psychological stress. John Books, New York.

Wiley and Sons, New York.

WIENER, J. M. 1970. Reaction of the family to

KALLMANN, F. J. 1953. Heredity in health and the fatal illness of a child. In B. Schoenberg,

mental disorder. W. W. Norton, New York.

A. C. Carr, D. Peretz and A. H. Kutscher

KAUFMAN, C. I., and L. A. ROSENBLUM. 1967. (eds.), Loss and grief: Psychological manage-

Depression in infant monkeys separated from ment in medical practice. Columbia Univ.

their mothers. Science 155:1030-1031.

Press, New York.

KENNELL, J. H., H. SLYTER, and M. H. KLAUS. WOLFENSTEIN, M. 1957.Disaster. The Free Press,

1970. The mourning response of parents to the Glencoe,Ill.

death of a newborn infant. New Eng. J.Med. WRETMARK, G. 1959. A study in grief reactions.

283:344.

Acta Psychiat. Neurol. Scand. 33:292.

