Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Defining and measuring the supply of children: Some anthropological considerations
Sarah F. Harbison
To cite this article: Sarah F. Harbison (1983) Defining and measuring the supply of children: Some anthropological considerations, Social Biology, 30:1, 32-40, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988514 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988514
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Defining and Measuring the Supply of Children: Some Anthropological Considerations

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Sarah F. Harbison
Population Issues Research Center Pennsylvania State University University Park, Pennsylvania

ABSTRACT: Recent versions of the economic theory of fertility have attempted to make the framework more generally applicable to all types of populations through an explicit treatment of supply considerations in combination with an analysis of the determinants of demand. Easterlin has suggested that the supply of children to an individual couple is determined by biological constraints in combination with the Davis-Blake intermediate variables and with mortality patterns. However, anthropological studies of household structure, fertility, adoption, and migration point to a broader definition of the supply of children and to a more dynamic view of the ways in which supply and demand for household members are adjusted over the life-cycle of the household.

Over the past several decades, research on the economics of fertility has proliferated. Early studies (Liebenstein, 1957,1974; Becker, 1960) emphasized the demand for children, pointing out that demand for children, as for any commodity, is determined by income, price, and tastes. Of these three factors, the economists have paid the most attention to income and prices, assuming for the most part that tastes remained constant. Numerous studies have evaluated the impact on fertility of various measures of income and the costs of children relative to other goods.
This demand-oriented approach has been criticized by many as applying only to modernized, contracepting populations and not to the typical less developed country (LDC).
In an attempt to make economic models of fertility more generally relevant, Easterlin (1975) and his colleagues (Easterlin et al., 1980) have developed an expanded economic framework which includes supply considerations as well as demand factors.

A more comprehensive economic framework remains the best point of departure for systematic fertility arfalysis. Such a framework, however, must be able to include the principal concepts of demographers, sociologists, and other scholars of human fertility, and it must be relevant to fertility behavior in a wide range of circumstances, past and present--to the trends, differentials, and fluctuations in fertility observed throughout human history (Easterlin, 1975, p. 54).
According to Easterlin, the supply (or production) of children in a noncontracepting population is determined by biological constraints on fertility in combination with mortality, morbidity, nutrition, and the "intermediate variables" (Davis and Blake, 1956). He suggests that in the course of modernization there is a shift from supply-constrained fertility to demand-constrained fertility. In other words, "the process of modernization alters not the rationality of the individual, but the nature of the problem from one of having too few children to one of having too many" (Easterlin, 1975 p. 54). In the early

32

Vol.30, No.1

Supply of Children

33

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

stages of development, fertility is supply the unit within which maximization oc-

constrained by Cn (supply), with de- curs, Easterlin uses "couple" inter-

mand (or Cd) above it. As development changeably with "household" (Eas-

proceeds, supply may exceed demand terlin, 1975, p. 54-55). For example,

and is equated to it through contracep- Easterlin uses "the total number of sur-

tion (Easterlin, 1975,pp. 54-53). Excess viving children to a representative mar-

demand gives way to excess supply. ried couple as the principal dependent

The various components of the de- variable" (Easterlin, 1975, p. 54). It

mand for children, including both values may seem somewhat strange to suggest

(psychological and economic) and costs that the unit of production (and hence

(production and consumption) have the appropriate unit of fertility analysis)

been analyzed and debated in eco- is other than the individual couple.

nomic, anthropological, and psycholog- However, cultural institutions such as

ical literature (Arnold et al., 1975; Hof- adoption, fosterage (see Carroll, 1970,

fman and Hoffman, 1973; Mueller, and Brady, 1976, for excellent reviews),

1973; Nag, 1972; and others). While and kinship obligations expand the ap-

there are still important disagreements propriate unit of analysis to the ex-

about this topic, the issues have been tended family, and to the larger society.

widely discussed and differences in in- Focusing on births to an individual feterpretation made clear. The concept of male or to a couple ignores one of the the supply of children, however, has not major characteristics of many tradi-

been so thoroughly scrutinized.

tional and developing societies. Individ-

The purpose of this paper is to con- uals frequently live in households com-

sider sociocultural, demographic, and prised of extended families of one type

economic factors related to the supply of or another. The household, typically

children in traditional or premodern part of a larger unit such as the lineage

populations and to discuss the implica- or clan, is the unit within which re-

tions of this essentially anthropological sources, including children, are pro-

literature for the Easterlin model and duced, allocated, and shared. Further-

economic models of fertility in general. more, this household unit is linked to

This review will focus on four issues: the other such units in the society through

appropriate unit of analysis; the source ties of kinship, marriage, and other cul-

of supply; the time-frame for the study turally determined reciprocal obliga-

of supply; and the micro (or family) tions.

mechanisms for the adjustment of sup- Kinship systems may expand the ap-

ply within the framework of a macro (or propriate unit of analysis by the way in

societal) population equilibrium.

which terms are assigned to various cat-

egories of relatives. For example,

UNIT OF ANALYSIS

Hoebel (1960, p. 23) points out that a Cheyenne man would call the children

Implicit in the economic framework of his brothers and male cousins by the

proposed by Easterlin is the assumption same kinship terms as his own children.

that the appropriate unit of analysis in This identification with the same kinship

the study of both supply and demand is term does not imply that there are no

the individual couple. Although he does differences between a man's biological

refer to the household and the family as offspring and the children of his brother.

34

Harbison

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

The term does, however, imply certain financialand behavioral obligations on both sides. As Robert Lowie pointed out, "if a term embraces a number of individuals, the probability is that the speaker is linked to all of them by the same set of mutual duties and claims, though their intensity may vary with the closeness of the relationship" (1968, p. 39). Kinship systems of this sort have actually been widespread in the history of populations (see Bohannan and Middleton, 1968) and imply a broadening of the concept of supply of children.
Easterlin's assumption that the nuclear couple is the appropriate unit of analysis is brought further into question by the wide variability in marital arrangements and household structure documented by sociologists and anthropologists. For example, Blake (1961) has demonstrated the depressing effect of unstable unions in Jamaica on fertility. Davis and Blake (1956) have outlined the effects of various types of family structure on fertility, with particular emphasis on those factors which promote high fertility. Gray and Gulliver (1964) present a collection of African studies dealing with aspects of matrilineage, polygyny, residence patterns, and the structure of the family. These studies, among many others, indicate that there is wide variability in the definition of the family group, in the cultural definition of who children belong to, and in the sociocultural definition of rights and obligations of various categories of relatives to children.
There has been considerable debate in the literature concerning the impact of extended family structure on fertility (Nag, 1962; Davis and Blake, 1956; Lorimer, 1954; Burch and Gendell, 1971), but this is not the main concern here. Rather the importance of taking

variability in family structure into account when attempting to evaluate the utility of economic models of fertility for developing populations is emphasized. Burch and Gendell's (1971) methodological suggestions are relevant here:
It will be essential to distinguish between coresidence and kin interaction, to define more carefully the various types of family structure, to keep the time reference for fertility (current or cumulative) congruent with that of family structure (crosssectional or longitudinal), to take intoaccount marriage patterns, and last but hardly least, to be more alert to thepossibility of contrary causal factors (Burch and Gendell, 1971, p. 102).
SOURCE OF SUPPLY
Given these brief remarks about the complex networks of families, kinship ties, and social obligations that are characteristic of traditional societies, the suggestion that it is not the individual woman who is the sole source of supply of children may not seem so surprising. Although Easterlin assumes that supply of children to the household is determined by the physiological capacity of the couple to reproduce, combined with social customs which determine age at marriage and other exposure variables, this assumption is not appropriate in many populations. If the extended household is the subsistence unit within which labor and goods are allocated and the demand for children determined, then it is the reproductive potential of all of the women living in the household which represents the internal source of supply of children to that household.
In addition to the births of the several women of reproductive age living in a household, children may be acquired by adoption and fosterage. Easterlin mentions this in passing (1975, p. 56) but as-

Vol. 30, No. 1

Supply of Children

35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

sumes it is "quantitatively unimport- families of 'excess' children, and to en-

ant." Actually it is a widespread practice sure the existence of a male heir" (1977,

in many traditional and modern soci- p. 10). Although adoption varies in im-

eties, and the advantages of the practice portance among societies, Marion Levy

have been well documented:

has suggested "some form of adoption is

Viewed from the perspective of emotional, social, and economic situations which motivate people to adopt children, adoption is a multipurpose social mecha-

universal in all known societies" (1966, p. 425).
Adoption as an alternative form of group recruitment serves multiple func-

nism with which people may implement their needs and designs through relationships with their kinsmen. Adoption may be to acquire children and to relieve parents of the burden of their children's support. Adoption can be used to provide

tions. Silverman (1970, p. 13) has pointed out that "culture copes with the insufficiencies of nature." Where there is a "gap" in the desired household age structure, adoption may be used to rem-

children with parents and siblings. Adoption may be used to acquire land or taro plots and to withhold them from another, to acquire heirs, and to establish, maintain, or sever social relationships with kinsmen and to promote change. It may

edy the situation. Numerous welldocumented studies indicate that adoption works in this way (Brady, 1976; Carroll, 1970). Carroll points out that there is a demonstrated correlation "be-

be a means of acquiring prestige, political support, financial credit, labor, or emotional succor (Lieber, 1970, p. 203).

tween the rate of adoption and the rate of infecundity" (1970, p. 11). In a study of the Nukuro, Carroll also found that

In other words, adoption provides an additional way of recruiting household members, augmenting the number of births to the female members of the household with additional children.

adoption was related to the failure of the female to bear a child: "all childless married couples who had been married fiveyears or more had adopted at least one child" (1970, p. 121).

Contrary to what Easterlin suggests, Adoption may be used to replace in-

the practice of adoption seems to have fants and children who have died, to ac-

been widespread throughout history in quire children of a desired age, or to re-

societies with many different types of so- lieve parents of too many children.

cial organization. The prevalence of Carroll has suggested that infertility is

adoption has been documented in Af- not the only explanation of high adop-

rica, New Guinea (Lorimer, 1954; tion rates: "many people adopt other

Ware, 1977), China (Wolf, 1980), Po- peoples' children after their own have

lynesia (Brady, 1976; Carroll, 1970; grown up, or to complete a family with

Mead, 1930), the Caribbean (Clarke, young children of a particular sex, or to

1966; Blake, 1961), and Japan (Davis, substitute for a deceased child" (1970,

1963; Hanley, 1977; Lee, 1977). In eval- p. 12). In addition to broadening the

uating the importance of adoption in source of supply of household members,

Tokugawa, Japan, Lee points out the adoption may serve numerous social

widespread practice of adoption: "Com- and political purposes as well. The crea-

bining data from four villages, there tion of political alliances (Brady, 1976),

were almost half as many adoptions as the fulfilling of kinship obligations, and

marriages. The adoptions were used to the adjustment of household size to

compensate for child deaths, to divest changing resources are all possible func-

36

Harbison

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

tions of adoption. As Brady (1976, p. 271) has pointed out, "by creating new or reinforcing existing kinship relations, adoption actualizes or extends the range of sociability, resource sharing, and population survival."
In contrast to Easterlin's assumption that the supply of children to a household is determined by the number of births to an individual woman combined with infant mortality, it seems clear that in many traditional societies the supply of children to a household is determined by the age and fertility patterns of the women of the household and infant mortality patterns, as well as the ability of the household to acquire infants and children from outside sources. This ability is determined by the kinship system and social, political, and economic status of the household in the context of a particular cultural system.
THE TIME-FRAME FOR THE STUDY OF SUPPLY
The analysis of the demographic structure of the household requires a consideration of biological, social, and ecological factors. Individuals have babies not only to have babies, but to have children, young adults, and eventually adults who may (or may not) remain within the household. In traditional societies, a particular household structure is desired as well as a certain number of births. If this is the case, then the appropriate time frame for fertility analysis (including both supply and demand factors) is the life-cycle of the household. At this point it is virtually impossible to discuss supply factors independent of demand factors.
An ecological-demographic approach to these issues suggests that at each stage in the life-cycle of the house-

hold, supply of personnel must be adjusted to the labor requirements and to the social and economic resources of the household. In any society there will be differences among households in both the supply of and demand for children, even if modern methods of contraception are absent. Differences among households in the age distribution and fecundity of married women, as well as differential requirements for supply in households of different economic and social status, can motivate transfers of infants and children of various ages.
Adjustment of household structure includes both recruitment when new members are needed and removal of surplus members. The mechanisms of adjustment vary for different age and sex groups at different stages in the life cycle of the household. Infants can be provided to the household either by birth or by adoption. Excess infants may be put up for adoption or, in some societies, may be killed. As children grow older, losses through mortality may be replaced through adoption and fosterage. Typically, as children become young adults, some household members are removed by the process of migration or marriage. Hooper summarizes the development process of the household and the role that adoption and migration play in Tahiti:
Having raised, fed, and cared for their children while they were young and helpless, the parents can expect their children to repay the obligation in kind as the children establish their own marital unions. This obligation falls equally upon all children, yet not all of them can remain within the household after they have established their own marital unions. Some will undoubtedly leave the community altogether, particularly those who belong to sibling groups who do not have land. Others settle within the community, either in new households, or in those to

Vol. 30, No. 1

Supply of Children

37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

which their spouses already belong. Yet at least one must remain within the natal household, bringing in his or her spouse, so that the household acquires the three generational span which it will maintain until the death of the members of the older generation. . . . In Maupiti, where the emigration of young people is so common, the adoption of grandchildren is a mechanism through which the economically necessary sequence of household development is maintained (Hooper, 1970, p. 68).
In addition to planning for the current and future labor force needs of the household, social obligations must be provided for as well. For example, in many traditional societies, daughters are exchanged among lineages for marriage. "Adoption provides a means for obtaining women for subgroups within a lineage who have no daughters" (Brady, 1976, p. 282). In addition, son survivorship provides motivation for acquiring, through birth or adoption, a male child who will come of age at the appropriate time. The main lesson of all this for modeling supply aspects of fertility is that births, rights to adopt, and "specific obligations to give up children in adoption are merely part of more general obligations between certain categories of kin: this seems evident in all societies that practice adoption on a large scale" (Carroll, 1970, p. 14).
Thus, the balance between Cj (demand for children) and Cn (supply) is a dynamic one which may shift over time. The determinants of demand are diverse, including value and cost of children, size of the family holdings, family structure, kinship structure and obligations, demand for labor within the household labor force, relative status of the household within the larger society, and preferences and values associated with family size. Any one or more of

these factors may shift at a particular time. Adoption is one possible adjustment mechanism:
Adoption is an adaptive mechanism for equitably distributing people relative to the variable requirements for personnel that domestic and descent groups are likely to develop in the course of exploiting their physical and cultural environments over time (Brady, 1976, p. 271).
In other words, adoption is a resource management strategy. There must be fairly strong adoptive advantages to the practice because, as Hooper (1970) has pointed out in his review of Polynesian populations, adoption is extremely widespread, being found in a wide variety of social and economic conditions. It is common in relatively wealthy as well as poorer communities and it is "common among the urban wage laborers of Papeete and the peasant communities of the outer islands" (Hooper, 1970, p. 66). The flexibility that adoption provides the household to expand or contract in time of greater or lesser personnel needs and greater or lesser resources is an obvious advantage.
MICRO ADJUSTMENTS AND MACRO EQUILIBRIUM
The Easterlin framework assumes that each household attempts to reach its own fertility equilibrium such that demand and supply are equated. Thus when supply constraints result in relatively low fertility on the average, households do not contracept and excess demand exists. Similarly, at a later point in development, "a household wishing to reduce family size must necessarily adopt some technique of fertility limitation" (Easterlin, 1975, p. 56). As we have seen, this view is too narrow

38

Harbison

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

and ignores the exchanges among households in children which routinely occur in all societies, but particularly in premodern ones. These exchanges can be presumed to allocate children from households with excess supply to ones with excess demand. In other words it is not necessary that all households begin with an equilibrium situation (supply= demand), only that society as a whole be capable of achieving such an equilibrium after the redistribution or transfer mechanisms have come into play. Thus, the concept of a "market" for children (or family members) in the society as a whole is relevant.
In this larger context, some households are "buyers" and others are "sellers." A middle-class peasant farmer who lacks sons can adopt one, buy one, or have a daughter marry one. This can occur as well even if natural sons exist but more family labor is desired. Poor landless families can get rid of "excess" fertility by selling, loaning out, or giving away children to relatives or families with excess demand. If we think of children as a marketable good, then a household can always obtain its optimum fertility (or family age-sex structure).
This logic suggests that where it is possible for family units to trade in the existing overall supply of children, then the aggregated demand and supply must be equated and the market cleared. To think of an overall excess demand for children is no more helpful than to think of premodern societies as having an excess demand for modern consumer goods or any other given commodity.
The crucial point is that in all societies, traditional and modern, there are biological and sociocultural mechanisms which adjust supply and demand. The adjustment mechanisms occur within

the household, which forms the link between individual behavior and needs and the larger society. There is a wide range of mechanisms available to any given household for the purpose of increasing or decreasing household personnel of all ages.
The term "multiphasic response," used by Davis (1963) to describe the various factors which contributed to the rapid fertility decline in Japan after World War II, is relevant here. Abortion, contraception, delayed marriage, and migration were all a part of the multiphasic response. Davis suggests that "families tended to use every demographic means possible to maximize their new opportunities and avoid lossof status. An understanding of this process in population theory has been hindered by a failure to see the multiphasic character of the response . . ." (Davis, 1963, p. 366).
SUMMARY
Although Easterlin assumes that contraception is the most important way in which supply is adjusted to demand, a review of anthropological and sociological literature indicates that adoption, marriage patterns, and migration, as well as variations in kinship systems may also be used to influence the supply of children. These mechanisms become more evident when supply is analyzed in the context of the life-cycle of the household.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to Dr. Thelma Baker, Dr. Warren Robinson, and Dr. David Shapiro, for helpful comments on an early draft to this paper. Useful suggestions for revisions were made by several reviewers.

Vol. 30, No. 1

Supply ofChildren
REFERENCES

39

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

BECKER, G. 1960. An economic theory offertil-

continuity. Routledge and Kegan Paul,

ity analysis, p. 209-231. In Demographic and economic change in developed countries. National Bureau of Economic Research. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton.

London.
HANLEY, SUSAN B. 1977. The influence of eco-
nomic and social variables on marriage and fertility in eighteenth andnineteenth cen-

ARNOLD, F. etal. 1975.Thevalue of children: a cross national study. East-West Pop. Inst., Honolulu.

tury Japanese villages. In R. D.Lee (ed.), Population patterns in the past. Academic Press, New York.

BLAKE, JUDITH. 1961. Family structure in Ja- HOEBEL, E. ADAMSON. 1960. The Cheyennes, maica. The social context of reproduction. Indians of the Great Plains. Holt, Rhinehart

The Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois.

and Winston, New York.

BOHANNAN, P., and J. MIDDLETON 1968. Kin- HOFFMAN, L. W., and M. L. HOFFMAN. 1973.

ship andsocial organization. TheNatural

The value of children to parents. In J.T.

History Press, New York.

Fawcett (ed.), Psychological perspectives

BRADY, IVAN (ed.). 1976. Transactions inkin-

on population. Basic Books, New York.

ship. Univ. ofHawaii Press, Honolulu.

HOOPER, ANTHONY. 1970. Adoption in the So-

. 1976. Adaptive engineering: An over- ciety Islands. InV. Carroll (ed.), Adoption

view of adoption in Oceania. In I. Brady

in Eastern Oceania. Univ. ofHawaii Press,

(ed.), Transactions in kinship. Univ. of Ha- Honolulu.

waii Press, Honolulu.

KINGSTON, M. H.1980. China men. Ballantine

BURCH, T., and M. GENDELL. 1971. Extended

Books, New York.

family structure and fertility: Some concep- LEE, R. L. (ed.). 1977. Population patterns in

tual andmethodological issues. InS. Polgar

the past. Academic Press, New York.

(ed.), Culture and population. Schenkman LEIBENSTEIN, H. 1957. Economic backward-

Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.

ness andeconomic growth: Studies in the

CALDWELL, JOHN. 1977. The persistence of high fertility. Dept. ofDemography, Australian

theory ofeconomic development. JohnWiley and Sons, New York.

National University, Canberra.

. 1974. An interpretation of the eco-

CARROLL, V. (ed.). 1970. Adoption in Eastern

nomic theory of fertility: Promising path or

Oceania. Univ. ofHawaii Press, Honolulu.

blind alley. J. Econ. Lit. 13(June):457-479.

. 1970. Adoption on Nukuro. In V. Car- LEVY, M. 1966.Modernization and thestruc-

roll (ed.), Adoption in Eastern Oceania. ture of societies. Princeton Univ. Press,

Univ. ofHawaii Press, Honolulu.

Princeton.

. 1970. What does adoption mean? InV. LIEBER, M.D. 1970. Adoption on Kapinga-

Carroll (ed.), Adoption in Eastern marangi. In V. Carroll (ed.), Adoption in

Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu. Eastern Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press,

CLARKE, E. 1966. My mother who fathered me.

Honolulu.

Allen and Unwin, London.

LORIMER, FRANK. 1954. Culture andhuman fer-

DAVIS, K. 1963. The theory of change and re- tility. UNESCO, Paris.

sponse in modern demographic history. LOWIE, ROBERT. 1968.Relationship terms. In

Pop. Index 29(4):345-366. DAVIS, K., andJ. BLAKE. 1956. Social structure
and fertility: An analytical framework.

P. Bohannan and J. Middleton (eds.),Kinship andsocial organization. Natural History Press, New York.

Econ. Develop. Cult. Change, 4:211-235. MEAD, M. 1930. Social organization of Manua.

EASTERLIN, R. A., R. A. POLLAK, and M. L.

Bernice B. Bishop Museum, Honlulu.

WACHTER. 1975.An economic framework MUELLER, E. 1973. Economic cost andvalueof

for fertility analysis. Stud. Fam. Plan. children: Conceptualization and measure-

6:(3):54-64.

ment. In J. T. Fawcett (ed.), The satisfac-

. 1980. Toward a more general eco- tions and costs of children: Theories, con-

nomic model of fertility determination:en- cepts, and methods. East-West Population

dogenous preferences and natural fertility.

Institute, Honlulu.

In R. A. Easterlin (ed.), Population and ec- NAG, MONI. 1962. Factors affecting human fer-

onomic change in developing countries. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

tility in nonindustrial society: A crosscultural study. Yale Univ. Publications in

GRAY, R. F., and P. H. GULLIVER. 1964. The
family estate in Africa: Studies of the roleof

Anthropology, New Haven. . 1972. Economic value of children in ag-

property in family structure and lineage ricultural societies: Evaluation of existing

40

Harbison

Social Biology

knowledge and an anthropological approach. In James Fawcett (ed.), The satisfactions and costs of children: Theories, concepts, and methods. East-West Center, Honolulu.
. 1975. Population and social organization. Mouton, TheHague.
POLGAR, STEVEN (ed.). 1971.Culture and population. Schenkman Publishing Co.,Cambridge, Mass.
SILVERMAN, M. 1970. Banaban adoption. InV.

Carroll (ed.), Adoption in Eastern Oceania. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.
WARE, HELEN. 1977. Economic strategy and the number of children. In J. Caldwell (ed.), The persistence of high fertility. Department of Demography, Australian National University, Canberra.
WOLF, ARTHUR. 1980. Marriage and adoption in China. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, Calif.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

