Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Reply to Ventura's comment on "methodological options in measuring illegitimacy and the difference they make"
Beth Berkov & June Sklar
To cite this article: Beth Berkov & June Sklar (1976) Reply to Ventura's comment on "methodological options in measuring illegitimacy and the difference they make", Social Biology, 23:4, 354-357, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988250 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988250
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Reply to Ventura's Comment on "Methodological Options in Measuring Illegitimacy and the Difference They Make"
Beth Berkov and June Sklar
Maternal and Child Health Branch, California State Department of Health, Berkeley, California; and International Population and UrbanResearch, University of California, Berkeley, California

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

We would be glad to assist NCHS in developing better methods for estimating illegitimacy in the United States. Given present problems, however, we believe it will be some time before a satisfactory single set of estimates can be produced. Meanwhile, there is need for better understanding of limitations in the official data and for continued production of alternate estimates. Among other purposes, our article was intended to call attention to these needs.
Stephanie Ventura's letter discusses only some of the reasons why we believe our estimates of numbers and rates of illegitimate births in the United States 1965-71 are preferable to those of NCHS. Her letter also expresses some of the viewpoints of NCHS we believe are confusing the effort to improve the data.
The basic issue is what phenomenon we are trying to measure. In our article we used a sociologic definition in which a birth is considered illegitimate when the biologic parents of the child are not married to each other at the time of the child's birth (Davis, 1939). We tried to come as close as possible to this definition in selecting both birth data and data estimating the population at risk. For the birth data, we recognized that states varied in their registration practices and in the code criteria they applied to identify illegitimate births. However, such variation meant

only that some states were more complete than others in their coverage of cases meeting our definition. As long as no states used methods that overstated illegitimacy and as long as no states made major shifts in coverage in the time period under study, the most logical approach was to combine the best and most complete data available from each state.
Ventura apparently agrees that a sociologic definition of illegitimacy is required for statistical study of the phenomenon. But because many states have until now followed registration practices based on a legal definition, she evidently concludes that the statistics must remain confined within this framework. Although we recognize there are serious practical problems, we do not agree that the limitations are so fixed. We note that the registration practices Ventura describes are in fact practices recommended to states by NCHS in model vital statistics laws and regulations. Our view is that these recommendations are outdated and do not reflect changes now occurring in both laws and attitudes related to illegitimacy.
Changes in registration practices are also occurring despite NCHS recommendations. Increasingly, unmarried mothers are objecting to the prohibition against naming the father, and grown illegitimate children are seeking to learn the identity of

354

Vol. 23, No. 4

Communic ations

355

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

their biologic parents. In the interest of the individuals involved as well as in the public interest, registration practices should encourage rather than discourage identification of fathers; to do otherwise facilitates failure to assume responsibility by fathers and perpetuates the unequal and disadvantaged position of the children and their mothers. From this standpoint even more than from a statistical standpoint, there is need for a better determination than has yet been made of goals for the future in registration practices related to nonmarital childbearing.
In criticizing our use of inferentially derived illegitimate birth data from nonreporting states, Ventura fails to note two important points. First, we demonstrated in our article that direct data from the nonreporting states, although compiled by varied inferential methods, gave a more accurate picture of what was happening than the assumption by NCHS that nonreporting states had the same experience as reporting states within geographic areas. Our article showed clearly that between 1965 and 1971 the illegitimacy trend in nonreporting states had been quite different from the trend in reporting states, mainly because the nonreporting states included California and New York, the two largest states where abortion laws had been liberalized several years before the Supreme Court decision. Thus, our study showed that similarity between reporting and nonreporting states is a highly questionable assumption.
A second point that should be noted is that inferential data probably reflect less concealment of illegitimacy than occurs in figures derived from an explicit birth certificate question. While there is danger that inferential data may overstate illegitimacy, there is general agreement that reported data understate it. Our national estimates of illegitimate births incorporating inferential data from nonreporting

states were considerably higher than NCHS estimates, particularly for whites.
Ventura has elsewhere noted that for reporting states "no attempt has been made to evaluate the accuracy with which the legitimacy question is completed" (Clague and Ventura, 1968, p. 1). Yet, because we have made evaluation studies only in California, she objects to our use of inferential data from the eleven other nonreporting states. In making this argument, Ventura ignores the fact that if there was overstatement of illegitimacy in any of the nonreporting states, it was most likely to have occurred in California, since this was the state where registration practices and criteria for identifying illegitimate births were least restrictive. Our evaluation studies showed no overstatement of illegitimacy in the California data for 1965-71 and thus we felt confident in using data from the other nonreporting states where varying but more conservative methods had been employed.
Our critic has said we used data for New York State compiled by applying the single criterion that father's age had been omitted on the birth certificate. The truth is that we used such data only for Upstate New York, not for New York City. Our data for the city came from the New York City Health Department and were compiled by an inferential method similar to but somewhat more restrictive than the method used in California. The failure of the New York State Health Department in Albany to make use of the city data is a striking example of greater concern for consistency of coding rules than for production of meaningful information. For New York City, the state office in Albany receives a tape with births already classified by legitimacy according to the city's inferential method. However, apparently because this is different from what is done in Upstate New York, the state office has chosen to ignore the better

356

Communications

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

data for the city and to produce statewide estimates that clearly are too low. Anyone interested in better data for New York State must therefore do what we did-- combine data for the city with data for the remainder of the state. For 1973, the combined figure was 27 per cent higher than the single figure (39,345 compared to 30,874); it was also 19 per cent higher than the estimate of 33,113 obtained by applying the NCHS method.
Going on to the question of estimating the size of the population at risk of illegitimate birth, we note that here again much of the confusion comes from the attempt to apply a legal definition of legitimacy. There is no perfect solution to the problem. In one sense, all women in the childbearing ages are exposed to risk because there is always the possibility that a married woman, separated or not, may have a child by another man. Although there is evidence that a small proportion of married women living with their husbands do have children by other men (Hartley, 1975, pp. 132-133), this event is more likely for women who are separated.
As we discussed in our article, a large proportion of women over age 25, particularly Black women, are reported in the census as (permanently) separated. By including these women in our denominators, we substantially reduced the size of our estimated illegitimate birth rates in comparison to the rates we would have obtained had we restricted our denominators to the conventional categories of single, widowed, or divorced. Had we not considered separated women at risk, we would have substantially overstated the rates, particularly for older Black women, and we preferred not to do this.
Our reasons for considering separated women at risk go beyond the reasons discussed by Ventura. A point she does not mention is the likelihood that some women who have never been married but have

had a child may report themselves as separated in the census. This likelihood has been recognized but not documented in the United States (Shryock and Siegel, 1973, pp. 286-288). In Britain, a study made in 1961 showed that over one-fourth of the births registered as illegitimate using a sociologic definition were to women who had reported themselves married in the census; a large proportion were cohabiting with men not their husbands (Hartley, 1969).
In regard to obtaining data on legitimate births to separated women, we agree that this is important information that should be sought. In its absence and with the knowledge that some births being counted as illegitimate are in fact births to separated women, we prefer to consider separated women at risk and thus to deal with an estimated illegitimacy rate that may be too low. The alternative is a rate that certainly is too high.
The estimates of numbers and rates of illegitimate births obtained by our methods probably are more accurate than the estimates of NCHS. This does not mean, however, that the use of inferential data is without problems or that states should not ask a marital status question on the birth certificate. A serious problem with inferential data--particularly in California--is the increasing use of maiden surnames by married women and changing practices in naming children which may lead to overstatement of illegitimacy.
As discussed above, we believe that full identification of biologic parentage is in the interest of the child, of the mother, and of others affected by the birth. For this reason and for statistical purposes, there also should be a question in the confidential section of the certificate that attempts to determine whether the parents were married to each other when the child was born. The shift in the NCHS recommended question from "legitimate?" to "is

Vol. 2 3 , No. 4

Communic ations

357

mother married?" presents anopportunity to improve national and state information about illegitimacy defined in sociologic terms. To achieve this goal, however, will

require that the new question beproperly interpreted andthat there be changes in registration practices that arenoteasy to make.

REFERENCES

CLAGUE, A. J., and S. VENTURA. 1968. Trends in women in England and Wales. J. Marr. Fam.

illegitimacy: United States 1940-1965. National 31(4):793-798.

Center for Health Statistics, Series 21, No. IS.

. 1975. Illegitimacy. Univ. of California

Rockville, Md.

Press, Berkeley.

DAVIS, K. 1939. The forms of illegitimacy. Soc. SHRYOCK, H. S., and J. S. SIEGEL. 1973. The meth-

Fore. 18:1.

ods and materials of demography. Vol.1. Gov-

HARTLEY, S. F. 1969. Illegitimacy among "married" ernment Printing Office, Washington, D. C.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Comment on "The Changing SexRRatio of the Navajo Tribe," by Kunitz and JSlocumb
Ansley J. Coale
Office ofPopulation Research Princeton University Princeton, New Jersey

In their paper on "The ChangingSex Ratio of the Navajo Tribe" in theSpring 1976 issue ofSocial Biology (Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 33-44), Kunitz and Slocumb fail to note or discuss what is almost certainly the principal source of the anomalous sexratios in thevarious populations they mention, probably including the Navajos. The cause ofthe otherwise inexplicable figures is defective census data.
The sequence ofsex ratios by age inthe native population in the United States, when graphed for an early census, say around 1910, closely resembles the line traced by the sex ratio ofthe population of rural Colombia in Figure 5 oftheir article, a pattern also tobefound inthe nonwhite

population of the United States about 1930. The basis forsuch a sequence of sex ratios, dipping well below 0.9 in adolescent and early adult ages andrising well above 1.0 in ages around SO to age 70 or higher, is differential omission and differential agemisreporting for males and females. Norealistic life tables incorporating differential mortality bysex could account for this irregular sequence. In fact, the only set of sex ratios presented by Kunitz and Slocumb that appears to be based onvalid data is the set for Japan in Figure 1.There isreally no point in trying to find social and medical explanations for variations that are in fact mostly spurious.
Erroneous sex ratios inthe U. S.census

