Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
What is the purpose of HIV antibody testing?
James Trussell
To cite this article: James Trussell (1989) What is the purpose of HIV antibody testing?, Social Biology, 36:1-2, 102-109, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1989.9988722 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1989.9988722
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

Brief Reports What is the Purpose of HIV Antibody Testing?

1 )

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

James Trussell
Office of Population Research Princeton University Princeton, New Jersey

ABSTRACT: Considerable attention, both in the scientific literature and in the popular media, has focused recently on the accuracy of tests for HIV antibodies. Many have pointed to the dangers of falsely identifying persons as being infected, and they have stressed that the predictive power of a positive test result may be small in populations with a low prevalence of HIV infection. The purpose of this paper is to argue that the current testing/counseling protocols, which are designed to increase specificity at the expense of sensitivity, are inappropriate in high-prevalence groups.

The title of this note is not intended with HIV would be missed even by a test

to be facetious. AIDS is a fatal disease that was 100per cent sensitive (when the

caused by human immunodeficiency vi- HIV antibody is present, then the test

rus (HIV), which can be transmitted will yield a positive result) to the anti-

through sexual contact and exposure to body. Second, the current tests are not

infected blood or blood products (and 100 per cent accurate. They are neither

neonatally from mother to neonate). All 100 per cent sensitivenor 100 per cent would agree that, ideally, an HIV test specific.2 There is a small possibility that

should accomplish two goals: (1) reas-

sure those who do not have the virus, and (2) inform those who do. While in-

fection" (CDC, 1987a).This conclusion wasbased on follow-up of persons infected by a blood trans-

forming those who are infected will not fusion at a known date. However, analysis of the

help to effect their cure (because there is

experience of Finnish homosexual males has revealed that the antibody may not appear for a year

not now a cure), it will enable them to or longer after infection (Ranki et al., 1987).These

guard against infecting others. Unfortunately, such an ideal test is not available

results suggest that the predictive power of a negative test result may be lower than was previously thought.

for two reasons. First, a test for the virus 2A test for HIV antibody (like any test) should

itself does not yet exist (except for re-

have two properties. Among those infected, the test should yield a positive result. This property is

search purposes). Instead, current pro- known assensitivity and maybe measured or quan-

cedures test for the presence in the blood of antibodies to HIV. Because an-

tified by the false-negative rate (the proportion of those who are infected who nevertheless test negative). Moreover, among those not infected, the

tibodies do not appear until some time test should yield a negative result. This property is

after infection,1 some persons infected

known as specificity and is quantified by the falsepositive rate (the proportion of those not infected

who nevertheless test positive). As a consequence

of the fact that current tests for the HIV antibody

1Current guidelines state that "persons ex- are neither perfectly sensitive nor perfectly spe-

posed to HIV usually develop detectable levels of cific, some fraction of those with a negative test

antibody against the virus within 6-12 weeks of in- result are in fact infected and some fraction of

102

Vol. 36, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

103

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

a person with the antibody will test neg- contracts, Miike, 1987). In simulations

ative (false-negative) and that a person performed by the CDC, it is assumed to

not infected with HIV will test positive have a false-positive rate (test is posi-

(false-positive). In the remainder of this tive, given HIV is absent) of 0.005 and a

discussion, I ignore the first problem false-negative rate (test is negative,

and concentrate entirely on the second. given HIV is present) of 0.01 (CDC,

For ease of discussion, I assume that 19876).

current tests detect HIV (and not just 2. If theEIA test is positive, complete

the antibody).

a more specific but much more expen-

Before proceeding further, I should sive (about $50 in negotiated contracts,

note that neither the false-positive nor Miike, 1987) confirmatory test, usually

the false-negative rates are known with the Western Blot (WB) test, on the

certainty. Furthermore, there may be a same sample of blood used for the EIA

considerable difference between these test. In simulations performed by the

rates under ideal laboratory conditions CDC, conditional on a positive EIA and under ordinary laboratory condi- result,'1 the WB test is assumed to have a tions. For a discussion of the variability false-positive rate of 0.0015 and a false-

in false-positive rates, see the excellent negative rate of 0.01 (CDC, 19876).

commentaries by Meyer and Pauker A person is declared to be infected

(1987), Miike (1987), and Center for with HIV if and only if both tests are

Disease Control (CDC) (1988). In the positive. Why is the two-step procedure

remainder of this note, I use the rates used? The PHS guidelines state that the

employed by the CDC (19876) in their purpose is to "further increase the spe-

own simulations.

cificity of the testing process" (CDC,

Current Public Health Service (PHS) 1987a).

guidelines (CDC, 1987a) call for the fol- The aim of this note is to argue that

lowing two-step testing procedure:

this purpose isinappropriate insome cir-

1. First,perform the Enzyme Immu- cumstances (specifically, in high-

noassay (EIA) test, which is relatively prevalence groups), circumstances in inexpensive3 (about $6 in negotiated which the goal ought to be to increase

the sensitivity of the testing process

those with a positive test result are in fact uninfected. It is well known that these fractions depend on the false-negative and false-positive rates and the fraction of those tested who are truly infected. We explore these issues. As we shall see, the problems we address are "caused" by the fact that test results are reported as either positive or negative. In fact, for example, a negative result should not be interpreted as negative withcertainty, but only as negative with some probability less than 100per cent.
3Actually, the EIA test is repeated when the initial test is positive (to reduce the likelihood of laboratory error), so that an "EIA test" may not be one test but two (or several). A positive "test result" occurs when both (or all) EIA tests arepositive (repeated reactive EIA); otherwise, the "test result" is negative. The false-positive and falsenegative rates shown in the text pertain to the "EIA test results" from the entire procedure, not to the individual tests involved (CDC, 1987b).

rather than the specificity. This conclusion leads to a call for a revision in PHS counseling/testing protocols. First, however, let us explore the rationale for the PHS testing guidelines.
Suppose that the prevalence of HIV in a group is rare, only 0.2 per cent (cer-
4It is important to note that the WB is ordinarily not performed unless the EIA is positive. Hence, the unconditional false-positive and falsenegative rates for the WB are not even estimated.
5Meyer and Pauker (1987) and Miike (1987) question whether the WB false-positive rate is this low. They cite evidence that it can be ten times higher. If so, then the argument in this note would be strengthened.

104

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

tainly an upper-bound estimate for low- 0.001), a rate that Meyer and Pauker

risk persons in the United States as a (1987) claim is far too low. If it were whole,6 and that persons are tested at higher, then again the predictive power

random. Then, as we can see from Fig- of a positive test result would be lower.

ure 1, if only the EIA test were used, For example, if the prevalence of HIV

0.198 per cent ( = 0.002  0.99) of the were 0.01 per cent and the joint false-

population would be infected with the positive rate were 0.005, then the pre-

virus and test positive while 0.499 per dictive power of a positive result in the

cent (0.998  0.005 would not be in- two-step procedure would be only 1.9

fected with HIV and test positive. Thus, percent.

of those who test positive only 28.4 per I agree completely with Meyer and

cent would be infected with HIV. The Pauker that HIV screening in low-

predictive power of a positive test result prevalencegroups is not warranted. It

is poor. With the two-step procedure, should nevertheless be noted that in the

we see that 0.19602 per cent ( = 0.002  CDC (1988) analysis of data collected by

0.99  0.99) would be infected with HIV the College of American Pathologists

and test positive whereas 0.00050 per Proficiency Testing program, there was

cent ( = 0.998  0.005  0.001) would not one false-positive when the two-step

not be infected with HIV and test posi- procedure was used. Likewise, there

tive. The predictive power of a positive was not one false-positive among

result in the two-step procedure is 99.75 250,000-plus blood donors in Minne-

per cent. The purpose of the two-step sota (SerVaas, 1987).7The real problem

procedure is nicely illustrated by this ex- lies with the accuracy of testing in some

ample. It raises the predictive power of a inexperienced commercial labs, and not

positive test result from 28 per cent to so much with the accuracy under the

virtually 100 per cent.

"ideal" conditions that seem to be at-

Nevertheless, this result should not tained by (among others) the Armed be interpreted as evidence that false- Forces. Regardless of this uncertainty positives can be ignored when testing about the magnitude of false-positive

groups with low prevalence of HIV. rates, I argue below that in high-

First, the prevalence of 0.2 per cent employed in the simulation is an upperbound estimate. If a lower prevalence were assumed, then the predictive

prevalence groups (not addressed by Meyer and Pauker), I reach a different conclusion: that we cannot afford the false-negatives.

power of a positive "test" (positive on My reasoning is motivated by an-

both EIA and WB) result would be other consideration that has not been

lower. Second, the joint false-positive addressed by the PHS. Before proceed-

rate used here is 0.000005 ( = 0.005  ing further, I should emphasize that this

6The evidence on prevalence is reviewed in Meyer and Pauker (1987). Screening of military recruits has revealed seropositive results in 0.16 per cent of men and 0.06 per cent of women. Among female blood donors, the seropositive rate isonly 0.01 per cent. Some of these individuals undoubtedly were in high-risk groups, so that the prevalence in low-risk groups would be even lower.

7There were 15 positives (positive EIA followed by positive WB). In an attempt to determine the specificity of these results, those testing positive were traced so that a test (which is difficult to perform and very expensive) for the AIDS virus (HIV) itself could be performed. HIV was cultured from the blood of 13. The 14th was already symptomatic with AIDS, and the 15th could not be located, though had previously admitted to being in a high-risk group.

Vol. 36, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

HIV .002

EIA

105
WB (.0019602) (.0000198)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

(.00000499)
Fig. 1.--Low Prevalence (0.2 per cent) of HIV. (The figure should be read from left to right. The conditional probability of advancingfromone state to the next is shown alongthe path connecting the two states. The unconditional probability of arriving at any state, shown in parentheses under that state, is the product of the conditional probabilities along the entire path to that state.)
consideration is not relevant in a low- and test negative on WB. Hence, of prevalence group (a fact that I will now those "reprieved," only 0.4 per cent acdemonstrate), but becomes very rele- tually would be infected with HIV. For vant in a high-prevalence group, as we each infected person falsely "reprieved" shall see below. First, let us examine the by the confirmatory WB test, there are predictive power of a negative "test" 252 uninfected persons who are corresult (negative on either EIA or WB). rectly "reprieved." Furthermore, Using the logic developed earlier, we among 100,000 people tested, the consee that it is 99.996 per cent accurate. firmatory test will cause only 2 persons Virtually everyone declared to be HIV- with HIV to be incorrectly informed free in fact is uninfected. Next, let us that they are not infected. Therefore, consider the probability that a person the cost (telling persons that they are not "reprieved" by the confirmatory WB infected with HIV when in fact they are, test (positive on EIA, but negative on plus the resources expended on the exWB) actually has HIV. We can see from tra test) of the two-step procedure is Figure 1 that 0.00198 per cent (=0.002 small when compared with the benefit (a  0.99  0.01) would be infected with reduction in false-positive reports). UnHIV, test positive on EIA, and test neg- der these circumstances, it does indeed ative on WB. Similarly, 0.4985 per cent seem reasonable to follow the PHS (=0.998  0.005  0.999) would not be strategy. infected with HIV, test positive on EIA, Suppose, however, that the preva-

106

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

lence of HIV in another group is much higher, say 20 per cent, which is probably less than the prevalence of HIV among homosexual men in some areas.8 This situation is depicted in Figure 2. Using the same logic as before, we find that the predictive power of a positive result on the EIA test alone is 98.02 per cent.9 With the confirmatory WB test, the predictive power rises to 99.998 per cent. Therefore, the "rights" of those without HIV seem to be guaranteed, because virtually none will be falsely "convicted."
But are the uninfected really protected? In this situation, we must examine false-negatives much more carefully. For example, we can easily deduce that the predictive power of a negative EIA alone is 99.75 per cent and that the predictive power of a negative result in the two-step procedure is 99.5 per cent. However, if we stopped at this point, we would overlook an important result. Closer examination reveals that 33 per cent of those "reprieved" by the WB actually would be infected with HIV. The cost of reducing false-positives is much higher than in the low-prevalence group. To reduce by two the number of uninfected persons falsely "convicted" by the EIA test, the confirmatory WB test must "reprieve" one infected person. If the behavior of the false "reprieved" is not modified, there is a high probability that this group will continue to spread HIV. The false "convicted"
8For example, Meyer and Pauker (1987) state that "perhaps 50% of homosexual men in San Francisco have serologic evidence" of HIV infection.
9This result--that the predictive power of a positive test result rises when the prevalence of the disease rises--is well known. It is a common exercise in an introductory statistics course. It is demonstrated for HIV testing in both CDC (1987b) and Meyer and Pauker (1987).

are protected at the expense of the larger pool of uninfected.
In the high-prevalence case, what should be done? I would argue that the answer depends on the purpose of the test. If it is for screening for employment, immigration, or insurance, then one might wish to protect the rights of the falsely "convicted" by following the PHS guidelines. This conclusion follows even more strongly if the false-positive rate is higher; see the discussion by Meyer and Pauker (1987). However, when the purpose is for counseling the individual (especially when the testing is performed anonymously), then one cannot protect the rights of the falsely "convicted" and the uninfected simultaneously. Because the tests are not perfect, there is a tradeoff between the two goals. In the low-prevalence case, the rights of the falsely "convicted" do seem compelling. Furthermore, the results powerfully suggest that HIV screening in low-prevalence groups is unwise (Meyer and Pauker, 1987; though see SerVaas, 1987). There was not one false-positive among 250,000 blood donors in low-prevalence Minnesota). In the high-prevalence case, the issue is not at all clear. Indeed, one might be tempted to argue that the second confirmatory test should be dropped in order to protect the public health.
A better solution would be to use the results of both tests when counseling individuals. Those positive on both are virtually certain to be infected with HIV. Those negative on EIA have only a tiny probability of being infected with HIV and may (reasonably) safely assume they are not. Those positive on EIA and negative on WB may still have a high probability of being infected with HIV and should be urged to modify their behavior (if it is risky) if they are in

Vol. 36, No. 1-2

BriefReports
EIA

.20

107
WB

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

(.000004)
Fig. 2.--High prevalence (20 per cent) of HIV. (The figure should be read from left to right. The conditional probability of advancing from one state to the next is shown alongthe path connecting the two states. The unconditional probability of arriving at any state, shown in parentheses under the state, is the product of the conditional probabilities along the entire path to that state.)

groups with a high prevalence of HIV, at least until further tests resolve the ambiguity. Note that the problem is similar to the situation aftera positive EIA test in the low-prevalence group in one respect, that is, the majority of those in the pool are not infected. The difference is that in the low-prevalence group the confirmatory test could be used to distinguish relatively accurately the infected from the uninfected. In the current situation--a positive EIA test and a negative WB test in a high-prevalence group--there is no further test available.10 Of course, subsequent retesting is

certainly warranted when there are ambiguous results, but it cannot be guaranteed to resolve the ambiguity.
The counseling task in this situation would be very challenging, especially because the degree of risk depends on the individual's prior probability of being infected, which may be unknown to the counselor. If the prior probability is 20 per cent, then this risk, as we have seen, is about 1 in 3. If the prior probability is 80 per cent, perhaps characteristic of IV drug users in New York, then this risk rises to 9 in 10. Furthermore,

tory test developed by the Cetus Corporation de-
tects the AIDS virus directly, even if it is latent 10This situation will undoubtedly change in the (hidden in cells), and it is claimed to be 100 per near future. SmithKline Bio-Science Laboratories cent accurate (NYT, 19886; Ou et al., 1988). Yet has developed a confirmatory test for HIV anti- another alternative would be to culture for the vibodies that isclaimed to be 100per cent specific, so rus. This procedure is very expensive, timethat the problem of false-positive results would be consuming, and difficult to perform, and it can deeliminated (NYT, 1988a). Another new confirma- tect the virus only when it is in an active stage.

108

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

even the individual may not know whether he or she belongs to a high-risk group (e.g., unknown to the individual, a sexual partner may have had sexual relations with a homosexual male or with an IV drug user). In many instances, nevertheless, an individual may be confident that he or she does belong to a high-risk group.11 My reasoning is that the counseling in situations where a positive EIA is followed by a negative WB could be phrased in terms of two hypothetical examples: (1) "If you are not in any of the following high-risk groups, then the probability that you are indeed infected is very small." (2) "If you are in any of the following high-risk groups, then the probability that you are infected is moderately high, and you should act as if you are infected and therefore could infect others until your ambiguous test status can be resolved." The high-risk groups would be. those defined by the CDC, and they might be further differentiated if more precise information on the prior probability of infection for various groups becomes available.
The alternative (the current procedure) to the proposed counseling protocols seems less messy only because the consequences are not readily evident to the counselor. One might agree with the logic of this argument but still conclude that no alteration to the counseling
11The problem still remains that the definitions of high-risk groups are imprecise with respect to truehigh-risk factors. For example, a male homosexual couple in which both partners have had sexual relations only with each other (even if they live in a relatively high-risk area such as San Francisco) should be at no greater risk than a monogamous heterosexual couple (who live in, say, Salt Lake City). Likewise, some IV drug users (who never share a needle and who always use a new sterile needle) should be at low risk. The hope is that as more evidence accumulates it will be possible to define high-risk groups with more specificity and also to develop good estimates of the prevalence of HIV in each group.

guidelines is necessary because the situation is so rare. Of 1,000 persons tested, 6 will test positive on EIA and negative on WB. Note, however, that the tests have already been performed; the only issue is the interpretation of the result (positive EIA followed by negative WB). The 2 (per 6) who are infected are just as much a public health problem as the 2 (per 1,000) who are infected in the low-prevalence group. The major difference is that they can be identified more precisely in the high-prevalencegroup than in the low-prevalence group.
Finally, I should note that a variant of this recommendation is already followed in tests to screen out HIV from the blood supply. All samples that test positive on EIA (regardless of the suspected prevalence of HIV) are destroyed, because the confirmatory test needlessly endangers, if only by a small amount, the nation's health--specifically, the health of the uninfected. The goal of protecting the rights of the uninfected to an HIV-free blood supply is attained at minimal cost. Nevertheless, because donors are notified (and counseled) only when the confirmatory WB is positive, the more general protection of the uninfected is compromised, as it is whenever the PHS counseling protocols are followed. Another variant of this recommendation is the PHS suggestion that persons in high-risk groups who test positive on EIA might be counseled about their probable infection status (and ways to reduce HIV transmission) before the confirmatory WB result becomes available (CDC, 1986). Nevertheless, if the WB result is negative, such persons would be told that they are HIV-free. Should the rights of the falsely "convicted" prevail in all circumstances, particularly in high-risk groups? What, after all, is the purpose of HIV testing?

Vol. 36, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

109

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Cates, James Curran, Irma Elo, Noreen

Goldman, Robert Hatcher, Kathryn Kost,

I have benefited from discussions with, or German Rodriguez, and Michael Stoto.

comments from, Sylvia Cerel Bowen, Ward

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

CENTER FORDISEASE CONTROL. 1986. Addi-
tional recommendations to reduce sexual and drug-abuse-related transmission ofhuman T-lymphotropic virus type III/Lymphadenopathy-Associated Virus. Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 35:11-13.
. 1987a. Public Health Service guidelines forcounseling and antibody testingto prevent HIV infection and AIDS. Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 36:509-515.
. 1987b. Recommendations for prevention ofHIV transmission in health-care settings. Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 36:1S18S.
. 1988. Update: Serologic testing for antibody toHuman Immunodeficiency Virus. Morbid. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 36:833-840.
MEYER, K., and S. PAUKER. 1987. Screening for
HIV: Can we afford the false positive rate? New Eng. J. Med. 317:238-241. MIIKE, L. 1987. Testimony ofLawrence Miike, Office of Technology Assessment,U.S. Congress, before the House Committeeon

Small Business, Subcommittee on Regulation andBusiness Opportunities, October 19, 1987. NEW YORK TIMES. 1988a. New AIDS test is being offered to confirm infection with virus, p. A10. February 26, 1988.
. 1988b. Two labs licensed for new AIDS test, p. A17. July 7, 1988.
Ou, C., S. KWOK, S.W. MITCHELL, D . H .
MACK, J. J. SNINSKY, J. W KREBS, P.
FEORINO, D. WARFIELD, and G. SCHOCHET-
MAN. 1988. DNA amplification for direct detection of HIV-1 in DNA of peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Science 239:295297.
RANKI, A., M. KROHN, J. ALLAIN, G. FRAN-
CHINI, S. VALLE, J. ANTONEN, M. LEUTHER,
and K. KROHN. 1987. Long latency precedes overt seroconversion in sexually transmitted Human-Immunodeficiency-Virus infection. Lancet. 2(8559):598-593. SERVASS, C. 1987. Letter to the editor, p. A18. New York Times, December 14, 1987.

