Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Evolution of genetic structures of small populations
Albert Jacquard
To cite this article: Albert Jacquard (1969) Evolution of genetic structures of small populations, Social Biology, 16:3, 143-157, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1969.9987815 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1969.9987815
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

Evolution of Genetic Structures of Small Populations
Albert Jacquard
Institut National D'Études Démographiques Paris, France

\
J
·&\
SOU
J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

To demonstrate the Hardy-Weinberg law describing the stability of the proportions of various genotypes in a population, it is necessary to assume that thepopulation is in a state of "perfect panmixia"; its behavior and the milieu in which it exists are such that there isno mutation, no migration, no selection, that successive generations are distinct, and that cross-breeding occurs by chance. Furthermore, it is necessary to assume that the population number is sufficiently large so as to be considered infinite.
This last condition is fulfilled: (a) by equating the frequency of a genotype with the probability ofits occurrence inthe population (the variance over the probable value is nil, if N is infinite) ; (b) by assuming that two nonidentical genes are independent (any relationship between two genes occurring only as a result of the probability of their identity, in which case they would pertain to an unlimited population).
Here weshall study the effect of limitation of the size of a population upon its evolution, the other conditions of randomness remaining the same. In the first part we shall define the various concepts employed, in particular, the genotype structures as well as the notations. The second

part will deal with the evolution of dependence among genes in a given population, in accordance with the recurrence formulae established by G. Malécot (1966). Finally, the third part will relate these recurrences to genotype structures, and theresultsobtained will then beapplied to the particular case of "sib-mating."
CONCEPTS AND NOTATIONS
In considering individuals or populations with regard to the genes they possess in a "locus," the Mendelian theory of heredity ascribes a discrete "beaded" structure to the biological information carried by chromosomes and transmitted from cell to cell or individual to individual. The elementary unit of this information is the locus; its content is the gene.
In thesame locus an individual possesses two genes--one transmitted from the father, the other from the mother. The individual is homozygous orheterozygous, depending upon whether ornot these two genes carry the same information in representing two distinct "alíeles."
Within a population, however, the number of different alíeles present within a locus can be extremely high. For reasons of simplicity, a population geneticist generally

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

144

Jacquard

Social Biology

assumes a case in which only two alíeles, ai and dz, can occur in any given locus; but this hypothesis does not agree very well with reality. Loci carrying more than ten known alíeles are not rare. Henceforth, we shall assume a case in which a given locus has n number of alíeles:
ai , . . . , a, , . . . an.
GENETIC STRUCTURES
The genetic inheritance of a population comprised of N individuals is composed of two N genes for a given locus. In order to define this inheritance, one must establish the number of each of the it alíeles (a,-), or, in other terms, their frequencies (w,).
The n numbers, Wi, constitute a vector which we call the gene structure of the population which may be written;

described by two indices, i and j , the order of which is not significant. By convention, these numbers are arranged along a triangle of n rows and n columns; the numbers in which the two indices are identical (i«) are arranged along the hypotenuse of the triangle, while the numbers in which the two indices are different (/,,) are situated at the intersection of the rows and columns containing tu and tjj respectively.
The trimat
ill

hi -- . tu

t u · · · · · tu

ta

hn ·tin

tin ínn

Í = (wi,

v>i, wn) .

The N individuals who constitute the population can have \n(n + 1) genotypes for a given locus--n homozygous genotypes (a,a<) and \n{n -- 1) heterozygous genotypes (fliOj).In order to define the population in terms of the associations of the genes which are present, we have only to establish the number of each of these \n{n + 1) genotypes, or, in other words, their frequencies,
TCij.
The \n{n + 1) numbers, iry, constitute a set which we define as a "trimat," which we designate as the genotype structure of the population with the notation:

AS =

is represented symbolically by A T . These trimats can be easily defined in
terms of elementary algebra (see Jacquard, 1968). Two algebraic operations can be used to relate the vectors with the trimats.
The condensation of a trimat. By definition, the "condensed vector" M of a trimat A T is such that
u = cond A T <=> V»--
m = Wn + ... 2 t u+ ... + tin} .
Each unit («»·) of u is equal to half the sum of all the units of A T having the i index, the unit /,-,· being counted twice.
The crossed product of two vectors. We designate the trimat A T as the "crossed product" (or more simply "crossing") of two vectors, u and v, of n components. This trimat is denned by

Tin Tin

THE TRIHATS
In general, a trimat, A T , is a set of \n{n + 1) numbers, each number (/,-,·) being

tu = Ui1>i ,
iVi * i , Ui = UiVj+

Vol. 16, No. 3

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

In the case where v = u, A T is the "crossed square" of u and is written
At first these notations seem quite tedious, and thus one can pass over them quickly; but they do allow a considerable economy of words. Many explanatory examples will be given later in the text.
It is noteworthy that according to the definition of the condensation of a trimat the gene structure of a population is equal to the condensed vector of its genotype structure:
j = cond AS .

These definitions, given for a total population, can easily be transposed for the case of the individual. The set of the probabilities, AP¿J, such that an individual A has the genotype {amj) (or Api, that a gene taken from A be of type ai), constitutes a trimat A Y A and a vector SA, called "genotype structure and gene structure in probability of A."
Suppose, for example, that we randomly select an individual A from a completely known population of genotype structure ASo. The a priori probability that this individual possesses the genotype (a¿a,) is equal to the frequency IT,; of this genotype within

STRUCTURES IN PROBABILITY
The gene structure s and genotype AS which we have defined correspond to the case where enumeration of the various genes and genotypes of the population is possible or where their frequencies are precisely known. However, most often, the available information is incomplete, the population being inaccessible either in size (only a portion of the population is known) or in time (we wish to define its structure in the future).

AYA = ASo.

Similarly,

SA = s0.

REFERENCE STRUCTURES
We can show that in a panmictic situation the genotype structure in probability of a generation is equal to the crossed-square of the genetic structure of the preceding generation:
AY, =?/_!.

In order to characterize a population for which we possess only fragments of information, a probability, P#, is allotted to the various genotypes possible (a<OEj). Thus, we put forth the definition: The genotypestruc-

Furthermore, if the population is infinite, the gene structure remains constant and we have
A o -->2
ASg = JO ,

ture in probability A Y of a population, pres- a relationship which expresses the well-

ent or future, is the set of the probabilities, de- known panmictic Hardy-Weinberg law.

pending upon the available information, of the various genotypes which pertain to an individual selectedrandomly from this popu-

When a population is not panmictic, its genotype structure AS can obviously be in

lation.

any proportions. We shall see that, in order

Similarly: The gene structure in proba- to characterize AS, it is beneficial to combility s of a population is the set of the pare it with two reference structures: the

probabilities, pi, of the various alíeles con- structure, pASj,, of a panmictic population

tained within a locus selected randomly having the same gene structure; and the

within an individual of the population.

structure, cAS, of a population composed

It is evident that for structures in prob- entirely of homozygous individuals and hav-

ability, as for real structures,

ing the same gene structure, s.

s = cond A Y .

In other words:

146

Jacquard

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

2 W\
P A S = 2wihV% . . . 2 2wíiVi . . . 2 z , i W n . . .W2,,
W\
cAS = 0 . . . W>!
n 0 · · wn

ly selected from A is identical to a gene randomly selected from B."
In the case of the son F of two individuals A and B, the two genes which he possesses were randomly obtained, one from A and the other from B; they are thus identical with probability 0AB. Malécot has given the name "coefficient of consanguinity" to the probability of having two identical genes in one individual. I t follows that: "The coefficient of consanguinity of an individual is equal to the coefficient of kinship, <t>, of his father and his mother."

P A S is designated as the "equivalent random structure of the population" and cAS

MEAN COEFFICIENT OF CONSANGUINITY OF A POPULATION

as the "equivalent homozygous structure." The concept of the coefficient of con-

INDIVIDUAL COEFFICIENTS OF KINSHIP AND OF CONSANGUINITY

sanguinity defined thus for an individual can easily be extended to a total population

Whatever the nature and complexity of the kinship ties between two individuals, A and B, the effect of these ties upon their genetic constitutions results from the probability for the genes of A and the genes of B to be the replicas of the same gene from one of their common ancestors. Whenever two genes thus arise by successive duplication from generation to generation from the same ancestral gene, they are said to be identical.
Knowing the genealogy of two individuals A and B, it is possible to calculate the probability of their genes being identical.

(on the condition that the total population be defined in terms of size and time, i.e., that it constitutes a "circle"). Thus: The coefficientof consanguinity for a population is the probability that the two genes of an individual randomly selected from a population are identical.
If the individuals, whose coefficient of consanguinity is equal to fx, represent a proportion Xx of the population, the coefficient of consanguinity o of the population will be equal to the average value of the individual coefficients:

As for all probability determinations, this result corresponds to a certain body of

= 23 A*fx

(1)

information and is modified if new information is obtained. Moreover, a genealogy, by definition, cannot be entirely known, and thus the calculated probabilities can only reflect the known portion of the genealogies of the individuals concerned.
In a precise fashion, the genetic relation-

a is generally called "Bernstein's coefficient" of the population.
Similarly, for the "coefficient of kinship," <j>, denned for two individuals, it is possible to develop an average coefficient of kinship ß for the total population: ß is the probability that two genes belonging to

ship between A and B is measured by the two different people randomly selected

"coefficient of kinship" (<£AB) which is de- from the population are identical.

fined by G. Malécot (1966) as follows: "The In panmictic populations (where mar-

coefficient of kinship (<£AB) of two individuals riages between individuals of the same gen-

A and B is theprobability that a gene random- eration occur by chance), there is a relation-

Vol. 16, No. 3

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

147

ship between thecoefficients a and ß of successive generations; in effect, the twogenes of an individual from generation g were randomly obtained from two individuals (the father and mother) from generation g -- 1 ; the probability that the two genes of the individual are identical is thus equal to the probability for identity between two genes belonging to twodifferent individuals randomly selected from the preceding generation, and it is written as:

a, = &-i .

(2)

EVOLUTION OFTHE INTERDEPENDENCE OF GENES INA SMALL POPULATION

In the second part of our study, weshall refer to the recurrences established by G. Malécot for the rate of consanguinity.

same person. This eventuality has a probability equal to 1/Ni(g -- 2).1 Similarly, in the second case, the two grandmothers could have been the same person, with a probability equal to 1/Nx(g -- 2).
Finally, the probability that A's two genes were transmitted to him from the same individual of generation g -- 2is
4Ni(g - 1) ^ 4N2(g - 2) N(g - 2) '
where N is the harmonic mean of 2Ni and 2N2, that is, the harmonic mean of the
MP MM
g-2

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

EVOLUTION OF THERATE OF CONSANGUINITY IN A SMALL POPULATION

g-

Let us consider, for each generation g, a

population which comprises Ni(g) men

and N2(g) women.

An individual A belonging to generation

g possesses, in a given locus, two genes

FIG. 1.--Derivation of two genes ina given locus for individual Aingeneration g.

which are, respectively, thereplica of oneof

two genes of his father (P) and one oftwo number of 2Ni and 2N2 which the populagenes of his mother (M). As can be seen in tion would have had if it contained: (a)as

Figure 1, the former is the replica of one of many women as it contained men; (6) as

the four genes belonging to the paternal many men as it contained women. N is

grandfather (PP) and the paternal grand- generally described by the term "effective

mother (MP);the latter is the replica of population."

one of the four genes belonging to the ma- The various possible combinations for

ternal grandfather (PM) and the maternal the origins of A'stwogenes canbe classified

grandmother (MM).

in two groups:

The two genes belonging to A could have 1. With probability 1/N(g - 2), these

been transmitted to him in the following two genes come from the same ancestor of

ways: (a) both genes through his grand- generation g --2. These two genes could

fathers (the probability being J ) ; (b) both therefore be identical, either because they

genes through his grandmothers (theprob- reproduce the same gene of this ancestor

ability being I); (c) one gene through a grandfather and the other through a grandmother (the probability being §).
In the first case, assuming random mating without consideration of kinship, it is possible that the twograndfathers were the

1 In effect, this consideration excludes all relationships between A's twograndfathers. With the first grandfather remaining constant, all the individuals from thegroup of N1(g--2) men of generation g--2 have the same probability of being the second grandfather. Theprobability that the twograndfathers were the same individual is thus equal to 1/N1(g-2).

148

Jacquard

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

(probability being §), o r because they reproduce the two genes of this ancestor (the probability being §), these also being identical (the probability being ttj-2, according to the definition of a).
2. With probability 1 - 1/N(g - 2), these two genes come from two different ancestors of generation g -- 2. They are thus identical if the two genes of which they are replicas were themselves identical (probability ßg-2, according to the definition of J8).
In total, the probability that A's two genes are identical is
1 ag = N(g - 2)

which, in accordance with formula (1), can be written

1 \aa = 2N(g - 2)

X a,,_i

1 2N(g -

N(g-2)J
2) 0-0-1

(3)

a recurrence equation which permits us to calculate the coefficients ag, if one knows the value of a for the first two generations and the series of numbers N(g). The evolution of the average consanguinity value for a population is thus determined by these numbers.

A CONSTANT SMALL POPULATION
If N remains constant from one generation to another, equation (3) is an equation of linear recurrence which can be solved easily when one recognizes that it can be written in the form

1 - a» = ( l - ^ ) (1 - ·»,_,)

The solution to the equation is

1 -- ag = aX? + b\l ,

(4)

where a and b are parameters defined by the initial conditions, that is, by the values of a for generations 0 and 1, and where Xi and X2 are the roots of

or = 21^ (N - 1 - VI + N2) ,

X2= ¿ (N - 1 + VI + N2) .

The roots, of which one (Xi) is negative and the other (X2) is positive, are both smaller than 1 in absolute value.
With succeeding generations when the index g increases, X? and X? approach zero; 1 -- ag also approaches zero and ag approaches 1.
At equilibrium the population is thus composed of individuals whose two genes are identical and who are thus all homozygotes.
On the other hand, the relation j3,,_i = ag demonstrates that ß also approaches 1 ; the genes of two different individuals are always identical.
At the limit, a single alíele thus subsists in the population. One can therefore state: A population of a constant small size, the other conditions ensuring perfect panmixia being respected, approaches total homogeneity for each locus.
In the case where a0 = ai = 0, we can determine the constants a and b of equation (4) ; we obtain

l-ao =

·[(x2 -

X2 --

- x,)xg.

(5)

1 + 2Ñ (1 - «»«-») ·

We can see from this equation that the convergence toward the homozygous equi-

Vol. 16, No. 3

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

149

librium is very slow, when N is somewhat increased. In effect, if 1/N2 becomes neg-
ligible before 1/N, and if g is large enough,
we can write

The calculation of 0AB is generally derived from the formula
«¿AB =

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

^ 2N.
The number of generations for approaching total homogeneity is thus of the same order of magnitude as the size of the population: 1 -- ag is divided by two (in other words, half the loci which are still polymorphic becomes mono-allelial) in a number of generations G, such that e-G'2N = §, or G = 2N7g2 ^ ; 1.4N.
For example, in a population where the permanent count is 50 men and 50 women of mating age, or where N = 100, it would take 140 generations, or three to four thousand years, to eliminate the moiety which is polymorphic (in the absence, of course, of mutation and of selection).
POPULATIONS OF VARIABLE SIZES

where the sum is extended to all of the different chains of kinship uniting A and B, the chain i having «,· links between A and the common ancestor C¿ and pi links between B and the ancestor C,-, this ancestor having a coefficient of consanguinity equal to /,,,-. However, this formula is valuable
FIG. 2.--Derivation of identical genes for brother F and sister S as offspring of unrelated parents P and M in a limited population.

The recurrence equation (3) permits us only if the various common ancestors C,- are

to determine aQonly if we know the function not related amongst themselves; this for-

N(e) describing the size of the population mula cannot be applied if these ancestors

during successive generations.

belong to a population of limited size.

G. Malécot (1966, p. 130) has shown that Let us consider, for example, a brother F

ag approaches 1, if N remains finite or if N increases as a linear function of g. In other

and a sister S, offspring of parents P and M

words, a population of variable size can con- without any known kinship ties between

serve a multiplicity of alíeles at each locus for them. In spite of the apparent absence of

a very long term, only if the variation between ties, P and M possess genes which have a

the sizes of two successivegenerations is also certain probability of being identical, pro-

increasing.2

viding that they belong to a limited popula-

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SPOUSES IN A LIMITED POPULATION

tion (see Fig. 2). This probability was previously designated by ßo-i, g being the

We know that the relationship between generation of F and S.

two married individuals A and B can be measured by their "coefficient of kinship," 0AB, defined as the probability that two genes randomly selected, one from A and the other from B, are "identical."

2 This result can seem contradictory to Lotka's theory which states that in a stable population the probability of extinction of a name is equal to 1 only if the population is stationary, that is, of constant size. Thus, a constant increase corresponds, at the limit, to a nil rate of increase, and the two results coincide.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

150

Jacquard

Social Biology

Calculating the coefficient of kinship of F and S, we find
because /p = /M = a,-i and /35_i = oa. Similarly, if we consider two first cousins
C and G belonging to generation g of a limited population, we get

trinsic characteristic of this couple. It depends upon the information gathered on the couple. As in all cases of probability, a coefficient of kinship is the translation of information; thus, it is necessarily partial, and the calculated coefficient simply reflects an extension of the knowledge which could be obtained.
EVOLUTION OF THE GENOTYPE STRUCTURE OF A LIMITED POPULATION

or O0CG = rgU + 12a, + 2a,_i + a,,_2] ;
and between double first cousins D and C, we get

Let us examine, for example, the case of a population in which the breeding size is about 100 individuals during a thousand year period, or about 40 generations. The mean coefficient of consanguinity is given by

= 1-U +T
- (7 -oi

-40 200 :

In this population the coefficients of kinship between first cousins become
3.7 0.9
0CG - 1 6 = T ~'

In order to characterize a population with regard to associations among genes possessed in a certain locus by the individuals comprising the population, it is necessary and sufficient to define the frequencies (ir,-,) of the various genotypes (fl¡a¡). If the number of alíeles in this locus is n, the set of the \n{n + 1) frequencies 7r,y constitutes a "trimat" which was denned as the genotype structure of the population AS.
In a population of limited size, the average coefficients of consanguinity a and of kinship ß approach 1, as generations are succeeding. Whatever the initial genotype structure (ASo), the population approaches an equilibrium structure (CAS) which no longer includes homozygotes all possessing the same alíele. ASe is thus a trimat in which all the units are zero, except for one of the units on the hypotenuse which is equal to 1. For example, in the case where only two alíeles A and a are present initially, and where only one alíele A remains at equilibrium, we write

and between double first cousins, 2.3 1.15

1 CAS = 0 0 .

In other words, the genetic relationship is almost as strong between first cousins in such a population as between brother and sister in an infinite population (for which <Í>FS = J); it is stronger for double first cousins.
This example illustrates that the coefficient of kinship for a couple is not an in-

We shall now try to ascertain by which pathway the population departs from the structure ASo to this equilibrium structure .AS.
RECURRENCE RELATIONSHIP OF GENOTYPE STRUCTURE IN PROBABILITY
Let us consider a population in which the numbers Ni and N2 of men and of women

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 3

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

151

are constant from one generation to another.

As we have seen in the first part, an individual A belonging to generation g can have genes arising from either (a) the same

- Í-T AY.,__-i,

(8)

grandparent of generation g -- 2, with prob-

ability

where tASj_2 is the "equivalent homozy-

-L _l_ _i_ = l
4Ni ^ 4N2 N '

gous structure" for the probable gene structure of generation g -- 2: sff_2, which was defined earlier.

where N is the "effective population"; or Equation (8) permits us to determine

(b) two different grandparents, with proba- AYff step by step, if we know probable bility 1 -- 1/N. In the first case, A's two genotype structures of generations 0 and 1,

genes are replicas either of the same gene as well as the probable gene structure of

or of two different genes of the grandparent successive generations sg. (each with probability J). If they are Assuming a known initial structure, we

replicas of the same gene they are therefore have AYo = AS0. identical, and A has the homozygous geno- The genotype structure, in probability, for

type (a¡ai) with a probability equal to dn individual rdndomly selected from a gen-

pVg-2, probability of the alíele a,- in genera- erdtion 1 is equal to the crossed product of the

tion g -- 2. If they are two different genes gametic structures of his father and his

of the grandparent, A therefore has the mother. Assuming random marriages, these

same genotype as this grandparent. The latter individuals both have a probable

probability that this genotype is (a<o,-) is gene structure equal to so; thus

equal to P£_2, which is the probability of an individual of generation g -- 2 having

= ? o = PAS,0 ,

(9)

this genotype. In the second case, A's two genes were
randomly selected from two different individuals of generation g -- 2. The probability that they constitute the association

according to the definition of the "equivalent panmictic structure" pASo.
Thus, we must discover how the probable gene structure sg is evolved. In calculating the "condensed vector" of each of the terms

(a,-ay) is thus the same as the probability of of equation (8), we find

finding the genotype (a,cty) in the generation g - 1, being P£_2.
Finally, the probability that A is homozygous (did,) is

1 S" ~ 2N
hence

. 1 . /. 1 2 N ' -2 T I 1 T7

Sg -

(6) = ( - i d " l (si -So) ·

and that A is heterozygous (did,) is

But according to the relationship presented in (9), si = i0. It follows that
Sg = S ( , _ l = Si) .

Thus, the gene structure in probability

These equations can be written in a con- remains equal to the initial structure, and

densed form:

we deduce that

152

Jacquard

Social Biology

where AAo represents the difference between

which permits us to write equation (8) in the initial structure and the equivalent

the form

random structure, equation (11) becomes

AYc-cASo = ( l - ^ ) (AYc_i-cASo)

(12)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

~r~ rt-»T \ A i 5--2 cAooy ,

where

an equation for which the solution is

y=

\ " A1 >a ·-- X2

ASg = cASo + AAXÎ + ABX? , (10)
where AA and A B are defined by the initial conditions and where Xi and X2 are the roots of
We again find that Xi and Xs have the values obtained for the recurrence of the coefficient of consanguinity ag studied in the second part of this paper. The two roots, both being less than 1 in absolute value, Xj and Xj, approach zero, and AY,, approaches cASo. The genotype structure, in probability, approaches the equivalenthomozygous structureof the initial population. This confirms the result obtained in the first part of this paper.
INTERMEDIATE GENOTYPE STRUCTURES
On replacing AA and A B in equation (10) by their values as a function of the initial conditions ASo and ASi = rASo, this equation becomes
r)-!ASo
Referring to equation (5), we note that the coefficient of cASo in this equation is actually ag, assuming that the population is not consanguineous initially.
Furthermore, if we say ASo = ,,ASo + AAo,

is a coefficient characterizing the influence of the initial structure ASo upon the structure AYff. I t is called the "coefficient of reduction" of the initial deviation from panmictic structure.
It should be mentioned that yg satisfies the same recurrence equation as 1 -- ag;
y° = (}~ Ñ ) T"-1 + 2Ñ7"~2'
but with the initial conditions 70 = 1 and
7i = 0.
It can be seen from equation (12) that at any given moment the structure in probability of a population can be divided into three components: (a) the equivalent homozygous structure cASo in the initial structure; (b) the equivalent panmictic structure pASo in the initial structure; (c) the difference AAo between the initial structure ASo and the equivalent panmictic structure.
The probable structure of the generation g is thus a function of the "weight" placed on these three reference structures, or ag, 1 -- ag, and yg.
We have seen that if N is sufficiently large so that 1/N2 becomes negligible before 1/N, then 1 -- ag approaches zero as
Similarly, we find that
y° ~ 2Ñ e "

Vol. 16, No. 3

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

and consequently, if g is large enough,
·2N + 1
7»
This demonstrates that the part of PASo which is present in AYff quickly becomes more important than that of AAo.
SUCCESSIVE PHASES OF EVOLUTION
Finally, the evolution of a population of limited size occurs in the following phases: 1. Starting with a given initial structure ASo,
the population attains, after the first generation, the equivalent panmictic structure ,,AS0. 2. In the second generation, the "remembrance" of the initial structure brings the probable structure A52 toward So. 3. This "remembrance" fades progressively and, depending upon the number of generations which have passed, AS0 approaches pASo; but, simultaneously, the average coefficient of consanguinity increases and approaches 1. When the effect of this increase of as brings it to the "forgetting" of ASo, A5¡, departs from the random structure pASo in order to approach the homozygous structure cASo.

generation g, the person's two genes are identical with probability aB and nonidentical with probability 1 -- ag. In the first case, the person is homozygous and has the genotype (a,a.) with probability w¿ the frequency of the alíele a,-. In the second case, the genes are independent and the individual has the homozygous genotype (a,a,) with probability w\ and the heterozygous genotype (a,a;) with probability 2w,Wj. All this is expressed in a condensed fashion by equation (12a).
ASO

This evolution can be schematically represented as shown in Figure 3. It can be seen that the limitation of size has two consequences: (a) a progressive tendency toward a homozygous structure; (b) a progressive "forgetting" of the initial structure, which "forgetting" is complete after the first generation in a random population of infinite size.
When the initial structure conforms to the genotype proportions of the panmixia AAo = 0, we can write, in this case, and this case only, equation (12) as

ASa = ag ,ASo + (1 -

, (12a)

which is known as Sewall Wright's relationship (see Fig. 3). However, we can see that this relationship is not true for the general case of a given initial structure.
One could have been tempted to establish this relationship (12) by the following reasoning. If we randomly select a member of

p FIG. 3.--Schematic representation of the evolution of a population of limited size.
This reasoning is faulty, because it assimilates nonidentical genes with independent genes. This assimilation is possible only in populations of infinite size. When the size is limited, a relationship of dependence exists among genes, even if they are not identical--a relationship resulting from the initial structure. This dependence would disappear only in the case where the initial structure had the same genotype proportions as it would have had if it had resulted from a paired association of independent genes, that is, in the case where ASo = ,,ASo.
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE GENETIC DERIVATION
Depending upon the number of generations which have passed, the existence of

154

Jacquard

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

increasingly strong dependency among the members of a population of limited size is often the subject of erroneous interpretations.
The fundamental equation

AY, = affCAS0 + (1 - as)j,ASo +

(12)

where ag tends to 1 and yg to 0 as g increases, indicates how the probability structure of successive generations evolves--probabilities which are defined as a function of the information possessed on generation 0.
In other words, AYff characterizes the set of all the possible eventualities for the population, g generations after it had been observed. But if, in a given generation we measure the actual frequencies of the various genotypes, that is, if we measure the real structure ASB, it is in no way permissible to apply the fundamental equation, in assimilating ASff and AYff, which would be nonsense. In the language of probability, we can say that AS,, is "the result of an experiment," consisting of allowing g generation to elapse; this particular result can not confirm or negate the "law of experiment."
In particular, if, at any given moment, we measure the frequencies of the genes of generation g, or in other words if we know sg, we have

and the proportions corresponding to Hardy-Weinberg's law are respected. However, on occasion, certain authors have tried to demonstrate a deviation from the proportions of panmixia within a limited population. Whenever such deviations exist, they do not arise from the effect of consanguinity brought about by the limitations of size; they occur only when the conditions of panmixia (random marriages and the absence of selection) are not respected.

Similarly, the relation
A Y t -> cASo
signifies that the population approaches a structure which is comprised of homozygotes of the same type exclusively; the probability that these homozygotes all are (didi) is equal to the initial frequency ow,-of the alíele a,-.
For example, in a generalized, simple case where there exist only two alíeles a and a' of initial frequencies p and q, the population approaches with probability p toward an equilibrium in which it has only homozygotes (aa); and with probability q, toward an equilibrium in which it has only homozygotes (a'a'):

In other words, the parameters p and q represent frequencies when dealing with the initial population, but they represent probabilities when dealing with the final population at equilibrium (at which time the frequencies can be only 0 or 1).

DISAPPEARANCE OF HETEROZYGOTES
When Wiand w¡ represent the frequencies of the alíeles a,- and a¡ in the initial population, and Ho(ij) the frequency of hétérozygotes (aid/) in this population, then equation (12) demonstrates that their probability in generation g is

P.(i/) = (1 - ag - ys)

(13)

X 2w(i + y,,H0(ij

In defining Ha as the probability that an individual of generation g is heterozygous (no matter of which genotype the person might be), Ho as the proportion of hétérozygotes in the initial generation, and pHa as this proportion in a panmictic population of the same genetic structure, we then have,

Vol. 16, No. 3

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

155

summing up term after term the \n{n -- 1)

THE CASE OF SIB-MATING

equation (13):

Populations comprised of two individ-

Eo = (1 - aa - ys)pHo + >yeH0 . (14)uals, a manand a woman, represent the

absolute minimal size necessary for the

But we have previously seen that the survival of the group, at least along sexual

values of agand yg are givenby

lines. Many geneticists have studied the

1 l-o,=
X2 -- Xl
X [(X2 - 1)\! + (1- Xi)xg

evolution of such populations which correspond to a systematic brother-sister mating (sib-mating).
This problem is generally presented in

1 [X2X1 -- X1X2], X2 -- Xi
where Xi and X2 are the roots of equation

the case where a given locus carries only two alíeles andwhere theinitial structure presents certain particulars which simplify the calculations: absence of homozygotes

or absence of hétérozygotes.

When N = 2,the roots of equation

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

But, the positive root X2 has an absolute
value which is always larger than that of
the negative root Xi; whenever g increases, X"! rapidly becomes negligible before X92,
and the relationship (14) can be written

are

X2 - ( 1 -

1-V5

I+V5

a n d A2 =

The parameters a and b in equation (4),

assuming the hypothesis that a<¡ -- ai = 0,

Between two successive generations the probability that an individual possesses a heterozygous genotype is thus reduced as

are a = 5 - --3VS

and, b, = 5 +n3¡V5 ;

ff = x = è<N~

from which isdeduced 5 - 3V5 n - V5V

This relationship isvaluable for sufficiently elevated values ofg, no matter what are the

(16)

numbers Ni and N2 of men and women in the population, numbers forwhich the har-

10 \ 4

monic mean isN/2. When thenumbers
can become negligible

are such that 1/N2 before 1/N, the re-

and similarly
s

+

yg/i-Vsy

lationship (14) becomes

10 \

)

(17)

Hs, + l

2N

(15)

5 - V5 / I + V5V 10 v 4 y

Thus, in a limited population theprobability of encountering a heterozygous individual undergoes with each generation a relative diminution equal to | N .

values which, applied to equation (12), permit usto calculate AY,,.
In order to calculate the values of aaand Y,, pertaining to the first generations, it is

156

Jacquard

Social Biology

simpler to note that the equation giving 1 -- aa is written
1 - a, = i(l - o_0 + 1(1 - a»-0 .
and similarly,

7» =

recurrence formulae for which the solution

·,

-n-i. ·>

TV.

is known as Fibonacci s series. The succes-

sive terms can be calculated easily (see

Table 1), when one observes that the g term

TABLE 1

BROTHER-SISTER MARRIAGES

hence,

If the initial population is comprised of homozygotes exclusively, then

Ho = 0 ;

hence,

,, ,.

N ., _

Ho = (1 -- ae -- yg) X ¿WiWi ;

but equations (16) and (17) show that -- ag -- yg = | ( 1 -- a,,_2
so that
Eg = (1 -- ag-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

GENEKATIONS
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

COEFFICIENTS

1-- a,,

a,,

y,,

1 1 = 2/2 3/4 5/8 8/16 13/32 21/64 34/28 55/256 89/512 144/1,024
0

0 0 1/4 3/8 8/16 19/32 43/64 94/128 201/256 423/512 880/1,024 1

1 0 1/4 1/8 2/16 3/32 S/64 8/128 13/256 21/512 34/1,024 0

has the form A,,/2", with A,, = Aff_2 + Thus, after the fifth generation of brothersister marriages, the equivalent homozygous structure, eASo, occurs for nearly twothirds of the probable structure, A 5 e , whereas the initial deviation from the panmictic structure occurs only for less than a tenth. At the tenth generation, these proportions reach 86% and 3%, respectively.
PARTICULAR CASES
If the initial population is comprised of hétérozygotes (ßar), then
Eo = 1 , Wa = HV = a , hence
E, = 1(1 - a, + 7,) ·
But equations (16) and (17) show that
1 -- a, + Ta = 1 -- Oí-i ;

It is noteworthy that in these two cases Et can be expressed as a function of a0, and that ys seems to disappear; but it only appears to be thus, since the phenomenon of "recall" of the initial structure plays a particularly concrete role. In the first case, it shifts the decrease of Eg in relation to that of 1 -- ag one generation back; in the second case, two generations.
CONCLUSION
By introducing the probability rationale hito the study of the evolution of a population of limited size, G. Malécot created concepts permitting a rigorous definition of the rules of this evolution. We have attempted here to apply a similar rationale not only to gene structures of successive generations but also to their genotype structures. We can easily see that the set of the probabilities of various genotypes in a future generation (which we call its "genotype structure in probability") is a linear combination of three reference structures: (a) the initial structure ASo; (fi) the equivalent panmictic structure pASo; (c) and the equivalent homozygous structure cASo-
Thus, we state that the respective "weights" of these three reference structures are a function of not only the "average coefficient of consanguinity" which progressively approaches 1 for succeeding genera-

Vol. 16, No. 3

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

157

tions, but also the "coefficient of reduction" of the initial deviation from panmictic structure, a coefficient which approaches zero. Having introduced this latter factor, we can describe in terms of probability the evolution of a population whatever its initial structure.
Finally, in specifying the significance of our results, we would like to take this occasion to correct a misinterpretation of the notion of "genetic drift." Limitation of the population size carries with it an increasing level of consanguinity, as measured by the "mean coefficient of consanguinity." This coefficient is involved in the probability structure of the population, but it does not

occur in the observed structure, at least in a panmictic situation. The proportions described by Hardy-Weinberg's law are affected only from the perspective of probability. On the other hand, they remain unaltered in all real populations, whatever the level of consanguinity, so long as the consanguinity level is due to the limitation of the population only. Often considered as a paradox, this statement becomes evident if we take care to define cautiously the concepts employed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Miss Jeni Smoly provided the careful translation of this article from French.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

JACQUARD, A. 1968. Liaison génétique entre individus apparentés. Population 23:93-128.
_____. 1968. Évolution des populations d'effectif
limité. Population 23:279-300. Li, C. C. 1955. Population genetics. Univ. of Chi-
cago Press, Chicago.
MALÉCOT, G. 1966. Probabilités et hérédité. I.N.E.D., Paris.

WRIGHT, S. 1951. The genetical structure of population. Ann. Eug. 13:323-354.
_____. 1965. The interpretation of population structure by F statistics, with special regard to system of mating. Evolution 19:395-420.
YASUDA, H., and N. E. MORTON. 1966. Studies on
human population structure. Proceedings of the Third International Congress of Human Genetics. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

