Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Premarital childbearing in northwest Kenya: Challenging the concept of illegitimacy
Bettina ShellDuncan & Matthew Wimmer
To cite this article: Bettina ShellDuncan & Matthew Wimmer (1999) Premarital childbearing in northwest Kenya: Challenging the concept of illegitimacy, Social Biology, 46:1-2, 47-61, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1999.9988987 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9988987
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 54
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

Premarital Childbearing in Northwest Kenya: Challenging the Concept of Illegitimacy

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Bettina Shell-Duncan and Matthew Wimmer
Department ofAnthropology University of Washington Seattle, Washington 98195-3100
ABSTRACT: A number of African countries, including Kenya, have experienced a marked rise in births among unmarried women. In Western countries, reproduction outside of marriage isassumed to be illegitimate and a social problem. Onehypothesis used to explain the increasing incidence of premarital fertility in Africa is a breakdown of traditional social controls by theextended family over the sexual behavior of adolescents. A competing hypothesis suggests that unmarried women use sexual relations to achieve goals such as marriage. Among Turkana pastoralists of northwest Kenya, we find a pattern of premarital birth that fits either hypothesis only loosely. Premarital fertility among the Turkana is both widespread and culturally acceptable, with over 30 per cent of women having at least one child prior to marriage. Although women with premarital births initiate childbearing on average one year earlier than women with only marital births, women's marital status does not influence the length of the interval between first and second births. Marriage among the Turkana is not a social trigger for the onset and continuation of reproduction or a means to legitimate reproduction. Marital status of the parents simply determines the custody of a child. In a premarital birth, the father pays a set fee to the mother's family, and the custody of the child remains permanently with the mother's family. If the parents later marry, the father must purchase custody of the child by another fee at that time. Since the Turkana have experienced few effects of modernization, the existence of such a practice suggests that cultural factors must be taken into account before assessing premarital fertility in Africa as a social problem.

The topic of nuptiality in sub-Saharan Africa has recently gained increasing attention among demographers as assumptions about the pattern of marriage, and its relationship to childbearing, become challenged. For decades, marriage in sub-Saharan Africa was considered to be an "early and universal" social institution (van de Walle, 1968), and marriage was considered to be the crucial event for gauging the onset of childbearing (Bledsoe and Pison, 1994). More recently, these notions have been identified as overgeneralizations. Data reveal that nuptiality patterns are more accurately characterized as heterogeneous, with the average age at first marriage ranging

broadly, from 15 to 21 years of age (Kaufman et al., 1987). Additionally, Bledsoe and Pison (1994, p. 4) have drawn attention to the fact that marriage "is only tenuously connected to childbearing in many African countries." At the same time, analyses of World Fertility Survey (WFS) and Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data demonstrate that, particularly in urban areas, the age at first marriage is rising, while the age of onset of reproduction remains relatively stable (Meekers, 1994a; Cochranne and Farid, 1989). Consequently, premarital childbearing is becoming increasingly common (Bledsoe and Cohen, 1993; Meekers, 1994a).

47

48

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

A growing body of literature devoted to documenting the prevalence and determinants of premarital childbearing in sub-Saharan Africa draws from the model of Western industrialized nations in labeling this phenomenon a "social problem" (Gyepi-Garbrah, 1985; Adegbola, 1987; Bledsoe and Cohen; Meekers, 1994b). Reproduction outside of marriage is assumed to be "illegitimate," and the negative social and health consequences are stressed (Gyepi-Garbrah, 1985; Adegbola, 1987). To explain the increase in premarital childbearing in sub-Saharan Africa, Cherlin and Riley (1986) have proposed two opposing (though not necessarily contradictory) causal frameworks: (1) "social disorganization" and (2) "rational adaptation."
The social disorganization argument is an extension of Caldwell's (1982) theory of fertility transition, emphasizing the effect of modernization in the erosion of traditional parental and community control over adolescent sexuality. According to this hypothesis, urbanization, education, Westernization, and structural economic changes result in a breakdown of traditional means of social control over adolescent sexual behavior and socialization. As disparities in educational and economic opportunities increase between urban and rural communities, a growing number of adolescents migrate to urban areas for schooling or employment opportunities and are thus separated from the social control of their kingroup (Lesthaeghe, 1980, 1989). Urbanization and education are also believed to contribute to the erosion of traditional moral codes by exposing adolescents to Western values about sex, sexual autonomy, and conjugal life (Caldwell, 1982; Nichols et al., 1986; Worthman and Whiting, 1989;

Lesthaeghe, 1989). In this context, Cherlin and Riley (1986) propose that adolescent sexual activity occurs because of opportunity and impulse, and without the intent to achieve any particular goal. Pregnancy is neither planned nor desired.
An alternative perspective, known as "rational adaptation," argues that unmarried adolescent females use sexuality and pregnancy as a rational or strategic way to achieve financial, career, and social goals. Cherlin and Riley (1986) distinguish these women in two ways: (1) those for whom sexual activity is a rational choice, but who do not intend to become pregnant; and (2) those for whom pregnancy in and of itself is a rational strategy. Women in the first group may enter a sexual relationship with an older man, or "sugar daddy," to obtain money for school fees or other expenses (Gage and Bledsoe, 1994; Dinan, 1983; Calves, 1997) or to obtain employment or job advancements (Bledsoe, 1980; Mann, 1985). Women in the second group may enter a sexual relationship for similar reasons, but also intend to become pregnant with the hope of facilitating marriage, creating emotional or obligational ties to a man, or improving status or marriage prospects by proving fertility (Cherlin and Riley, 1986; Meekers, 1994a; Calves, 1997).
Both the social disorganization and rational adaptation models rest upon the assumption that the institution of marriage legitimates sexual relations and reproduction, and that women who become pregnant before marriage, either wittingly or unwittingly, are defying a social norm. This assumption, however, does not hold true for all societies throughout subSaharan Africa. For example, Meekers (1994a) reports that among the Bagenda of Uganda, virginity at marriage is not

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Premarital Childbearing

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

highly valued, and parents actually encourage premarital sexual relations by building a separate house for sexually active adolescents. Similarly, the Rendille pastoralists of northern Kenya encourage sexual activity among unmarried adolescents, viewing it as an opportunity to practice and perfect the traditional family planning method, withdrawal (Muruli et al., 1998). By contrast, other groups are known to have strong prohibitions against premarital sexual activity and childbearing. Clearly, discerning whether premarital sexuality and/or childbearing constitutes a violation of social norms requires an understanding of the cultural context in which it occurs.
The purpose of this study is to document the level and pattern of premarital fertility in a rural Kenyan community and to evaluate the cultural context surrounding this phenomenon. Specifically, we hypothesize that premarital childbearing is discouraged because paternal support would not be assured. Additionally, because polygyny is practiced in this society, we assume that marriage among women is early and universal and that premarital pregnancies among young teenage women arise from a breakdown of control over adolescent sexuality. Consequently, we hypothesize that women with premarital pregnancies do not marry at later ages, but initiate reproduction earlier, and consequently have higher levels of fertility.
SOCIAL DISORGANIZATION VS. RATIONAL ADAPTATION: PREVIOUS RESEARCH
To date, the few studies that explore the explanatory power of the social disorganization and rational adaptation hy-

potheses have been limited by their focus on national or supranational level statistics. In the absence of information on ethnicity and cultural values, it is impossible to evaluate social norms regarding premarital childbearing, and only indirect inferences can be drawn. Adegbola (1987) was the first to examine premarital fertility in sub-Saharan Africa using data from the Nigerian Fertility Survey. Variables relating to urbanization were found to be positively associated with an increased percentage of women reporting premarital fertility, while the per cent practicing traditional religion was negatively associated with the same dependent variable. These findings were interpreted as supporting a version of the "social disorganization" hypothesis, which argues that Westernization results in the breakdown of traditional institutions.
In Meekers' (1994) examination of DHS data from seven sub-Saharan countries, the findings that premarital childbearing is more common among literate than illiterate women and that, on average, literate women become sexually active and marry at a later age are interpreted as support for the rational adaptation hypothesis. However, the survey data also reveal a high incidence of induced abortion and unwanted premarital pregnancy, suggesting that the social disorganization hypothesis cannot be fully excluded. Consequently, Meekers (1994a, p. 57) concludes that "only scattered support exists for each of these hypotheses, and there is no information on the relative importance of each type of behavior in different socioeconomic and cultural groups."
Calves (1997) has also attempted to test the relative validity for each explanatory framework for premarital fertility for Cameroon. Recognizing the limitations

50

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

of large-scale survey data that lack information on motivations, Calves supplemented the Cameroon DHS (CDHS) with qualitative data from focus group discussions among adolescents and parents of adolescents. However, because CDHS did not include information about ethnicity, and focus group discussions were conducted only in the city of Yaounde, inferences about the ethnic differences in the social context of premarital childbearing are limited. This study does, however, provide powerful insight to the social context and motivations surrounding premarital childbearing in Yaounde.
Results from this study indicate that the current pattern of adolescent fertility is partially explained by the breakdown of social control of the elders over adolescent sexuality, as adolescents who live away from their parents are more likely to be sexually active (Calves, 1997). However, focus group discussions among adolescents from various socioeconomic subgroups demonstrate that the rational adaptation model also applies. Across all economic subgroups, sexual behavior was reported as used for economic gain as well as for networking to meet a spouse. Premarital childbearing was largely unwanted among younger adolescents, while it was reported that older adolescents choose to have a child prior to marriage to provide security for their future, prove their fertility, and create financial and emotional ties to a man (Calves, 1997).
These studies demonstrate that while the social disorganization and rationalchoice explanatory frameworks are mutually exclusive for individual cases, both phenomena may apply to individuals at different stages in their lives or to different subgroups of the population. More-

over, distinguishing the two explanatory models requires that the cultural norms regarding premarital sexuality and childbearing are understood and that individual motivations are evaluated within their specific sociocultural context.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
STUDY POPULATION: THE TURKANA
The Turkana are a tribe of traditional nomadic pastoralists who inhabit the harsh semidesert region of northwest Kenya. This study concentrated upon the Ngisonyoka, one of nineteen territorial subsections of the Turkana, numbering approximately 10,000 individuals. They are located in a 9,000 km2 territory of Turkana District that is roughly bound by the Turkwel and Kerio rivers and the southern border of the district (Figure 1). This area is one of the harshest and least productive regions of East Africa, characterized by extreme heat and wind, low and unpredictable rainfall with annual accumulations typically under 300 mm per year, and scattered, patchy resources. They exploit this region by herding mixed stock including camels, cattle, goats, sheep, and donkeys and are entirely dependent upon their herds for subsistence, either directly from animal products of milk, blood, meat, and fat, or indirectly by exchanging animals for farm goods such as maizemeal, tea, and sugar.
The Turkana are an ancephalous society, organized by kin groups with patrilocal residence and patrilineal descent. Membership in a patrilineage determines social identity in terms of affiliation with one of more than 25 brands (emechar/ ngimacherin) which are tribal subdivisions with distinct customs, rules, and

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Premarital Childbearing

51

©Lokichar
Nakwamoru -2

igTURKANA
mum
~T»lekPs The Barrier

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

kilometers

FIG. 1.--Mapof south Turkana.

laws (Barrett, 1987). The Turkana live in polygynous family units, know as ngawei (s., awi), which usually range in size from ten to fifty persons. Members of an

awi typically include a head herd-owner, his wives, their sons and unmarried daughters, and possibly other extended relatives such as widowed parents.

52

Shell-Duncan and YY'immer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

The Turkana are highly mobile, moving approximately once every three weeks, driven by the needs of their herd animals. To accommodate the different foraging and watering needs of their different species of livestock, the Turkana have developed complex herding strategies involving high mobility and herd fission and fusion based on species and production (McCabe et al., 1988). In the wet season all the animals can be congregated because of the proximity of water and grazing areas. In the dry season, the herds break apart by species and age and are taken to various locations to meet their needs. For example, camels need to be watered only once every three days, so they can be taken to distant desert locations. Cattle, however, need to be watered daily, so they are grazed in the limited mountain regions which have closer access to water holes.
Maintaining large herds of mixed species is extremely labor-intensive. It involves not only travel over long distances in search of adequate grazing areas, but also watering the animals, work that is done by adolescent girls and young women. Also, women, assisted by children, are responsible for laborious tasks including fetching water for their family, collecting firewood, building huts, and milking animals twice daily. Children are also highly valued for their assistance in herding animals. Very small children (age five or six) are responsible for tending herds of baby goats and sheep. Preadolescents and early teens are responsible for herds of goats and sheep that often number in the hundreds. Older teens and adults typically divide the responsibility of herding the cattle and camels.
Because of the Turkana's reliance on livestock for subsistence, the demography

of livestock and humans is closely linked. In the wet season when forage and water are available in sufficient quantities, families and their herds congregate in neighborhoods or grazing associations called adakars. In the dry season, as herds disperse and split apart, homesteads dissociate and eventually break into "satellite" camps. As the families and their livestock migrate and divide, household composition changes. Having a fluid, flexible household composition is critical because of the need to balance the number of food-producing livestock and the number of people required for efficient herd management. In order to adjust to changes in labor demands or food supplies, animals may be exchanged between households. However, more commonly, children are transferred between households to accommodate changing labor needs and resource availability (ShellDuncan, 1994). Because of the labor intensive nature of herding, and because children contribute significantly to labor, the demand for children is very high.
DATA
Data were collected in 1990 and 1991 over the course of an 18-month field study of sociocultural and biological determinants of maternal and child health among the Turkana. Households (ngawei) from the Ngisonyoka territorial subsection were randomly selected, and all women ages 15 and over were identified to be interviewed and to complete a questionnaire regarding marital status, completed fertility, child mortality, household composition, and child fostering. Dates of vital events were determined through the use of a local event history calendar established by Little and Leslie (1990). Because the Turkana name wet and dry seasons in each year, it is possible to esti-

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Premarital Childbearing

53

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

mate dates of vital events with a degree of precision not normally possible in nonliterate populations lacking vital registration systems. These data do, however, suffer from a number of potential sources of bias. The number of children in the sample is most certainly an underenumeration of children born to the women interviewed. This underenumeration is due, in part, to recall error, particularly by older informants. Quite often one or several children are "forgotten," particularly those who died at an early age. The Turkana also are quite reluctant to mention children who have died because of the painful nature of the subject. If children born outside of marriage are at an elevated risk of mortality, perhaps because of being firstborn or because of suffering from lack of paternal support, they would be underenumerated relative to marital births. Complete reproductive histories were collected from a total of 358 women, and data on 343 women who had ever given birth were analyzed for this study. Differences in age-specific fertility rates of women with at least one premarital birth versus those with only marital births were compared using chisquare analysis.
Ethnographic information was obtained through extensive participant observation over the course of fieldwork. Additionally, in-depth interviews were conducted with key informants, and focus group discussions were conducted on gender-separated groups of adolescents, young adults married less than ten years, and elders. Topics that were raised in focus group discussions include (1) attitudes toward premarital sexual activity, (2) attitudes toward premarital pregnancy, (3) male responsibility for premarital pregnancy, (4) rights and responsibilities

of parents and kin for a child born prior to marriage, and (5) factors considered in negotiating marriage arrangements. The goal of these interviews and focus group discussions was to obtain information about perceptions and viewpoints on premarital childbearing across generations and by gender and to gain insights as to if and when premarital childbearing is considered an individual or social problem.
RESULTS
MARRIAGE AMONG THE TURKANA
Defining whether children are born within marriage requires understanding what is meant by "marriage" among the Turkana. As is typically found in African societies, marriage among the Turkana is a process, rather than a discrete event marked by a single ceremony. An unmarried woman is known as an apese (literally, "girl"), and when she is approaching a marriageable age, she is visually distinct. As a display of her family's wealth she will wear as many beaded necklaces (ngakoromwa) as the family can afford to provide. In addition, she will wear distinct skins and will often accentuate her appearance by smearing her skins, beads, and hair with fat mixed with red ochre (emunyen). A married woman is referred to as aberu (pi., ngaberu), and wears distinctly different jewelry and skins. For example, the number of beaded necklaces are reduced, and she wears a brass or aluminum neck ring (alagama) which denotes her married status. In addition, the design and animal source of her skins (gazelle, calf, sheep, etc.) are prescribed by the brand of her husband. A third category is apese ngabus, which literally means "girl of the skins." This title is

54

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

given to an unmarried woman who has borne a child. Even though she is unmarried and lives with her father's family, she wears the skins of a married woman, builds her own hut, and is allotted milking animals for herself and her dependent(s).
The process of marriage among the Turkana is initiated by negotiations about bridewealth which is paid in animal stock. Unlike some East African pastoralists, the Turkana do not have a fixed bridewealth. The payment varies widely, depending on the wealth of the families involved. Turkana bridewealth can be as much as 100 to 200 small stock and 65 to 100 large stock, among the highest of any East African pastoral society (Galvin, 1985). The bridewealth payments can be paid slowly over a long period of time, extending up to twenty or more years. Once bridewealth has been agreed upon, and an initial payment (usually one-half of the animals) has been received by the woman's family, the woman typically leaves her father's awi and begins to reside with her husband. Although the residence change is acceptable and expected, the actual process of transfer is shrouded by an atmosphere of covertness. Members of the husband's family sneak into the bride's awi in the middle of the night to "kidnap" the bride and bring her to the husband's awi. The following morning a ritual known as akinyonyo is performed, which involves removing the bride's skins and beads of a girl and replacing them with those of a married woman. The bride will reside with the senior wife of her husband or, if she is the first wife, with her husband's mother until she gives birth to her first child, at which time she will make her own hut and be allocated her own animals. The marriage process is not considered complete until all bridewealth animals

have been paid. The completion of payments is marked by a ceremony highlighted by the killing of an ox.
A survey of 87 post-reproductive women showed that the interval between the onset of cohabitation and killing the ox can range from 1 month to 28 years, and in a small number of cases bridewealth payments were never completed. Clearly, the marriage process among the Turkana is prolonged, and estimates of the level of premarital childbearing depend on how marriage is defined. For the purpose of this study, the onset of marriage was defined as the date of initiation of cohabitation. Selection of this event to define marriage is justified by two factors: (1) When asked to identify women as married or unmarried and to provide a date of marriage, the Turkana emphasize initiation of payments and change of residence. (2) Initial animal payments and residence change demark Turkana classifications of unmarried girls (apese) and married women (aberu).
MARRIAGE PATTERN AND PREMARITAL
CHILDBEARING
Using date of cohabitation to define the onset of marriage, information on premarital childbearing was obtained through the collection of reproductive histories from 343 women in the nomadic sector of the Turkana population. Our data confirm that the Turkana are highly polygynous with 55.2 per cent of married females sampled living in polygynous unions. By comparison, Kaufman and colleagues (1987) report that the range in proportion of women living in polygynous unions in sub-Saharan Africa ranges from 53.8 per cent (Congo) to 10.2 per cent (Kinshasa).

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Premarital Childbearing

55

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

It has long been asserted that in polygynous societies the demand for wives is high and promotes a pattern of early and universal marriage for women (Bledsoe and Pison, 1994; Goldman and Pebley, 1989; Ezeh, 1997). By contrast, marriage among the Turkana is neither early nor universal. Among ever-married women, the mean age of marriage is 20.8 years, placing them at the upper end of the range of variation in average age at marriage in sub-Saharan African populations (Kaufman et al., 1987). An analysis of DHS data from seven African countries revealed that the per cent of women with at least one premarital birth ranges from 2.6 per cent to 20.3 per cent (Table 1), with Kenya displaying the highest rate of premarital childbearing (Meekers, 1994a).
In Turkana, a region not included in the Kenyan DHS survey, this pattern is even more pronounced: Over 30 per cent of all surveyed women had their first birth prior to marriage, and quite notably, a significant proportion of higher order births are premarital as well. This finding prompts the question whether women who have premarital births are initiating childbearing at earlier ages and/or whether they are delaying marriage. The overall mean age at first birth among women in this survey is 20.1 years old (Figure 2), while on average, unmarried women initiate childbearing 1.05 years before married women (p < 0.01).
Examination of these data across cohorts indicates no secular trend in age at first birth. The mean age of marriage of ever-married women is 20.8 years (Figure 3). Controlling for age, we found that married women who have had at least one premarital birth marry on average 3.28 years later than women with only

marital births (p < 0.01). It is noteworthy, however, that of women sampled who had at least one nonmarital birth, 17 per cent were currently unmarried, with ages ranging from 17 to 42 years, and that many have more than one birth outside of marriage. The Turkana indicate that some women may never marry, particularly if their fathers are wealthy herdowners and no potential husband can meet the family demand of a high bridewealth. Because of the labor-intensive nature of herding, a wealthy herdowner may attach more value to increasing his family size, and potential labor pool, than to increasing herd size through bridewealth payments. The sample size of this study is too small to shed light on this phenomenon.
Estimates of age-specific fertility (Table 2) reveal small but significant differences in fertility patterns and levels of women who initiate childbearing prior to marriage as compared to those with only marital births. In particular, the early segment of the reproductive period (ages 15-19) reveals dramatically higher agespecific fertility rates for women with premarital births. This process culminates in a higher total fertility rate for women with premarital births, who achieve 21 per cent higher fertility than their counterparts. The underlying determinants of this fertility differential are that women with premarital births initiate childbearing a full year earlier than women with only marital births and that marital status at first birth does not influence the length of the interval between first and second births, a mean birth interval of 2.54 years. Consequently, marriage among the Turkana is not a social "trigger" for the onset or continuation of childbearing.

56

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

Social Biology

TABLE 1
PER CENT OF RESPONDENTS WHO HAD FIRST BIRTHS BEFORE MARRIAGE
Country
Burundi Ghana Kenya Liberia Mali Togo Zimbabwe Turkana
SOURCE: Demographic and Health Surveys, 1985-89, reported by Meekers, 1994.

Percent
2.6
8.2 20.3
17.6 9.7 15.1 13.0 31.4

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

10

15-19

25-29

35-39

45-49

55-60

20-24

30-34

40-44

50-54

60+

Age Category

Women with no premarital births

· Women with at least one premarital birth

FIG. 2.--Mean age at marriage among women who have had at least one premarital birth versus women with only marital births.

SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT OF LEGITIMATE REPRODUCTION AMONG
THE TURKANA
Given that such a high proportion of births occur prior to marriage, it is important to consider what is the legitimate context of childbearing among the Turkana. For demographic purposes, a legitimate child is typically defined as one who was conceived or born in an extant

legal union (Adegbola, 1987; Bledsoe and Pison, 1994). By this definition, marriage legitimates sexual relations and reproduction, and premarital childbearing is viewed as a violation of social norms.
The situation in Turkana is strikingly different. Premarital childbearing is not only acceptable, but often encouraged by family members. Furthermore, the process of bridewealth negotiations need not be started for a man to have approved

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Premarital Childbearing

57

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

10

15-19

25-29

35-39

45^9

55-60

20-24

30-34

40-44

50-54

60+

Age Category

A Women with no premarital births

· Women with at least one premarital birth

FIG. 3.--Mean age at first birth among women who have had at least one premarital birth versus women with only marital births.

TABLE 2
FERTILITY HISTORIES FOR WOMEN (POST-REPRODUCTIVE AND REPRODUCTIVE) WITH ONLY MARITAL BIRTHS VERSUS WOMEN WITH AT LEAST ONE PREMARITAL BIRTH

MARITAL

AGE
INTERVAL
15-19.. 20-24.. 25-29.. 30-34.. 35-39.. 40-44.. 45^9.. Totals...

Personyears
1,010 960 844 585 445 336 230

Births
95 283 255 165
88 25
7 918

ASFa
94.06 294.79 302.13 282.05 197.75
74.41 30.44 1,275.63 TFR = 6.38

"ASF = Age-Specific Fertility = Births/Person-yearsX 1,000. V < 0.01.

Personyears
424 399 324 234 176 118
81

PREMARITAL

Births
92 104 127 79 35
10 4 451

ASF X2

216.98 38.71*

260.65 391.97 337.61 198.86 84.75 49.38 1,540.2

1.45 8.18* 2.21 0.05 0.03 0.20 16.94*

TFR = 7.70

or "legitimate" sexual relations with an unmarried woman. Consent of the woman's family depends on their perception of the man's ability to provide animals, labor, and political support from his family. In many ways, he is evaluated as

a potential husband. However, if he chooses not to marry the woman, no ill feelings result. Obtaining consent of the woman's family is, however, very important, and women who are suspected of having sexual relations with a man who

58

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

does not meet with the family's approval are severely punished, often by being beaten. One key informant who became pregnant by a man who did not meet with her family's approval was beaten so severely that she miscarried.
The birth of a child often accelerates bridewealth negotiations or payments, but pregnancy does not mandate marriage. If a child is born before marriage, a man must pay a fee called ekichul, which is a fixed fee of 30 animals (20 goats or sheep and 10 cows or camel) for the first child and 11 animals (10 small stock and 1 cow or camel) for each subsequent child. After the payment of this fee, the father no longer has any responsibilities for or rights to the child. Custody of the child is held by the maternal grandparents.
When an unmarried mother eventually marries, custody of any children born prior to marriage remains with the maternal grandparents. The mother moves to her husband's aWi without these children. If a woman marries the father of any of her children born prior to marriage, he may obtain custody of the children by "purchasing" them from his father-in-law with payments that are added on to the bridewealth. These payments are separate from the earlier-paid ekichul. The maternal grandparents have the right to refuse a son-in-law's request to purchase his children if they wish to retain custody. They often do refuse because the elderly are dependent upon young children for assistance with domestic activities such as fetching water and firewood. In addition, because of the labor-intensive nature of herding, the demand for children is very high.
Consequently, nonmarital childbearing is an important source of "foster children," that is, children residing with a

caretaker other than the biological mother. An earlier study found that approximately 17 per cent of all Turkana children live as foster children (ShellDuncan, 1994). Furthermore, children born prior to marriage were found to be over five times more likely to reside separately from their biological mother, and in nearly 60 per cent of the cases the maternal grandmother is the foster mother.
From these results it can be concluded that among the Turkana the importance of marriage in relation to reproduction is that it determines the custody of a child. Because of the high demand for children, coupled with a tradition in which custody of premarital children is held by the biological mother's kin group, premarital childbearing is not only approved of, but often encouraged. The high level of premarital childbearing results from delayed marriage and earlier initiation of reproduction. It does not, in most cases, reflect a breakdown of moral codes or familial control over adolescent sexual behavior. Rather, it demonstrates that, among the Turkana, the sanctioned state of reproduction is not encompassed by the institution of marriage, and that "legitimate" childbearing can occur among unmarried women.
DISCUSSION
Although premarital childbearing in sub-Saharan Africa increasingly is becoming labeled a "social problem," it is important to appreciate the immense cultural diversity found within and between African nations and to recognize the multifaceted sociocultural context of marriage and childbearing in different ethnic groups. Recent studies have demonstrated that generalizable demographic "facts"

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Premarital Childbearing

59

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

that hold true for all of sub-Saharan Africa are difficult to support with DHS or other data.
This study among the Turkana challenges a number of widely held assumptions. Although the Turkana are highly polygynous, marriage among women is neither early nor universal. Although most reproduction occurs within marriage, it is not the only legitimate context of childbearing. Although premarital childbearing is common among the Turkana, it does not necessarily reflect a widespread breakdown of control over adolescent sexual behavior. For the Turkana, the role of marriage in regard to childbearing is that it determines custody of a child. In addition, premarital or extramarital childbearing represents a different life course strategy; women who have at least one premarital birth tend to initiate childbearing earlier, marry at later ages, and have higher total fertility than women with only marital births. A substantial number of women have higher order births prior to marriage, and a small fraction of unwed mothers never marry.
For the Turkana, premarital childbearing occurs in the context of a number of features that promote or support the practice. First, children are highly valued as economic assets, and children born prior to marriage are not discriminated against or socially disowned. Second, "legitimate" reproduction entails familial approval of the child's father, his acknowledgment of paternity, and his payment of a single set fee {ekichul). And finally, prolonged paternal support is not required, as the child is integrated into the mother's extended family, most often becoming fostered by the maternal grandparents. At a later date, if the socially recognized father chooses to marry the child's mother,

he may be allowed to purchase the child through the payment of a fee added to the bridewealth payment.
Isiugo-Abanihe (1994) has demonstrated that among the Ibo of Nigeria, high bridewealth leads to the postponement of marriage. Similarly, for the Turkana, who have one of the highest bridewealth fees of any East African pastoralists, marriage among women is late. Moreover, Meekers, (1994a), using data from seven African countries, demonstrated that the overall strongest correlate of premarital childbearing is later age at marriage, as women who marry late have greater exposure to the risk of premarital pregnancy. Hence, in the broader African context, it may be the case that premarital childbearing is a common rational choice in societies that display key features: high demand for children, extended kin support for childrearing, and high bridewealth or other factors contributing to a postponement of marriage.
This study also demonstrates that Cherlin and Riley's (1986) conceptualization of rational choice as a determinant of premarital fertility may be manifest in various forms in different cultural settings. Cherlin and Riley (1986) stress that unmarried adolescents may intentionally choose to have a child in order to achieve financial or social goals, despite the fact that they are defying a social norm. By contrast, among the Turkana there is widespread social approval of premarital childbearing. Parents may actually encourage an unmarried daughter to have a child before marrying to assure that they have assistance from this child in old age.
Alternative forms of rational choice models are also found in Western societies. For example, Hamburg (1986) identifies a subset of Western adolescent

60

Shell-Duncan and Wimmer

Social Biology

mothers who follow a rational alternative the degree to which premarital fertility

life course strategy. For these women, is, in fact, a social problem.

early, andusually premarital, childbear-

ing is viewed as a response to adverse

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

socioeconomic conditions, such asen-

We aregrateful to themany people who

demic youth unemployment. This strat- assisted invarious aspects ofthis research, in-

egy may also depend upon significant kin cluding Dr. Rada Dyson-Hudson, Dr. Paul

network support, especially grandmothers' care of children, and different subculture norms of fertility behavior (Bur-

Leslie, Ms. Leah Imoru Lobar, Mr. Michael O'Neill, Dr. Sharon Stash, and Dr. James Wood. We thank the Hon. S.M. Toyya,District Commissioner, and the Turkana District

ton, 1990). Clearly, recognizing that Officers for their cooperation. This research

premarital childbearing occurs in widely was supported by the National Science Foun-

varying cultural contexts and that the broader social approval and support for unwed mothers and their children vary

dation Award BNS-8914312 and BNS8718447, the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, the Sigma Xi Scientific Research Society, the Hill Foundation,

greatly in different social settings are im- and the Biomedical Research Support Fund at

portant considerations for determining Pennsylvania State University.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ADEGBOLA, O. 1987. An appraisal of non-marital

tion or rational strategy? Paper presented at the

births inNigeria, p.77-98. InThe cultural roots

Annual Meeting of the Population Association

of African fertility regimes: Proceedings of the of America, March 27-29, Washington,D.C.

Ife Conference, February 25-March 1, 1987. CHERLIN, A., and N. RILEY. 1986. Adolescent fertil-

Population Studies Center, University of Penn-

ity: An emerging issue in sub-Saharan Africa.

sylvania, PA.

PHN Technical Note 86-23, The World Bank,

AIAYI, A. A., L. T. MARANGU, J. MILLER, and J. M.

Washington,D.C.

PAXMAN. 1991. Adolescent sexuality and fertil- COCHRANNE, S. H., and S. M. FARID. 1989. Fertility

ity in Kenya: A survey of knowledge, percep-

in sub-Saharan Africa: Analysis and explana-

tions, and practices. Stud. Fam. Plan. 22:

tion. Discussion paper no. 43,The World Bank,

205-214.

Washington, D.C.

BARRETT, A. 1987. Dying and death among the DINAN, C. 1983. Sugar daddies and gold-diggers:

Turkana. Spearhead No. 97. Gaba Publications,

The white-collar single women in Accra, p.

Eldoret, Kenya.

344-366. In C.Oppong (ed.), Female and male

BLEDSOE, C. 1980. Women and marriage in Kpelle

in West Africa. George Allen and Unwin, Lon-

society. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, CA.

don.

BLEDSOE, C., and B. COHEN (eds.). 1993. Social dy- EZEH, A. C. 1997. Polygyny and reproductive be-

namics of adolescent fertility in sub-Saharan

havior in sub-Saharan Africa: A contextual

Africa. National Research Council Report on

analysis. Demography 31:355-368.

Population Dynamics of Sub-Saharan Africa. GAGE, A., and C. BLEDSOE. 1994. The effect of edu-

National Academy Press, Washington,D.C.

cation andsocial stratification on marriageand

BLEDSOE, C., and G. PISON (eds.). 1994.Nuptiality

transition to parenthood in Freetown, Sierra

in sub-Saharan Africa: Contemporary anthropo-

Leone, p. 148-166. In C. Bledsoe and G. Pison

logical and demographic perspectives. Claren-

(eds.), Nuptiality in sub-Saharan Africa: Con-

don Press, Oxford.

temporary anthropological and aemographic

BURTON, L. 1990. Teenage childbearing as an alter-

perspectives. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

native life-course strategy in multigeneration GAGE, A., and D. MEEKERS. 1994. Sexual activity

black families. Hum. Nat. 1:123-143.

before marriage in sub-Saharan Africa. Soc.

CALDWELL, J. C. 1982.Theory of fertility decline.

Biol. 41:44-60.

Academic Press, New York.

GALVIN, K. 1985. Food procurement, diet, activities

CALVES, A. E. 1997.Premarital sexual activityand

and nutrition of Ngisonyoka Turkana pastoral-

childbearing in Cameroon: Social disorganiza-

ists in an ecological and social context. Unpub-

Vol. 46, No.1-2

Premarital Childbearing

61

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

lished doctoral dissertation, State University of

1988. Movement and migration as pastoral re-

New York, Binghamton.

sponses to limited and unpredictable resources,

GOLDMAN, N., and A. PEBLEY. 1989. The demogra-

p. 727-734. In E. E.Whitehead, C. F. Hutchin-

phy of polygyny in sub-Saharan Africa, p.

son, B. N. Timmermann, and R. G. Varady

212-237. In R. J. Lesthaeghe (ed.), Reproduc-

(eds.), Arid lands today and tomorrow. Proceed-

tion and social organization in sub-Saharan

ings of an International Research and Develop-

Africa. Univ. ofCalifornia Press, Berkeley.

ment Conference.

GYEPI-GARBRAH, B. 1985. Adolescent fertility in MEEKERS, D. 1994a. Sexual initiation and premari-

sub-Saharan Africa: An overview. The Path-

tal childbearing in sub-Saharan Africa. Pop.

finder Fund, Boston.

Stud. 48:47-64.

HAMBURG, B. A. 1986. Subsets of adolescent mothers:

. 1994b. The implications of premarital

Developmental, biomedical, and psychosocial di-

childbearing forinfant mortality: The case study

mensions. In J. B. Lancaster and B.A. Hamburg

of Cote d'Ivoire, p.296-312. In C.Bledsoe and

(eds.), School-age pregnancy and parenthood:

G. Pison (eds.), Nuptiality in sub-Saharan

Biosocial dimensions. Aldine-DeGruyter, NewYork.

Africa: Contemporary anthropological and de-

ISIUGO-ABANIHE, U. C. 1994. Consequences ofbride-

mographic perspectives. Clarendon Press,Ox-

wealth changes onnuptiality patterns amongthe

ford.

Ibo of Nigeria, p. 74-91. In C. Bledsoe and G. MURULI, L., B. SHELL-DUNCAN, and W. OBIERO.

Pison (eds.), Nuptiality in sub-Saharan Africa:

1998. Withdrawal and periodic abstinence for

Contemporary anthropological and demographic

family planning among the Rendille of northern

perspectives. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Kenya. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting

KAUFMAN, G., R. LESTHAEGHE, and D. MEEKERS.
1987. Marriage patterns and changes in sub-

of the Population Association of America, April, Chicago.

Saharan Africa, p. 45-76. In The cultural roots NICHOLS, D., D. A. LADIPO, J. M. PAXMAN, and E.

of African fertility regimes. Proceedings of the O. OTOLORIN. 1986. Sexual behavior, contracep-

Ife Conference, February 25-March 1.

tive practice and reproductive health among

LITTLE, M. A., and P. W. LESLIE. 1990. Report to the
Government of Kenya, Office of the President:

Nigerian adolescents. Stud. Fam. Plan. 17(2): 100-106.

The South Turkana Ecosystem Project.

SHELL-DUNCAN, B. 1994. Child fostering among

LESTHAEGHE, R. J. 1980. On the social control of

nomadic Turkana pastoralists: Demographic and

human reproduction. Pop. Develop. Rev. 6(4):

health consequences, p. 147-164. In E. Fratkin,

527-548.

K. A. Galvin, and E. A. Roth (eds.), African

. 1989. Production andreproduction in sub-

pastoralist systems: An integrated approach.

Saharan Africa: An overview of organizing prin-

Lynne Rienner Publishers, Boulder, CO.

ciples, p. 13-59. In R. J.Lesthaeghe (ed.), Repro- VAN DE WALLE, E. 1968. Marriage in African cen-

duction and social organization in sub-Saharan

suses and inquiries. In W. Brass etal. (eds.), The

Africa. Univ. ofCalifornia Press, Berkeley.

demography of Tropical Africa. Princeton Univ.

MANN, K. 1985. Marrying well: Marriage, Status

Press, Princeton.

and social change among educated elite inColo- WORTHMAN, C. M., and J. W. WHITING. 1987. Social

nial Lagos. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

change in adolescent sexual behavior, mate se-

MCCABE, J. T., R. SYSON-HUDSON, P. W. LESLIE, P.

lection, and premarital pregnancy rates in a

H. FRY, N. DYSON-HUDSON, and J. WIENPAHL.

Kikuyu Community. Ethos 15:145-165.

