Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Lowfertility childbearing decision making
Deborah Oakley
To cite this article: Deborah Oakley (1986) Lowfertility childbearing decision making, Social Biology, 33:3-4, 249-258, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988643 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988643
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 6 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

Low-fertility Childbearing Decision Making

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Deborah Oakley
School of Nursing University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan

ABSTRACT: It is often assumed that childbearing decisions involve conscious consideration of alternatives. This study was an investigation of whether community-college enrollees (N = 419) aged 18 to 36 years old had thought about the low fertility options of having no or one child. Only half had considered one or both options. Selected characteristics of the decision making process were also examined. Discriminant analysis showed that the variables contributing significantly to distinguishing among the options-considered groups included the degree of consciousness about making childbearing decisions in general, religiosity, and the importance of three variables that measured the values and cost of children: new experiences that children can provide, generalized costs of children, and achievement of a role identity through parenthood. Outcomes associated with the low-fertility options considered were also studied.

Among women in their peak reproductive years, the shift toward low fertility options has been dramatic. An increasing proportion of women in their 20's expect to have two, one, or no children; a decreasing proportion expect to have three, four, or five or more. In the United States in 1982, 70 per cent of ever-married women 20 to 24 years old expected to have two or fewer children, compared to 44 per cent in 1971 (National Center for Health Statistics, 1983, 1973).
Modern contraceptives make reproductive decisions possible. Having two children has become the normative choice, and it is now relevant to study decision making about low-fertility options: the ideas of having no children or one child. Do most people specifically consider low-fertility options? Theories about the decision making process in general posit a series of decision making steps, starting with conscious recogni-

tion of choice as an issue. In decision making, this first step is referred to as awareness of choice, or recognizing a problem or need (Brim et al., 1962; Janis and Mann, 1977). If theories about the decision making process apply to childbearing, there should be widespread recognition that personal choice about having children is possible. This first step initiates the subsequent decision making phases: information gathering, development and evaluation of alternatives, choice, action, and reevaluation. Without the initial step, there would be no trigger to activate decision making, so that options would go unrecognized and choices would never actually be made.
Theories about the decision making process also indicate that once an issue is recognized as a matter of choice, action alternatives should be generated. While decision making theory does not specify how many, or how similar, the options

249

250

Oakley

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

should be, more than one would be required to make a decision a choice. Prescriptive programs to improve decision making under uncertainty have generally been designed to promote making choices among multiple similar options (Beach et al., 1976), but the few studies of how people actually do make decisions in real life settings have focused on the number, rather than on the similarity, of options considered.
Past studies of reproductive decisions indicate that some people lack awareness about choice. Most who are aware consider a limited number of options. In one U.S. study, 26 per cent of the parent couples and 6 per cent of the nonparent couples studied said they had made no active decision about having or not having children (Ory, 1978). Silka and Kiesler (1977) also concluded that consciously considering alternatives was not typical in their study group of 21 couples intending to remain childless, 21 intending to have children, and 19 unsure couples. Busfield and Paddon (1977) observed that their sample of 290 British couples tended to take the idea of having children for granted. Oakley's analysis (1980) of data from 66 primiparous pregnant women clients of a London clinic showed further that these women typically felt that women had to have babies as part of their feminine role, so that decision making was generally irrelevant. Beckman (1978) characterized some couples as slowly drifting into parenthood, while Hollerback (1980) used the phrase passive fertility decision making for people who did not even recognize possible fertility choices.
As for more specific reproductive behaviors, Steinhoff (1978) and Rosen and Benson (1982) found that the number of alternative ways considered to resolve an unplanned pregnancy varied. In

Steinhoff s U.S. study of abortion clinic and maternity patients, all of whom were single at the time of conception, 57 per cent of the 91 women who obtained abortions had considered the other al- _ ternatives of marriage, single parent- ^ hood, or adoption, but only one of the 27 who became mothers had seriously considered abortion. In Rosen and Benson's study of adolescent partners, the 31 young women who kept the baby were more likely to feel that their partner saw no problem or decision to be made. Among the total number of males interviewed (19), 22 per cent considered only one alternative outcome, but 29 per cent considered at least four.
Luker's study (1975) of abortion patients in a California clinic showed that denial of sexual activity, fear of parents' finding out about their daughter's sexual activity, and misestimating probabilities of pregnancy all contributed to limiting the contraceptive alternatives considered.
Mumford (1983) found in his study of vasectomized men that they had begun serious consideration of a vasectomy only after completing or going beyond their desired family size. Until that time, they had generally ignored information about the procedure.
These findings about reproductive decision making are consistent with new research on decision making in general (Wright, 1984). Prescription about the "best" way to make decisions is now dif- # ferentiated from description about how people actually go about making their decisions.
Since decision making theory may be an adequate guide to understanding decision processing for some, but not all people, one aim of the exploratory study reported here was to examine the decision making process about explicit con-

Vol. 33, No.

Low-fertility DecisionMaking

251

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

sideration of low-fertility options. Because previous research on related topics suggested that consideration might not be universal, the major focus of this study was on determining factors ^associated with explicit consideration of low-fertility options. It was hypothesized that low-fertility decision makers, those who explicitly considered the options, would differ in demographic, attitude, and other decision processing characteristics. Research on reproductive, as well as other decisions, shows that those who recognize options are more educated and less traditional. Generally, these traits are associated with different values and decision processing characteristics.
Finally, it was also hypothesized that having considered the low fertility options would be positively related to using more effective birth control methods and negatively related to the number of children expected.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Respondents for this study were enrolled in a middle-western community college in the United States--a sampling source that was likely to have adequate representation of persons expecting to have two or fewer children, and thus to have considered the low fertility options. A recruitment letter was sent to a one-in-three simple random sample of ^nrollees stratified by sex and zip code. Twenty-eight per cent offered to participate, providing a convenience sample of 223 women and 196 men, all of whom were interviewed personally, usually in their homes. Demographically, they were similar to county residents of the same ages.
The variable measuring the lowfertility alternatives considered was con-

structed from a series of three questions. These questions determined whether people had thought or had always assumed they would or would not have children; whether they had thought about having just one child. The constructed variable then showed the extent to which options were considered, ranging from those who were assumers through those who had thought about it but had not considered either of the two low-fertility options explictly, and those who had considered one but not the other, to those who had considered both.
In accord with theories about the childbearing decision process (Burch, 1980), the idea of self-conscious, deliberate decision making was operationalized by an eight-item scale of consciousness about decision making. Cronbach's alpha for this scale was 0.72, indicating adequate internal reliability.
Other aspects of the decision process that were measured included the timing and ways in which the alternatives were considered: the age at which the respondent first thought about having children; whether or not the respondent reported having "requirements" for things to be a certain way before having children; and a measure of current salience of thinking about having (more) children. These variables were initial ways to examine components of the way low fertility ideas are considered, whatever the number of alternatives.
Demographic variables included age, sex, religion, religiosity, marital status, expectations for completed education, measures of work status and work history, and current personal income. Attitude variables included the number of children wanted when the respondent was growing up, the amount of satisfaction they felt they would derive from

252

Oakley

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

having a(nother) child, whether or not they felt there was a maximum age for childbearing, and a set of five variables produced from 49 benefit and cost items derived from Hoffman and Hoffman's (1973) work on the values of children as adapted by Bram (1978). The five factors were identified by factor analysis, using varimax rotation after a principal axis solution. These five factors accounted for 45per cent of the variance in the 49 items and dealt with generalized costs, new experiences, interruption of partner's career or education, parenthood role identification, and fears associated with having children.
The current method of contraception and the number of children expected were the outcome variables.
The analysis was conducted in three phases. First, the decision making process was described. Next, discriminant analysis was used to determine characteristics associated with explicit consideration of the various low-fertility choices. This statistical technique was used because the aim was to determine factors that identified differences among the decision making groups. All variables used in this part of the study met requirements for use in discriminant analysis (Klecka, 1982), and were used as either interval or dichotomous measures. Finally, bivariate statistical tests were conducted to see whether low fertility decision making was related to the outcome variables.
RESULTS
Thirty-five per cent never thought about whether or not to have children, but instead just assumed they would; another 5 per cent assumed they would not have any. In other words, 40 per cent of the sample never entered into any deci-

sion making process about the idea of

having children at all. They could not

generate low-fertility options because

they never thought about an opportu-

nity to choose. This group was labeled as

assumers.

4

Ten per cent reported they had thought about whether or not to have children but said they had not considered either of the low-fertility options specifically. Presumably, they considered higher fertility options, which were not examined in this study. This group was labeled as thinkers.

Only 27 per cent of the sample considered both having none and having one child. This group was labeled as having considered both options. Among those considering just one option, but not both, 16 per cent considered only the single option of having no children (the no-child option only group), while 7 per cent considered only the single lowfertility option of having one child (the one-child option only group).

Half of the respondents (27 + 16 + 7 per cent) had explicitly considered both or at least one of the low fertility options. That is, they had proceeded to the low fertility option consideration phase specified in theories about how people go about making decisions, but individuals differed as to how many low fertility options they considered. Although 27 per cent had considered both, another 23 per cent had considered only one option. +

Responses to the items comprising the decision making consciousness scale are shown in Table 1. Most (83per cent) chose the most or most nearly conscious responses for a majority of the items, and 22 percent did so for all eight items in the scale.

As for timing, Table 2 shows the distribution of ages for the first thoughts

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Low-fertility Decision Making

253

TABLE 1
PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONSES TO ITEMS CONSTITUTING SCALE FOR CONSCIOUS DECISION MAKING

ITEM
Term "decision making" about whether or not to have any children
Term "decision making" about total number of children to have
Term "decision making" about when to have children
There are/were no real decisions
Having children is/was carefully thought out
Having children is/was just part of life . . .
Circumstances just decide(d)
I feel/felt that I have/had control over the situation

Definitely
60.3%
56.7
54.3 7.9
59 2 13.7 10.9
49.2

APPLIED

Somewhat

Little Bit

21.5%

9.6%

24.9 10.5

24.3 10.7 9.3 17.4

24 7 7.7 23.6 23.4 23.1 24.8

35.5 10.1

Not at All
8.6%
7.7
10 2 65.4
84 39.3 41.3
5.3

TABLE2
PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF AGES FOR FIRST THOUGHTS ABOUT HAVING CHILDREN

ITEM
First thought about having (JV= 249) First thought about having no children (N=Y19)
First thought about having one child (W=218)

Below 10 years
3.6%
1.1
2.3

10-17 years
36.5%
27.9
9.6

PER CENT

18-20 Years

21-25 Years

29.3% 21.3%

32.4 28.5

31.2 35.8

Over 25 Years
9.2%
8.9
21.1

Not sure
0.0%
1.1
0.0

about having children, first thought about having no children, and first thought about having one child. Most people reported they had started thinking about these issues after they had reached age 17. Before that age, very few considered the idea of having one child, although a larger proportion had already considered the idea of having

none. (The number reporting for each of these variables is reduced because of the branching structure of the questionnaire. If respondents reported they had always assumed they would have children or had never thought specifically about the options of none or one, it did not make logical sense to ask these follow-up questions.)

254

Oakley

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

The vast majority (82 per cent) said they had requirements before they would have children. In order, the requirements stated by more than half the respondents were an adequate income (69 per cent), a good relationship with their partner (66 per cent), good health (56 per cent), marriage (55 per cent), good feelings about being a parent (53 per cent). Other items included good feelings about self (50 per cent), a good job (43 per cent), education completed (38 per cent), a good job for the respondent's partner (37 per cent), home ownership (21per cent), some minimum age (19 per cent), childcare arrangements (19 per cent), and other items (12 per cent).
One-third (32 per cent) of the sample reported that recently they had thought a lot about having (more) children. Another 32 per cent had thought about it some, 20 per cent had thought about it a little, and 16 per cent not at all.
To determine the variables that could best discriminate among the groups that comprised the dependent variable (assumers, thinkers, no-child option, onechild option, both no and one-child options), the nine variables that demonstrated a statistically significant bivariate relationship were entered into a forward, stepwise discriminant function analysis. As shown in Table 3, the degree of consciousness about childbearing decision making, the degree of religiosity, and the importance of new experiences gained through children, costs of children in general, and identification with the parental role all contributed significantly to discriminating among the groups at alpha <0.05. Whether or not the respondent expected to complete some education beyond four years of college contributed further discriminatory power when the

TABLE3
STEPWISE DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS

Step andVariable Name
1 Conscious decision making . . 2 Importance of new expert-
ences from having children . . 3 Religiosity 4 Importance of general costs
of children 5 Importance of parenthood
role identity 6 Expected education
completed

F-stat. Signif. 12.47 < 0.001
4.83 < 0.001 3.42 0.009
2.80 0.026
2.45 0.045
2.10 0.080

alpha criterion was weakened to 0.10 for inclusion. According to the F statistic, each group was significantly different from all others, except that assumers and those having considered only the one-child option were not significantly different from each other in this sample.
In addition to investigating some determinants of the options considered, I did an analysis to test whether the dependent variable groups might be related to certain outcomes associated with fertility behaviors, including proportions expecting to have at least one child, the total number expected, and the current contraceptive method.
Proportions have or expecting to have at least one child are shown, by options considered, in Figure 1. For the purpose of illustration, the top branches of the decision tree show those who reported that they had thought about whether or not to have children, further subdivided according to whether or not they had specifically considered the option of having none, and then the option of having only one. Those who said yes to both questions are in the top branches. In the fourth "column" or branching sets, current parents are distinguished from nonparents, and finally

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Low-fertility Decision Making

255

Considered having none

Considered having one

Parents now

Expect a(nother)

Proportionwho have or expect to have at least one child

86.6%

thinkers

71.9% 96.6%

97.6%

assumers

90.6%

FIG. 1.--Proportion expecting at least one child by low-fertility options considered.

those who expect tohave (more) are dif- pected to have at least one child. For ferentiated from those not expecting those who considered having one but (more). Theleaves ofthe decision tree not having zero, thepercentage was97 can then begrouped into six major cate- per cent. The other two groups also had gories. Thechildless intending to re- higher proportions having orexpecting main childless are scattered at every to have atleast one child. Using the test ^fourth node, starting from thetop. The for differences inproportions, I found top group arethen those who consid- the proportion of the no-child option ered all options. Of the 112 in that (but notone) group who expected to group, 87 per cent had or expected to have atleast onechild was significantly have atleast onechild. Thenext group lower than that of all the other groups.
down arethose who specifically consid- The total number of children exered the option of having nochildren, pected was also significantly, if modbut did not seriously consider the idea of estly, related to the options considered having just one. Of the 65persons in (F= 7.27, p< 0.001, eta= 0.26) so that group, only 72per cent hador ex- that assumers and thinkers expectedthe

256

Oakley

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

highest number (X = 2.25) and those having considered both options expected the lowest (X = 1.71).
The relationship of the low-fertility options considered to contraceptive methods used at the time of interview was also examined. Respondents were presented with a list of all methods as part of their respondents' booklet and asked to mention the letter corresponding to the method they currently used. Chi-square analysis showed significant relationships between low-fertility options considered and diaphragm and sterilization use. Users of diaphragms were more likely to have considered all options, and nonusers were more likely to have been assumers. There was little difference in the proportions having considered either of the single options, no children or one. In contrast, those using female sterilization as a contraceptive method were more likely to have been assumers. Of the 14 reporting this method, 10 were assumers and two of the others said they had thought about whether or not to have children but had not specifically considered either of the low-fertility options.
DISCUSSION
The descriptive results showed that the decision process varied, in that 40 per cent said they never were even aware of a choice about having children and only 27 per cent had explicitly considered both low-fertility options. The discriminant analysis showed that certain measures of decision processing, value, and demographic characteristics distinguished among those who thought about low fertility options more, as compared with less, explicitly.
Are these differentiating characteristics merely identifiers of different

groups, or may they be related to some causative circumstances?
Variables such as religiosity may work through agenda setting of what gets considered in people's thinking. Perhaps those who attend religious services most frequently had mutually shared values, which were then reinforced and maintained through their frequent participation. These reinforcements could have kept the participants' thinking in the channel that was most acceptable to the group--adhering to the norm--or otherwise limit the scope of thought. This interpretation is consistent with Merwin and Pol's finding (1983) that women who changed their childbearing intentions, during a fiveyear period, from some to no children, were likely to place less importance on religion.
If religiosity is viewed as a reinforcement mechanism, this could explain why the frequency of attending religious services, but not the major religious identification, was related to the number of low-fertility options considered. If it were the values alone, then Catholics should probably have more homogeneous decision patterns than those with the more diverse Protestant, Jewish, or no religious identifications. In this study Catholics were not significantly different in the low-fertility options considered, as compared with the other religious groups. The reinforcement experience by those attending religious services more often could be an explanation for the effect of religiosity.
The association between conscious decision making and having considered low fertility options may simply mean that the same personality types made conscious decisions and thought comprehensively (not the same attribute, as indicated by an eta of 0.35). However, it

Vol. 33, No.

Low-fertility DecisionMaking

257

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

seems plausible that a more conscious thought process about childbearing might have led to a greater likelihood of considering low-fertility options, which in turn was linked to differences in the number of children expected. Since considering the possibility of no child and of one child was associated with choosing lower fertility, an increase in conscious childbearing decision making might have demographic effects in the group studied.
Three of the variables that measured the costs and benefits of children did contribute to discriminating among almost all the groups, but their main power was derived from the divergence of one decision making group from all the others. Those who had thought about whether or not to have children but had not considered the two lowfertility options felt that costs of children were less important and role identity through parenthood more important than did all the other groups. For the new experiences variable, the group that had considered childlessness but not having one child, placed less value on new experiences gained through parenthood. It appears then that values and costs of children differed primarily for the thinkers and the childless-only groups, and that the other groups were not so distinct in their ratings on these variables.
The finding that diaphragm users were more likely, and sterilization users were less likely, to have considered lowfertility options probably indicates that these two methods were useful for rather different types of contraceptors. The diaphragm users tended to have considered more options. In contrast,

sterilization users in this sample tended to have been assumers, perhaps making this decisive contraceptive choice precisely because they had not considered the low-fertility options.
Overall, the results reported here add further evidence that complex models of decision-making are not universally appropriate for investigating real-life fertility choices. Certainly, for many of the respondents studied here, childbearing decisions did not start with a base of zero, and many had not evaluated nearby low-fertility alternatives.
Further research that measures consideration of all fertility options may help delineate just which pairs of options are most commonly considered. For those who consider some alternatives but not others, particularly if they avoid the next-best choice, decision theory needs to be supplemented with some way to explain how people choose the alternatives to consider. Theory also needs to be developed to explain how people become aware that they have any choice at all about the low fertility options. The ways in which topics reach the agenda of personal thinking need to be known if we are to understand the real meaning of reproductive choice.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported in part by a grant from the Center for Population Research, NICHHD (R01-HD14611). Special appreciation is extended to those who provided professional assistance in data gathering and management: Barbara Austin, Corinne Haslett, Anh Le, Laurence Magder, Elisabeth Moore, Jessica Mugambwa, Penny Pierce, and Jonathan Urla.

258

Oakley

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BEACH, L. R., B. D. TOWNES, F. L. CAMPBELL,
and G. W. KEATING. 1976. Developing and testing adecision aid forbirth planning decisions. Org. Behav. Human Perform. 15:99116.
BECKMAN, L. 1978. Couples' decisionmaking processes regarding fertility. In K. Taeuber, L. Bumpass, andJ. Sweet (eds.), Socialdemography. Academic Press, New York.
BRAM, S. 1978. Through thelooking glass: Voluntary childlessness asa mirror of contemporary changes in themeaning of parenthood. In W. Miller and L. Neuman (eds.), The first child and family formation. Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
BRIM, O. G., D. C. GLASS, D. E. LAVIN, and
N. GOODMAN. 1962. Personality and decision process. Stanford University Press, Stanford, California. BURCH, T. 1980. Demographic behavior: Interdisciplinary perspectives on decisionmaking. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
BUSFIELD, J., and M. PADDON. 1977. Thinking
about children: Sociology and fertility in post-war England. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
HOFFMAN, L. and M. HOFFMAN. 1973. The
value of children to parents. In J. Fawcett (ed.), Psychological perspectives on fertility. Basic Books, New York. HOLLERBACK, P. 1980. Power in families' communication, andfertility decision-making. Population and Environ. 3:146-173.
JANIS, I., and L. MANN. 1977. Decision making: A psychological analysis ofconflict, choice, and commitment. Free Press, New York.
KLECKA, W. R. 1982. Discriminant analysis.

Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, California. LUKER, K. 1975.Taking chances: Abortionand the decision notto contracept. Universityof California Press, Berkeley.
MERWIN, M., and L. G. POL. 1983. Childlessness: Apanel study of expressed intentions. Soc. Biol. 30(30):318-327.
MUMFORD, S. 1983.The vasectomy decisionmaking process. Stud. Fam. Plan. 14:83-88.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS.
1973. Birth expectations and fertility: June 1972. Curr. Population Reports, Series P20, No. 248.
. 1983.Fertility of American Women: June 1983.Curr. Population Reports, Series P-20, No. 395.
OAKLEY, A. 1980. Women confined: Towardsa sociology of childbirth. Schocken Books, New York.
ORY, M. 1978. The decision to parent or not: Normative and structural components. J. Marr. Fam. 40:531-539.
ROSEN, R. H., and T. BENSON. 1982. The sec-
ond class partner: The male role in family planning decisions. InG. L. Fox (ed.), The childbearing decision. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, California.
SILKA, L., and S. KIESLER. 1977. Couples who
choose to be childless. Fam. Plan. Persp. 9:16-25. STEINHOFF, P. 1978. Premarital pregnancy and the first birth. InW. Miller andL. Newman (eds.), Thefirst child andfamily formation. Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
WRIGHT, G. 1984. Behavioral decision theory. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, California.

