Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The transitional effect on the sex ratio at birth of a sex predetermination program
S. D. Walter
To cite this article: S. D. Walter (1974) The transitional effect on the sex ratio at birth of a sex predetermination program, Social Biology, 21:4, 340-352, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988132 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988132
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

The Transitional Effect on the Sex Ratio at Birth of a Sex Predetermination Program

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

S. D. Walter
Department of Epidemiology and Community Medicine University of Ottawa Ottawa, Ontario

It appears likely that the technology to allow parents to choose the sexes of their children prior to conception will become available in the near future. If this exciting possibility does occur, it may have profound implications for the demographic, biological, epidemiological, and sociological structures of a population. If the impact of such sex predetermination (SPD) is to be channeled in a desirable direction, quantitative estimates must be made of the diverse and complex effects which might be expected. This paper will consider in particular the possible changes in the sex ratio which might occur following the introduction of an SPD program.
SEX PREDETERMINATION METHODS
Sex predetermination will here be taken to mean the determination or choice of the sex of a child prior to its conception. A more general term, sex control, includes the determination or identification of the sex of an unborn fetus. Sex determination following conception has the longer history, a large number of theories and folklores having been developed over many cen-

turies, often concerning the physiology, mood, or activities of a pregnant woman or her fetus. These theories have evolved more recently into a number of sex determining techniques, utilizing radiology and hormone, saliva, chromosome, and amniotic fluid analyses (Cederqvist and Fuchs, 1970; Largey, 1972). Some sex preference might be exercised by removal of the blastocyst from the mother, determining its sex, and then selectively reimplanting only embryos of the desired sex (Keynes, 1967). This procedure has been demonstrated as technically feasible in animals, although with rather poor blastocyst survival (Gardner and Edwards, 1968). This method applied to humans might be relatively unattractive economically in view of the expensive microsurgery required. It should also be remembered that if the probability of achieving a child of a given sex on any particular conception is approximately one half, then an average of two such removals and sexings would be necessary before obtaining a child of the desired sex.
The first method developed to predetermine sex before conception involves the electrophoretic separation of X and Y

340

Vol. 21, No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

341

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

sperm, followed by artificial insemination. Following the almost accidental discovery of the electrochemical properties of sperm (Schroder and Kolstov, 1933), fertility experiments on animals were able to achieve a 65-70 per cent accuracy in the production of offspring of the desired sex. (Gordon, 1958; Sevinc, 1968). Other methods which have tried to exploit the differential properties of the androsperm and gynosperm before intercourse are centrifugation (Lindahl, 1958) and agglutination (Bhattacharya, 1966). Success comparable to that for electrophoresis has been claimed for both of these methods.
Further approaches to the problem involve discriminating between the X and Y sperm during or shortly after intercourse, by modifying or optimizing the environment of the sperm before reaching the ovum. Alkaline or acid douches (Cook, 1941; Unterberger, 1930) and a rhythm schedule of intercourse (Rorvik and Shettles, 1970) use to advantage the greater motility of the androsperm. These two methods in combination have been claimed to be 80% effective in the choice of sex (Shettles, 1961).
More conjectural solutions have been the use of special pills, foams, and jellies to differentially affect the receptivity of the reproductive tract to X and Y sperm. It is also possible that further advances along these lines may be made by investigating the biochemical changes occurring in the parents which are indicated by correlations between the sex ratio at birth and such factors as stress, the use of drugs during pregnancy, toxemia, and parity. In any case, it seems probable that at least one of the above methods will be technically feasible in humans, and a number of writers have regarded it as likely to become available in the near future (Etzioni, 1968; Taylor, 1968; Kahn and Weiner, 1967).

PREDICTING THE EFFECTS OF SEX PREDETERMINATION
Most writers on the subject seem to agree that the introduction of SPD would make some changes, however small, in the birth rate and the sex ratio at birth, which in turn would make an impact on the structure of society as a whole. The main difficulties in assessing the possible magnitudes of these effects are the speculative nature of the problem and the unpredictability of the behavior of a human population in such a situation. Four main areas of information may be used in order to make such predictions: (1) what people do now, i.e., current and past fertility patterns that have been observed and documented; (2) what people would like to do now in an ideal situation where they could realize their ideal family size and composition; (3) what people say they would do if SPD were available; (4) what informed authorities think people would do if SPD were available.
The reliability of any quantitative estimate of an effect of SPD will clearly depend on the degree of objectivity of the data used and on how far this past information on actual, ideal, or intended fertility is generalizable to the future when important social changes might be generated by SPD.
Despite a wide variety of motives cited, a preference for males in an ideal family has been demonstrated consistently in a variety of cultures (Largey, 1972; May and Heer, 1968; Dinitz et al., 1954; Markle and Nam, 1971), sometimes combined with a desire for a balanced sex ratio in completed families. There are also indications that people presently make some efforts toward achieving these objectives. There is a relatively high male sex ratio among the last-born children in families (Winston, 1932) and a longer interval between the first and second child when the first is male (Westoff et al., 1961). In

342

Walter

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

addition, the probability of having an additional child increases with the number of children of like sex previously born (Clare and Kiser, 19S2; Freedman et al., 1960).
Interview data on how people say they would react if SPD were available are unfortunately scanty. However, the general indication is that, if they accepted the idea, their reproductive performance would compare roughly with their ideal fertility at the present time (Markle and Nam, 1971; Flanagan, 1942). There is evidence to suggest that the rate of acceptance of SPD would depend on many of the important demographic variables, including socioeconomic status, religion, urban or rural residence, and previous reproductive history. Thus, differential effects on the birth rate and the sex ratio might be anticipated in various sectors of society, with a consequent increase in tension between these groups. In Markle and Nam's study (1971) of United States college students, the proportion of respondents who said they would use SPD was 26 per cent; but this figure went up to 62 per cent when they were presented with the alternative of having a one-sex family and down to 16 per cent when it was suggested that artificial insemination might be involved. The ultimate utilization rate of SPD is thus very hard to predict. Further, data of this kind derived from interviews on a subject which may be socially unacceptable at present may be biased. It has been suggested by Etzioni (1968) that the movement toward a higher proportion of males being born might be greater than indicated by interviews.
LONG-TERM EFFECTS ON THE
SEX RATIO
All of the above discussion concerns the initial effects that might be anticipated following the introduction of SPD and is based on limited extrapolation from current fer-

tility patterns and on interview-derived data. Although inevitably more speculative, a number of authors have concerned themselves with the long-term implications of SPD. Here, the possible long-term behavior of the sex ratio at birth will be examined.
In moving from short-term to long-term prediction, one must attempt to take into account the changes in attitudes that might accompany the initial changes caused by SPD. If it is supposed that the sex ratio would initially increase in favor of males, it might be expected that any substantial change would then enhance the value of females to the community, which might precipitate a reversal of the tendency toward a high sex ratio. This process might continue as shortages of one or the other sex became apparent in turn, with corresponding oscillations of the sex ratio. This concept has been proposed by several writers, including Keyfitz (1971, p. 119):
With abundance of boys, the tastes of parents would alter. Before even the first generation of children under the regime of free choice of sex grew to marrying age, parents would have an increased appreciation of girls. They might even respond with an excess of girls. Some swaying back and forth between boys and girls would subsequently occur.
Largey (1972, p. 390) saw the process as self-regulating, an overabundance of males initiating a greater demand for females with "a temporarily imbalanced sex ratio generating change in norms, behavioral patterns, and perhaps current sex preference patterns themselves so as to rebalance the sex ratio."
A simple mathematical model was constructed to predict the behavior of the sex ratio under various sets of assumptions to see if the oscillations described above could be simulated and what the limit (or ultimate) value of the sex ratio might be. Jones (1973) has also used models to investigate this problem, but his models did not em-

Vol. 21, No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

343

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

A. Females entering population at risk of pregnancy.

B, Females who enter SPD program.

Sex of child chosen independently of current or past birth patterns in the rest of the population.
Sex of child influenced by current or past birth patterns in the rest of the population.

Current sex ratio at birth with contributions from D, E, and P.

C. Females who do not use SPD.

F. Sex ratio unaltered by SPD.

FIG. 1.--Categorization of births in a population where sex predetermination is used.

body any changes in attitudes or preferences as time progressed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS The structure of the model developed here is shown in Figure 1, which illustrates how the current sex ratio at birth may be constructed from the contributions made by births to females in various categories, those women either using or not using SPD. A parametric formulation of the model is used. Even though the numerical values of the sex ratio predictions are speculative, this formulation allows an assessment of the approximate nature and the relative magnitudes of effects of changes in the values of the various parameters involved.
In the presentation of results, the origin of the time scale is the point at which the SPD program is initiated. Some of the parameters are defined as follows, a is the total rate of entry of all females into the population at risk of pregnancy, assumed approximately constant over short periods. p{t) is the proportion of females entering at time t who use the SPD program. By definition, p(t)=O for / < 0. d(x) and C2(x) are distribution functions of the times to conceptions for females respectively nonparticipating and participating in the program. Thus, C2(x) is the probability that a female in the program will have conceived before a time x has elapsed after entry. G is the period of gestation, assumed constant, bo is the proportion of boys born

to nonparticipating mothers, i.e., the "natural" proportion, assumed constant, b (x) is the proportion of all births which are male to mothers who entered the SPD program at time x. m(t) is the proportion of all births which are male at time t to mothers in or out of SPD program.1
Our model assumes that (1) females entering the population at risk of pregnancy decide immediately whether or not to use the program and that there are no subsequent transfers in or out of the program; each individual female in the program makes a choice of sex which remains unaltered until conception; and (3) the population is homogeneous as regards the acceptance of SPD. For simplicity, we will ignore the effects of infertility and multiple births. However, these constraints could be easily removed to construct a more detailed model. Let us now consider the male and total birth rates at time t to users and nonusers of SPD.
Non-SPD mothers.--Those females who enter at time x and conceive at time t -- G have a total birth rate of a = (1 --p(x)) c± (( -- G -- x), where ci(.) is the probability density function corresponding to Ci(.). Hence, summing (integrating) over all possible values of x, the total rate of births at time t to nonparticipators is
1 Throughout this work the proportion, m, of births which are boys is used. The conventional sex ratio of male births/female births may be simply derived as m/(1-m).

344

Waller

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

n
«J_co V-p(*))ci(t-G-x)dx
and the corresponding rate of male births is (1) times b0.
SPD mothers.--The total rate of births to participating females will be
rt-o
"X P(x) c2 {t - G - x)dx

unrealistic. The parameter P represents the limit (or ultimate) utilization rate of SPD and is the proportion of mothers from Box A in Figure 1 who move into Box B. The value of p gives the rate of adoption of SPD, with high values representing arapid development in its use.
For the distribution of times from entry to conception, we will take

and the rate of male births
«X P(x)b(x)c2 (t-G-x)dx.
Combining these results, we have

c(x) = hi-**,

(4)

implying a constant rate of conception at any time for all females who have not previously conceived.
While equation (3) may be considered

-a -a
p(x) b(x) c2 (t -- G --x)dx

« ( * ) = · ft_~Ja-p(x))c1(t-G-x)dx + £ Gp(x)c2(t-G-x)dx (2)

The denominator ofequation (2) simplifies to the value 1 ifCi(.) = c2(.). We will assume the latter to be true, because the general behavior of m(t) isonly slightly modified by different conception time distributions for users and nonusers ofSPD.
To investigate the explicit behavior of the function m(i), we must specify particular expressions for />(.), c(.) and b(.). We will use
that is, a negative exponential growth of the program, which eventually is used by a proportion P of entering females. Although empirical data following the introduction of comparable health programs--for example, the birth control pill in the United States (Ryder, 1972)--often have the appearance of a logistic growth curve, the negative exponential has the advantage of only involving one variable parameter (P), while Pmay be regarded as a multiplicative constant for this purpose. This choice implies aslight simplification in the formulation, while yielding a model which is not

a reasonable model for the rate of acceptance of an innovative program and equation (4) may be verified approximately by observation on human populations,the specification of 5(.) is much more difficult, and in fact can only be speculative. Let us suppose that among the females in the program atany given time t, there is a proportion 6 who always choose to have boys, and (j> who always choose girls, regardless of any previous birth patterns. These two groups make up the mothers in Box D.
In contrast, let us suppose that the remaining proportion (1 -- 6 -- <£) of females are influenced by the proportion of males born in the total population in the past (Box E ) . We might suppose that in a society where the sex ratio at birth has been altered from the "natural" value, for example, toward anexcess of males, such mothers would react in the opposite direction and thus have girls rather more frequently. Let us assume that the proportion of male births in this sector of the program members (Box E) is 1 -- m(t -- y), where tn(t -- Y) is the proportion of male births

Vol. 21, No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

345

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

to the whole population at time t -- y, and t is the time of entry into the SPD program of these particular discriminating mothers. The parameter y represents a lag period or reaction time before which parents do not respond to previous birth patterns. Its duration may be influenced by a number of factors including: (1) delays in the publication of data on current fertility; (2) the phase between such publication and entry into the program;2 and (3) the length of time it takes for parents to react to an excess of one sex, which may be within a relatively short time, such as a few months or a year, within several years, or only after an extended period, such as a generation.
The third factor is the single most important influence on y and, in turn, on the effects of SPD. One might suggest that the sex preferences of parents might change rapidly if they wanted to improve their children's chances of finding a marital partner of approximately the same age. On the other hand, they might only respond much later when an excess of males of marrying age existed or when there was an excess of males in the employment market, with a subsequent increase in the relative value of a female. Whichever of these occurred would have other important effects on fertility, as discussed later.
It should be remembered that any reactions to past fertility patterns could only manifest themselves after a minimum of approximately nine months, the length of gestation. Further, parents would respond not to the proportion of males born at any particular instant of time in the past, as assumed here, but probably to the fertility observed over some extended period. Both
2 This phase consists of a stage in which the decision to enter the program is being made, some delay in entry in order to have a child at a convenient time, and an induction period into the program itself.

of these factors would add to the inertia of the system, tending to dampen any very rapid changes in the sex ratio which might otherwise occur.
Under these assumptions, we have that the proportion of births which are male to mothers entering the SPD program at time x is a weighted average of the proportions of births to mothers with fixed and variable sex preferences (Boxes D and E respectively), or

b(x)=9

(5)

Substituting this equation into equation (2), after simplification, we have that, if 1 y£ p, the proportion of males being born at time t is
m{t) =

where

m(x--y)dx, (6)

-1
and
Under this formulation, equation (6) provides the description of the transitional behavior of the sex ratio, and it is this description which is developed to give the results below. Although the solution of equation (6) for m(t) may be found in closed form, it is somewhat tedious algebraically and only numerical results will be quoted here, with the exception of the expression for the asymptotic value which is derived in the next section.

346

Walter

Social Biology

RESULTS

ratio would occur. However if, as is more

LIMITING VALUE OF THE SEX RATIO

likely, there would be more fixed prefer-

After a very long period of time, the ences for boys, a male excess would result,

proportion of entering mothers using SPD the size of the excess increasing with P

would tend, from equation (3), to the value and 6.

P. The nonparticipators (the remaining Some special cases are of interest: If

proportion 1 -- P) · would still produce P = 0, then from equation (7), m* = b0,

males with probability bo. From equation which corresponds to no program partici-

(5), the participators would have a propor- pants yielding an unchanged male propor-

tion of male births equal to

tion for all t.Ii P =1 (implying all moth-

ers use SPD), then

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

where m* is the value of m{t) after stability, or equilibrium has been reached. We thus have that m* is, as before, a weighted average of the sex proportions from users and nonusers of SPD, equal to
m* = (l--P)b0

m* = ·
If e = <l> -- 0, then m* = y2. Thus, universal usage of .SPD, combined with sex preferences which reacted perfectly to past fertility, would lead to a sex ratio at birth of unity.

Solving for m* gives

(7)

Table 1 gives some numerical values of

TABLE l
EQUILIBRIUM VALUES OP THE PROPORTION OF BIRTHS W H I C H ARE MALE (m*)

p
0.2 OS 1.0
0.2 0.S 1.0
0.2 0 5 . .. .. 1.0

00

in*

0 0 0.S07 0 0 0.503 0 0 0.500
0.4 0.1 0.535 0.4 0.1 0.564 0.4 0.1 0.600
0.4 0.4 0.508 0.4 0.4 0.505 0.4 0.4 0.500

m* for various sets of values of P, 6, and <]). With b0 taken as 0.51 (approximately the proportion of males born presently), then if the proportions of parents with fixed preferences for boys and girls are equal (zero, in particular), a decrease in the sex

NUMERICAL RESULTS
Figure 2 shows the solution of equation (6) for three sets of parameter values, with all the variables except P being constant. In all the results of this section, X is taken to be 0.2. The value of y is 6 months (i.e., some SPD mothers react to the sex ratio at birth six months previously); 8 = 0.4 and <£= 0.1, reflecting a majority preference for males in the 50 per cent of SPD mothers with fixed sex preferences. All of the curves begin with a male proportion of 0.51 and then increase with time. The curve with P = 1 (ultimate adoption rate of SPD equal to 100 per cent) demonstrates the oscillating behavior postulated above, reaching a peak of just over 60 per cent males two years after the first SPD births, declining to a minimum after about four years, and then stabilizing to approximately the equilibrium value of 60 per cent. The other two curves with P = 0.5 and 0.2 do not oscillate as much, and the final values of the male proportion are lower, reflecting the smaller impact of SPD with less widespread usage.

Vol. 21, No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

347

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

640 r

^ = 0.1, y = 6 mo., 6=0.4, 4>= 0.1

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015
AALEBIF!THS

620

60.0

5ao

·c u.

56.0

2o 54.0

P = 1.0

520

50.0

II

I J_

3 4567

10

YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

FIGURE 2

Whereas Figure 2 illustrates the effect of P (the ultimate utilization rate), Figure 3 shows the effect of |3, or how quickly the SPD method can be implemented in the population. When (5=1.0 (a very rapid

build-up of the program), the male proportion reaches a maximum of 63 per cent after just under two years, that is, slightly sooner than the peak for |3 = 0.1. In general, with a rapid acceptance of the program, the os-

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD 64.0 P = 1.0, Y = 6 mo., 6 = 0.4, <t> - o.1
620

to X

60.0

I
58.0
-If V>^^^"Hi

Ifo 7560 / 54.0
u
VCL 520
I

-- e = 1.0 = 0.1

i I I li

I

2 345 67

YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

FIGURE 3

II

1 10

348

Walter

Social Biology

dilations begin sooner and are of greater more quickly when parents are influenced magnitude; but the effect of f3 in this re- by birth patterns only six months earlier, spect appears to be comparable to that of as compared to five years earlier; and in P, with larger values of P giving larger and the latter situation, changes in the male earlier oscillations also. Theutilization rate proportion of several percentage points ocP also has an important influence on the cur for over 20 years. This point is also long-term behavior of the sexratio, whereas demonstrated in Figure S where an even P only affects its initial changes. Although larger value of y (10 years) is used. The not shown graphically, the effect of (} isin- period of the oscillations is now just over significant when y is large, that is, when 10 years initially. As in Figure 1, the amparents react to thefertility pattern of sev- plitude of the oscillations is greatly affected eral years previously. I t also appears that by the value of P, as maybe seen by com(3 does not substantially affect the time pe- paring the two curves with 100 per cent riod (or wavelength) of the oscillations. and 50 per cent usage of SPD.
In Figure 4, the influence of y is P r e - Figure 6 shows curves with 6 = <f> = 0,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

64.0r-

P = 1.0, fi- 0 . 1 , 6= 0 . 4 , <t>= 0.1

620

to

--IX 1600 ca

UJ

i <

.sao

U.
O 560 ui--
540

520

50.0

I 4 6 8 10 12 14
YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS
FIGURE 4

16

18

20

sented, with two otherwise comparable which oscillate toward the stable situation

curves for y = 6 months and S years. With with equal numbers of boys and girls being

the larger value of y, the oscillations are born. Once again, the rate of convergence

greater and have a longer wavelength, with and the size of the sex ratio oscillations

changes in the trends of sex preferences depend on the time lag term y.

occurring roughly every S or 6 years, com-

pared to approximately 2 years when y = 6

DISCUSSION

months. Although the ultimate proportion The above graphs show how a relatively

of males is the same (60per cent) for both simple mathematical model canproduce the

curves, a stable situation is reached much oscillations in the sex ratio that have been

Vol. 21, No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

349

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

64.0 i-

P= 0.1, 7 = 10 y r s . 6 - 0.4, 4>- 0.1

620

1
CO

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015
PCT MALE BIRTHS

U
520

-- P = 1.0 -- P = 0.5

50.0

I

I

II II II I

J

6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

FlGTJKE 5

proposed by other authors. An examination tions made by the various parameters of of the results indicates the effects on the the system. We may now discuss how the amplitude and time period of the oscilla- results would be modified under slightly

PERCENTAGE OF MALE BIRTHS VS TIME SINCE INTRODUCTION OF SPD

p = 0.5
510

=o

5Q5

5Q0

49.5

49.0 LL. 48.5 O
48.0

y= 6 mo. y= 5 yrs,

475

470 I I I I I I I

2 34 567 8

10

YEARS SINCE FIRST SPD BIRTHS

FIGURE 6

350

Walter

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

different assumptions and a few implica- and wished to have another of the opposite

tions of the results.

sex. If this were the case, the utilization

It may be seen that as the time needed rate would be lower than if SPD were avail-

to react to an excess of one or other sex (y) able to all parents; but the influence of

becomes large, the changes in direction of past fertility would also be much less, with

the proportion of male births are quite almost all SPD mothers falling in Box D

abrupt (see, for example, Figure S with of Figure 1. If this latter policy were used,

P = 1). These abrupt changes are a con- we might expect the sum of 6 and <f> to be

sequence of the model where those SPD approximately one. But if the motivation

mothers who react to past birth patterns to have a third child after two previous

do so in response to the proportion of males female births were stronger than after two

born at one particular time in the past. A previous male births, the male excess would

more realistic assumption might be that still manifest itself.

such mothers are influenced by the fertility A further consideration is the interaction

experienced over some extended period of of SPD with other changes in societal atti-

time in the past. If this assumption were tudes and values. For example, if the con-

true, the sex ratio would change less dra- cept of zero population growth and other

matically than in the results shown here, social pressures caused many parents to de-

particularly for those with large y. Never- sire only two children, the objective of

theless, it is not inconceivable that, for the parents to have one child of each sex would

first oscillation at least, a relatively abrupt by no means be easy to achieve without the

change in the trend of the sex ratio might use of SPD. A side effect might therefore

occur as a reflection of a "shock" reaction be the widespread usage of. SPD, with a

to the sociological implications of, say, a majority of parents choosing one child of

large excess of males in the population. each sex (usually with the boy first), a

The parameter that has the largest indi- small percentage choosing two boys, and

vidual influence on the impact of SPD is an even smaller number choosing two girls.

the utilization rate P. The value of this When parents who do not complete their

parameter will depend to a large extent on two-children families (because of mortality,

the policy by which SPD is made available sterility, or breakdown of marriage) are

to the public, and this value will in turn taken into account, we might infer that a

affect the associated values of 6 and tf>. If small percentage excess of males might oc-

SPD were made freely available to all cur under these conditions. For a further

prospective parents, it is unlikely that the discussion of the influence of SPD on indi-

utilization rate would be very close to 100 vidual parents and family building, see

per cent, the value assumed in the idealized Jones (1973).

situation for some of the results presented. The effect of the "reaction time," y, is

However, with such complete availability, also important. We have seen how when

it is probable that a reasonable number of parents only react to a male excess that has

SPD mothers would in fact respond to past existed for several years, the resulting in-

fertility, as has been assumed here. We stability in the sex ratio continues for a

might suppose, as an alternative, that a considerable length of time. If the time pe-

policy was adopted to make SPD available riod of the oscillations in the sex ratio is

only in "extenuating circumstances" for more than a few years, then marital "raid-

individuals, such as cases where parents al- ing" of other age groups with a relatively

ready had two children of the same sex small shortage of the minority sex (usually

Vol. 21, No. 4 Sex Predetermination and the Sex Ratio

351

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

female) becomes less feasible. If, for sim- is great. It is clear that the way in which

plicity, we supposed that marriages took the people are educated about SPD will

place only between couples of the same age, have animportant influence on theresulting

and we also assumed that the pressures to fertility.

marry and have children remained un- If the techniques of sex predetermination

altered, then a rise of 10 per cent in the in humans are perfected, then the politi-

proportion of males born would result in cians and administrators of society will

approximately a 20 per cent decline in the have some difficult decisions to make about

marriage rate, with a corresponding reduc- if and how they should be made available

tion in thebirth rate for thepeople in that to the public. The objectives of the indi-

age group.

vidual, if realized, might yield disastrous

In practice, a gross excess of males would consequences or great benefit to society. A probably initiate some alterations in the sustained male excess with a resultant fall structures of marriage, andtheprospect of in thebirth rate might present great proba greatly reduced birth rate might increase lems to an industrial society based on exthe pressure on married women to have pansion, but it might equally well imply more children. Some of these effects might long-term good to a developing nation faced be reduced by early publicity of the pos- with a population explosion. The magnisible effects of a sustained excess of one tude and scope of the effects of sex presex in an attempt to modify the sex prefer- determination will depend greatly on how ences of individuals currently having chil- it is administered, and themore feasible it dren. Such publicity might also tend to becomes as a technical venture, the more reduce thedifferentials between thesex ra- urgent becomes the need for research on tios of different sectors of society. Alterna- the subject to enable rational decisions to tively, an encouragement of a male excess be made.

might beone wayof initiating a substantial

decline in the birth rate, as for example in

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

India where the motivation to have boys

The author is supported by the OntarioMinistry of Health Grant R.D. 10.

REFERENCES

BHATTACHARYA, B. C. 1966. An attempt to pre- WHELPTON. 1960. Size of family and preferences

determine the sexof calves by artificial insemi- for children of each sex. Amer. J. Sociol.

nation with spermatozoa separated by sedi- 116:141-146.

mentation. Nature 211:863.

GARDNER, R. L., and R. G. EDWARDS. 1968. Control

CEDERQVIST, L. L., and F. FUCHS. 1970. Antenatal of the sex ratio of full term in the rabbit by

sex determination; a historical review. Clin. transferring sexed blastocysts. Nature 218:346-

Obstet. Gynec. 13:159-177.

349.

CLARE, J., and C. V. KISER. 1952. Social and GORDON, J. G. 1958. The control of sex. Sci.Amer.

psychological factors affecting fertility preference 199:87-94.

for children of a given sex in relation to JONES, R. J. 1973. Sex predetermination and the

fertility. Milbank Mem. Fund. Quart. 29:621- sex ratio at birth. Soc.Biol. 20:203-211.

673. KAHN, H., and A. WEINER. 1967. The next thirty-

COOK, R. 1941. Sex control again in the news. three years: A framework forspeculation. Daed-

J. Hered. 31:265-271.

alus, p. 705-732.

DINITZ, S., R. R. DYNES, and A. C. CLARKE. 1954. KEYFITZ, N. 1971. How birth control affects

Preferences for male or female children: Tra- births. Soc.Biol. 18:109-121.

ditional or affectional? J. Marr. Fam. Liv. KEYNES, R. D. 1967. The predetermination of

16:128-131.

sex. Adv. Sci. (London) 24:43-46.

ETZIONI, A. 1968. Sex control, science, and society. LARGEY, G. 1972.Sex control, sexpreferences,and

Science 161:1107-1112.

the future of the family. Soc. Biol. 19:379-392.

FLANAGAN, J. C. 1942. A study of factors deter- LINDAHL, P. E. 1958. Separation of bull spermato-

mining family size in a selected professional zoa carrying X and Y chromosomes by counter-

group. Genet. Psychol. Monog. 25:50-75.

streaming centrifugation. Nature 181:784.

FREEDMAN, D. S., R. FREEDMAN, and P. K. MARKLE, G. E., and C. B. NAM. 1971. Sex pre-

352

Walter

Social Biology

determination: Its impact on fertility. Soc. Biol. 18:73-83.
MAY, D. A., and D. M. HEER. 1968. Son sur-
vivorship motivation and family size in India: A computer simulation. Pop. Stud. 22:199-210.
RORVIK, D. M., and L. B. SHETTLES. 1970. How
to choose your baby's sex. Look 24 (April): 88-98. RYDER, N. B. 1972. Time series of pill and IUD use: United States, 1961-1970. Stud. Fam. PI. 3:232-240.
SCHRODER, V. N., and N. K. KOLSTOV. 1933. Artifi-
cial control of sex of progeny in mammals. Nature 131:329. SEVINC, A. 1968. Experiments on sex control by

electrophoretic separation of spermatozoa in the rabbit. J. Reprod. Fertil. 16:7-14. SHETTLES, L. 1961. Conception and birth sex ratios. Obstet. Gynec. 18:122-130. TAYLOR, G. R. 1968. The biological time bomb. World Publishing Co., New York. UNTERBERGER, F. 1930. Das problem der wilkürlichen Beeinflussung des Geschlechts beim Menschen. Deutsche Med. Wochenschr. 56:304-307.
WESTOFF, C., R. G. POTTER, P. G. SAGI, and E.
MISHLER. 1961. Family growth in metropolitan America. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J. WINSTON, S. 1932. Birth control and the sex ratio at birth. Amer. J. Sociol. 38:226-231.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

