Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
To cite this article: (1994) Book notes, Social Biology, 41:1-2, 136-140, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1994.9988867 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1994.9988867
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

THE SKULL. VOLUME I: DEVELOPMENT.
VOLUME 2: PATTERNS OF STRUC-
TURAL AND SYSTEMATIC DIVERSITY.
VOLUME 3: FUNCTIONAL AND EVOLU-
TIONARY MECHANISMS: Edited by James Hanken and Brian K. Hall. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1993. Vol. 1: 602 pages, $75, hardbound; $37.50, paperback. Vol. 2: 580 pages, $75, hardbound; $34.50, paperback. Vol. 3: 470 pages, $70, hardbound; $27.50, paperback.
These three volumes on the vertebrate skull, published simultaneously late in 1993, constitute a remarkable undertaking by Editors James Hanken and Brian K. Hall and 34 other contributing scholars.
This comprehensive analysis of the comparative morphology, development, evolution, and functional biology of the skull has been made possible by a number of vital developments in the last decade. Technological advances such as the scanning electron microscope, genetic and cell markers, in-vitro culture methods, and a variety of molecular analyses have allowed resolution of embryonic events that could not be studied by earlier investigators. Many long-held beliefs have been re-evaluated about the fundamental organization of the skull, such as segmentation and the origin of the cranial skeleton and musculature.
In addition, innovative techniques and methodology in vertebrate systematics have led vertebrate biologists to

reexamine trends in skull evolution in the light of revised hypotheses about vertebrate relationships. Functional morphological analyses also find investigators asking new questions about dynamic aspects of skull structure and their bearing on skull evolution.
The editors comment that the present series is far different in scope and content from Sir Gavin De Beer's monumental work The Developmentof the Vertebrate Skull (1937) and is intended as a complement to it, not a successor. However, like DeBeer, they make ample use of high-quality illustrations, many published for the first time in these volumes.
The aims in assembling the volumes were (1) to present the results of recent studies of skull development and structure; (2) to evaluate the implication of these results for fundamental questions in vertebrate structure and evolution; (3) to examine current work on the functional bases and constraints of skull form; (4) to use the skull to illustrate evolutionary patterns and processes and to test hypotheses that purport to account for them; and (5) to promote further research in these and related areas.
Volume 1 (Development) concerns cranial development and growth with ten chapters on head segmentation, differentiation and morphogenesis of cranial cartilage and bone, metamorphoses, later stages of ontogeny, the neural crest, mechanisms of axis specification and cephalization, skull growth, and quantitative and develop-

136

Vol. 41, No. 1-2

Book Notes

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

mental genetics. The treatments focus on underlying causal mechanisms rather than patterns of development.
Volume 2 (Patterns of Structural and Systematic Diversity) has as its main theme cranial diversity, examined from two broadly different perspectives. Of the volume's nine chapters, the first three consider aspects of the evolutionary origin and basic structure of the skull and its component tissues. The remaining six chapters document patterns of cranial diversity within major lineages. Authors were asked to identify general and prominent trends of cranial evolution, illustrated with specific examples.
Volume 3 (Functional and Evolutionary Mechanisms) builds on the two preceding volumes. It deals with the vertebrate skull both in the context of its function and in relation to the ecological and evolutionary mechanisms that underlie cranial diversity. The ten chapters comprise four related themes: (1) linkage with the prior volumes by discussion of the role of developmental factors in mediating diversification and by emphasizing the need to integrate developmental and populational approaches; (2) specific and prominent skull function, such as feeding, locomotion, and hearing and sound transmission; (3) the methodology for mechanical analysis of skull structure and function, as well as its practical limits; and (4) mechanisms of cranial evolution. These chapters are intended to convey a sense of the range of topics, paradigms, and approaches that are being considered at present.
As the editors themselves comment, a certain amount of overlap in chapter content both within and between volumes is unavoidable in a work of this

magnitude. Reflecting the integrated, multidisciplinary approach that is being used to answer many questions in cranial biology, certain topics receive substantial treatment in more than one volume.
These three volumes represent a major resource and reference work made available to the individual scholar in high-quality paperback editions which contain a remarkable 1,652 pages, 342 line drawings, 44 halftones, and 23 tables for a total cost of $99.50.
THE BODY SOCIAL. SYMBOLISM, SELF
AND SOCIETY: By Anthony Synnott. Routledge, London and New York. 1993. 309 pages. $55, hardback. $18.95, paperback.
The human body is not only a biological phenomenon, it is also a social creation of immense complexity. It is not so much a 'given' as a social category, with different meanings, composed, imposed and developed in each age by each individual. The attributes, functions and specific organs of the body and the senses are likewise highly controversial.
The Body Social explores the history of thinking about the body and the senses, paying special attention to shifts in ways of thinking about the body over time, and to the clash of different approaches to the body today.
Synnott writes in his Introduction, "The dynamics of paradigm shifts are critical to any understanding of the body social, and it does make a difference to our lives if one thinks of the body as a tomb (Plato), a temple (Saint Paul), an enemy (Teresa of Avila), a machine (Descartes), or the self (Sartre). Yet 'the body,' in practice, is only

138

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

a specific body in time and space, male or female, old or young, and so on."
The book is divided roughly into two parts: the first part on the body and the second on the senses. He begins with an overview of how people think and have thought about embodiment, noting the principal paradigms over the centuries, but very briefly, and considers how and why they have changed. The author then examines particular parts of the body, including the face and hair, and particularly body senses; touch, smell and sight. He also provides an up-to-date survey of the literature on the body as a social and biological phenomenon in a twenty-page Bibliography at the end of the volume.
Anthony Synnott is Associate Professor in the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Concordia University, Montreal.
THE SCENTED APE. THE BIOLOGY AND
CULTURE OF HUMAN ODOUR: By D.
Michael Stoddart. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York, 1990. Hardbound and paperback.
The human race is often at odds with its own sense of smell; much time and effort is spent removing natural body odor and replacing it with the sexual attractant odors of plants and animals. Both men and women appear to have a need to smell of something-- anything other than of people. Yet the fact remains that we are the ape most richly endowed with scent-producing glands.
This book examines the sense of smell in humans, comparing it with the known functions of the sense of smell

in other animals. It reviews the evolution of communication by chemicals from primitive organisms, in which sexual reproduction first arose, through to the most advanced animals in which there is a well-forged internal chain of nerves and hormones linking the nose to the testes and ovaries.
In many non-human mammals, sexual physiology and behavior is facilitated by odor cues, and there are claims for a similar facilitation in humans. The place of odors and scents in esthetics and in psychoanalysis serves to illustrate the strength of the link between the nose and the emotional center of the brain. Perfumes and incense are seen as cultural acquisitions, with origins firmly rooted in biological phenomena which had a functional significance at one time in our evolutionary past.
The book concludes with the development of an argument which suggests that our olfactory enigmas arise from a process of olfactory desensitization which occurred at a time when mankind's ancestors were forsaking the forests and evolving a new, gregarious lifestyle on the open plains. We are unique among gregarious animals in retaining the nuclear family, and olfactory desensitization is one of a suite of anatomical and physiological adaptations which serve to strengthen the essential bond between male and female upon which the nuclear family depends.
Summaries to the more technical chapters and the provision of a glossary of technical terms render the author's thesis readily accessible to readers lacking a zoological or biological background.

Vol. 4 1 , No. 1-2

Book Notes

139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Michael Stoddart holds the Chair of Zoology in the University of Tasmania. A researcher into mammalian olfactory biology, he is author or editor of five academic books and has contributed to many other.
The Scented Ape arose out of his interest in man as an animal, and in the value of the discipline of comparative zoology to help unravel puzzles in human biology.
KNOWLEDGE, POWER, AND PRACTICE: THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF MEDICINE
AND EVERYDAY LIFE: Edited by Shirley Lindenbaum and Margaret Lock. University of California Press, Series on Comparative Studies of Health Systems and Medical Care, Berkeley, 1993. 428 pages. $50, hardbound. $15, paperback.
This series of original essays was produced for a symposium sponsored by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research held in 1988 in Portugal. Participants were from Africa, Canada, France, the United Kingdom, Venezuela, and the United States.
The aims of the conference were two-fold: The first was to reflect on the historical development of medical anthropology and to consider the directions it is heading. The second was to request all participants to write a paper linking human biology, the cultural construction of knowledge, and the relations of power. In addition, each paper was to be based on research concerned with some aspect of health, illness, or affliction, providing a basis for discussion of ways in which differ-

ent data and analytic approaches might be integrated and considered as a whole.
The resulting volume of original essays by the conference participants is divided into five parts, each with a brief introduction followed by from two to four essays. The five parts are titled: The Cultural Construction of Childbirth, The Production of Medical Knowledge, Contested Knowledge and Modes of Understanding, Constructing the Illness Experience, and Body Politics--Past and Present. Contributors include Roberto BricenoLeon, Jean Comaroff, Sue Estroff, Horacio Fabrega, Jr., Ronald Frankenberg, Bryon Good, Mary-Jo DelVecchio Good, Donna Haraway, Patricia Jeffrey, Roger Jeffery, Patricia Kaufert, Gilbert Lewis, Shirley Lindenbaum, Margaret Lock, John O'Neil, Tola Olu Pearce, Rayna Rapp, Lorna Amarasingham Rhodes, and Allan Young.
STATISTICAL MODELS FOR CAUSAL
ANALYSIS: By Robert D. Retherford and Minja Kim Choe. Wiley and Sons, A Wiley-Interscience Publication, New York, 1993. 258 pages, hardbound.
This volume provides a clear explanation of statistical models used in the social and biomedical sciences, particularly those models used in the analysis of nonexperimental data. Using an approach that focuses on model specification and interpretation, the book is a practice-oriented guide on how to use these models that have become essential tools for the modern researcher.

140

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Based on a highly successful classroom course, the book includes computer programs implementable on either mainframe computers or microcomputers as well as examples taken from an actual population study.
Topics covered include: bivariate linear regression; multiple regression; multiple classification analysis; path analysis; logit regression; multinomial logit regression; survival models, including proportional hazard models and hazard models with time dependence.
While omitting a good deal of difficult mathematics, such as derivations of sampling distributions and standard errors, the authors nonetheless provide a rigorous examination of model specification and interpretation, illustrating their application to the kinds of research undertaken by social and biomedical scientists.

Supported by numerous tables and graphs, using real survey data, as well as providing an appendix of computer programs for the statistical packages SAS, BMDP, and LIMDEP, the book is an ideal primer for understanding and using statistical models in analytical work.
Robert D. Retherford is a senior fellow in the Program on Population of the East-West Center and an affiliate graduate faculty member of the Department of Sociology of the University of Hawaii. Dr. Retherford is also Past President of the Society for the Study of Social Biology.
Minja Kim Choe is Assistant Director of the Program on Population of the East-West Center and an affiliate graduate faculty member of the School of Public Health at the University of Hawaii.

