Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Sex differences in vulnerability and maladjustment as a function of parental investment: An evolutionary approach
Ada Lampert & Ariella Friedman
To cite this article: Ada Lampert & Ariella Friedman (1992) Sex differences in vulnerability and maladjustment as a function of parental investment: An evolutionary approach, Social Biology, 39:1-2, 65-81, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1992.9988805 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988805
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 12
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

Sex Differences in Vulnerability and Maladjustment as a Function of Parental Investment: An Evolutionary Approach

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Ada Lampert and Ariella Friedman
Department of Behavioral Sciences, Ruppin Institute, Emek-Hefer, Israel; and Department of Psychology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

ABSTRACT: Sex differences in aspects of mental health are examined as a function of uneven parental investment in children. Relative vulnerability is a new construct mediating the influence of parental investment on mental health. Couples (129) in three stages of the family life cycle are measured by scales for parental investment, relative vulnerability, anxiety, depression, and ten psychosomatic syndromes. Results show a path of positive correlations from the parent's sex to level of parental investment, to level of relative vulnerability, and to levels of anxiety and depression. Women invest more than men, and hence they are more vulnerable, anxious, and depressed. They reach the summit of their vulnerability while they have three young children. Relative vulnerability was found to have positive effects along with the negative ones and to affect women in different ways than it does men. Results are interpreted in terms of different parental strategies selected by evolution for each sex.

Some reviews of the literature concerning sex differences in mental health (e.g., Garai, 1970; Oakes, 1984; Widow, 1984; Whitley, 1984) indicate that the most salient difference is the higher level of anxiety women have exhibited in comparison to men. That iwomen are more anxious than men is, as a matter of fact, an assumption accepted by the psychological mainstream (e.g., Maccoby and Jacklin, 1974; Frank et al., 1985), by the psychiatry textbooks, (e.g., Freedman et al., 1980; DSM III, 1985), and by the layperson who knows that "mothers worry more than fathers."
But anxiety is not the only difference. Depression is known to be more common among women (Brown and Harris, 1978; Freedman et al., 1980; DSM III, 1985), and there are similar indications about neurotic symptoms in general (Dohrenwend, 1969, 1974).

There seems to be a general inclination to explain these differences between the sexes in terms of social learning. Social norms permit women to exhibit their distress, while for men it is forbidden. These norms are so strongly rooted in our society that a woman has to choose, cruelly, between being healthy and masculine, or being feminine and disturbed (Erdwins et al., 1980). No doubt, these social norms are a powerful force affecting our behavior, but if they are not just arbitrary forces, can there be any biological ground from which the norms ultimately derive? Some authors suggest that the higher emotional distress of women is connected to being married and having young children. Erne (1974) shows that in childhood girls enjoy better mental health than do boys, and this situation changes only after adolescence. Donelson and Gullahorn

65

66

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

(1977) show that married women are at the highest risk, suffering many symptoms of tension, while other researchers identify having young children as a major factor increasing mothers' tension (Heer, 1978; Rollins and Feldman, 1970; Gillespie, 1971; Richmond, 1976; Brown and Harris, 1978; Nock, 1979; Guttman, 1987).
As Trivers (1972, 1975) indicated, differential parental investment by each sex has profound implications for the evolution of parental strategies. The concept "parental investment" (Dawkins, 1976; Mellen, 1981) can be well understood in terms of time. The net biological investment per child demands two to three years of the mother, while from the father one night is enough. From this oversimplified biological point of view, it is clear that natural selection should select for strong devotion of a mother to her children. When our ancient ancestors left the forest for the dangerous savanna (Mellen, 1981; Klein, 1989), successful child rearing became so hard that cooperation of both mother and father was essential (Shepher, 1978; Betzig et al., 1988; Lovejoy, 1988). Thus, we have a combined strategy for the male. Great care for his children, along with a temptation for promiscuous affairs, risking his minimal biological investment only. The mother, on the other hand, is strongly devoted to her children, emotionally committed to her high investment, and also has learned to accept her partner's help, and to fear his desertion. Thus, the unequal parental investments create unequal parental strategies, which put the parent who invests more in a state of "Relative Vulnerability," by which we mean the apprehension of being deserted and the

feeling of dependency on the partner. While great distance separates our own society from that of early man on the African savanna, there is evidence that even today men have strong promiscuous or polygynous tendencies (e.g., van den Berghe, 1980; Barash, 1981) and women are threatened by men's potential desertion, so that they are vulnerable relative to their partners (Satir, 1970; Rossi, 1977; 1984; Bardwick, 1979). This relative vulnerability, if it exists long enough, may interfere with mental health, increasing levels of anxiety and other emotional difficulties. Thus, we come to the central thesis of our research (see Figure 1): Sex of parent influences through innate inclinations the amount of parental investment, which influences through emotional commitment relative vulnerability, which through anxiety affects mental health.
We are aware of the "mixed" character of that claim, having biologicalgenetic processes in the first step, along with an environmental emphasis later on. This is the way we believe the process works: Starting with biological determinants, human behavior enjoys great freedom in its expression depending on many varied forces in the environment. Social norms are part, quite a powerful part, of the flexible, changing, environmental conditions which are influenced by the biological basic determinants. For instance, social norms which dictate higher care giving by mothers to their children, in comparison to fathers, are insuring by that the initial higher biological investment of the mothers and therefore can be considered to be selected by evolution. Having these "mixed" assumptions in mind, we claim that the sex of

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Parental Investment

67

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Sex of Innate

Parental Emotional Relative

Anxiety Maladjustment

Parent Inclination Investment Commitment Vulnerability

Fig. 1.--The chain of claims connecting parental investment with mental health.

the parent can predict the amount of care given to children by that parent, but we are also able to predict that in spite of the innate inclination of women to invest a great deal in their children, and the connection of high investment to vulnerability, still the vulnerability of a woman responds to environmental factors. Such responses can be expressed in changes of vulnerability along the family life cycle, in accord with changes of the amount of parental investment children need.
Out of this line of reasoning, two hypotheses were derived and tested:
1. There is a path of positive correlations from the parent's sex to levelsof investment, vulnerability, and maladjustment, and women are inclined to invest more than do men.
2. Along the family life cycle, there is the stage of having young children, where mother's vulnerability reaches its summit.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Parental investment can manifest itself in so many different forms that it is nearly impossible to measure and compare the mother's contribution to that of the father. However, Israel has the kibbutz, which offers the investigator a homogeneous and highly organized way of life, with two parents working all day outside, and with both of them supposed to take care of their children

in the evenings. More than that, a family of the kibbutz is a social unit, but not an economic one. Thus, it is possible to measure parental investment in terms of care giving to children by any parent, in the evenings, after their work. Kibbutz is a modern Western way of life, so that generalization is permitted. Still another advantage is the strong egalitarian ideology of the kibbutz, pushing fathers to take care of their children along with mothers. Any difference in parental investment would therefore be in spite of the lack of economic dependency between the parents and the formal egalitarian ideology.
Three groups are included in our sample:
1. 40 couples before marriage, age 17-21 years, who have been in close relationships for six months or more.
2. 50 married couples with three children, all of them less than 12 years old.
3. 39 married couples with three children, all of them more than 12 years old. For this group a ceiling of 55 years old was kept in order to prevent old-age effects.
Total sum of subjects is 258, and they were picked at random in 30 different kibbutzim.
Parental investment.-- Parental investment was measured by a questionnaire which is a revised version of Tiger and Shepherd (1975), indicating a division of parenthood duties between

68

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

mother and father in the kibbutz. Our to 0.79. The whole scale shows "Gutt-

form aimed at the relative aspect, com- man split-half" reliability of 0.74.

paring contributions of any parent to Validity was tested, in the absence

those of the other one. Ten of the items of any appropriate criterion, with a

are "care investment" (e.g., giving group of 84 social workers who were

food) and six are "educational invest- asked to play roles, either of a partner

ment" (e.g., telling stories). Thus, we who fears desertion or of a partner who

have two scores for each parent, "rel- feels secure. The responses obtained

ative care investment" and "relative educational investment." As we already mentioned, parental investment has many different biological, emotional, and behavioral forms, and we can measure only an indication of a much broader phenomenon.

this way are highly differentiated: / (82) = 4.3 P < 0.01. As with parental investment, scores are relative and bear no information about any absolute state of vulnerability, whatever it means.
Maladjustment. --Maladjustment

Relative vulnerability. -- Relativevul- was measured by four scales:

nerability was measured by a new scale

we have developed for this particular purpose, in which vulnerability is the

a. "Tennesseeself-concept scale" (Fitts, 1965) from which we made use of

perceived fear of being deserted and the

four scores: "physical- self," "moral-

feelings of dependencyon the partnerboth in comparison to the fear and dependency of the partner. The core of the scale, stemming from the theoretical assumptions, is fear of desertion.

self," "personal-self and "familyself."
b. "State-trait anxiety inventory" (Spielberger et. al., 1970) from which we made use of the trait half of the inventory only.

Dependency was empirically found to be in strong relation to the fear of desertion, while three other tested elements, e.g., "giving way," had shown weaker relations. Out of 24 prime

c. Three items from the anxiety inventory were also used for measuring depression. The items were picked because of their content (e.g., "I am sad"), and the subscale was validated against the Hebrew version of Levitt

statements elaborating the fear of desertion and dependency, 12 were chosen for the final version, six for every element, in regard to their alpha values. The subject is asked to mark his or her agreement with any statement, on

and Lubin (1975) scale for depression.
d. 10 large groups of psychosomatic symptoms were drawn from the psychiatric literature (Freedman et al., 1980) and served as a self-report measurement: "excessive eating," "intes-

a five-degree scale. All the statements are relatively phrased, for instance, "I would dare to leave my partner more than he would dare to leave me," or in the opposite, direction, "My depen-

tinal disorders," "anorexia," "cardiovascular disorders," "respiratory disorders," "allergic and skin disorders," "rheumatoid arthritis," "peptic ulcer and pyrosis," "sleep disorders," and "headaches."

dence on my partner is greater than his

dependence on me."

Thus, we have measured maladjust-

Reliability for each item was tested ment with scores for four aspects of

on "Guttman's lower bounds for true self-esteem, anxiety, depression, and

reliability," and values range from 0.55 10 psychosomatic disorders.

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Parental Investment

69

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

PROCEDURE
Interviewers had visited our subjects' homes, giving them the questionnaires in a fixed order. The couples were requested to answer without consulting one another and anonymity was strictly kept. Thirty interviewers from thirty kibbutzim chosen at random planned to visit five random couples each. Some couples refused to answer, and in some kibbutzim there were not enough suitable couples for our sample groups, so that we had 129 couples instead of 150. Subjects finished the work within 30-40 minutes, believing the research dealt with the development of marital relationships. The interviewers knew nothing about the research assumptions, nor the measurements used.
ANALYSIS OF DATA
Considering the path of correlations we predicted in our first hypothesis, path analysistechniqueproved to be of great value, enabling us to decompose the variance and attribute its portions to specific variables. The P values are correlation coefficients chosen in regard to level of measurement used, from the point biserial correlation in the first step up to Pearson correlations in the last one. In cases where a suppressor variable was present, P is the beta coefficient of partial correlation.
Differences between the sexes were tested by the t test, and the variance according to stage in family life cycle was tested by analysis of variance.
RESULTS
FIRST HYPOTHESIS
In order to show the chain of variables as predicted by our first hypoth-

esis, we shall present two kinds of results. One is a path of correlations starting with the parent's sex and ending with adjustment variables. The second is simply higher levels for women in all these variables as compared to men. These two kinds of results are presented in Figure 2.
Fifty couples with three young children are analyzed in Figure 2. Mean values for each variable are indicated by "/" for females, and by "m" for males. The arrows of correlations are pointing out directions of influence we have assumed out of our theoretical frame of reference, without, of course, any unequivocal "proofs" from the data.
We can see that sex of the parent might predict strongly the portion of the total "care investment" and quite well the portion of "educational investment." The latter is more stereotypically masculine (Parsons, 1955), since fathers are more easily engaged in this kind of parenthood, and the segregation by sex there is less sharp.
In any case, it is the mother who invests more "care" than the father does (r(98) = 15.85, P<0.01) and also more "education" than the father (t (98) = 7.71, P<0.01). Going on, we see the influence of relative parental investment on relative vulnerability, with females who are mothers more vulnerable than fathers (t (98) = 6.22, P< 0.01). Because of the correlation between sex and vulnerability, we have to decompose the variance in order to capture the exact relations of the three variables: sex, parental care (as an example for investment), and vulnerability (Figure 2). The effect coefficient is the overall influence of sex on vulnerability, via care investment, in an "ideal experiment,"

70

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

fx=74.82 Family Self
mx=72.06

\
P=-
1/
p=.31

fx=73.18 Moral Self
mx=71.66

Positive Zone Negative Zone

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

fx-39.6 Educational Investment
mx=28.42

fx=36.94 Anxiety mx=33.3

/

/ p=68

p=-.63

fx=4.92

/

Depression /

mx=4.06

p=.43

\ fx=70.1 \ Personal
Self mx=72.42

Decomposition of Variance Sex and Vulnerability via Care:

effect coefficient causal direct causal indirect

.96 .21 .75

fx=71.64
Physical Self mx=72.22

FIG. 2.--Path analysis for the correlations between parent's sex and mental health (N = 100). P = regression coefficients or beta, all significant, p < 0.01.

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Parental Investment

71

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

which controls all the rest of the world. To this overall influence, sex contributes, directly, the small portion; parental investment contributes, indirectly, much more. In other words, it is the parental investment and not the sex of the parent, that affects relative vulnerability.
As we see to the right in the middle of Figure 2, it was revealed unexpectedly that relative vulnerability of parents affects mental health positively as well as negatively. In the positive zone, it raises one's family-self, which is higher for women (f(98) = 2.53, P < 0.01) as a function of their higher vulnerability. The normal-self is also raised by vulnerability in the positive zone, but difference between the sexes is not significant. In the negative zone, we see the price one pays if one invests more: anxiety (higher for mothers, f(98) = 2.44, P<0.01); depression (higher for mothers, t(98) = 3.44, P < 0.01); low personal-self (lower for mothers, f(98) = 1.69, P<0.05); and low physical-self (lower for mothers, not significant).
The psychosomatic symptoms we have measured among the adjustment variables, failed to show significant relations with vulnerability or a difference of means between the sexes. There is one exception concerning cardiovascular disorders, which will be presented under the heading "Other Results."
We are able now to conclude that women are inclined to invest more in their children than men do, that their higher investment exposes them to a relative vulnerability, which may interfere with their mental health in some ways while affecting it positively in other ways.

SECOND HYPOTHESIS
The second hypothesis may enrich our central claim testing in two ways. First, it is an alternative examination for the path of correlations, with the advantage of escaping the problematic parental investment measurement. Instead of measuring it, the amount of parental investment is manipulated by sampling three stages of the family life cycle: before marriage (no investment); with three young children (summit of investment); and after raising children (less investment). The prediction is that vulnerability of mothers in comparison to fathers reaches its peak while they have young children. Second, it is a way to show how vulnerability responds to environmental changes. Although vulnerability may stem out of innate inclinations to invest a lot, it is still flexible enough to change with the situational conditions surrounding the actual giving of care. Figure 3 shows vulnerability in three stages of family life cycle, by sex.
The mirror effect expressed by Figure 3 is a function of the relativity of our vulnerability scale, and one has to remember that it is a measurement of the gap between the parents and not the absolute values of each. The existence of three young children causes the deepest gap in vulnerability between the parents. Before and after this stage the sexes are more similar, and vulnerability has less to do with parental investment. Analysis of variance for the interaction between sex and stage shows significant values: F (2) = 4.56, P<0.05. It may be stated again that the greater role mothers take in their childrearing exposes them, when they

72

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

uo 4 0 -
C/2

41.24
A\ \

5<

37-

/ 36.95

37.87 34.1

Z 34-

·-- --

z<

33.63 -- -tr" 32.78

31- 1 |

Before marriage

With 3 young
children

After raising
children

Female · Male · -

FIG. 3.--The relative vulnerability by three stages and by sex (JV = 258).

are investing, to the effects of relative vulnerability.
OTHER RESULTS
By analyzing the data, we found that the "relative vulnerability" is manifold, having different kinds of influences, not only because of its positive and negative zones, but also because it affects mothers in other ways than it affects fathers. Some major such differences are presented in the following figures. First is the physicalself by sex as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4 presents the relations of physical-self and relative vulnerability via anxiety, by sex. It can be seen that the physical-self of women (sense of being healthy and attractive) is strongly influenced by their vulnerability, and a vulnerable woman suffers a decline in this aspect of her self-

esteem, while for men the influence is much weaker. But more than that, the decomposed variance, in the tables, shows that all influence for women stems directly from vulnerability, while for men most of it stems from anxiety. That means again, that it is vulnerability that damages mothers' physical-self while for fathers this direct effect does not exist.
Another aspect of differential influence of relative vulnerability for each sex was found in the personal-self (sense of being worthy and valuable) as shown in Figure 5. By controlling anxiety, we found that relative vulnerability strongly damages the personal-self of women. Looking at the lower table, we see that controlling anxiety formen produces a positive (!) direct effect of vulnerability on personal self. In other words, the more a woman is vulnera-

Vol. 39, No. 1-2 WOMEN:

Parental Investment

73

Decomposition of Variance Vulnerability and Physical Self via Anxiety

effect coefficient causal direct causal indirect

-.99 -.98 -.01

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

MEN:

Decomposition of Variance Vulnerability and Physical Self via Anxiety

effect coefficient causal direct causal indirect

-.32 -.13 -.19

FIG. 4.--Path analysis for the relations of relative vulnerability with physical-self, via anxiety, by sex (N = 100).

ble, the less she is pleased with herself, while the more a man is vulnerable the more he is pleased with himself. We are going to suggest some explanations for these "strange" differences between the sexes in our discussion, but

first let us present one more surprising sex difference.
The psychosomatic symptoms we have measured as part of the adjustment variables failed, as a general rule, to show significant relations with vul-

74 WOMEN:

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

Decomposition of Variance Vulnerability and Personal Self via Anxiety

effect coefficient causal direct causal indirect

-.76 -.63 -.13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

MEN:

Decomposition of Variance Vulnerability and Personal Self via Anxiety

effect coefficient causal direct causal indirect

-.08 -.35 -.43

Fio. 5.--Path analysis for the relations of relative vulnerability with personal-self, via anxiety, by sex (N = 100).

nerability, but when we analyze the data by sex there is one symptom that does reveal an interesting relation. The cardiovascular disorders, abnormal blood pressure, and any kind of heart dysfunction are positively connected to

men's vulnerability and negatively to women's vulnerability. This pattern of opposing relations is found, among our variables, once, and only once more, with the moral-self, which relates positively to the cardiovascular disorders

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Parental Investment

75

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

of men and negatively to these of terms of social norms, and we think

women. Figure 6 presents the relations rightly so. But if one tries to explain

of these three variables, by sex.

why these are the social norms, and

The difference between males and why they are so common all over the

females, concerning the relationship of world (van den Berghe, 1979), then an

vulnerability to cardiovascular disor- evolutionary view seems appropriate.

ders via moral-self, is short and clear. Once it was biologically fixed that

The effect coefficient for women is mother invests more than father

negative (means good health), while (Dawkins, 1976), natural selection

for men it is positive (means bad should prefer mothers who increase

health). The vulnerable man pays, as their investment more and more. So-

Figure 6 is suggesting, for his vulnera- cial norms are, in this respect, two-

bility, by cardiovascular disorders fold: On one hand they are the cogni-

which are mediated partially by his tive collective product and expression

moral-self. The meaning of this medication will be discussed in the next section.

of the coevolutionary process (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981; Alexander, 1990), unifying genes, and mind, and culture rather than separating them.

CONCLUSIONS AND

On the other hand, social norms are a subject matter for our free will and val-

DISCUSSION

ues and, as such, indicate the dynamic

1. The inclinationto invest, more or nature of human evolution, of which less, in the childrenis strongly predicted we are at the same time both products by sex, and mothers invest more than and shapers. One may put things in an fathers. The high correlation we have even more complicated way. The last found between the parent's sex and the two million years of evolution pushed amount of parental investment by each human fathers to participate more and parent draws a clear picture. Women more in childrearing (Mellen, 1981; are the sex who invest more, much Lovejoy, 1988; Klein, 1989) and egalmore, even if the measurement ignores itarian ideologies are part of that very the biological aspects of pregnancy, process, but the ancient biological base giving birth, and nursing. This phe- is still a real challenge for these new nomenon is especially salient within winds, demanding strong determinathe kibbutz background, because of tion on the reformers' part.

the lack of economic dependency between the parents, and the egalitarian ideology (Tiger and Shepher, 1975; Shepher and Tiger, 1982) which does have an effect on the contribution of fathers to their children, but it is still less than that of mothers. We did not find even one couple where a father does more than a mother, even though both of them work all day outside. One may, of course, explain these results in

2. The higher parental investmentof mothers in comparison to fathers exposes them to threat of desertion, and they become more vulnerable in the marital relationships. Levels of relative vulnerability are, as predicted, strongly connected to levels of investment, and therefore women are more vulnerable. Any kind of exchange model (e.g., Homans, 1961; Thibaut and Kelley, 1959; Blood and Wolfe,

76 WOMEN:

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

Decomposition of Variance Vulnerability and Cardiovascular Disorders via Moral Self

effect coefficient causal direct causal indirect

-.40 -.26 -.14

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

MEN:

Cardiovascular Disorders

Decomposition of Variance Vulnerability and Cardiovascular Disorders via Moral Self

effect coefficient causal direct causal indirect

-.44 -.21 -.23

Cardiovascular Disorders

FIG. 6. --Path analysis for the relations of relative vulnerability with cardiovascular disorders, via moral-self, by sex (N = 100).

I960; Winch, 1971; Safilios-Rothschild, 1976) may well explain the lesser interest of a partner with a lesser investment and his easier decision, or temptation, to go away. But in order to explain why the less interested partner

is usually the father, and why women enter, again and again, such a kind of partnership, we prefer to think in terms of a long path, starting at biological structures which influence social norms and in a way shape the par-

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Parental Investment

77

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

ents' bargaining. Being the more vulnerability to anxiety and depression

interested partners, women feel them- among them cannot be interpreted in

selves in danger of desertion, feel clinical terms without further examina-

themselves dependent on their tions.

spouses, and these are the feelings we 4. Along with emotional damage,

have called "relative vulnerability." relative vulnerability also causes posi-

The higher interest women have in tive healthy effects by strengthening the

their children, and hence in the part- family and the moral-self. At first look,

nership, is a function of both what she this last conclusion seems to contradict

had invested in the past and what a new our prediction of negative effects as a

start will demand of her in the future result of relative vulnerability. Never-

(Dawkins, 1976). The fear of desertion theless, we feel that these results are

is, of course, a function of the great consistent with the evolutionary frame

help fathers are giving, which mothers of reference. Family and moral-self are

have learned to expect. Evolution that evaluations one makes of one's self in

encourages fathers to participate more regard to social norms dictating "cor-

and more in childrearing is increasing rect" behavior, especially marital be-

by that very move the mothers' expec- havior. When these evaluations grow

tations and fears.

positively along with increasing rela-

3. The state of relative vulnerability tive vulnerability, which grows with pa-

is liable to interferewith mentalhealth, rental investment, then we can look at

increasing levels of anxiety anddepres- these social norms, or rules of ethics, as

sion. We have started our paper with mechanisms that encourage the par-

the uneven figures of anxiety and depression according to sex, and now we

ents to invest more. The culture (Barkow, 1980, 1989) and morality

are able to say that mothers in our sam- (Ullock and Wagner, 1980) become es-

ple are suffering from more anxiety and deeper depression than fathers do,

sential parts of human evolution, selecting all along the way the best avail-

and these are connected to relative vul- able mechanisms to guarantee

nerability. The logic is simple. Relative successful parental investment. One

vulnerability is a state of apprehension, may always predict a delicate balance

of uncertainty, perhaps of helplessness, and all of these increase anxiety

between the selection of means which increase genetic profits on one hand

and depression (Brown and Harris, and means which counter the price of

1978). Thus, we find that very basic such profitable means on the other

normal functions--like being a mother hand. If parental investment is a prof-

who invests in children more than does itable mean, and relative vulnerability

a father and is in a state of relative (with anxiety and depression) is the

vulnerability--are capable of causing price, then morality is the counter

emotional symptoms. On the other hand, we are not saying that we have

mean. The positive and negative zones of Figure 2 are a topographic expres-

any information regarding incidences sion of such a balance.

or epidemiology. All our women are Religious morality traditionally suphealthy, would not enter any incidence ports the weak as a kind of compensastatistics, and the relations of relative tion for their vulnerability. As such,

78

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

morality seems to be the product of good minds with a well developed sense of justice. But when parental investment enters the picture, we begin to wonder if morality is more than that. After all, any factor, cultural or genetic, capable of motivating human behavior is a subject for natural selection (Lumsden, 1989); and morality is doubtless such a factor. Thus, we assume, parents who are encouraged by moral laws to continue their efforts of investing in their children could do a better job. Such a line of reasoning takes the copyrights for morality from Judaism and Christianity far back to the African savanna, but the function is the same. Giving prizes to the vulnerable, celebrating the weak, encouraging them to go on. In other words, one may see the family and moral self, raised by the state of relative vulnerability as psychological mechanisms that strengthen the parents in the hard task of caring for their children.
5. Relative vulnerability responds sensitively to situational changes, and the woman reaches the summit of her vulnerability, when she has young children. Figure 3 shows the rise and fall of the woman's relative vulnerability in accord with the different stages of the family life cycle. Apart from the support these results give to our central thesis, showing the connection between parental investment and vulnerability without measuring parental investment, two facts are of special interest.
First, although we consider vulnerability to be a product of different parental investment and different parental strategies selected by evolutionary processes, it is obvious that vulnerability cannot be considered to be a "fem-

inine trait" since it changes along the female life span, depending on what she is doing rather than on what she is. Second, in all stages, women are more vulnerable than men, even before they marry. That means that some amount of sensitivity does exist as a special feminine trait.
Are the first and the second contradictory claims? In a way, they are contradictory, but that is the nature of our mixed thesis, assuming innate inclinations resulting from parental strategies (women are the sex who has to be sensitive to the danger of desertion, to identify the vulnerability, and perhaps take fit measures to prevent it) along with great freedom to respond to the situation in which one is acting. As a matter of fact, flexible reactions to the environment are innate abilities selected by evolution.
6. In some aspects relative vulnerability affects women in other waysthan men. It damages the physical-self of women more than that of men, decreasesthe personal-self of women and increases that of men, and affects positively the cardiovascularfunction of women and negatively that of men. Looking at Figures 4 and 5, one gets the impression that relative vulnerability means different things to women as opposed to men. The vulnerable woman is most sensitive to her physical-self, suffers damage to her personal self, while the vulnerable man enjoys a better personal-self. These differences can be well understood in terms of different parental strategies. The high investment of women commits them strongly to their children and hence to the marital unit. Knowing the smaller commitment of her spouse and the temptation he feels toward

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Parental Investment

79

other women, a wife enters a state of relative vulnerability, fearing the attractiveness of any other women around her, and feels a decline in her own attractiveness and self-satisfaction. There is some contribution here to the well-known phenomenon of a greater concern by females about their attractiveness in comparison to males (e.g., Erne, 1974; Pomerants, 1979; Townsend, 1989). The next step of interpretation, assuming that the woman is doing whatever seems appropriate to increase her attractiveness to the male, is saying that her concern should predict measures a wife takes in order to prevent the potential desertion threatening her (like being more coquettish).
The story of the vulnerable man is different. Although he is vulnerable because he invests much in his children, he is by no means investing more than his spouse does; hence his fear of desertion is smaller and so is his need to increase his attractiveness. He has another type stress. If evolution by means of natural selection did encourage fathers, who had to cope with the hard life in the savanna, to assist their wives in childrearing (Mellen, 1981; Lovejoy, 1988), then acute conflict should emerge within the males' motivational system. Along with this "new" trend of fatherhood, there is still room for the ancient maleness, pursuing easy genetic profits by inseminating as many women as possible without helping

them to look after the children. The moral code serves to give powerful support to the male who becomes a good father, increasing his positive personal-self, but the conflict, we believe, is still there. The good father is a male who neglects other opportunities around him and has to repress those drives which go counter to familial devotion. Cardiovascular disorders have been partially attributed to strict selfcontrol (Appels, 1979), and therefore we suggest a positive connection of men's vulnerability (see Figure 6) to cardiovascular disorders as an expression of the conflict in their parental strategies and the need of the vulnerable man to repress the promiscuous male. The mediation of the moral-self in these connections supports the idea. The fact that for women the connections are reversed indicates the absence of conflict between the new moral rules and the ancient parental strategies of mothers, always investing a lot and highly devoted.
One may ask why evolution could not pick up a clear course for fathers too, preferring, for instance, the devotion of the father to his family? Our answer is simple. Evolution plans nothing. Every successful trait continues and because of the minimal initial biological investment of the father, promiscuity can succeed even in the era of heavy qualitative investments of two parents for every child.

REFERENCES

ALEXANDER, R. D. 1990. Epigenetic rules and Darwinian alogarithims. Ethol. Sociobiol. 11:241-303.
APPLES, A. A. 1979. Psychosocial model of the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease. Ged-

rad: Tijdschrift voor Psychologie 7:6-21. BARASH, D. P. 1980. Human reproductive strat-
egies: A sociobiologic overview. In J. S. Lockard (ed.). The evolution of human social behavior. Elsevier, New York.

80

Lampert and Friedman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

. 1981. Sociobiology: The whisperings within. William Collins Sons and Co.,Glasgow. BARDWICK, J. M. 1979. In transition. Holt, Rinehart, and Wilson, New York.
BARKOW, J. H. 1979. Biological evolution of culturally patterned behavior. InJ. S. Lockard (ed.), The evolution of human social behavior. Elsevier, NewYork.
. 1989. Theelastic between genes and culture. Ethol. Sociobiol. 10:111-130. [000c]
BETZIG, L., M. BORGERHOFF MULDER, and P.
TURKE (eds.). 1988. Human reproductive behavior. Cambridge University Press,London.
BLOOD, R. O., and D. M. WOLFE. 1960. Hus-
bands and wives: The dynamics of marriage living. Free Press, Glencoe.
BROWN, G. W., and T. HARRIS. 1978. Social ori-
gins of depression: A study of psychiatric disorder in women. Tavistock Pub., London. DAWKINS, R. 1976. The selfish gene. Oxford University Press, New York.
DOHRENWEND, B., and B. DOHRENWEND. 1969.
Social status and psychological disorder. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,NewYork.
. 1974. Social andcultural influences on psychopathology. In M. Rosenzweig and L. Porter (eds.), Annual review of psychology, 25. Palo Alto, California.
DONELSON, E., and J. E. GULLAHORN. 1977.
Women: A psychological perspective. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York. DSM III. 1985.American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. Third edition. EME, R.F. 1974. Sex differences in childhood psychopathology: A review. Psychol. Bull. 86:574-599.
ERDWINS, C., A. SMALL, and R. GROSS. 1980.
The relationship of sex-role toself concept. J. Clin. Psychol. 36:111-115. FITTS, W. H. 1965. Tennessee self concept scale (manual). Counselor Recordings and Tests. Nashville.
FRANK, S. J., P. A. TOWELL, and M. HUYCK.
1985. The effect of sex role traits on three aspects of psychological well being in a sample of middle aged women. Sex Roles 12:1073-1087.
FREEDMAN, A. M., H. I. KAPLAN, and B. J. SAN-
DOK. 1980.Comprehensive textbook of psychiatry (3rded.). Williams andWilkins Company, Baltimore. GARAI, J. E. 1970. Sex differences in mental health. Genet. Psychol. Monog. 81:123-142.
GILLESPIE, D. 1971. Who has the power? The marital struggle. J. Marr. Fam.33:445-458.
GUTTMANN, D. 1987. Reclaimed powers:Toward anew psychology ofmen and women in later life. Basic Books, New York.
HEER, D. N. 1963. Dominance and the working wife. In I. F. Nye (ed.), The employed

mother in America. McNally and Co., Chicago. HOMANS, G. C. 1961.Social behavior: Its elementary forms. Harcourt Brace, New York.
KLEIN, R.G. 1989. The human career: Human biological and cultural origins. Universityof Chicago Press, Chicago.
LEVITT, E.E., and B. Lubin. 1975. Depression: Concepts, controversies, and some new facts. Springer, New York.
LOVEJOY, O. C. 1988. Evolution ofhuman walking. Sci. Amer. 259(5):82-89.
LUMSDEN, C. J. 1989. Does culture need genes? Ethol. Sociobiol. 10:9-28.
LUMSDEN, C. J., and E. O. WILSON. 1981.
Genes, mind, and culture. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
MACCOBY, E., and C. JACKLIN. 1974. The psy-
chology of sex differences. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
MELLEN, S. L. W. 1981. The evolution of love. S. H. Freeman and Company, Oxford and San Francisco.
NOCK, S.L. 1949. The family life cycle: Empirical or conceptual tool? J. Marr. Fam. 41:1525.
OAKES, R. 1984. Sex patterns in DSM III. Amer. Psychol. 39:1320-1322.
PARSONS, T. 1955. Family structure and the socialization ofthe child, p.35-131. In T.Parsons and F.R. Bales (eds.), Family, socialization and interaction process, III. Free Press, Glencoe.
POMERANTS, S. C. 1979. Sex differences in the relative importance of self esteem, physical satisfaction, andidentity in predicting adolescent satisfaction. J. Youth Adol. 8:51-61.
RICHMOND, M. L.1976. Beyond resource theory: Another look at factors enabling women to affect family interaction. J. Marr. Fam. 38:257-266.
ROLLINS, B. C., and H. FELDMAN. 1970. Marital
satisfaction over the family life cycle. J. Marr. Fam.32:20-28. Rossi, A. B. 1977. A biosocial perspective on parenting. Daedalus 106:1-32.
. 1984. Gender andparenthood. Amer. Sociol. Rev.49:1-19.
SAFILIOS-ROTHSCHILD, C. 1976. A macro and micro examination of family power andlove: An exchange model. J. Marr. Fam.38:355362.
SATIR, V. 1970. Marriage as a human actualizing contract. InH. A. Otto (ed.), The family in search of a future. Meredith Corp., New York.
SHEPHER, J. 1978.Reflections on the originsof the human pair bond. J. Soc. Bio. Struct. 1:253-264.
SHEPHER, J., and L. TIGER. 1982. Kibbutz and
parental investment. InP. A. Hare, H. Herbert, V. Blumberg, V. Kint, and M. Davies (eds.), Small groups: Social-psychological

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Parental Investment

81

processes, social action and living together. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
SPIELBERGER, C. D., R. L. GORSUCH, and B. E.
LUSHENE. 1970. Manual for the state, trait anxiety inventory (self evaluation questionnaire). Consulting Psychologist Press, Palo Alto, California.
THIBAUT, J. W., and H. H. KELLEY. 1959. The
social psychology of groups. Wiley, New York.
TIGER, L., and J. SHEPHER. 1975. Women in the
kibbutz. Brace, Jovanovich, Harcourt, New York. TOWNSEND, J. M. 1989. Mate selection criteria. Ethol. Sociobiol. 10:241-253. TRIVERS, R. L. 1972. Parental investment and sexual selection. In B. Campbell (ed.), Sexual selection and the descent of man, 1871-

1971. Aldine, Chicago.
ULLOCK, B., and N. N. WAGNER. 1980. The evo-
lution of human sexual behavior. In J. S. Lockard (ed.), The evolution of human social behavior. Elsevier, New York.
VAN DEN BERGHE, P. L. 1980. The human family: A sociobiological look. In J. S. Lockard, The evolution of human social behavior. Elsevier, New York. . 1979. Human family systems, an evolutionary view. Elsevier, New York.
WIDOM, C. S. 1984. Sex roles and psychopathology. Plenum, New York.
WHITLEY, B. E. 1983. Sex-role orientation and self- esteem: A critical meta-analytic review. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 44:765-778.
WINCH, F. R. 1971. The modern family. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

