Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Demography and research with high altitude populations
Gordon F. De Jong
To cite this article: Gordon F. De Jong (1970) Demography and research with high altitude populations, Social Biology, 17:2, 114-119, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987853 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987853
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

Demography and Research with High Altitude Populations

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Gordon F. De Jong
Department of Sociology The Pennsylvania State University University Park, Pennsylvania

An understanding of how people live and work in high altitude environments has only recently become a topic of scientific research; yet there are an estimated thirteen to sixteen million persons, mostly living in economically underdeveloped areas of the world, who reside above an altitude of 10,000 feet. The biological effects of altitude are only slowly being identified, but enough is known to suggest influences on population growth and demographic balance.
As is the case for many problems which face man, the issues related to life at high altitude cut across the boundaries of several scientific disciplines. Biological, physiological, medical, psychological, anthropological, economic, and sociodemographic causes and consequences are interwoven in a complex mosaic. This paper attempts to delineate some of the ways demography has and can contribute to the study of high altitude populations. Toward this goal, three main points will be considered: (1) a brief review of past research on demographic variables and high altitude populations; (2) the development of a research framework which incorporates biologically related and demographic factors; and (3) the identification of some research possibilities which emerge from this framework.

RESEARCH ON DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES IN HIGH ALTITUDE POPULATIONS
The term "population" is common to many disciplines, and it is often used in different ways. Here population refers to an aggregate of human organisms which inhabit a specified area. The focus on human aggregates as the unit of analysis, instead of individual members who constitute the aggregate, is a key to the perspective of the demographer as compared to other researchers.
Other than a few descriptive accounts of national populations in high altitude regions of the world, there have been very few demographic studies which explicitly considered altitude as a variable. The few studies there are have tended to focus on natality. The major demographic dialogue is encompassed within a series of five articles which have appeared since 1963.
The exchange began with a study by Stycos (1963) of regional natality differences in Peru. Based on 1940 census data, the author reported that the observed regional differences were almost entirely explained by the proportion of women who became mothers. When urbanization, literacy, and language were introduced as control variables, the correlation analysis indicated that Indian language areas tended to have a high

114

Vol. 17, No. 2

High Altitude Populations

115

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

incidence of mothers but low motherhood natality. The net result was that the highest natality was in Spanish rural areas and the lowest in Indian urban areas. These findings were interpreted as due to differences in cultural factors related to mating patterns by Indians and mestizos. It was suggested that the Indians have more permissive norms concerning sex relations, establish cohabiting relations later than do mestizos, and that such unions are less stable than mestizo unions. The effect is to decrease the total exposure to the risk of conception.
The cultural natality-differential thesis of Stycos was tested by Heer (1964) for Ecuador and Bolivia as well as Peru. Using census data, he found that the populations in Indian-speaking, higher altitude areas once again had lower natality than those in lower altitude, more prosperous, Spanish-speaking areas. Heer's data indicated, however, that Indian areas also had a high proportion of females in the labor force, and this suggested to the author that there may be a conscious attempt to control births, possibly by means of abortion or infanticide.
Subsequently, James (1966) introduced a different twist into the debate by hypothesizing that natality differentials between the Spanish and Indian-speaking populations of Andean countries were due to the physiological effects of altitude rather than to voluntary sociocultural factors. Using census data from twenty-one Peruvian and nine Bolivian departamentos, and from eighteen Ecuadorian provincias, James' data showed a strong negative relationship between mean altitude and measures of natality. A multiple analysis of language, altitude, and natality supported the thesis that altitude was a most powerful explanatory variable and that it may be due to physiological effects rather than birth-control factors.
The research by James prompted Heer (1967) to re-evaluate his original conclusions by adding altitude and recalculating the correlation analysis. Heer found altitude to be

the most important variable in accounting for natality differences in Peru, but not in Bolivia or Ecuador.
Reviewing all these arguments, Whitehead (1968) concluded that the fertility indicators used in the prior research had failed to control effectively for high levels of infant mortality (see Robinson, 1963). To support his point, he reviewed some of the serious problems in the quality of census data on which the prior studies were based. Sketchy survey data give some indication of the high level of infant mortality and seem to refute the idea that fertility is low in areas of high altitude. The author's exploration of reasons for high infant mortality suggests economic and social rather than physiological causes.
On the basis of these five demographic studies it perhaps can be concluded that the relative contribution of sociocultural and altitude factors to natality differences in Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador is still in need of considerable elucidation.
Demographic research on high altitude populations has not been restricted to natality. Mortality, and particularly infant mortality as already noted, has attracted some attention. Several studies including Mazess (1965), Grahn and Kratchman (1963), and Lichty et al. (1957), have used census and survey data to support the hypothesis of a positive relationship between infant mortality and altitude.
Biological and physiological research on high altitude populations has also included natality and infant mortality. A major stimulus has come from clinical observations concerning birth weight, prematurity, neonatal mortality, and physiological stresses on the mother. Monge's work (Monge et al., 1945; Monge, 1948) indicates that observations on the relationship between altitude and natality have historical dimensions. The Spanish chroniclers of the sixteenth century noted that no child of Spanish blood was born during the first fifty years of Spanish occupation of the Peruvian highlands. Not

116

De Jong

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

unrelated was the subsequent decision of the Spaniards to move their capital from the mountains to the seacoast.
Data on the biology of altitude and reproduction are more abundant from animal than human experiments (Donayre, 1966; Van Liere and Stickney, 1963). Based on studies in actual or simulated altitude environments, the natality-depressing effects of altitude seem to be related to circulatory system adjustments to hypoxia, to the functioning of the hypothalamic and endocrine systems, to germ-cell production, to copulation, to gestation, to birth weight, and to early mortality (Opitz and Schneider, 1950; Moncloa et al., 1965; DeBias, 1966; Weihe, 1962). However, the direct transfer of these findings to human natality depends on further scientific evidence. A significant step is the research by Sobrevilla (1967) which identifies reduced estrogen excretion as an important distinction between high- and low-altitude samples of pregnant women.
Migration has been involved in a few studies of high altitude populations. Migration is related to the study of gene flow and evolutionary forces, but variability in gene flow is more closely linked to isolation and secondarily to migration which often provides a vehicle for dissipating isolation (Spuhler, 1959; Matsunaga, 1965). An example of such research with a high altitude population is provided by Cruz-Coke and others in a sample of communities in Chile (Cruz-Coke, 1967; Cruz-Coke et al., 1966). Migration was found to be a predominant force in the study of an optimal evolutionary model.
This brief parallel review of demographic and biologically-related research not only indicates the current stage of findings but also provides a backdrop for considering further research possibilities.
A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR RESEARCH
Toward a synthesis of demographic and biological research on high altitude popula-

tions, a conceptual framework composed of three sets of variables is proposed in Figure 1. The first set of variables is demographic and includes population change, the components of such change (natality, mortality, and migration), and the basic populationstructure variables of population size, agesex composition, and distribution. To this list can be added race, if it is considered from a physical rather than a social perspective. These factors constitute the essence of basic demographic analysis (see Ryder, 1964). There are causal and consequential relationships among these factors which may be altered when any one factor is related to a variable outside the demographic system.
A second set of variables can be termed the social aggregate components of a population. These are primarily achieved, as opposed to ascribed population characteristics which can be aggregated for descriptive and analytical purposes. Much demographic research focuses on developing reliable and valid generalizations about how social aggregate variables affect and are affected by basic demographic variables. An elementary example is the influence of the religious composition of an area on natality trends. In turn, the natality trends often alter various compositional features of the population.
Social aggregate variables can provide an index of behavioral expectations. If the degree of education influences migration, this is assumed to indicate something about the attitudes and behavior of people with high as compared to low education. Social aggregate factors, then, provide a conceptual link to the social and cultural base of the population. The logic of this linkage is demonstrated quite well in the previously cited Stycos-Heer-James debate on factors explaining Indian and Spanish-speaking population natality differences in Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador. It should be recognized, however, that many social and cultural factors are not measured directly by social aggregate population traits. But it is equally true that correlations between altitude and birth rates

Vol. 17, No. 2

High Altitude Populations

117

do not directly measure the effects of hypoxia. They may reflect the ability of people to make social, cultural, and economic adjustments to environmental conditions. In other words, the integration of variables at different levels of analysis depends in part on understanding of linkage mechanisms.
The third set of factors in Figure 1 is biological variables related to high altitude. While the items included are not mutually exclusive and certainly not exhaustive, they are indicative of the concepts used in past and present theory and research. Delineating some research possibilities may illustrate ways in which these three sets of factors may be related in research problems.

SOME RESEARCH POSSIBILITIES
There are two basic approaches to the analysis of the relationship between demographic and biological variables in high altitude populations. Demographic factors may be viewed as independent variables which offer explanations for biologically-related phenomena. The influence of population isolation on gene exchange illustrates this type of relationship. The second approach treats demographic factors as the dependent variable, with the object of explaining the effects of biologically related altitude factors upon them. A study of the influence of hypoxia on mortality rates illustrates this approach. While it is clear that reciprocal influences are

natality mortality migration distribution age-sex composition population size

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Selected Biologically Related
Variables

Social Aggregate Variables

Hypoxie, genetic and nutritional effects on:
birth weight sperm production maturation and aging infectious disease susceptibility pulmonary function endocrine function cardiovascular function

ethnic background race marital status language family and kinship characteristics
labor force participation occupation industry education income religion

FIG. 1.--A conceptual framework for demographic and biologically related research in high altitude populations.

118

De Jong

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

involved, the research possibilities which follow will emphasize the latter approach.
The review of past research indicates both social and biological influences are significant in differentiating high- and low-altitude population natality trends. Many of these influences are linked to natality through a set of so-called "intermediate variables" proposed by Davis and Blake (1956). Included are the following factors: (1) age of entry into sexual union; (2) permanent celibacy; (3) amount of reproductive period spent after or between unions; (4) voluntary abstinence from intercourse; (5) involuntary abstinence from intercourse due to impotence, illness, temporary separations; (6) coital frequency; (7) fecundity or infecundity as affected by involuntary causes; (8) the use or non-use of contraception; (9) fecundity or infecundity as affected by voluntary causes such as sterilization, subincision, and medical treatment; (10) fetal mortality from involuntary causes; and (11) fetal mortality from voluntary causes.
In Western societies, the degree and efficiency of contraceptive use explain many of the trends and comparative differences in natality rates. For high altitude populations this may not be the case--for socioeconomic as well as biological reasons. What is required are more careful studies which show how biological factors affect natality of high altitude populations. In addition, such studies must be combined with social variables so that the relative contribution of each can be assessed. At present, only the crudest estimates of this type are available.
Numerous possible combinations of social aggregate and biological variables, as outlined in Figure 1, could be studied in relation to natality through the intermediate variables mentioned above. An exemplary list might include social-class differences in natality of populations at the same and different altitudes; the effect of women working on natality and gestation; the relationship

between birth weight, neonatal mortality, and the education of the population; the effect of social status, religion, marital form, or labor force characteristics on copulation and fertilization.
A complementary list could be offered for the study of mortality and migration. Again biological and social aggregate variables can be related to demographic trends and differences: for example, how education affects the prevalence of disease and life expectancy; the manifestations of hypoxia by race and occupation; and the impact of nutritional level and physical fitness by social class on age-sex specific mortality. For migration studies, gene exchange could be related to isolation, marital form, social class, language, and race. Other migration studies might focus on the cause of death in migrant populations to and from high altitude areas, or the fertilization of women with different social characteristics who migrate from low to high areas and vice versa. Another interesting study would be the possible relationship between hypoxia, selected social aggregate variables, and the sex ratio at birth.
The strategy for these types of studies will differ with individual researchers as well as with the perspectives of different disciplines. For the demographer, the approach may begin by explicitly including altitude as an areal variable along with other social and economic factors which help explain trends and variations in natality, mortality, and migration. The biological researcher may focus more on the ways altitude is translated into the physiology of human natality and mortality. Common to research from either perspective are concerns for variations in the degree of altitude, for the length of time spent at altitude levels, for whether or not the populations are native to the area, and for obtaining adequate-sized probability samples rather than accidental samples with unknown sampling bias.

Vol.17, No. 2

High Altitude Populations

119

CONCLUSIONS
The modest goal of this paper was to delineate some of the ways demography contributes to the study of high altitude populations. Deliberately avoided was a wide range of social, cultural, psychological, political, economic, technological, and environmental issues which selectively could be included in high altitude research. Most notable is the influence of the family system --the social structural unit most immediate to natality, mortality, and migration. For most social scientists, biological influences

on human behavior usually seem to be outweighed by economic development, political power, social status, motivation, land tenure systems, and a host of similar attitude and behavior correlates. However, in the atypical environment of the high altitude areas of the world, possible biological correlates of human behavior become more salient, even to the social scientist. The result would seem to be unusual opportunities for researchers to synthesize the theories and methodologies of several disciplines toward an understanding of man at high altitude.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

CRUZ-COKE, R. 1967. Genetic characteristics of high- MONCLOA, F., J. DONAYRE, L. SOBREVILLA, and

altitude populations in Chile. Paper presented at R. GUERRA-GARCIA. 1965. Endocrine studies at

the meeting of Investigators on Population Biol- high altitude. J. Clin. End.Metabl. 25:1640-

ogy of Altitude, Washington,D.C.

1642.

CRUZ-COKE, R., A. P. CRISTOFFANINI, M. Aspil- MONGE, C. 1948. Acclimatization in the Andes.

LAGA, and F. BINANCANI. 1966.Evolutionary Translated by D. F. Brown, Johns Hopkins

forces inhuman populations in anenvironmental Press, Baltimore.

gradient in Africa. Hum. Biol. 38:421-438.

MONGE, C., M. SANMARTIN, J. ATKINS, and J.

DAVIS, K., and J. BLAKE. 1956. Social structure and

CASTANON. 1945.Acclimatación del ganado ovino

fertility: An analytic framework. Econ. Dev. en las grandes alturas. An. Fac. Med. (Lima)23:

Cult. Change: 4:211-235.

15-31.

DEBIAS, D. A. 1966. Thyroid-adrenal relationship OPITZ, E., and M. SCHNEIDER. 1950. The oxygen

in altitude tolerance. Fed. Proc. 25:1227-1232.

supply of the brain and the mechanism of de-

DONAYRE, J. 1966. Population growth and fertility ficiency effects. Ergebnisse der Physiologie 46:

at high altitude. In Life at high altitude, Pan 126-260.

American Health Organization Scientific Publi- ROBINSON, W. C. 1963. Urbanization and fertility:

cation No. 140, Washington, D.C.

The non-Western experience. Milbank Mem.

GRAHN, D., and KRATCHMAN, J. 1963. Variations in

Fund. Quart. 41:291-308.

neonatal death rates and birth weight in the RYDER, N. B. 1964. Notes on theconcept of a popu-

United States andpossible relations to environ- lation. Amer. J. Sociol. 69:447-463.

mental radiation, geology, and altitude. Amer. J. SOBREVILLA, L. A. 1967. Fertility at high altitude.

Hum. Genet. 15:329-352.

Paper presented at the Meeting of Investigators

HEER, D. M. 1964. Fertility differences between In- on Population Biology of Altitude, Washington,

dian and Spanish-speaking parts of Andean D.C.

countries. Pop.Stud. 18:71-84.

SPUHLER, J. N. 1959. Physical anthropology and

. 1967. Fertility differences in Andean coun- demography. In P. Hauser andO. D. Duncan,

tries: A reply to W.H. James. Pop. Stud. 21: The study of population. University of Chicago

71-73.

Press, Chicago.

JAMES, W.H. 1966. The effect of altitude on fer- STYCOS, J. M. 1963. Culture and differential fer-

tility in Andean countries. Pop. Stud.20:97-101. tility in Peru. Pop. Stud. 16:257-270.

LICHTY, J. A., R. Y. TING, P. D. BURNS, and E. VAN LIERE, E. J., and J. C. STICKNEY. 1963. Hyp-

DYAR. 1957. Studies of babies born at high alti- oxia. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill.

tude. Amer. Med. J. Dis.Child. 93:666-677. WEIHE, W. 1962.Some examples of endocrine and

MATSUNAGA, E. 1965.Measures affecting popula- metabolic functions in rats during acclimatiza-

tion trends and possible genetic consequences. tion to high altitude. In W. Weihe (ed.),The

World Population Conference, Belgrade, Yugo- physiological effects of high altitude. Pergamon

slavia.

Press, NewYork.

MAZESS, R. B. 1965. Neonatal mortality and alti- WHITEHEAD, LAURENCE. 1968. Altitude, fertility,

tude in Peru. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 23:209- and mortality in Andean countries. Pop. Stud.

214. 21:71-73.

