Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
An "epidemic" model of sexual intercourse prevalences for black and white adolescents
David C. Rowe , Joseph Lee Rodgers & Sylvia MeseckBushey
To cite this article: David C. Rowe , Joseph Lee Rodgers & Sylvia MeseckBushey (1989) An "epidemic" model of sexual intercourse prevalences for black and white adolescents, Social Biology, 36:3-4, 127-145, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1989.9988728 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1989.9988728
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

An "Epidemic" Model of Sexual Intercourse Prevalences for Black and White Adolescents

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

aDavid C. Rowe, bJoseph Lee Rodgers, and bSylvia Meseck-Bushey
aSchool of Family and Consumer Resources, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona; bDepartment of Psychology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma

ABSTRACT: In adolescence (12-16 years), the prevalence of sexual intercourse increases each year. To explain the increasing yearly prevalences, we propose a recursive equation model of onset of adolescent sexual intercourse. The model allows for an "epidemic" process (the transmission of sexuality from a nonvirgin to a virgin) and a nonepidemic process (two virgins progressing to sexual intercourse). The model also requires that virgin females be pubertally mature before they will progress to sexual intercourse. Adequate fits were obtained to the intercourse prevalences for both black and white respondents. Comparisons of alternative models established that the full model was superior to models that omitted either the nonepidemic process or the requirement of females' pubertal maturation. The model was able to fit both white and blacks simultaneously, assuming equal transition probabilities in both races. Hence, we propose the hypothesis that race differences in sexual intercourse prevalences may be strongly influenced by the age of initiation of the "epidemic" process and by race difference in females' rates of pubertal maturation. The results suggested that most new cases of sexual intercourse arose from the epidemic process and that males were more prone to progress to intercourse, given an opportunity.

A theoretical understanding of the prevalences of sexual intercourse is an important goal for the behavioral sciences. Early sexual activity carries the health risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases and infertility, and teenage pregnancy places a burden on young mothers and their families that can endure across generations (Furstenberg et al., 1987; Hayes, 1987). A theoretical understanding of early sexual activity, then, may provide a guide to public policy formation. From a purely scientific point of view, this arena is a challenging one for testing alternative behavioral theories.
In this paper, we advance a new quantitative theory of adolescent sexu-

ality. This theory proposes that adolescent sexuality is partly transmitted by an "epidemic" process analogous to the epidemic transmission of infectious diseases. Our theory makes explicit assumptions about the causal antecedents of sexuality--including a greater emphasis on biology than most theories of sexual behavior--and produces quantitative predictions for sexual intercourse prevalences.
Our theory is designed to explain the cumulative prevalences of sexual intercourse, that is, the proportion of individuals of a given age who have ever had sexual intercourse. Not surprisingly, the prevalence of sexual intercourse increases rapidly with age during adoles-

127

128

Roweet al.

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

cence until about half of adolescents in the late teenage years report sexual intercourse (Zelnik et al., 1981). Two demographic differences are consistent throughout the literature on teenage sexuality. The male prevalence of sexual intercourse is higher than the female, and blacks' prevalence is higher than whites. The race difference is of scientific and practical interest because of its historical persistence and magnitude, especially in the early teenage years. In Zelnik and Kantner's (1980) national survey, 65 per cent of never-married black women 15-19 years reported having had sexual intercourse, compared to only 42 per cent of white women. The racial difference was greater at younger ages. At age 15, 41 per cent of female blacks had initiated intercourse, versus
18 per cent of female whites. Similarly, during adolescence, prevalences of pregnancy have been greater for black than white women. This ratio was about 2:1 black to white births from years 15 to 19 years, but about 7:1 for black and white women 14 years and below (Washington, 1982). Some surveys report social class differences in sexual intercourse prevalences, with higher rates among lower-class individuals, but these differences are typically not as large as those of sex and race.
Several types of theory attempt to explain the demographic facts of sexual intercourse prevalences. One type focuses on socioeconomic variation in the opportunity costs of sexuality (Furstenberg, 1976). Opportunity costs refer to the loss of future benefits entailed by a particular behavioral decision. Applied to adolescent sexual intercourse, lower social class individuals may regard opportunity costs low because they perceive the chances of success from deferring for long-term goals (e.g.,

education) as minimal. In this case, factors such as educational aspirations, school grades, school attendance, and so on, should relate to sexual intercourse prevalences as individual difference variables and also explain social class variation. Other indicators of social disadvantage (e.g., single parent families) may also bear an association with the opportunity costs of sexual intercourse.
A second type of theory uses variation in social norms to explain variation in adolescent sexuality. Social norms are the values regarding the appropriateness of sexual intercourse held by peers, family members, and the teenagers themselves. Individuals in peer groups that approve more of sexual behavior should themselves, according to this view, be more likely to initiate early sexual activity.
Both types of theory explain some variation in sexual intercourse among teenagers; yet they have limitations. Race differences are a particularly difficult problem for these theories. Furstenberg et al. (1987&) tried to reduce racial differences by statistically controlling variables tied to socioeconomic differences. Poor grades, school attendance, educational aspirations, and related variables barely dented the 3.7 odds ratio of black:white sexual intercourse odds. Normative variables, however, were more successful. For example, respondents' reports of friends' intercourse reduced the odds ratio from 3.7 to 1.8; it was one of the few variables to make a substantive difference.
Despite its empirical successes, normative theory does not necessarily give theoretical insight, because the mechanisms that cause differences in community norms were left unspecified. Furstenberg et al. (1987) recognized that

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

An "Epidemic" Model

129

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

the normative explanation appears circular "in claiming that blacks have early intercourse because other blacks (peers) have early intercourse (p. 515)." The unanswered, but essential, question is what sustains different social norms in different communities. Such a question naturally promotes a search for "third variables" that would explain both high prevalences of sexual intercourse and approving community norms. Although one explanation might be historical-- communities receive different social traditions which they then maintain (Washington, 1982)--it would be more satisfying to find some functional reason for the persistence of disparate norms.
Biology has been relatively neglected in discussions of the determinants of sexual intercourse in adolescence; yet pubertal development takes place during this period. In both sexes, with males lagging behind females by about two years, pubertal development produces changes in appearance as adolescents acquire secondary sexual characteristics. In the body, these changes are promoted by an order-of-magnitude change of testosterone levels in males and by substantial changes in estrogen and androgen levels (of adrenal origin) in females. A biological theory of adolescent sexuality postulates that the concomitant increase in sexual activity during this age period is a consequence of pubertal influence on sexual libido; physical changes may cause adolescents to desire sexual activity. Later, opportunities will come.
Udry's Adolescent Sexuality Project provides the first strong evidence for such biological theorizing (Smith et al., 1985). This research has involved studies of Tanner's stage levels--the level of breast and genital development in females and genital development in

males--and studies of hormones. In their study of pubertal maturation, both girls' and boys' level of puberty were related to sexual behavior (intercourse and sexual experience) independent of age (Smith et al., 1985). In girls, growth affected most by androgenic hormones (pubic hair) correlated more highly with sexual behavior than growth affected most by estrogens (breast development). This result suggested that the effect of physical development was a direct one on sexual behavior, rather than an indirect one mediated by adolescent peers' perception of a women's level of pubertal development. In girls, the relationship between pubertal maturation and sexuality also interacted with the influence of same-sex friends. Women with low levels of pubertal maturity were unlikely to engage in sexual behaviors, regardless of their friends' sexual experience level, but women who were pubertally mature were affected by same-sex friends' sexuality. Those with more sexually active friends were themselves more likely to be sexually active. In these two studies, the samples consisted of white respondents only; but two research projects indicate a relationship between pubertal maturation events and initiation of sexual activity in blacks (Presser, 1978; Zabin et al., 1986).
Hormone levels in blood appear to affect sexual behavior (Udry et al., 1985,1986). Males' level of free testosterone predicted sexual intercourse, sexual experience (petting behaviors short of intercourse), and sexual arousability. Hormones appeared to work through a biologically-based change in sexual motivation, as neither age nor pubertal appearance changes could account statistically for the hormonesexuality relationship. In females, a

130

Rowe et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

number of sexual interest and activity variables, except for intercourse itself, were predicted from adrenal origin androgenic hormones. Estrogenic hormones, which affect visible secondary sexual traits in females, were unassociated with sexual behavior. The lack of prediction of sexual intercourse may be partly a problem of statistical power; 11 in a sample of 78white females reported intercourse. As in males, neither age nor secondary sexual traits mediated the relationships. Both studies counter the prevailing view that sexual activity is merely the result of social norms or adolescents' reactions to physical changes in others. Instead, hormonal changes appeared to produce a sexual libido responsible for sexuality. No evidence exists for the reverse causation that sexual activity affects hormonal levels in females.
Because blacks mature pubertally earlier than whites, a biological model can be applied to race differences. Nationally, blacks attain menarche earlier than whites (Harlanetal., 1980). Age of menarche, however, may be less important than the overall level of pubertal maturation. For example, increases in pubertal hormones considerably antedate menarche in girls (Udry et al., 1986). Black girls progress through Tanner's stages of pubertal growth considerably earlier than white girls (Harlan et al., 1980). According to the National Health Examination Survey, this racial difference is independent of age at menarche and social class, suggesting that it is a biologically based racial difference. There is also a suggestion of differences in follicle stimulating hormone levels in black and white girls (Nankin et al., 1974), with black girls having higher levels. In contrast, the data for males are conflicting. The Na-

tional Health Survey suggests equal rates of pubertal maturation in black and white males down to age 12 years, but two other studies, also employing observer ratings of pubertal maturation, indicate black males were ahead of white males under age 14 years (Nankin et al., 1974; Foster et al., 1977). Although the maturational difference between whites and blacks may be partly responsible for their different prevalences of sexual intercourse, a test of maturational effects requires an explicit model of the social processes determining the spread of intercourse among adolescents, as we discuss next.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
STATEMENT OF THE MODEL
In this paper, we describe a theoretical model of the initiation of sexual intercourse. This model takes as data the cumulative prevalences of sexual intercourse, namely, the proportion of adolescents of a given race or sex who have ever had sexual intercourse with a partner. The model will contain two terms, one representing an "epidemic" process of the transmission of sexual intercourse and the other representing a nonepidemic process of two virgin partners having sexual intercourse together. In both processes, we assume that for a female to participate in sexual intercourse, she must be pubertally mature. We also assume that a single probability exists that describes the chance that an individual will initiate intercourse, given an encounter with a nonvirgin partner. This probability may differ for males and females, but is assumed to be constant over the period 12-16 years.
In the theory of infectious disease, epidemics are spread by face-to-face en-

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

An "Epidemic" Model

131

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

counters between an infected individual and a susceptible individual. These theories also assume "homogeneous" mixing, that is, that encounters between infected and susceptible individuals are at random. Given these simplifying assumptions, the rate of spread depends only on the proportion of the population already infected. This transmission process can be described by differential or difference equations (see CavalliSforza and Feldman, 1981 for applications of such models to social phenomena).
In our analogy, nonvirgins are the "carriers" of sexual intercourse and virgins are the susceptible individuals. We begin by assuming that encounters between individuals occur randomly. Later, we will examine the consequences of relaxing this assumption. Under random assortment, in a population with proportions Pm of male nonvirgins and Pf of female nonvirgins, the probabilities of two opposite-sexed individuals encountering one another are Pm (1- Pf), Pf(l - Pm), and (1 - Pf) (1Pm), for an encounter between nonvirgin males and virgin females, nonvirgin females and virgin males, and virgin females and virgin males, respectively. Because we assume that only pubertally mature females will initiate sexual activity, we reduce the number of pairs by the proportion of mature females of a given age (Mt, where t is an age from 12to 16 years). Finally, not all encounters of partners lead to sexual intercourse. The following two recursive equations include this restriction using the parameters T and k and define our model:
(1) Pm, +i = Pm, + Tm (1 -Pm,)
Pf< + kM,(l-Pm,)(l-Pf,)

(2) (1-Pft) Pmt +
kM,(l-Pmt)(l-Pft),
where t is the age period (i.e., 12 years, 13 years, etc.); Pm is the proportion of male nonvirgins; Pf is the proportion of female nonvirgins; M, is the proportion of pubertally mature females at age t; Tm is the transition probability (per encounter) that a male virgin will engage in sexual intercourse, given an encounter with a nonvirgin female; Tf is the transition probability (per encounter) that a female virgin will engage in sexual intercourse, given an encounter with a nonvirgin male; and k is the probability that two nonvirgins will engage in intercourse per encounter (a nonepidemic process).1
ASSUMPTIONS OF THEMODEL
We limited the spread of sexual intercourse to pubertally mature females for empirical reasons. As reviewed earlier, Udry's research found that pubertal maturation was associated with females' initiation of sexual behavior. Although the same association was found for males, males will initiate intercourse earlier in pubertal development than females. In particular, some black males initiate coitus very early, even prior to puberty (Clark et al., 1984; Finkel and
1The parameters T and k can be given another interpretation. Our interpretation is that they refer to the probability of a virgin making the transition to nonvirginity, given a single encounter per year. However, T also can represent the number of "effective" encounters per person per year. An "effective" encounter is one between a virgin and nonvirgin (or two virgins) leading to sexual intercourse. Effective encounters are the product of the probability of transmission per encounter times total number of encounters. The latter interpretation is the standard "mass action" principle of transmission in epidemic theory (Anderson, 1982,p. 154).

132

Rowe et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Finkel, 1975). Thus, although male sexual activity varies with puberty and with hormonal levels, a lack of pubertal development is not as restrictive on male sexual behavior as it is on female behavior. Data on this issue will be presented later.
The random assortment assumption, on the surface, appears to counter friendship homogamy and influence theories. Studies in the behavioral sciences indicate friendship homogamy for different social attitudes and behaviors (Kandel, 1978). Certainly, the virginity status of opposite-sex friends might be correlated, because of social and influence or social selection processes. Billy and Udry (1985) have investigated the effect of best same-sex and oppositesex friends' intercourse behavior on the likelihood that virgin respondents will make the transition to sexual intercourse. In agreement with our random assortment assumption, they found no influence of either friends on the likelihood that white males or blacks make the transition. On the other hand, white females were influenced somewhat by the intercourse behavior of their best friends.
Because the "random assortment" assumption may be unrealistic, we will investigate the effects of relaxing it. Thus, we will permit a correlation between the intercourse statuses of opposite-sex friends to account for friendship similarity. In fact, this correlation will over-adjust to the extent that opposite-sex best friends are correlated because they have had intercourse together. That process is dynamically accounted for by the model. The part of the correlation reflecting "non-random encounters" is what we wish to adjust for. As we cannot empirically separate these two components of resemblance,

we will use a range of possible values of nonrandom assortment. In addition, we have data directly bearing on this issue, as we shall see later.
We also assume that the transition probabilities, Tm for males and Tfior females, remain constant across individuals and across the age 12-16 period. This assumption is sufficient to fit the kind of aggregate data we have available, but it is undoubtedly a simplification. It is more likely that a range of individual differences in transition proneness exist, depending on differences in personality and experience. Tm and Tf, then, represent something like the mean value on the Tm and Tf distributions across individuals. The average proneness may remain fairly constant across these years; and enough individuals may have Tm and Tf values close to the mean so that the approximation will suffice. It is important to note that a constant Tm and Tf allows for changes in the conditionalprobability of engaging in intercourse, given age. This probability is greater for older than younger adolescents. However, this change in conditional probability accords with the model because (1) among older adolescents, the prevalence of females' pubertal maturity has increased, and (2) among older adolescents, the risk of encountering a nonvirgin who can "transmit" sexual intercourse is greater. Tm and Tf are themselves probabilities conditioned on encountering a nonvirgin individual, and for any person, they can remain relatively constant during the age 12-16 period.
EVALUATION OF THE MODEL
To evaluate our hypotheses, we adopt the strategy of comparing the adequacy of competing models. The raw data will consist of sexual intercourse

Vol. 36,No. 3-4

An "Epidemic" Model

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

prevalences, grouped by sex and race, for adolescents 12-16 years old. We will test the fit of models to the data from each race separately, and then to data from the combined races of blacks and whites. We will sequentially test models, comparing purely epidemic models (i.e., without the virgin-virgin term) with mixed models combining both nonvirgin-virgin and virgin-virgin terms. Within each category, we will compare models that include the females' pubertal maturation restriction with models that do not impose this restriction.

sample at different age points, although high proportions of the sample were represented in the full longitudinal process.
Separate data sets were constructed in the following way. The 12- and 13year-old groups consisted of two rounds of data: Round 1 at Raleigh and Round 1 at Tallahassee. The 14-year-old group consisted of four rounds, the first two rounds at both locations. Each of the 15and 16-year-old data sets incorporated three rounds: Raleigh, Rounds 2 and 3; and Tallahassee, Round 2.

METHOD
Data set.--The "epidemic" model was fit to data on sexual intercourse prevalences from the Adolescent Sexuality (ADSEX) data set collected by the Carolina Population Center between 1978 and 1982. The ADSEX project surveyed complete intact schools in two metropolitan areas: Raleigh, North Carolina, and Tallahassee, Florida. The school setting is especially powerful for testing the epidemic model because the face-to-face transmission process is directly reflected in the data. National samples of adolescents would be more statistically representative of the population but would involve noninteracting youths. Subjects were interviewed and administered questionnaires in their homes. The original response rate was above 80 per cent in both Raleigh and Tallahassee. In Raleigh, there were three rounds of data collection; in Tallahassee, two rounds. The rate of retention was above 80 per cent throughout the longitudinal rounds. We combined the different rounds and locations of the ADSEX study to maximize our sample size at each age point. Hence, somewhat different youths were included in the

RESULTS
DATA TABLES
Our analyses focused on sexual intercourse. Each respondent was asked twice in the questionnaire whether they had had sexual intercourse. One question was simply a yes/no response to a single item asking whether the respondent had ever had sexual intercourse. This item included a definition of intercourse and equivalent slang terms. The other item was a question concerned with the frequency of sexual intercourse. A minority of youths (< 5 per cent) contradicted themselves by giving conflicting answers to the two questions (see Rodgers et al., 1982, for a discussion of this problem). These individuals were recorded as virgins.
Table 1 presents the intercourse prevalences by race and sex. The prevalences, as expected, differed widely among these groups. At age 12, 4-6 times the percentage of blacks had initiated sexual intercourse as whites. Within race, about four times the percentage of males as females were sexually active. Although racial and sexual disparities diminished with age, they did

134

Rowe et al.

Social Biology

TABLE1 SEXUAL INTERCOURSE PREVALENCES BY AGE"

Whites Boys

GROUP

. ..

Girls

Blacks Boys

Girls

. ..

"Sample size in parentheses.

12
115 (113)
2.1 (207)
40.0 (35) 115 (61)

AGE
13 14

19.6 (204)
4.1 (196)

27.4 (314)
11.2 (347)

57.6 (59)
22.2 (63)

61.0 (146)
27.8 (144)

15
41.7 (199) 24.5 (184)
79.1 (67)
52.0 (77)

16
50.3 (169) 34.3 (216)
78.4 (97)
59.5 (84)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

not converge. At 16 years, prevalences black males (63per cent, intercourse)

were about 20-30 per cent greater in clearly violated the assumption that pu-

males than in females, and in blacks bertal maturation wasaprerequisite for

than inwhites.

sexual intercourse.

We next examined the relationship On theother hand, in thetwo female

between sexual intercourse and puber- groups, sexual intercourse status was

tal maturation. Each questionnairecon- positively associated with pubertal

tained black and white line drawingsto growth (in whites, an increase from 7

represent pubertal growth stages, per cent to29per cent; inblacks, anin-

adapted from Tanner's (1978) photo- crease from 32per cent to 49per cent).

graphs of pubertal maturation stages. Hence, these data were somewhat in-

Respondents made two self ratings: consistent with our assumption that im-

girls, breast and pubic hair stage; boys,

penis andpubic hair stage. Scores on

each self-rating ranged from 1to5 and were averaged. Table 2presents the relationship between pubertal level and sexual intercourse status. Incalculating

TABLE2
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PUBERTAL MATURATION AND NONVIRGINITY STATUS

the tabled values, wecombined inter-

TANNER'S STAGES

mediate pubertal levels (1.5, 2.5, etc.)

GROUP

1-3 4 - 5

with the next lowest stage level. The ta- Females

ble presents together several immature levels with relatively small sample sizes (Levels 1-3)and compares them to two mature levels (Level 4, and adult maturity, Level 5, combined).
In both black and white males, indi-

Black
White
Males Black

. .. .... ...

32% (63) 7% (132)
63% (70)

49% (278) 29% (546)
77% (343)

viduals with lowpubertal statuses re- White ported sexual intercourse. Inparticular,

. . . 20% (148)

46% (716)

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

An "Epidemic" Model

Females Whites Blacks .

GROUP

TABLE3
FEMALE PREVALENCES OF PUBERTAL MATURITY
AGE
12 13 14 15
36% 62% 80% 95% 53% 67% 82% 88%

135
16
93% 93%

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

mature individuals do not report intercourse. The lack of a perfect association of pubertal status with coitus must, therefore, introduce some error into our model--namely, the 29 (20 black and 9 white) females in Stages 1-3 who reported coitus. However, if some of these females had intercourse through situations outside the model, for instance, because they were victims of rape or child molestation, then our behavioral data may be closer to no (voluntary) sexual intercourse for pubertally immature females than they suggest on the surface. We took advantage of the positive association of pubertal status and females' coitus by incorporating females' pubertal level into our recursive equation model.
Table 3 indicates the proportion of females who were pubertally mature at each age. A significant racial difference showing earlier maturation in black girls occurred at age 12 years (17 per cent, z = 2.3, p <0.05). In the National Health Examination Survey (Harlan et al., 1980), racial differences in pubertal growth remained statistically significant through 17 years, although the magnitude of the difference was quite small after age 14years.
MODEL FITTING
The model-fitting routine accepted the age-12 sexual intercourse prevalences as starting values and then calcu-

lated sexual intercourse prevalences for ages 13-16 years using recursive equations 1 and 2. An optimization routine (Loehlin, 1987, p. 229-231) was used that selected parameter values to minimize a chi-square calculated from the difference of the observed minus expected frequencies of sexual intercourse divided by the expected frequencies. This routine started with trial values of Tm; the male transition probability, Tf; the female transition probability; and k (except in models where k = 0). Because the routine found local minimums, it was modified so that separate searches were carried out for different values of k in which a bisecting search pattern selected new trial values of k until the true minimum was located, for models containing the female maturation component, the percentage of mature females given in Table 3 were entered into Equation 2. For models omitting the maturation component, the percentage mature was set equal to 1.0.
When fit to one racial group, the model had eight independent observations, which were used to estimate three parameters (Tm, Tf, k). Hence, there werefivedegrees of freedom with which to test this model statistically. The minimized chi square was for the males and females combined. When the nonepidemic term was omitted (i.e., when k = 0), the model estimated two parameters, yielding six degrees of freedom.

136

Roweetal.

Social Biology

When fit to ooth racial groups, Tm was constrained to equality for black and white males; Tf to equality for black and white females; and k to equality for both races. The minimized chi square was the chi square for all groups combined. In this condition, sixteen observations were available, and three parameters were estimated. Hence, the model had thirteen degrees of freedom. Omitting the nonepidemic term (k = 0) increased the degrees of freedom by one (df = 14). In all cases, a small chi square value was desirable because it indicated small discrepancies among predicted and actual sexual intercourse prevalences.
Table 4 displays the results of comparing the statistical adequacy of purely epidemic models (k = 0) and mixed

models (fc>0). A purely epidemic model without maturation was statistically rejected (chi square p value <0.05) for whites and whites plus blacks, but it was accepted for blacks (x2 = 5.0, p>0.05). Surprisingly, the purely epidemic model with maturation of females was rejected in two of the three statistical tests. Moreover, this model required high transition probabilities for males (Tm = 1) and females (Tf> 0.46). Given the lack of fit of these models, the addition of the virgin-virgin nonepidemic term was deemed necessary (i.e., k>0).
The first set of three models contained the virgin-virgin term but omitted the female maturation parameter (Mt). This model, although not rejected at the 0.05 level, gave a weaker fit for whites

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

TABLE4
MODEL FITTING FOR WHITES, BLACKS, AND RACESCOMBINED

Model
Pure epidemic No maturation W B W+B

X1 df TU

Tr

27.690 6 1.0 4.649 6 1.0 46.106 14 1.0

0.50 0.308 0.48

Statistical k Adequacy*
0R 0A 0R

Maturation W B W+B

37.687 6 1.0 4.174 6 1.0 62.780 14 1.0

0.90 0.46 0.70

0R 0R
0R

Mixed Model No maturation W B
W+B»

9.554 5 1.0 4.332 5 0.961 14.048 13 1.0

0.231 0.259 0.250

0.038 0.037 0.036

A A

Maturation
wB
W+B

5.690 5 0.899 3.316 5 0.779 10.275 13 1.0

·:R = reject.p < 0.05; A = accept,p > 0.05. »: Females, X2 = 9.832 (df ·= 5),p < 0.1.

0.221 0.306 0.329

0.100 0.137 0.080

A A A

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Vol. 36,No. 3-4

An "Epidemic" Model

137

(x2 = 9.554, df = 5, p < 0 . 1 ) . In the combined group, the overall chi square was nonsignificant (x2 = 14.048, df = 13, p>0.05). However, this chi square consisted of two independent chi squares, onefrom themale prevalences (4.216) and the other from the female prevalences (9.832). Thefitto these female prevalences was weaker, asthe chi square was nearly significant (p<0.1) with five degrees of freedom (eight female observations and three estimated parameters, Tm, Tf, and k).
Adding female maturation to the equations improved the model fits in each case. The chi square values were nonsignificant for whites (5.7), blacks (3.3), and the races together (10.3). The transition probabilities were greater for males than females (Tm whites = 0.899, Tm blacks = 0.779; Tf whites = 0.221; Tf blacks = 0.306). All probabilities were fairly similar for the two races, including nonepidemic

transition probability (k whites = 0.100; k blacks = 0.137). Figures 1 and 2 graph the predicted versus obtained sexual intercourse prevalences using the model fits done for blacksand whites, respectively.
The comparison of the combined group (whites plus blacks) with the sum of the racesfitseparately cantest forthe equality of Tm, Tf, and k for black and white racial groups. This test has three degrees of freedom (thedifference of 10 degrees offreedom for the racesfitseparately and 13 dfs for the races combined). This chi square failed to reach significance (x2 = 1.269, df = 3, p > 0.05). That similar values of Tm, Tf, and k could satisfy theprevalences from the races combined was understandable given the fairly similar values obtained when the races were fit separately. In the combined solution, however, Tm had the somewhat undesirable property of attaining an upper bound

Blacks
100

Predicted -o- Black Males -o- Black Females
Observed + Black Males x Black Females

FIG. 1.--Best-fitting sexual intercourse prevalences in blacks.

138
100

Rowe et al.
HMtes

Social Biology
Predicted - · - White Males - · - White Females
Observed + White Males X White Females

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

FIG. 2.--Best-fitting sexual intercourse prevalences in whites.

(7m = 1.0). The transition probability also increased for females (Tf = 0.329).
Because Tm> Tf, given an encounter with a nonvirgin, males would be more likely to have coitus with thepartner than females. This result, of course, reflects the greater prevalence of intercourse inmales than females. These values of Tm and Tf assume that just one pairing hasoccurred in theyear; hence, they areunrealistically high. The probability per encounter is certainly lower; for example, if an average of five encounters with opposite-sex friends who could potentially participate in intercourse per year occurred, then Tm would equal 0.2 and Tf would equal 0.066 for the solution using all four groups (whites + blacks).
To test whether the model was merely a general mathematical expression of developmental growth, we also fit the mixed model with maturation on artificial four-group data and on fourgroup ADSEX smoking prevalence

data. The model statistically rejected the smoking prevalences, a number of combinations of purely linear increases in prevalences, and logistic increases that differed by race but not by sex. These results suggest that the mixed model was relatively specific to thetype of process postulated; for example, it was superior to any purely epidemic model of sexual intercourse transmission.
THE ASSUMPTION OFRANDOM
ASSORTMENT
Thus far, the mixed model hasrequired theassumption that opposite-sex partners meet at random with regard to their prior sexual activity. The ADSEX data set included information on the person named by each respondent as his or her best opposite-sex friend. Hence, we cancalculate thePhicoefficient (the correlation for dichotomous data) for the coital status of opposite-sex friends. These correlations at least give a rough

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

An "Epidemic" Model

139

TABLE 5
EFFECT OF CORRELATION OF PARTNER'S SEXUAL STATUS ON MODEL FITS

Phi and Group
Phi 0.00 Whites Blacks

TM
0 899 0 779

7>
0.221 0.306

k
0.100 0.137

A?
5.690 3.316

Phi 0.05 Whites Blacks

0.932 0.756

0.212 0.293

0.104 0.156

5.840 3.376

Phi 0.10 Whites Blacks

0.985 0 902

0.205 0.293

0.106 0.157

6.011 3.399

Phi 0.15 Whites Blacks

1.00 0.928

0.185 0.282

0 113 0.172

6 222 3.447

Phi 0.20 Whites Blacks

1.00 0.910

0.159 0.259

0.12 0.197

6.486 3.524

Phi 0.25 Whites Blacks

1.00 0.759

0.13 0.20

0.127 0.25

6.797 3.69

Phi 0.30 Whites Blacks

1.00 0.884

0.102 0.197

0.134 0.250

7.174 3.735

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

idea of the possible violation of therandom assortment assumption. They place an upperbound on the violation of the assumption, because a part of friends' resemblance may be due to the initiation of sexual activity subsequent to the encounter of the twoindividuals.
Phi coefficients were calculated for white males with best female friend (Phi = 0.15); white females with best male friend (Phi = 0.11); black males with best female friend (Phi = -0.08); and black females with best male friend (Phi = -0.12). These correlations were unexpectedly small. The negative Phi coefficients for blacks were totally unanticipated; they reflected a high prevalence of intercourse in this population, such that even considerable (about 30

per cent of all pairings) nonvirginnonvirgin pairings failed to produce a -positive association. Although we cannot be sure that the opposite-sex friend was always the sexual partnerof the respondent, these low values support our random assortment assumption.
Nonetheless, we decided to explore the effect of one possible violation of this assumption--a positive assortment for sexual intercourse status--on the performance of the mixed model with maturation. The recursive equations were modified to replace the random assortment probabilities with probabilities based on a given value of the Phi assortment coefficient. Table 5 fits the model using Pm andP/asmarginal values from which the probability of virgin males

140

Rowe et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

paired with nonvirgin females, virgin females paired with nonvirgin males, and virgins paired together was calculated, given Phi. Hence, at each cycle of calculation, nonrandom assortment probabilities were substituted for the random ones, assuming that the value of the assortment correlation remained constant at ages 12-16 years.
The main conclusion from Table 5, showing the parameter estimates and chi square values for different assumed correlations, is that violations of the assumption in this range have surprisingly little effect. The models including a correlation fit worse than the random assortment model, but this deterioration occurred relatively slowly. Transition probabilities for males gradually increased, transition probabilities for females gradually decreased, as did the k transition probability. These changes reflected the effect of correlated intercourse status, which was to increase both the numbers of nonvirginnonvirgin and virgin-virgin pairings; the latter, but not the former, appeared in the model. Hence, we saw an increase in £'s value, as more virgin-virgin pairs were present to contribute to the transition process. Why were the changes in parameter values relatively small ones? Partly, because the marginal distributions limited consequences of any correlation. There were few nonvirginnonvirgin pairings to begin with. Correlations under 0.20 changed the proportions in different pairings, but by only a few per cent; hence, the similarity of random assortment and low correlation models. Given that we do not know what actual correlation males and females have for their coitus status, a random assortment assumption will remain a practical way to obtain fairly accurate parameter estimates.

DISCUSSION
SUMMARY OF MODELPROPERTIES
Sexual intercourse prevalences increase rapidly during adolescence. We have provided a theoretical model, derived from the theory of epidemic infectious disease, to describe the spread of onset of coitus among adolescents. Our model assumed that intercourse is spread by the contact of individuals and that virgins and nonvirgins of both sexes come into contact randomly. Under these conditions, the probability that a youth will engage in intercourse depends on the proportion of nonvirgin youths. The greater the fraction of sexually active youths, the greater the possibility of spread. The model included an "epidemic" process whereby a virgin experienced first intercourse with a nonvirgin (the "carrier" of sexual intercourse). Our model also included a nonepidemic process whereby virgin males and females encounter one another and progress to sexual intercourse. In both processes, pubertally immature females were excluded from initiating sexual intercourse. Starting with coitus prevalences at age 12, our mixed model, combining the epidemic term of nonvirgin-virgin encounters and the nonepidemic term of virgin encounters, successfully predicted intercourse prevalences for ages 13-16 years.
We explored the validity of the assumptions of the mixed model by comparing it to alternative models. Some of these models were "nested" within the mixed model and so could be tested with fewer degrees of freedom. Thus, we established empirically that the virginvirgin encounter term was necessary, because omitting it led to a statistical rejection of the model. A purely "epidemic" model, involving the "transmis-

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

An "Epidemic"Model

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

sion" of sexual intercourse only from nonvirgins to virgins, was unable to fit the data. Nevertheless, the "epidemic" component of the model does contribute the most to the spread of coitus, because the probability, k, that two virgins progress to coitus (per encounter) was only about 0.1.
Model comparisons were also used to evaluate the maturational hypothesis. Based on empirical data showing that females' prevalences of coitus increased substantially with pubertal maturation, a limitation was imposed that only pubertally mature females could progress to sexual intercourse. Although these models were not nested hierarchically, the mixed model with a maturation component provided a better fit than the mixed model omitting a maturation component. Moreover, the maturation component improved the fit when the model was applied to both black and white respondents in a single analysis. The earlier sexual maturation of black girls than white girls absorbed some of the racial difference in coitus prevalences.
The model required an assumption that encounters between sexual partners occurred at random with regard to sexual intercourse status. This assumption, although on the surface seemingly implausible, was supported by the empirical correlations of best opposite-sex friends' sexual intercourse statuses. These correlations were quite weak. A second analysis examined the consequences of relaxing the random assortment assumption. For correlations less than 0.3, the fit of the model was gradually worsened, but slowly enough to suggest that it was quite robust to minor violations of the random assortment assumption. Hence, although this was a simplifying assumption, random assort-

ment will produce, under a range of conditions, reasonable parameter estimates and close approximations to observed coitus prevalences.
THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS
This model differs from other explanations of adolescent sexual intercourse in several ways. First, it places a heavy emphasis on biological maturation as the proximal determinant of sexual intercourse. Puberty is a genetically timed biological event that itself increases sexual libido and drive. Research by Udry and his colleagues demonstrates that libido--indexed by hormonal levels-- has a direct effect on sexual arousal and drive, independent of physical appearance factors that might mediate social reactions to individuals, and independent of age. The model included this biological component in its restriction that pubertally immature females would not progress to sexual intercourse. We assume that they lack sexual motivation and desire because of their hormonal immaturity.
Second, it attributes new cases of sexual intercourse directly to social interactions among adolescents. In the analogy to infectious disease, intercourse can only occur after an encounter of two individuals, and it spreads in only one direction (it makes no sense to say that virgins "give" virginity to a nonvirgin). The parameter values in the model were estimated assuming that only one social encounter leading to intercourse occurs in a year. Such an assumption was clearly unrealistic because more than a single opportunity is likely to occur in a year's time. Tm and Tf, the probabilities that a nonvirgin "transmits" intercourse to a virgin, given an encounter, therefore must exceed their true values. Nonetheless, this model draws attention

142

Rowe et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

to the proportion of nonvirgins and the frequency of social interactions as themselves factors serving to increase transitions to nonvirginity.
From this perspective, several puzzling findings about sexual intercourse prevalences can be given new interpretations. We hypothesize that the racial difference in coitus prevalence may result from an earlier "initiation" of the "epidemic" process in the black than in the white community. In our results, females were the main source of restraint on the spread of sexual intercourse, because pubertally immature females were seen as unlikely to engage in coitus and because the female transition probability (Tf, the probability of a virgin's progressing to intercourse, given an encounter with a nonvirgin), about 0.3, was lower than that of males, about 0.8. Our model could fit the sexual intercourse prevalences at age 13-16 for blacks and whites simultaneously, with equaltransition probabilities and allowing for the differential maturation rates of black and white girls. The model cannot itself demonstrate that the epidemic process was initiated earlier in the black sample. However, the higher prevalences for blacks than whites at age 12 suggests earlier initiation among blacks. At age 12,17 per cent more black than white females were mature, and this relative difference would only increase if the maturation curves were extrapolated to younger ages. Given that the conditions exist in the black sample for early initiation--namely, a larger pool of sexually receptive females, we can speculate that the racial difference may be the result of a difference in the timing of the "epidemic" process.
Furstenberg et al., (1987) found that blacks' coitus prevalences were lower in integrated high schools than in all black

high schools. In light of our model, this result might be interpreted in terms of the frequencies of opposite-sex social encounters. Assuming most individuals experience their first coitus with someone of the same race, cross-race social encounters would not lead to intercourse. However, if these encounters require time and effort, then they should reduce the rate at whichwithinrace social encounters occur, and hence they should also reduce rate of spread of sexual intercourse from nonvirgins to virgins.
The model does not deal directly with social norms regarding sexual intercourse. In our model, Tm and Tf may partly reflect social norms favorable or unfavorable toward sexual intercourse. Yet, race differences were lacking. That is, given an opportunity for sexual intercourse, blacks were no more likely to engage in sexual intercourse than whites. Some social norms might be regarded as consequences rather than causes of coitus. For example, if, in the black community, adolescents hold norms that are more favorable to early parenthood and early coitus, these relative normative differences may simply reflect the reality of these actual differences and not constitute their determinants. It is difficult to apply normative pressure against a behavior that is engaged in by half or more of 15-year-old boys and girls. Hence, the "epidemic" spread of coitus may be a factor in the weakening of normative pressures against coitus.
CAVEATS AND LIMITATIONS
Although we believe that considerable potential exists for new applications and extensions of this basic model, it does possess several limitations. The model dealt with aggregate data and

Vol. 36, No. 3-4

An "Epidemic" Model

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

therefore neglected individual-difference factors. The opportunity-cost model is consistent with individual differences in proneness toward coitus. Adolescents who perceive that the delay of coitus will bring few future rewards, such as security and income, will more likely engage in intercourse than those perceiving higher opportunity costs. Such reasoning leads to the implication that the values of Tm and 7/will differ widely among individuals; that is, given a virgin's encounter with a nonvirgin, there should be a range of transition probabilities to nonvirginity. Earlier, we suggested that Tm and Tf be regarded as the means of a distribution of transition probabilities. To test such ideas, prevalence data would be needed for subgroups of the populations varying in opportunity costs. Presumably, the basic mixed model would apply to all subgroups, but Tm and Tf would be unequal among them. We see much to gain from modeling the probabilities of individuals of different types making transitions, instead of modeling aggregate data.
The model also does not deal directly with questions of selection or influence. At an individual level, a virgin boy or virgin girl might want intercourse and so actively look for someone similarly predisposed. Conversely, a nonvirgin might actively pressure a virgin into sexual intercourse; survey data suggest that "date rape" has a surprisingly high prevalence. Finally, opportunities for intercourse may come by happenstance, and the reaction of an individual to the opportunity might depend on proneness and on temporary situational factors. The model we have proposed is really moot on the exact social process leading to coitus in individual cases, and a mixture of selection, influence, andhappen-

stance processes would be invisible to the model as we have proposed it. Nonetheless, the nature of this process is a separate research topic of considerable importance.
In closing, we caution that our analogy between epidemic infectious disease and coitus is neither literal comparison nor a moral prescription. The infectious disease model was chosen simply because it provides a tractable mathematical description of a transmission process between well-defined statuses; moreover, our best fitting model was not even purely "epidemic," since it contained a nonepidemic term within it. Our analogy should not be misinterpreted as implying a moral position regarding premarital coitus among teenagers. It is rather a useful, plausible, and empirically defensible description of what might be occurring in adolescent groups.
CONCLUSIONS
The mixed model successfully predicted the prevalences of sexual intercourse for adolescents 13-16 years old. Although the model is (by definition) a simplification of social life, its assumptions of maturationally influenced female "risk," randomly pairing sexual partners, and occasional transition of virgin pairs to nonvirginity received empirical support. The intercourse prevalences at age 12 were high in all groups, except white females; hence, considerable "epidemic" spread may have occurred at younger ages. Although undoubtedly difficult to collect, data are much needed on the sexual behavior of children under 12years old.
The "epidemic" process provided a new hypothesis for racial differences. This hypothesis is that racial differences

144

Roweetal.

Social Biology

in pubertal maturation rates, with earlier maturation among blacks than white girls, may lead to an earlier initiation of the social transmission ofcoitus among blacks, with a consequent snowballing effect on coitus prevalences at later ages. Although cultural factors may contribute to race differences insexual behavior, this maturationally based interpretation can avoid moral implications (e.g., undesirable social norms, parental neglect) concerning the black community, asimplied by other theories of these race differences. Whatever their race, parents ofpubertally mature teenagers face adifferent challenge than others.

Finally, this model can beextended to investigate other dependent variables. Wehave already begun to investigate theuse ofthemodel with other adolescent problem behaviors (e.g., smoking and drinking), and the model will eventually beuseful asa description of HIV (AIDS) virus transmission among adolescents and as a description of aetiologies of adolescent pregnancy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported bya grant from the National Institute ofChild Health and Development (R01HD21973).

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ANDERSON, R. M. 1982. Transmission dynamics and control of infectious disease agents, p. 149-176. InR. M. Anderson and R. M.May (eds.), Population biology of infectious diseases. Springer-Verlag, New York.
BILLY, J. O. G., and J. R. UDRY. 1985. Pat-
terns of adolescent friendship andeffects on sexual behavior. Soc.Psychol. Quart. 48:27-41.
CAVALU-SPORZA, L. L., and M. W. FELDMAN.
1981. Cultural transmission and evolution: A quantitative approach. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ.
CLARK, S., L. ZABIN, and J. HARDY. 1984. Sex,
contraception and parenthood: Experience and attitudes among urban black young men. Fam. Plan. Persp. 16:77-82. FiNKEL, M., and D. FINKEL. 1975. Sexual and contraceptive knowledge, attitudes and behaviors of male adolescents. Fam. Plan. Persp. 7:256-260.
FOSTER, T. A., A. W. VOORS, L. S. WEBBER,
R. R. FRERICHS, and G. S. BERENSON. 1977.
Anthropometric and maturation measurements ofchildren, ages 5to 14years, in abiracial community: The Bogalusa Heart Study. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 30:582-591. FURSTENBERG, F. F. 1976.Unplanned parenthood: The social consequences of teenage childbearing. Free Press, New York.

FURSTENBERG, F. F., J. BROOKS-GUNN, and
S. P. MORGAN. 1987. Adolescent mothersin later life. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
FURSTENBERG, F. F . , S. P. MORGAN, F. A.
MOORE, and J. L. PETERSON. 1987. Race dif-
ferences in the timing of adolescent intercourse. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 52:511-518.
HARLAN, W. R., E. A. HARLAN, and G. P.
GRILLO. 1980. Secondary sex characteristics of girls 12 to 17 years of age: The U.S. Health Examination Survey. J. Pediat. 96:1074-1078. HAYES, C. D. 1987. Risking the future: Adolescent sexuality, pregnancy, and childbearing, Vol. I.National Academy Press, Washington,D.C. KANDEL, D . B . 1978. Homophily, selection, and socialization. Amer. J. Sociol. 84:427436. LOEHLIN, J. C. 1987.Latent variable models: An introduction tofactor, path, and structural analysis. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
NANKIN, H. R., M. SPERLING, F. M. KENNY,
A. L. DRASH, and P. TROEN. 1974. Correla-
tion between sexual maturation and serum gonadotropins: Comparison of black and white youngsters. Amer. J. Med. Sci. 266:139-147.

Vol. 36,No.1-4

An "Epidemic" Model

145

PRESSER, H. B. 1978. Age at menarche, sociosexual behavior, and fertility. Soc. Bio. 25:94-101.
RODGERS, J . L., J. D. G . BILLY and J. R . UDRY.
1982. The rescission of behaviors: Inconsistent responses in adolescent sexuality data. Soc. Sri. Res. 11:280-296.
SMITH, E. A., J. R. UDRY, and N. M. MORRIS.
1985. Pubertal development andfriends: A biosorial explanation of adolescent sexual behavior. J. Hlth. Soc. Behav. 26:183-192. TANNER, J. M. 1978. Foetus into man: Physical growth from conception to maturity. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.
UDRY, J. R., J. O. G. BILLY, N. M. MORRIS,
T. R. GROFF, and M. H. RAJ. 1985. Serum androgenic hormones motivate sexual behavior in adolescent boys. Fertil. Steril. 43:90-99.

UDRY, J. R., L. M. TALBERT, and N. M. MOR-
RIS. 1986. Biosocial foundations for adolescent female sexuality. Demography 23:217231.
WASHINGTON, A. C. 1982. A cultural and historical perspective on pregnancy-related activity among U.S. teenagers. J. Black Psychol. 9:1-28.
ZABIN, L. S., E. A. SMITH, M. B. HIRSCH, and
J. B. HARDY. 1986. Ages of physical maturation and first intercourse in black teenage males and females. Demography 23:595605.
ZELNIK, M., and J. KANTNER. 1980. Sexual ac-
tivity, contraceptive use and pregnancy among metropolitan-area teenagers: 1971-- 1979. Fam. Plan. Persp. 12:230-237.
ZELNIK, M., J. KANTNER, and K. FORD. 1981.
Sex and pregnancy in adolescence. Sage, Beverley Hills,CA.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

