Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Reversible sterilization: Socioethical considerations
Gale Largey
To cite this article: Gale Largey (1978) Reversible sterilization: Socioethical considerations, Social Biology, 25:2, 135-144, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988331 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988331
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Reversible Sterilization: Socio-ethical Considerations

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Gale Largey
Department of Sociology Mansfield State College Mansfield, Pennsylvania
ABSTRACT: Recent developments make it appear likely that sterilizations will soon be reversible. This paper explores the socio-ethical implications of such a development, discussing its potential as a means of voluntary birth control and, in particular, its use by welfare recipients, the mentally ill, retardates, and prisoners. The paper underscores the importance of reviewing and discussing present norms restricting sterilizations and emphasizes the need to formulate public policies relating to reversing sterilizations.

It seems likely that sterilizations will soon be reversible (Brueschke, 1976; Guha etal., 1976; McCormick and Torres, 1976; Nair, 1976; Gomel, 1977; Jones, 1977; Silber 1971a,b,d). Such a development can mean a safer and more effective means of birth control, but it further complicates the already complicated socio-ethical issues related to sterilization. In this paper, I will explore some of the questions posed by reversible sterilization techniques.

of sterilization--its irreversibility. If nothing else, the sheer number of persons who have already been sterilized has generated need for reversibility. Winston (1977, p. 305) has noted that we do not know how many sterilized persons would like to have their sterilizations reversed, but he estimates that the figure may be as high as 15 per cent. And, based upon his study of 103 women who asked for reversal of sterilization, he concluded the following:

REVERSIBLE STERILIZATION
According to the Association for Voluntary Sterilization, there are presently about ten million Americans who have been sterilized (Gonzales, 1976) and, according to the Worldwatch Institute, there have been an additional sixty-five million such people worldwide (Stokes, 1977). Moreover, studies of trends in contraceptive practices indicate a clear and definite direction toward increased use of sterilization for birth control (Westoff, 1976). As a

The most important reason for reversal was remarriage or planned remarriage (patient remarried or new marriage planned 81, patient feeling incomplete or defeminised 8, wanted to add to family 4, child died after sterilization 4, medical reasons (amniocenteses, etc.) 4, and to improve sexual relationship 2. Most patients had divorced, but three marriages had ended with the husband's death. Eight patients (7.7%), still married to the same husband, requested reversal because they thought that their sexual relationship might improve. Four patients who had been sterilized because of a genetic disorder requested reversal because of the recent availability of amniocenteses.

result, it is not surprising that there has

been a great deal of recent medical re- Responding to this demand, researchers
search aimed at overcoming what many have developed a variety of reversibility people view as the most serious drawback techniques (Sciarra, 1976; Schima and

135

136

Largey

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Lubell, 1976). Their effectiveness had varied and clearly, at this stage of research new developments are in process. Still, it is worth pointing out some of the rather dramatic reports of successfully reversed sterilizations in both men and women. For example, using microsurgical techniques only on male patients, Silber (1977a,b,c,d), has reported successfully restoring fertility in 21 of 22 men--some of whom had been sterilized for as long as ten years. And, using similar techniques on females, Gomel (1977) reported successfully reversing the sterilizations in 27 of 31 women. Moreover, approximately 73 per cent of Gemel's patients who attempted pregnancy were successful within six months after the operation (see also Diamond, 1977; Westoff, 1978).
Finally, human testing of a patented reversible nonsurgical method has been initiated by researchers at the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia. The method is described as follows (Jones, 1977, p. 25):
A hysteroscope, which includes fiberoptics and a light, is inserted into a woman's uterus, permitting view of the fallopian tube ends. Catalyzed silicone is injected into the tubes, and within a few minutes cures into a rubber-like solid. The tubes are blocked, preventing conception, but each silicone plug carries an integral tip and ring. At a later date, these can be used with a special instrument to withdraw the plugs and restore fertility.
In sum, the medical means of reversing sterilizations appears to be a probable, rather than just a possible, development in the near future. Thus, serious consideration of its social and ethical ramifications is indeed appropriate--especially since sterilization continues to be advocated by some people for eugenic and euthenic aims.
In the remainder of this paper I will explore some of the implications of reversible sterilization as a means of voluntary

birth control, as a condition for welfare support, as a condition for conjugal visits by prisoners' spouses, and as a means of birth control for the mentally ill and mentally retarded.
REVERSIBLE STERILIZATION ASA MEANS OF BIRTH CONTROL
As previously indicated, sterilization has lost its stigma as an extreme and undesirable method of birth control and is increasingly becoming a preferred contraceptive practice. In fact, as of 1975, a National Institute of Child Health and Human Development survey found that sterilization had become second only to the pill as the birth control method most favored by Americans, used by approximately one out of three couples. Undoubtedly, prospects for reversibility will make sterilization even more attractive. But, it raises some critical issues:
Should the medical profession encourage sterilization of the spouse whose sterilization can most easily be reversed? Prior to 1973, approximately 75 per cent of sterilizations performed in the United States were done on males. Since that time, however, there has been a gradual shift, and currently more than half are performed on females. The general reason given for this shift is that the surgical method for sterilization of women has become easier and safer. If it becomes possible to reverse sterilization of males more easily than that of females, then perhaps we will see a trend back to sterilization of males. In either case, the ease of reversibility in male versus female sterilization is a factor to be considered when a physician is giving advice about which spouse should be sterilized.
Should the physician only use a sterilization procedure that lends itself to reversibility? At this point, successful reversals are often contingent upon the particular

Vol. 2 5 , No. 2

Reversible Sterilization

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

technique that was employed in the sterili- that the same basic restrictions on each of

zation. For example, in discussing their the restrictions should apply to all meth-

particular reversal procedure, McCormick ods of birth control, especially insofar as

and Torres (1976, p. 623) noted that "it age is concerned.

probably would not be successful in in- Would widespread use of reversible

stances of laproscopic tubal ligation be- sterilization as a means of birth control

cause of the excessive tissue destruction of pose a threat to human rights? Stokes

that procedure." And, with respect to vas- (1977, p. 7) has aptly pointed out that

ectomy reversal, Silber (1977a, p. 1201) "sterilization poses a human rights issue.

concluded:

There is no way to insure that a woman

will take her pill every day or that a man

If vasectomy is performed by cauterizing the abdominal side vas lumen, and doing nothing to the testicular side, a sperm granuloma is more likely to form, less pressure will develop, and subsequent reversibility is more probable.

will use a condom. But, sterilization is different. It does not require the continuous voluntary participation of the individual." The most dramatic example of the human rights problems posed by steriliza-

tion is the case of India in the mid-1970's.

Neither McCormick and Torres nor Silber indicated exactly how many presently sterilized persons they feel have been irreversibily sterilized, but Winston (1977, p. 30S) has noted that nearly 38 per

Feeling compelled to control population growth, the Indian government initiated a crash sterilization program, performing over seven million sterilizations in one year. Claims of coercion were widespread,

cent of the persons involved in his study and subsequent public reaction lead to unhad been sterilized in such a way they seating the ruling Congress Party in the

could no longer be considered potentially spring 1977 elections. With the change of reversible. That finding of course raises parties came a sharp curtailment of the

the issue of what techniques of steriliza- program. But still, the situation raises two tion physicians should be encouraged, points: (1) If sterilization were denned as

perhaps required, to use assuming that the reversible, would the Indian government costs, health risks, and contraceptive ef- have been so strongly criticized, and if

fectiveness are considered comparable be- not, to what extent would it have extween sterilization techniques that do and panded the programs? (2) If reversible

do not lend themselves to reversibility.
Should legislation governing reversible sterilization be less restrictive than that governing irreversible sterilization? During the 1970's, the United States courts struck down various laws prohibiting sterilization. Some legislation, however, still prohibits sterilization of anyone under

sterilization had been the widely practiced form of birth control in Indian society, what would have prevented the Indian government from simply limiting reversals as a means of population control? (See Borders, 1976, 1978; Callahan, 1977; Christiansen, 1977; Gulhati, 1977; Ping, 1976; Sinha, 1977; Warwick, 1976.)

21 and is generally much more restrictive

than that governing other forms of birth control. If sterilization becomes reversible,

WELFARE RECIPIENTS

it seems likely that these restrictions will In 1973, it was widely reported that a

be challenged on grounds that such sterili- number of welfare recipients in Alabama,

zation is no more permanent than the pill California, South Carolina, and Tennes-

or intrauterine devices. It may be argued see had been sterilized without their fully

138

Largey

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

informed consent. In addition, information gathered by the Committee to End

Prohibit payment for sterilization operations on anyone under the age of 21.

Sterilization Abuse, the Southern Poverty Prohibit Federal payment for hysterectomies Law Center, and the National Welfare performed solely for birth control.

Rights Organization offered further evidence that a substantial number of welfare recipients, Blacks, native Americans, and Chicanos had been sterilized with federal

Establish special procedures to assure that people in prisons or mental institutions and those who are mentally incompetent are not sterilized capriciously.

funds without their full voluntary and in- The regulations have brought criticisms

formed consent (Donovan, 1976a, b; from groups arguing that such require-

Dreifus, 1975; Huebner, 1975; Rothman, ments deny free access to sterilization and

1977; Spriggs, 1974; Vaughan and Sparer, that in effect the regulations make it more

1974; Weisbord, 1975).

difficult for the poor than other groups to

As a result, there has been series of be voluntarily sterilized. Furthermore,

court actions to examine the claims and libertarians view the regulations as arbi-

establish new regulations. In one such ac- trary violations of individual rights.

tion, Federal Judge Gerhard Gesell con- At this point, the question of the con-

cluded that there was incontrovertible stitutionality of the procedures remains

evidence that minors and other legal in- open. But, in light of advances in reversi-

competents have been sterilized with fed- ble sterilization, it seems clear that at least

eral funds and that an indefinite number two points will be raised:

of poor people had been improperly To what extent are current restrictions

coerced into accepting a sterilization under on sterilization based upon its irreversibil-

the threat that various federally supported ity? If sterilization becomes a reversible welfare benefits would be withdrawn procedure it seems likely that civil liberta-

(Rothman, 1977). Subsequently in De- rians may argue even more strongly for cember, 1977, the Health, Education and fewer restrictions on its use. In particular

Welfare Department issued new regula- it seems likely that the age restriction will

tions aimed at assuring welfare recipients be challenged on the grounds that if an

that they could not be denied benefits if eighteen year old can vote why cannot the

they refused sterilization. The regulations person be sterilized. Yet there will still be

are premised on the assumption that the nagging concern about who ultimately

sterilization is an "irreversible" procedure, has the power to reverse the sterilization.

and they include the following provisions As previously stated, there is a clear dif-

(Rosenbaum, 1977, p. 29):

ference between depending on a physician

Require the patient to sign a consent form in her primary language showing that she understood the consequences of a sterilization operation.

for a prescribed pill which one may use at one's own discretion and being totally dependent on a physician to reverse a sterilization. The vulnerability of persons on

Require the doctor to state in writing that he has informed the patient of the risks and benefits of sterilization and has impressed on her that she will not lose welfare funds or other benefits if she declines to be sterilized.

public assistance in this respect cannot be ignored, especially in light of Larsen's (1976) study indicating that an upsurge of fascist attitudes could intensify political

Establish a mandatory waiting period of 30 pressure toward the sterilization of chronic

days between the time a consent form is welfare recipients.

signed and the time a sterilization operation, paid for with department funds, is per-

To what extent should the government

formed.

provide individual welfare recipients who

Vol. 25, No. 2

Reversible Sterilization

139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

have been previously sterilized an opportunity to have their sterilization reversed? This question raises the issue of the government's responsibility to identify persons who did not give informed consent and the government's obligation to offer such persons the opportunity to utilize reversal techniques. The operation and cost of a government program that would provide such an opportunity is obviously a complex problem. Nonetheless, one must surely anticipate that at least some of the persons who have been sterilized against their wishes will soon claim that the government should restore their fertility.
THE MENTALLY RETARDED
Sterilization of the retarded has historically been controversial. In 1907, when Indiana enacted the first law legalizing such sterilizations, it was seen by many as a way of ending feeble-mindedness, and soon other states followed with enactment of their own compulsory sterilization laws. Since then, there have been over 70,000 known sterilizations of the retarded (Comer, 197S, p. 175); and, between 1969 and 1974, there were 64 mental retardates sterilized under a Montana legislation which specified (Anonymous, 1974):
Sterilization is recommended to all patients who are physically able and are apt to procreate, and who will be living more or less independently in the community. It is not suggested for the severely retarded or for those such as mongoloids who would be unlikely to procreate. The policy is based upon the understanding that the mentally retarded generally unite with mentally retarded mates and have the risk of reproducing mentally retarded offspring.
Over the years, the issue of compulsory sterilization has been argued vehemently in the courts. Only once, however, has it reached the U.S. Supreme Court, and in that 1927 decision (Buck v. Bell) a Virginia sterilization statute was upheld as constitutional because it was in the com-

pelling interest of the state (Moss 1976; Murdock, 1974). Understandably, many advocates of the rights of the retarded feel that another case should be considered by the Supreme Court in the light of new evidence about retardation.1
Despite the fact that the Supreme Court has not made a ruling since 1927, there have been many important decisions in lower courts which have established a definite trend toward more stringent regulations limiting sterilization of the retarded. For example, in the Wyatt v. Aderholdt (1976) decision, Judge Frank Johnson ruled that all sterilizations for those under 21 are prohibited, except for medical emergencies, and no sterilizations for those over 21 are permitted without the individual's voluntary and informed consent. Significantly, the decision also stipulated that the substitute consent of a parent or guardian was unacceptable because such consent was not genuinely voluntary (Soskin, 1977, p. 43).
In this context, it seems certain that the reversibility of sterilization is likely to deepen the controversy surrounding sterilization of the retarded. Some parents of the growing number of deinstitutionalized retarded individuals are likely to press for easier sterilization on the grounds that deinstitutionalization affords greater likelihood of heterosexual contact and greater risk of unwanted pregnancy. Some parents are likely to argue that sterilization supported by substitute consent is a reasonable precaution that should be permitted if indeed it is reversible.
To what extent are current regulations on sterilization of the retarded based upon the assumption of its irreversibility? The
1 In October, 1977, the Supreme Court began hearing a case (Sparkman v. Stump) in which a retarded woman claims she was sterilized against her will and without informed consent upon the request of her mother and with the authorization of a judge. At the time this article was written, the case had not yet been decided. See also Murdock, 1974.

140

Largey

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

explicit importance of the irreversible na- and Offord (1977) concluded that offspring

ture of sterilization with respect to present of alcoholic mothers are at increased risk,

laws regulating sterilization of the re- particularly for anti-social behavior be-

tarded is not clear. But it does seem that sides the health risk to the offspring.

the advent of reversibility would undercut Cohler et al. (1975, p. 277) found that the

some of those regulations. Moreover, there problems encountered during pregnancy

is also likely to be discussion about and childbirth sometimes aggravate the

whether reversible sterilization should be disturbance of a mentally ill mother. And,

restricted any more than other methods of in the same vein, Eisenberg (1977, p. 907)

birth control--a complicated considera- has noted that when one considers the

tion because trends toward deinstitu- difficulties faced by parents, there is rea-

tionalization have afforded formerly in- son for concern about having seriously

stitutionally sterilized retardates an in- mentally ill persons caring for children.

creased opportunity for heterosexual con- Such studies are widely disputed and tact. challenged. However, they have lent sup-

Under what circumstances should at- port to advocates of measures to prevent

tempts be made to restore the fertility of reproduction by the mentally ill especially

previously sterilized retarded individuals? while they are ill or taking medications

This question parallels the one raised that have unknown effects upon the fetus.

about formerly sterilized welfare recip- Mclntire (1973) and Ingle (1973) have con-

ients, but is even further complicated be- tended that (1) a child has a right to be

cause it raises the issue of the mental com- born of sane and able parents; (2) for its

petency needed to be a parent. This is own good, society has the responsibility to

especially an issue if a sterilized retardate take actions that will prevent the birth of

marries an individual who is judged to be individuals who have a high risk of being

mentally competent. This question may be or becoming mentally ill; and, (3) society

a very pertinent one because Sabagh and has the responsibility to protect the men-

Edgerton (1962) found that almost two- tally ill individual from being burdened

thirds of discharged mental retardates un- with parental responsibilities which he or

derstood the meaning and implications of she cannot freely assume. Moreover,

sterilization, discussed their reactions to it, Mclntire has suggested that it would not

and expressed disapproval of the steriliza- be any more unreasonable to regulate and

tion procedure.

license parenthood than it is to license

marriage or driving.

THE MENTALLY ILL Gamer et al. (1976, p. 311) have noted that children born into the general population have a 1to 2 per cent chance of devel-

As with the mentally retarded, public concern about the procreative behavior of the mentally ill has intensified because of changing mental health policies and

oping schizophrenia. But a child born into treatments. However, unlike welfare rea family where at least one parent has cipients and the retarded, the mentally ill

suffered from schizophrenia has a 10 to IS have not been so readily sterilized. In-

per cent chance of developing the disor- stead, they have been "institutionally

der. Moreover, if the definition of risk is sterilized", that is, they have been incarc-

broadened to include other kinds of emo- erated and sexually segregated in public or

tional disorders, between 20 and 30 per private institutions and thus denied the

cent of this high-risk population will be opportunity to procreate. Recently, how-

affected. In a similar vein, El-Guebaly ever, with the extended use of psycho-

Vol. 25, No. 2

Reversible Sterilization

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

tropic drugs and community-based treatment procedures, fewer and fewer of the mentally ill are "institutionally sterilized", and although it is not well documented, there is some public concern that, due to inadequate use of the pill and other birth control measures, there are a growing number of children being born to persons who are not able to care for them adequately. In addition, there is public concern about experimental efforts to have coed wards in mental hospital (Reynolds, 1977).
In this context, the development of reversible sterilization seems likely to further complicate the issue of contraception for the psychiatrically severely disturbed population.
Under what circumstances, if any, should society require a mental patient to undergo a reversible sterilization as a condition for freedom from institutional sterilization? The situation of the mentally ill who have been institutionalized parallels the situation of the mentally retarded. Clough et al. (1976, p. 604) have noted that historically "a mental patient may be protected against pregnancy by being placed in a locked ward. In the modern variant, the patient may escape confinement by accepting contraception." Likewise, Chez (1971, p. 5123) has noted that the acceptance of contraception is subtly being introduced "as the prerequisite for community exposure. That is, replacing institutional or segregational sterilization with compulsory contraception." This kind of condition or prerequisite obviously undermines the principle of voluntarism in the use of bith control, and it raises the additional issue of the psycho-social effects of such a sterilization on the recovery of the patient (Schneider, 1973; Janke and Wiest, 1976-77; Wood, 1976). It also raises the very pertinent but difficult questions of when a patient would be sane enough to have the sterilization reversed

and what are the rights of a sane spouse of an insane patient to bear a child. In short, besides the individual rights of the patient, the rights of the patient's spouse have to be respected too.
PRISONERS
Prisoners, like some of the mentally retarded and the mentally ill, have traditionally been "institutionally sterilized." Society has simply locked up convicted criminals and held that such individuals should not be given the opportunity to reproduce because they could not provide for the care of their offspring. Moreover there has been the added argument that one must consider the right of the offspring, since there is increased risk of psychological problems among children of imprisoned parents (Sack et al., 1976; Sack, 1977).
The counter-arguments have been that the denial of heterosexual opportunity constitutes "cruel and unusual" punishment, and that it causes unwarranted anxiety, aggression, and disruption of the prisoner's life (Rudovsky, 1973). It is pointed out that enforced abstinence has been the major cause of rampant homosexuality in prisons and that the abstinence undermines rehabilitation because of the difficulties it brings to the spousal relationship. It is not surprising, therefore, that Jacobs and Steele (1977, p. 289) have contended:
Certainly conjugal visitation, the policy most ameliorative of enforced sexual deprivation, should be a far more important item on the prison reform agenda than the myriad of calls for new counselling and training programs.
There is also the contention that society should not be denying a convicted criminal's spouse his or her coital rights.
In this context, it seems likely that the development of reversible sterilization may raise some critical questions:

142

Largey

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Under what circumstances, if any, and, in some cases, the mentally ill. Still, a

would it be permissible to require the use different kind of issue may arise if strin-

of reversible sterilization as a condition or gent restrictions are placed on reversible

prerequisite for conjugal visits? At this sterilization, and that is the question of

time, unconditional voluntary use of birth whether or not an individual prisoner may

control is obviously preferred. However, control his/her own body to the extent of

the possibility of an imprisoned woman having him/herself sterilized. In this re-

becoming pregnant and giving birth while spect, there may have to be resolution of

imprisoned is one circumstance that is the differences between voluntary reversi-

likely to focus concern about the need for a ble sterilization and other voluntary

certain and effective means of birth con- means of birth control, including abortion.

trol when a prisoner is permitted conjugal It is even conceivable that if voluntary

visits.

castration is granted to violent sex offend-

Under what circumstances, if any, would reversible sterilization be an acceptable prerequisite for coed prisons? Ross (1973, p. 176) has noted:

ers as an alternative to imprisonment, then voluntary sterilization may be requested by some individuals convicted of child neglect/abuse as an alternative to their imprisonment (see Brown and Cour-

At the moment, it seems reasonably clear tis, 1977; Rees, 1977).

that no court would ever find separate pris- I fully recognize that the prospects for

ons illegal because they violate the Equal Protection clause. However, if the Equal

such requests are very hypothetical. Yet,

Rights Amendment passes, separate prisons the fact that they could be made does un-

will most certainly be illegal.

derscore the complex legal and medical

issues to be resolved with the development

If prisons do indeed follow the trends set of reversible sterilization.

in college dormitories, group homes for the

retarded, and mental hospitals, then coed prisons may soon become acceptable. Yet,

FINAL REMARKS

at the same time, such a trend will undoubtedly generate a great deal of concern about potential offspring, and there will be the serious issue of exactly how to avoid such a problem. The appeal of reversible sterilization is therefore obvious, but here again the issue may not be voluntary versus compulsory/involuntary reversible sterilization, but rather whether or not society has the right to establish reversible sterilization as a condition for the privilege of being sentenced to a coed prison.

This paper was meant to be exploratory, not explanatory. It is clearly preliminary. The aim has been to stimulate the reader to consider the potential issues that may arise with the development of reversible sterilization.
In many respects, the issues that have been raised in this paper would also be raised with regard to other prospective developments in human contraception. For example, a slow-release removable birth control pill to be implanted in the

Under what circumstances, if any, body may soon be developed. And then, at

should reversible sterilization be denied if a given time, it would be removed. Such a

it is requested by a prisoner?Since there is development, like reversible sterilization,

no recent evidence of prisoners having would decrease the voluntary participa-

been involuntarily sterilized, the.question tion of the patient. Unlike the pill, the

of restoring fertility is not so much an issue condom, or the diaphram, and to a lesser

as it is with welfare recipients, retardates, degree intrauterine devices, control over

Vol. 2 5 , No. 2

Reversible Sterilization

143

reproduction would not bedirectly in the concern about the individual's direct con-

hands of the user; instead, the user would trol over his/her reproductive potential.

have to depend upon the expertise of a

physician.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thus, reversible sterilization, along with developments such as a pill implant for long-term birth control, may further insure the effectiveness of contraception. But concomitantly, they may add further

The author would like to acknowledge the assistance of library personnel at the Hastings Center Institute, the Kennedy Institute, and Mansfield State College. The research was supported by a travel grant received from Mansfield State College.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ANONYMOUS. 1974. Montana eugenic sterilization GRUNEBAUM. 1976.Children of psychotic moth-

law applies to retardates. Pediat. News 8 ers. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 33(March):311-317.

(June):6-7.

GOMEL, VICTOR. 1977. Tubal reanastomosis by mi-

BORDERS, WILLIAM. 1976. Mrs. Gandhi confirms crosurgery. Fertil. Steril. 28(January):59-65.

some died in protests over sterilization drive.New GONZALES, BETTY. 1976. Estimate of the numberof

York Times, October 28, p. 15.

voluntary sterilizations performed 1970-75. News

. 1978. Birth control slows in India. New release, May.Association for Voluntary Steriliza-

York Times, February 6, p. A2.

tion, New York.

BROWN, ROBERT S., and RICHARD COURTIS. 1977. GUHA, S. K., A. AHMED, and H. K. KAUR. 1976.

"The castration alternative." Canadian J. Feasibility study ofthe reversible occlusion device

Criminol. Correct. 19 (April): 157-170.

for the vas deferens. Med. Biol. Engin. 14

BRUESCHKE, E. E. 1976. Reversible occlusive de- (January): 15-18.

vices. J. Reprod. Med. 17 (August): 103-115.
CALLAHAN, DANIEL. 1977. Health and society: Some ethical imperatives. Daedalus 106 (Winter):23-33.
CHEZ, RONALD A. 1971. Mental disability as a basis for contraception and sterilization. Soc. Biol. 18 (Suppl.):S120-S132.

GULHATI, KAUAL. 1977. Compulsory sterilization: The change in India's population policy. Science 195 (March 25): 1300-1305.
HUEBNER, AL. 1975.Dare call it genocide. Science for thePeople 8 (March): 7, 20-21.
INGLE, DWIGHT J. 1973. Who should have children? Bobbs-Merrill Company, Indianapolis.

CHRISTIANSEN, DREW. 1977. Ethics and compul- JACOBS, JAMES B., and ERIC H. STEELE. 1977. Sex-

sory population control. Hastings Center Rep.7 ual deprivation and penal policy. CornellLaw

(February):30-33.

Rev. 62 (January):289-312.

CLOUGH, LOUISE, VIRGINIA ABERNATHY, and JANKE, LOIS, and WILLIAM M. WIEST. 1976-77.

HENRY GRUNEBAUM. 1976. Contraception for the
severely psychiatrically disturbed: Confusion, control, and central indication. Comprehen. Psychiat. 17 (September):601-606.

Psychosocial and medical effects ofvasectomy in a sample of health plan subscribers. Internat. J. Psychiat. Med. 7(1):17-34. JONES, STACY. 1977. Patents: reversible non-surgical

COHLER, BERTRAM J., D. GALLANT, H. birth control. NewYork Times, August 13, p. 25.

GRUNEBAUM, J. WEISS, and E. GAMER. 1975.
Pregnancy and birth complications among mentally illand well mothers and their children. Soc. Biol. 22 (Fall):269-279. COMER, DOUG. 1975.Sterilization of mental defectives: Compulsion and consent. Baylor Law Rev. 27 (Winter):179-198.
DIAMOND, EDWARD. 1977. Microsurgical reconstruction of the uterine tube in sterilized patients. Fertil. Steril. 28 (November):1203-1211.

LARSEN, JNUD S. 1976. Fascism and attitudes toward mandatory sterilization: Thedevelopment of an attitude scale. J. Soc. Psychol. 100:107-110.
MCCORMICK, W. G., and JOSEPH TORRES. 1976. A
method of Pomeroy tubal ligation reanastomosis. Obstet. Gynecol. 47(May):423-425.
MCINTIRE, ROGER. 1973. Stimulus/response: Par-
enthood training or mandatory birth control: Take your choice. Psychol. Today 7 (October):34-41. Moss, STORROW A. 1976. Compulsory sterilization

DONOVAN, PATRICIA. 1976a. Sterilization and the poor: Two views onthe need for protection from abuse. Fam. Plan./Pop. Rep. 5 (April):28-30.
. 19766. Sterilizing the poor andincompetent.
Hastings Center Rep. 6 (October):7-8.

of the mentally ill andretarded. Southwest. LawJ. 3 (Fall):775-781. MURDOCK, C. W. 1974. Sterilization ofthe retarded: A problem or a solution. Calif. Law Rev.62 (May):917-935.

DREIFUS, CLAUDIA. 1975. Sterilizing the poor. The NAIR, V. R. 1976. Vasoplasty: A newtechnique.

Progressive 8 (December): 13-19.

Brit. J. Urol, 48(August):275-277.

EISENBERG, LEON. 1977. Psychiatry and society. PING, H. K. 1976. Creating new classes of people.

New Eng. J. Med. 96 (April 21):907-911.

Far East Econ. Rev. 92 (April 2):24-2S.

EL-GUEBALY, NADY, and DAVID OFFORD. 1977. REES, JIM. 1977. 'Voluntary' castration of mentally

The offspring of alcoholics: a critical review. disordered sex offenders. Crimin. LawBull. 13

Amer. J. Psychiat. 134 (April):357-366.

(January-February):30-49.

GAMER, ENID, DAVID GALLANT, and HENRY ROSENBAUM, DAVID E. 1977. H.E.W. to issuenew

144

Largey

Social Biology

regulations to prevent forced sterilizations. New York Times, December 2, p. 20. Ross, SUSAN C. 1973. The rights of women: The basic ACLU guide to a woman's rights. Dutton, New York. ROTHMAN, SHEILA. 1977. Sterilizing the poor. Society 14 (January-February):36-41. Rudovsky, David. 1973. The rights of prisoners: The basic ACLU guide to a prisoner's rights. Avon, New York.
SABAGH, G., and R. B. EDGERTON. 1962. Sterilized
mental defectives look at eugenic sterilization. Eugen. Quart. 9 (Spring):213-222.
SACK, WILLIAM H. 1977. Children of imprisoned fathers. Psychiatry 40 (May): 163-174.
SACK, WILLIAM H., JACK SEIDLER, and SUSAN
THOMAS. 1976. The children of imprisoned parents. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat. 46 (October):618628. SCIARRA, JOHN J. (ed.). 1976. Advances in female sterilization techniques. Harper & Row, Hagartown, Md.
SCHIMA, MARILYN E., and Ira Lubell (eds.). 1976. New advances in sterilization: The Third International Conference on Voluntary Sterilization. Association for Voluntary Sterilization, New York.
Schneider, JAN. 1973. Counselling for sterilization. Obst. Gynecol. 42 (November): 778-784.
SILBER, SHERMAN. 1977a. Microscopic vasectomy reversal. Fertil. Steril. 28 (February):1191-1203. . 1977b. Microscopic vasovastomy and spermatogenesis. J. Urol. 117 (March):299-302. . 1977c. Perfect anatomical reconstruction of

the vas deferens with a new microscopic surgical technique. Fertil. Steril. 28 (January):72-77.
. 1977d. Vasectomy reversal. New Eng. J. Med. 296 (April 14):886-887. SINHA, ARUN. 1977. Twonotes from India. Dissent 24 (Winter):94-95. SOSKIN, RON. 1977. Voluntary sterilization-- safeguarding freedom of choice. Amicus 2 (February):40-44.
SPRIGGS, EDWARD. 1974. Involuntary sterilization: An unconstitutional menace to minorities andthe poor. New York Univ. Rev. Law Soc.Change 4 (Spring):127-151.
STOKES, BRUCE. 1977. Birth control: More people are turning to sterilization. New York Times, May 20, p. 7.
VAUGHAN, DENTON, and GERALD SPARER. 1974.
Ethnic group and welfare status of women sterilized in federally funded family planningprograms, 1972. Fam.Plan. Persp. 6 (Fall):224-228.
WEISBORD, ROBERT G. 1975. Genocide? Birth control and the Black American. Greenwood Press, New York.
WESTOFF, CHARLES. 1976. Trends in contraceptive practices: 1965-1973. Fam. Plan. Persp. 8 (March/April):54-57.
WESTOFF, LESLIE A. 1978. Vas deferens in vasectomies. Esquire 89 (March 1):25-26.
WINSTON, R. M. L. 1977. Why 103 women askedfor reversal of sterilization. Brit. Med. J. 1 (July 30):305-307.
WOOD, CURTIS. 1976. Psychosocial aspects of sterilization. Curr. Psychiat. Therap. 16:303-311.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

