Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Physical development of interracial children in the first year
Alfred F. Naylor & Lee Willerman
To cite this article: Alfred F. Naylor & Lee Willerman (1979) Physical development of interracial children in the first year, Social Biology, 26:1, 7-15, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988357 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988357
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Physical Development of Interracial Children in the First Year

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Alfred F. Naylor and Lee Willerman
National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; and Departmentof Psychology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas
ABSTRACT: Interracial children of white mothers and black fathers were compared to interracial children of black mothers and white fathers on growth rates during the first year of life. Results indicate that interracial children of white mothers gained less weight between birth and four months of age than did interracial children of black mothers or monoracial black or white children. By one year of age, catch-up growth appears to have occurred, and there is little evidence for lasting effects of the growth retardation during the first four months of life.

All too often when comparing human races in terms of either physical or intellectual measures, we must concede that differences observed could be due to either genetic or environmental influences or some combination of the two. Provided that certain preconditions are met, the offspring of interracial matings open the possibility of untangling some of the genetic and environmental influences on traits that may have been found to differ between races. The crucial precondition is that the respective midparent averages for the traits in question or other relevant

life of interracial children of black and white parentage. First we compare the growth of such children as a function of parental racial combination, and then we compare the growth of the interracial children to "monoracial" black and white controls. We readily acknowledge that the designation of race is somewhat arbitrary given the substantial degree of admixture amongst American blacks of genes more characteristic of whites (Reed, 1969) and that the racial designations employed here have a large social component.

traits do not differ by mating type, i.e., midparent scores of white mothers and

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

black fathers do not differ from midparent scores of black mothers and white fathers. If these midparent factors are either equivalent or statistically controlled, then observed differences between the two mating types ought to be attributable to environmental influences (in the absence of sex linkage).
The purpose of the present study is to report on growth during the first year of

Comparative growth studies on whites, blacks, interracials and East Indians have been conducted both in Mozambique by da Costa Martins (1971) and in Pretoria, South Africa, by Levine (1972). Whites grew most rapidly of the four groups in both locations. Levine found East Indian growth to be most similar to that of whites and attributed the black and mixed differential to both genetic and environmental

causes. However, da Costa Martins found

Address requests for reprints to: Alfred F. Naylor, the mixed group to parallel whites most

Federal Building, DNB, NINCDS, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20205.

closely, although all four were approxi-

7

8

Naylor and Willerman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

mately equal in size at maturity. In Cuba, Laska-Mierzejewska (1970) observed that blacks and mulattoes were actually taller at maturity than whites.
Davenport and Steggerda (1929) believed that they found a possible instance of negative heterosis when they reported the browns of Jamaica weighed less and were shorter than samples of whites and blacks from that island. Shapiro (1961) pointed out that the three groups were hardly comparable since the browns included a higher proportion of males between 16 and 20 years of age who had not yet attained full adult stature. Gedda (1967), in studying crosses of American black fathers and European mothers, found some increase in stature in children when compared to a sample of Italian children. This, of course, is doubtful evidence of heterosis since the American blacks were soldiers who had been selected to exceed minimal height.

black children at later ages. Remarkably, Garn et al. (1972) found postnatal ossification proceeded more rapidly in blacks than whites even though the whites were at considerable socioeconomic advantage, confirming older findings of Hess and Weinstock (1925).
We have noted that within the Collaborative Perinatal Project black pregnancies tend to terminate sooner and yield lighter babies than white or interracial pregnancies. Fujikura and Froehlich (1972), using project data, found that at about 35-weeks gestation the weights of black babies begin to lag behind whites. Erhardt et al. (1964), Freeman et al. (1970), and Bergner and Susser (1970) had also reported this phenomenon. The latter authors reviewed dietary studies and concluded only that the effect of maternal nutrition on birth weight is an open question and that a fresh experiment using dietary supplements is called for.

Among secondary school children of similar socioeconomic status in Kingston,

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Jamaica, Ashcroft et al. (1966) observed The data to be reported come from the

that the stature and weight of Africans, Collaborative Perinatal Project which has

Afro-Europeans and Europeans were followed approximately 56,000 children

similar, indicating that in that environ- from the time of the mother's pregnancy

ment the size potential of blacks and inter- through eight years of age in twelve col-

racials equalled that of whites. Comparing laborating hospitals throughout the coun-

data on black children from private prac- try. These children have been given bat-

tice born in the District of Columbia to teries of neurological, psychological, and

published white norms, Scott et al. (1950) other tests at various prescribed intervals

also found no differences. In three sepa- during the course of their growth. In the

rate studies, Barr et al. (1972) in Califor- entire Collaborative Study the racial dis-

nia, Owen and Lubin (1973) in Ohio, and tribution is approximately 46 per cent

Garn et al. (1973) in Michigan found that black, 45 per cent white, and the rest

while black babies may be smaller at mainly Puerto Rican. Details of the sam-

birth, within a year or two they overtake pling frames in each hospital and other

and become larger than socioeconomically hospital characteristics can be found in

matched white children. In another large Broman et al. (1975).

scale study from California, Wingerd et al. There were 214 black-white interracial (1971) present results which are quite con- pregnancies identified within the Colsistent with the above three studies, al- laborative Study. During registration of though the authors summarize their data the pregnancy, the mother was asked so as to de-emphasize the larger size of about the race of the father, and her reply

Vol. 26, No. 1

Interracial Children

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

is the source of our interracial definition. Psychological test data from this sample have been previously used to examine the relation of race of mother to intellectual performance in interracial children (Willerman et al., 1970, 1974). The present study focuses on physical measures, namely, weight and length at birth, four months, and one year of age as obtained during routine pediatric and neurological examinations.
RESULTS
In our studies of intellectual performance within this sample, the most interesting analyses involved contrasting the effect of race of mother on four-year IQ. The IQ's of interracial children of white mothers (and black fathers) averaged about nine points higher than the IQ's of children of black mothers (and white fathers) although genetic intellectual potential, as judged from socioeconomic variables, seemed about equal in the white-black and black-white matings. Another finding of interest was that interracial children of black mothers obtained significantly higher scores at eight months of age on the Bayley scale of Mental Development than did interracial children of white mothers. No significant difference was observed on the Bayley Scale of Motor Development administered at that time.
The results of these studies were interpreted as indicating early postnatal environmental influences on the mental development of the children, the effects of which were detectable as early as eight months of age. It should be noted, moreover, that the interracial children of black mothers performed significantly better at eight months of age and significantly worse at four years of age. In general, there is a positive, but low relationship of mental test scores at eight months and four years of age within both black and white

groups of children (Broman et al., 1975). The reason for this reversal was not clear, although we will have more to say about that in the Discussion section of this report.
COMPARISONS BETWEEN INTERRACIAL
GROUPS
Because of special interest in the longitudinal characteristics of the growth process during the first year of life, the interracial children must have been measured at birth and four months of age to be included in the analyses that follow. Of the original group of 214 interracial children, only 144 of them had been measured on either height or weight at both birth and four months of age. Forty-five cases were lost because of failure to keep follow-up appointments; others were lost because the child was delivered at a different hospital or was not a liveborn. Use of one-year physical measurements required that previous measurements also be available. Thus, the interracial sample includes those who were measured at both birth and four months and may have also been measured at one year as well. No children measured at one year, but lacking either birth or four month data, are included in the interracial growth analyses that follow.
Table 1 gives the means and standard deviations for a variety of descriptive characteristics for the two interracial mating groups--those composed of white mothers and black fathers, and those composed of black mothers and white fathers. The two groups do not differ significantly on any of the variables shown. Means and standard deviations for the two mating types are practically identical, except that a nonsignificantly larger proportion of the black mothers who came for four-month follow-up appointments were married. Since the mean and standard deviations were so similar for the two mat-

10

Naylor and Willerman

Social Biology

TABLE l
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE INTERRACIAL PREGNANCIES

VARIABLES

Socioeconomic index

Gestation (weeks)

Parity

;

Maternal age

Prepregnant weight (kg).

Maternal height (cm.)...

Per cent male offspring .

Per cent married . . . . ; . .

WHITE MOTHER

Mean
47
39.6
1.6 24 59 162 52 72

SD
20 2.9 1.6 5.8 12 6.4

No.
109 112 112 112 106 102 112 112

BLACK MOTHER

Mean
46
39.4
1.9 25 57 161 47 84

SD
18 2.8 2.2 5.9 8.9 7.8

No.
32 31 32 32
n
31 32 32

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

ing types, it seemed unnecessary to adjust thus an adjusted estimate of the difference

for all the slight differences in the analyses in measure between children of white and

to follow which compare the two groups. black mothers.

Table 2 presents the means and stan- None of the differences in Table 2 is

dard deviations for the weight and height significant when compared to its standard

measures taken at birth, four months, and error. While the data cannot be regarded

one year of age for the two mating types. as conclusive as to whether or not differ-

The pattern of means for weight and ences exist, Table 2 does suggest that in-

length are very similar. At birth the inter- terracial children of white mothers were

racial children of white mothers are larger at birth than interracials with black

slightly heavier and longer, but by four mothers, but were decidedly smaller at

months of age the pattern is reversed and four months and at one year.

the interracial children of black mothers As a second procedure, the data for

are now heavier and taller. By one year of weight and height were independently age the differences between the infants are subjected to analyses of variance with race relatively less, although the height and of mother and sex of child entered as be-

weight advantage for the interracial chil- tween subject variables and weight or dren of black mothers is still maintained. height at the three ages as a within subject

Table 2 also compares the interracial children of black and white mothers after adjustments have been made for sex of baby and marital status. Data from a child were used for a weight or a height analysis only if they were recorded at both birth

variable. The computer program used to analyze the data was a modification of the BMD08V program. This modified program has the advantage of providing unweighted means solutions for unequal cell sizes (Marston, 1974).

and four months; use of data at one year When the weight data were analyzed

also required the availability of the earlier including the one year measurements, no

data. The qualitative dichotomies of race significant main effect for race of mother

of mother, sex of baby, and marital status or sex of child were observed, nor was

can be quantified by using the scores 0 and there a significant interaction between

1 and assigning (arbitrarily) the value 1 to race of mother and weight of child. When

having a white mother, to being female the weight data were reanalyzed after

and having parents who were married. excluding the one year weight, however,

Multiple regression of the physical mea- the race of mother x weight of child in-

sures on the scores were then performed. teraction was now statistically significant

The regression constant for race effect is (^I.MO = 4.32, p < 0.0S). This result

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1
·J Z

Interracial Children

11

O\ c^ ^}-
o £ CT- fj- vo r-

O <^ vO <^» vO ^J" HHM
+1 +1 +1

i^ t^. -- m \n \o
odd
+1 +1 +1

O »*> "O O vO r-

rr> \o *r>
i-t f^ O
dd d 11

II

PQ O O
111
xi d
S

means that the interracial children of white mothers had gained significantly less weight between birth and four months of age than did the interracial children of black mothers. There was also a significant sex X weight interaction. Boys gained more weight between birth and four months than did girls {FiM0 = 4.81, p < 0.05). Unlike the weight interaction involving race of mother, however, there was no cross-over of the means between birth and four months. Boys were heavier both at birth and at four months of age.
Similar analyses were applied to the length data and no significant main effects or interactions were observed. The results were not affected when one-year data were excluded from the analyses.
COMPARISONS WITH M0N0RACIAL CONTROLS
The difference in weight gains for the children of the two mating types raises a major question. Is the apparent reversal in size advantage due to accelerated growth in interracial children of black mothers or is it due to retarded growth in children of white mothers? The interracial sample is small as a whole, and the size of the subsample born to black mothers particularly discourages elaborate analyses. Therefore, we decided to seek answers to this question by making controlled comparisons between children of interracial and "monoracial" matings.
In order to be eligible for inclusion in the statistical analyses, the monoracial children had to have weight and length measurements at all three ages. This was not the case for the interracial children, who were only required to have measurements at birth and four months of age. There were 11,835 monoracial white children and 12,320 monoracial black children eligible for the analyses.
Two multiple regression models were applied, the predictive variables chosen

12

Naylor and WiDerman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

being those that had a high probability of schedule, actual age at examination and

being recorded and were intended to re- its square were also used in the predictive

flect, directly or indirectly, socioeconomic, model. As a consequence, 46 per cent of

obstetric (or intrauterine), and genetic the variability in four-month weight was

influences on growth. Both models in- accounted for.

cluded terms for sex of baby, marital Table 3 presents the adjusted differ-

status, actual presence of the father in the ences for weight and length between inter-

home, age of the mother, gestational age, racial children and monoracial controls

prepregnant weight and height of the using the first model. The results in Table

mother, and squares of some of those 3 rather decisively answer the question of

terms.

whether the reversal in weight is due to

The first alternative model also included retarded growth among the interracial

terms for parity, and socioeconomic index children of white mothers or accelerated

(SEI), as well as squares and cross- growth among the interracial children of

products between terms. The SEI is a black mothers. From the first two columns

simple index based on percentiles of in- of adjusted differences for weights, it is

come, education of head of household, and clear that the white interracials suffered

occupation of head of household (Myrian- growth retardation relative to controls

thopoulos and French, 1968). The index even though at birth they had shown an

incorporates major items of socioeconomic insignificant advantage over white con-

information, but does not correct for trols and a substantial one over black con-

numbers of persons and age composition trols. By one year of age, catch-up growth

of the household.

seems to have occurred, and adjusted

The second alternative model included as additional terms family income, education of the mother, number of adults in the home, number of children less than five years of age, number older than five, and

weight differentials appear to have been eradicated. The length differentials are all nonsignificant and neither strongly support nor contradict the conclusions drawn from the body weight analyses.

squares and cross-products of many of

these terms. It was found that the models were indistinguishable in predictive value.

DISCUSSION

Each accounted for 21 per cent of the vari- The most important finding in the pres-

ability in birthweight and 18 per cent in ent study was that interracial children

length at birth. Since the first model had with white mothers gained less weight be-

fewer variables, and previous work (War- tween birth and four months of age than

burton and Naylor, 1971) had suggested a did interracial children of black mothers.

rational basis for a parabolic relation be- We are inclined to attribute the four-

tween parity and birth weight, the first month weight deficit to transference from

model became the basic one for adjust- mother to child of the temporary disorga-

ments of physical measurements.

nization resulting from having broken a

In performing calculations on mea- very strong taboo. Contributing to this

surements at birth, we used the regression disruption may be the fact that the inter-

model as described. However, at four racial child of a white mother more obvi-

months and at one year, physical size at ously shows that a mixed mating has oc-

birth was itself added to the predictive curred than does the interracial child of a

model. Also, since postnatal examinations black mother. Furthermore, review of the

were not always performed precisely on nonpsychiatric medical records of white

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1
CJ £
li s
·II

Interracial Children

13

T}- T}- \r>
· -. odd
+1 +1 +1 ! +1 +1

Tt- o« oo OfOfO

OO O I

+1 +1 +1 ·t^o

+1 +1
00 I
odd

+1 +1 +1 +1 +1 +1
oo o
II

TTOO o o o

+1 +1 +1 +1 +1 +1

"* ° s

o o rt odd

-l-rMin
VI

,||

s ?s .
II

it
J3 o ·

interracial mothers suggested that they tended to have more psychological problems, but the evidence is too weak and various to justify summary here.
A supplementary hypothesis is that the mother-infant interactions involving the white unmarried mothers would be more subject to disruption and therefore associated with reduced weight gains in the children. Although the limited available data demonstrate trends clearly consistent with this expectation, the results cannot be regarded as conclusive.
The interracial children of white unmarried mothers weighed 3,199 gm. at birth and gained only 2,862 gm. during the first four postnatal months. The interracial children of white married mothers weighed 3,242 gm. at birth and gained 3,022 gm. during this same period. These values can be compared to the birth weight of 3,301 gm. (unadjusted) for the monoracial white controls and a weight gain of 3,152 gm. during the first four months. Thus, the interracial children of white unmarried mothers gained 160 gm. less than the corresponding married group, and both groups gained less than the white monoracial controls.
Reduced weight gain for the interracial children of the white mothers does notappear due to the generally observed negative correlation between birth weight and weight gain during the first four months (r = -0.30). First, the white monoracial controls weigh more at birth than the white mother interracials; and second, the negative correlation between birth weight and weight gain during the first four months is slightly stronger among the interracial children of black mothers (f = -0.34) than among the interracial children of white mothers (r = --0.27).
The growth retardation of white interracials at four months seems to have had no serious long-range consequences. Not only is there catch-up in later physical

14

Naylor and Willerman

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

growth, but by four years of age these children showed an IQ distribution that would be normal for children of two white parents (Willerman et al., 1970, 1974). This change means, of course, that the specific maternal behaviors associated with reduced weight gain early in life must be different than those associated with intellectual performance at four years. Unfortunately, we have no information bearing on this speculation.
As background to interpreting these results, it should be noted that the Collaborative Perinatal Project collected its data from 19S9 to 1966, and the social and economic influences operating at that time are the ones to be considered. We surmise that when their interracial babies were born, white mothers found themselves in direct conflict with a powerful miscegenation taboo. Disapproval by the black community against race mixing seems to have been weaker, although in recent years such pressures may have intensified. It seems reasonable to infer that white mothers of interracial babies found themselves under greater tension-inducing social pressures than did black mothers.
The fact that the interracial children gained less weight during the first four months of life may help to explain our previous finding that interracial children of white mothers obtained lower scores when tested on the Bayley Scale of Mental Development at eight months of age (Willerman et al., 1974). Perhaps childrearing conditions in the homes of the interracial children of white mothers were sufficiently deleterious to depress the behavioral performance as well as to reduce weight gains in the children. Glaser et al., (1968) observed that children hospitalized for failure to thrive recovered spontaneously when returned to favorable home environments. We have too little information about the early home environments to confidently pursue this argument, but it

does seem plausible that many of the interracial children of white mothers may not have gotten their normal quota of "mothering."
Confirming this impression is the finding that when extremely small weight gains between birth and four years were observed, they were much more frequent among the interracial children of white mothers. Taking a value of less than 2,500 grams as indicative of low weight gain between birth and four months of age, we find that about 24 per cent of the interracial children of white mothers and 6 per cent of the interracial children of black mothers had gained less than this amount (X2 = 4.0, p < 0.05, corrected for continuity). If we arbitrarily use 4,000 grams as indicative of good growth between birth and four months, about 8 per cent of the interracial children of white mothers and 6 per cent of the interracial children of black mothers exceed this amount. Thus, we are led to conclude that while a substantial proportion of interracial children of white mothers show especially small weight gains between birth and four months, there is no strong evidence that this growth retardation is consistently characteristic of interracial children of white mothers in general.
In summary, our results indicated that interracial children of white mothers gained less weight between birth and four months of age than did interracial children of black mothers or monoracial black or white children. By one year of age, catch-up growth appears to have occurred, and there is little evidence for lasting effects of the growth retardation during the first four months of life.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Collaborative Study of Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, and Other Neurological

Vol. 2 6 , No. 1

Interracial Children

15

and Sensory Disorders of Infancy and Childhood is supported by the National Institute of Neurological Diseases andStroke. The following institutions participate: Boston Lying-in Hospital; Brown University; Charity Hospital, New Orleans; Children's Hospital of Buffalo; Children's Hospital of Philadelphia; Children's

Medical Center, Boston; Columbia University; Johns Hopkins University; Medical College of Virginia; New York Medical College; Pennsylvania Hospital; University of Minnesota; University of Oregon; University of Tennessee; Yale University; and the Perinatal Research Branch, NINCDS.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ASHCROFT, M. T., P. HENEAGE, and H. G. Negro newborn infants. Amer. J. Dis. Child.

LOVELL. 1966. Heights and weights of Jamaican 29:347-354.

schoolchildren of various ethnic groups. Amer. J. LASKA-MIERZEJEWSKA, T. 1970. Morphological and

Phys. Anthrop. 24:35-44.

developmental differences between Negro and

BARR, G. D., C. M. ALLEN, and H. R. SHINEFIELD. white Cuban youths. Hum. Biol. 42:581-597.

1972. Children of three skin colors. Amer. J. Dis. LEVINE, E. 1972.The skeletal development ofchil-

Child. 124:866-872.

dren of four South African populations. Hum.

BERGNER, L., and M. W. SUSSER. 1970. Low birth Biol. 44:399-412.

weight andprenatal nutrition: An interpretative MARSTON, P. T. 1974. Instructions for analysis of

review. Pediatrics. 46:946-966.

variance programs BMD08V and Orth. 2. Psy-

BROMAN, S. H., P. L. NICHOLS, and W. A. KEN- chology Department, University of Texas at Aus-

NEDY. 1975.Preschool IQ: Prenatal and early de- tin.

velopmental correlates. Hillsdale, N.J.:Lawrence MYRIANTHOPOULOS, N. C , and K. S. FRENCH.

Erlbaum Associates.

1968. An application of the U.S. Bureau of the

DA COSTA MARTINS, D. 1971. Height, weight and Census Socioeconomic Index to a large, diversified

chest circumference of children ofdifferent ethnic patient population. Soc. Sci. Med. 3:283-299.

groups in Lourenco Marques, Mozambique, in NAYLOR, A. F., and N. C. MYRIANTHOPOULOS.

1965 with a note on the secular trend. Hum.Biol. 1967. Therelation to ethnic and selected socio-

43:253-262.

economic factors to human birth-weight. Ann.

DAVENPORT, C. B., and M. STEFFERDA. 1929. Race Hum. Genet. 31:71-83.

crossing in Jamaica. Washington: Carnegie In- OWEN, G. M., and A. H. LUBIN. 1973. An-

stitution of Washington, Publication No. 395.

thropometric differences between black and

ERHARDT, C. L., G. B. JOSHI, F. G. NELSON, B. H. white preschool children. Amer. J. Dis. Child.

KROLL, and L. WEINER. 1964. Influences of 126:168-169.

weight and gestation on perinatal and neonatal REED, T. E. 1969. Caucasian genes in American

mortality byethnic group. Amer. J. Pub. Heath. Negroes. Science 165:762-768.

54:1841-1855.

SCOTT, R. B., W. W. CARDOZO, A.DEG. SMITH,

FREEMAN, M. G., W. L. GRAVES, and R. L. and M. R. DELILLY. 1950.Growth and develop-

THOMPSON. 1970.Indigent Negro and Caucasian ment of Negro infants. J. Pediat. 37:885-893.

birth weight-gestational age tables. Pediatrics. SHAPIRO, H. L. 1961.Race mixture. In Raceand

46:9-15.

Science, General Conference ofUNESCO. United

FUJIKURA, T., and L. A. FROEHLICH. 1972. Birth Nations, New York.

weight, gestational age, and renal glomerular de- WARBURTON, D., and A. F. NAYLOR. 1971. The

velopment as indices of fetal maturity. Amer. J. effect of parity on placental weight and birth

Obstet. Gynecol. 113:627-631.

weight: An immunological phenomenon? A report

GARN, S. M., D. C. CLARK, and F. L. TROW- of the Collaborative Study of Cerebral Palsy.

BRIDGE. 1973. Tendency toward greater staturein Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 23:41-54.

American black children. Amer. J. Dis. Child. WILLERMAN, L., A. F. NAYLOR, and N. C.

126:164-166.

MYRIANTHOPOULOS. 1970. Intellectual develop-

GARN, S. M., S. T. SANDUSKY, J. M. NAGY, and ment of children from interracial matings. Science

M. B.MCCANN. 1972.Advanced skeletal devel- 170:1329-1331.

opment in low-income Negro children. J. Pediat.

. 1974. Intellectual development of children

80:965-969.

from interracial matings: Performance in infancy

GLASER, H. H., M. C. HEAGERTY, D. M. BULLARD, and at four years. Behav. Genet. 4:83-90.

and E. C.PiVCHIK. 1968. Physical and psycholog- WINGERD, J., E. J. SCHOEN, and I. L. SOLOMON.

ical development of children with early failure to 1971. Growth standards in thefirst two yearsof

thrive. J. Pediat. 73:690-698.

life based on measurements of white and black

HESS, A. F., and M. WEINSTOCK. 1925. A compari- children ina prepaid health care program. Pediat-

son of the evolution ofcarpal centers in whiteand rics 47:818-825.

