Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Sociobiology: A valid explanation of child abuse?
Debra Umberson
To cite this article: Debra Umberson (1986) Sociobiology: A valid explanation of child abuse?, Social Biology, 33:1-2, 131-137, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988630 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988630
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

Sociobiology: A Valid Explanation of Child Abuse?

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Debra Umberson
Centerfor Continuing Education of Women University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan

ABSTRACT: Most explanations of child abuse among humans focus either on psychologic dysfunction of the perpetrator of abuse or environmental stress on the perpetrator. More recently, evolutionary theory and studies of infant abuse among nonhuman species have led to a sociobiological explanation of child abuse among humans. Advocates of this approach (Lenington, 1981;Daly and Wilson, 1981) suggest that abuse of offspring be viewed within the context of genetic relatedness and inclusive fitness. This report addresses the methodological and theoretical problems which arise when the sociobiological explanation of infant abuse is applied to humans. Suggestions are made to fill gaps in the sociobiological explanation, consequently allowing rudimentary tests of hypotheses.

Traditionally, sociologists and psy- least avoid injuring the young. These

chologists have attributed child abuse to concepts figure heavily in a discussion of

individual pathology or excessive envi- parent-offspring conflict by Trivers

ronmental stress. More recently, so- (1974). Trivers argues that parent-

ciobiologists have explained child abuse offspring conflict arises when parents

in evolutionary terms, largely based on perceive their input to the offspring's

the concepts of inclusive fitness and ge- welfare as being more of a cost than

netic relatedness. If sociobiological ten- benefit, either in personal energy or in

ets are correct, predictive statements energy which could be offered to young

can be developed concerning the pro- who merit more care. The parent must

clivity of certain parents to abuse, and "determine" that the infant is ready to

the probability of particular offspring survive on its own or that the infant is

being abused. This report reviews evi- not worth further investment.

dence of infant abuse in nonhuman spe- Trivers' focus is on conflict between

cies and the sociobiological explanation biological parent and offspring; he

of child abuse among humans and con- stresses that although conflict is inevita-

cludes with suggestions for empirically ble, the most efficient survival of both

testing the sociobiological explanation parent and offspring is paramount.

of child abuse.

However, there are situations in which a

The basis of inclusive fitness is that biological parent or other conspecific

animals seek to maximize their evolu- adult physically abuses an infant, some-

tionary success by insuring the survival times fatally. Abuse of infants and

of their offspring or those offspring most young by conspecific adults has been

closely related to them (Dawkins, 1976; documented for several different spe-

Barash, 1979). Furthermore, the great- cies. Analysis of these cases reveals sev-

er the genetic relatedness between adult eral common components, and supports

and young, the greater the probability principles of genetic relatedness and in-

that the adult will protect, nourish, or at clusive fitness.

131

132

Umberson

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Nonprimate species.--Most documented instances of nonprimate infant abuse occur under conditions of extreme environmental stress, particularly crowding. In a 1962 study, excessive crowding among rats was associated with exceedingly high rates of infant mortality which resulted from "inadequate maternal care, infanticide and cannibalism" (Calhoun in Hrdy, 1977, p. 9). Wilson (1980) notes that guppies also cannibalize their excess young during periods of overpopulation.
Infanticide under conditions of extreme crowding can be viewed as an example of inclusive fitness. An extremely crowded environment suggests a limitation of resources. If all are allowed to survive, the entire species may become extinct due to starvation. However, by restricting resources to the members most likely to survive, the entire group ultimately benefits by maintaining its strength and reproducing at a more opportune time. In this sense, destroying the young enhances the survival of the species.
Other nonprimates have killed conspecific infants in the absence of environmental stressors. After nomadic lions dispel or kill adult males and take over a pride, they sometimes kill the young cubs of the pride. It is suggested that, since the female can not reproduce as long as she is nursing her young, ridding the pride of young cubs (sired by the supplanted males) frees the females so that they may produce offspring of the usurping males (Schaller, 1972). This pattern closely parallels that seen among mice (Wilson, 1980) and baboons (Hrdy, 1972).
These instances of infanticide may be viewed as reflecting the influence of genetic relatedness. Because the usurping lions share no genetic material with the

cubs, they have little reason to invest time and energy in caring for the cubs. In addition, by killing the cubs sired by the deposed males, the usurping lions increase the number of sexually receptive females in the pride, enabling the usurpers to produce their own offspring.
Nonhuman primates.--More extensive documentation of infanticide exists for nonhuman primates. Infanticide has been observed among "hanuman langurs and numerous other colobines" as well as in isolated cases among "various species of prosimian, the Barbary macaque, and free-ranging rhesus macaques" (Hrdy, 1977, p. 246). These instances are precipitated by conspecific males. Hrdy (1977) notes three general categories of explanation offered for this behavior: (1) high population densities--environmental stress; (2) pathological behavior with no adaptive value; and (3) sexual selection.
The first two categories are similar to the environmental stress and psychologic dysfunction explanations seen in the sociological and psychological literature. The third category, sexual selection, which Hrdy finds most acceptable based on her studies of infanticide among the langurs, reflects sociobiological principles. The instances of infanticide observed by Hrdy were evoked by males not affiliated with the troop who usurped the leadership of a troop. The usurping langurs, following much the same pattern as the lions observed by Schaller, proceeded to kill the unweaned infants in a troop. Hrdy suggests that the males killed the infants to avoid the "two to three year delay in female sexual receptivity should the mother continue to nurse the infant" (1977, p. 246). By destroying the infant which was sired by another male, the new male may then impregnate the female with

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

Sociobiology and Child Abuse

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

his own progeny; hence the explanation, "sexual selection."
In sum, while examples of conspecific abuse of infants and young are limited, several patterns do emerge. It seems that abuse and infanticide are associated with lack of genetic relatedness between perpetrator and victim (e.g., lions, primates), low reproductive potential of victim (e.g., rats, guppies), and excessive environmental stress (e.g., rats, guppies). These same patterns may be assessed in an analysis of child abuse among humans.
Humans.--While the literature on infant abuse in most species is sparse, the literature on child abuse among humans isvast. Information has been gathered on rates, perpetrators, victims, and types of abuse. These rich data sources make it possible to begin to test hypotheses for the various explanations (e.g., psychologic dysfunction, environmental stress, sociobiological) of child abuse.
Sociobiologists predict that the three patterns related to abuse of infants among nonhuman primate and nonprimate species (i.e., lack of genetic relatedness, low reproductive potential, and environmental stress) are rough predictors of abuse of human offspring by their primary caretakers. Sarah Lenington (1981, p. 24) predicts three general conditions which, based on sociobiological reasoning, should be associated with child abuse among humans: (1) lack of confidence in paternity; (2) lack of parental resources; and (3) low reproductive value of offspring.
The first factor, lack of confidence in paternity, refers to the parent's belief that the child shares his/her genetic material (i.e., genetic relatedness). The second and third factors--lack of parental resources and low reproductive value of offspring--may be seen as interre-

lated. When parental resources are scarce, parents must provide fewer resources to each child and to themselves in order for all to survive. In such instances, the parent may deprive a child so that the parent and other offspring are more apt to survive on the limited resources (i.e., inclusive fitness).
From a sociobiological perspective, if resources are scarce and the parents do deprive a child, that child should not be chosen at random. Rather, the parents will find it most "beneficial" to deprive only the offspring which has the lowest reproductive potential, that is, the child in which the least time and effort has been invested, which is farthest from reproductive maturity, and which may be unable to reproduce as an adult.
These assumptions, based on sociobiological premises, elicit numerous hypotheses, several of which have been examined by Lenington (1981) and Daly and Wilson (1981). Previous research on child abuse provides findings which could be used to support a sociobiological explanation of child abuse. For example, there is empirical support for an inverse relationship between rates of child abuse and family income (Gelles, 1981). Daly and Wilson (1981) and Lenington (1981) suggest that higher rates of abuse among low income families represent an attempt to conserve resources which would better serve the parents or other children. There is also evidence that stepparents are more apt to abuse their children than are biological parents and that biological fathers are more apt to abuse their children than are biological mothers. Several scientists suggest that these relationships are explained on the basis of genetic relatedness; stepparents have no "genetic investment" in stepchildren (Daly and Wilson, 1981;Lenington, 1981), and bi-

134

Umberson

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

ological fathers can not be as certain of parentage (i.e., genetic relatedness) as can biological mothers (Lenington, 1981). These are only two examples of the sort of hypotheses which have been based on the sociobiological explanation of child abuse, but these examples are very representative of the nature of such hypotheses.
IDENTIFYING AN ETIOLOGY OF CHILD
ABUSE
While several aspects of child abuse may be explained by the sociobiological argument explicated by Daly and Wilson and Lenington and reviewed above, they support environmental stress explanations of child abuse as well. Thus, it should be noted that, while there is seeming support for these hypotheses, there is no actual support for the sociobiological reasoning behind the hypotheses. Lenington (1981) acknowledges this problem and suggests additional hypotheses to provide support for the sociobiological explanation, while negating the environmental stress explanation. While Lenington targets several crucial weaknesses in the evidence for a sociobiological explanation of child abuse, she too neglects critical theoretical and methodological considerations.
First, as Lenington points out, most studies do not clearly separate evidence for various etiologies of abuse (e.g., environmental stress versus sociobiological). Most of Lenington's proposed "corrective" hypotheses also yield to this error. For example, she hypothesizes that "a child's risk of being abused by his biological father is related to the father's confidence in paternity." While this hypothesis is based on sociobiological considerations (i.e., genetic relatedness), it could easily be based on envi-

ronmental stress or psychologic dysfunction considerations. Fathers who are psychologically impaired and pathologically suspicious of parentage may be more inclined to inappropriate and violent behavior. Fathers who have realistic reasons to doubt parentage may be experiencing more marital stress which may be conducive to domestic violence.
A second problem results from the nature of the data utilized by these researchers. Most of the empirical support for the sociobiological explanation reported by Daly and Wilson and by Lenington is founded on bivariate secondary analyses of single variables with rates of abuse. However, based on sociobiological tenets, numerous variables should be considered; for example, age and sex of perpetrator and victim, relationship between perpetrator and victim, and family income. In sum, a multivariate analysis is mandatory for a legitimate study on this topic. Bivariate analyses are not only inadequate, but misleading.
Third, neither Daly and Wilson nor Lenington specify what is meant by "child abuse." Most importantly, sexual abuse cases should be differentiated from other forms of physical abuse and neglect. While a separation of sexual from other forms of abuse may not be necessary in environmental stress explanations of child abuse, this separation is imperative in order to establish a credible sociobiological explanation. If the basic components underlying child abuse are related to inclusive fitness, one would expect stepfathers to sexually abuse their adolescent stepdaughters rather than otherwise physically abuse them, as sexual abuse is an action which might enhance the stepfather's evolutionary success.
In sum, there are several problems

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

Sociobiology and Child Abuse

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

with the existing evidence presented in predictor. Based upon these and several

support of the sociobiological explana- other characteristics derived from socio-

tion of child abuse. Most analyses are bi- biological premises, a predictive scale

variate in nature; the need for relevant could be created to determine which

control variables is not addressed; and child in a family is most susceptible to

sexual abuse cases are not differentiated abuse. The following outline covers only

from other forms of abuse. The follow- the most basic components which

ing section incorporates theoretical and should be included in such a scale and

empirical considerations which may does not purport to represent a fully ad-

lead to a more adequate test of the so- equate basis for such a scale.

ciobiological explanation of child abuse.

I. A sample of families must be

A TEST OFTHE SOCIOBIOLOGICAL EXPLANATION

drawn. The families should have more than one child and must be characterized by at least one substantiated case of child

A common finding in research on child abuse is that one child in a family is singled out for abuse regardless of the number of children in the family (Ebbin et al., 1969; Friedrich, 1976; Gil, 1970).

abuse. All children in the family should be of at least average mental and physical health (as health impairments represent environmental stress as well as lack of potential for inclusive fitness). Cases of sexual abuse should be examined separately

The focus of abuse on one child lends from other forms of abuse.

credence to the sociobiological explanation of child abuse as opposed to an environmental explanation. Based on sociobiological principles, the least promising reproductive candidate

II. Scale items should represent three major components: (1) Genetic relatedness of perpetrator to victim; (2) Status of family resources; (3) Reproductive potential of child.
Several variables are suggested as rep-

should be singled out for abuse in times of stress or limited resources, whereas an environmental stress argument implies that all children in a family are at equal risk of abuse.1 Since one child in a

resentative of these components: for genetic relatedness, (1) perpetrator's relationship to child as parent (biological, step, foster, adoptive) or other relative and (2) sex of perpetrator; for status of family resources, (1) total family income

family is typically singled out for abuse, researchers may examine specific families characterized by abuse and, drawing from sociobiology, delineate character-

and (2) per capita family income; for reproductive potential of child, (1) perpetrator's age, (2) age of child, (3) sex of child, and (4) number of siblings.

istics which should be associated with the child most susceptible to abuse in that family. For example, the child's reproductive potential determined by age and sex, etc. as compared with that of his/her siblings, would serve as a partial

All of these variables are included in the American Humane Association's national data base. However, data on abuse or nonabuse of siblings is not included. The AHA format could be used as a guide in developing items for a pre-

dictive scale of child abuse. The most

adequate study on this topic would in-

volve collection of data specific to the

1 The environmental stress explanation might study's focus. These variables alone, of

predict afocusof abuse on one child in the family if that child was the primary source of stress in the family (e.g., when the child is handicapped).

course, preclude a comparison of the predictive power of the sociobiological

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

136

Umberson

Social Biology

explanation ascompared to other expla- psychology currently provide a substan-

nations of abuse.

tial theoretical andempirical base for an

Analysis of this or a similar scale understanding ofchild abuse. This is not

should also include various interactions to say that biological concepts do not

between variables (e.g., sex and age of also underlie the origins of child abuse.

perpetrator and victim). If the scale Humans are complex social creatures

proves to identify the victim of abuse in whose behaviors area response to many

a family, further evidence would be pro- factors. Weshould consider both socio-

vided for a sociobiological explanation logical andbiological factors in attempts

of child abuse. If the scale was found to to explain human behavior. Perhaps a

have predictive value, it could beusedto "sociobiology" can begin to address

identify children at risk of abuse. In ad- questions raised by cross-species analy-

dition, sociobiologists would have some ses, such as why humans frequently

serious evidence for their case on child damage but do not destroy their chil-

abuse. Currently, the sociobiological dren via physical abuse, an action which

explanation hasnovalidity asa basisfor further reduces the potential for inclu-

child abuse treatment or policy. As sive fitness. A true socio-biology is an

Lenington (1981, p. 26) notes:

ambitious undertaking. Oversimplifica-

Conclusions about human behavior are apt to be overtly or covertly translated into political policy. . . . At a minimum

tion of its concepts serve only to diminish itspotential contributions toward an understanding of human behavior.

we should require that thehuman data be consistent with highly specific predictions made from evolutionary theory. The predictions should differ from those made by stress or psychiatric models for child abuse or from those made by an eco-

In conclusion, the current sociobiological explanation of child abuse is based more on rhetorical than methodological manipulation. In order to provide more substantial support for the so-

nomic model for human behavior.

ciobiological explanation ofchild abuse,

What may prove to bemore interesting and beneficial is a truly integrated discipline of sociology and biology. To date, sociobiological hypotheses have been based exclusively on biological or

sociobiologists must conduct moreprecise and complicated tests of their hypotheses. Until then, thesociobiological explanation of child abuse is not wellfounded empirically or theoretically.

evolutionary theory. The sociological

elements are totally lacking. Humans differ from other animals in many ways.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Child abuse among humans is not sim- Special thanks to Michael Hughes and

ply a natural response based on genetic relatedness and inclusive fitness. Child abuse is socially defined and evokes

Polly Phipps for comments, editorial and otherwise.
Thisarticle is based onapaper presented at the Annual Meeting ofthe Southern Soci-

strong societal response. Sociology and ological Society, 1983,Atlanta, Georgia.

REFERENCES

BARASH, DAVID. 1979. The whisperings within: DALY, M., and WILSON. 1981. Abuse and ne-

Evolution and the origin of human nature.

glect of children in an evolutionary perspec-

Harper and Row, New York.

tive. In R. D. Tinkle (ed.), Natural selec-

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

Sociobiology and Child Abuse

137

tion andsocial behavior. Chiron Press, New York. DAWKINS, R. 1976. The selfish gene. Oxford University Press, New York. FWEDRICH, W. 1976. The role of the child in abuse: A review of the literature. Amer. Orthopsychiat. 46(4): 580-90.
GELLES, RICHARD. 1980. Violence in the family: A review of research in the seventies. J. Marr. Fam. 42(4) 873-903.
GIL, D. 1970. Violence against children: Physical child abuse in theU.S. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

LENINGTON, S. 1981. Child abuse: Thelimitsof sociobiology. Ethol. Sociobiol. 2: 17-29.
HRDY, S. B. 1977. Thelangers of Abu: Female and male strategies of reproduction. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
TRIVERS, R. L. 1974. Parent-offspring conflict. Amer. Zool. 14: 249-264.
SCHAIXER, G. B. 1972.The Serengeti lion: A study of predator-prey relations. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
WILSON, E. O. 1980. Sociobiology. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

