Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Changes in sexual desire after voluntary sterilization
Frank D. Bean , Margaret Pruitt Clark , Scott South , Gray Swicegood & Dorie Williams
To cite this article: Frank D. Bean , Margaret Pruitt Clark , Scott South , Gray Swicegood & Dorie Williams (1980) Changes in sexual desire after voluntary sterilization, Social Biology, 27:3, 186-193, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988420 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988420
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Changes in Sexual Desire After Voluntary Sterilization

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

fr
1Frank D. Bean, 2Margaret Pruitt Clark, 1Scott South, 1Gray Swicegood, and 1Dorie Williams
1 Department of Sociology, the University of Texas,Austin, Texas,and 2Department of Sociology,Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine.

ABSTRACT:Sterilized and non-sterilized males and females are compared with respect to the effects of voluntary sterilization on longitudinally reported changes in desire for sexual intercourse in order to ascertain which of several alternative hypotheses provides the best prediction of postoperation perceptions of changes in sexual desire. The results indicate that sterilized women are less likely than sterilized men to report enhanced desire, a result that supports the idea that a gender-specific explanation of sterilization effects is required to account for the sexual consequences of sterilization.

Over the past two decades, voluntary sterilization has become an increasingly popular method of birth control in the United States (Presser and Bumpass, 1972; Pratt, 1975; Westoff and Ryder, 1977; Ford, 1978). In view of frequently expressed fears that surgery for such purposes may be "demasculinizing" or "defeminizing" (Rodgers and Ziegler, 1973, p. 165), and given evidence indicating that some persons think erroneously that sterilization interferes with male sexual capability (Presser and Bumpass, 1972), investigations concerning the effects of contraceptive sterilization on male and female sexuality are of practical as well as theoretical significance. The purpose of the present paper is to test several alternative hypotheses that may be invoked to predict self-reported changes in sexual desire after surgery among married males and females who have undergone sterilization, as well as among individuals whose spouses have been sterilized.

ciated with the effectiveness of the contraceptive method used. In any event, to the extent that reports of frequency reflect actual rates of marital intercourse, one would expect married couples to report similar rates of intercourse, regardless of which spouse had been sterilized. Desire for sexual intercourse, however, may vary independently of the frequency of sexual relations, since frequency may be more a reflection of the power dynamics of a couple (which partner has more control over frequency of intercourse) than of individual responses to sterilization. A more sensitive measure for assessing the effects of sterilization on individuals' sexual response would appear to be whether or not their desire for sexual intercourse has changed following surgery. The hypotheses to be considered, therefore, involve predictions of self-reported changes in sexual desire following contraceptive sterilization.

Recent research into the sexual effects of sterilization (Trussell and Westoff,

ALTERNATE HYPOTHESES

1980) suggests that frequency of inter- Prior research on the sequelae of steri-

course among married couples may not in- lization has focused either upon only one crease following surgery, although in type of sterilization procedure or upon general coital frequency is positively asso- only one spouse (usually the one being

186

Vol. 27, No.3

Sexual Desire and Sterilization

187

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

sterilized). To our knowledge, no previous study has simultaneously examined both types of surgery and both sterilized and nonsterilized spouses. Since sterilization may have an effect upon either spouse (or both), irrespective of which spouse is sterilized, it is important not only to examine the effects of obtaining either a male or a female procedure, but also the effects on both the sterilized and the nonsterilized spouse.
Compensatory Hypothesis.--Our first hypothesis concerning postsurgical effects may be derived from the work of Rodgers and Ziegler and their associates (1968, 1969, 1973) on the socialpsychological effects of vasectomy. In these studies, vasectomized men exhibited tendencies toward personal and sexual maladjustment (in comparison with controls) while simultaneously expressing a high degree of satisfaction with the procedure. The men were described as responding to the surgery as though it were demasculinizing, as evidenced by an overemphasis on "masculine" behavior (however defined) and a decrease inflexiblebehavior. The data were interpreted as suggesting that a compensatory mechanism may operate among vasectomized males whereby surface satisfaction is generated in response to having undergone an anxiety-provoking experience. This suggests that to the extent that males are anxious about how vasectomy may affect their sexual capabilities, they may attempt to compensate by emphasizing positively valued sexual behaviors presumably threatened by the surgery (Williams et al., 1980). Given this sort of process, vasectomized males might be expected to report greater poststerilization increases in desire for sexual intercourse than nonsterilized males (i.e., those whose wives obtained a sterilization).
A similar prediction might apply in the case of females undergoing sterilization.

Research reporting that some women feel defeminized and devalued after sterilization (e.g., Rodgers and Ziegler, 1973; Ekblad, 1961; Whitehouse, 1971) would seem to indicate that the experience has just as much anxiety-provoking potential for women as for men. In this event, the compensatory hypothesis provides a basis for expecting sterilized women to be just as likely as sterilized men to report greater postsurgical increases in desire for sexual intercourse than nonsterilized persons.
Fear of Pregnancy Hypothesis.-- Another perspective on the sexual effects of sterilization would emphasize that, above all else, sterilization is elected for contraceptive purposes--that is, people undergo sterilization primarily because they do not wish to have additional children (cf. Wiest and Janke, 1974, pp. 446-447). A major consequence of the decision for sterilization may be the removal of anxiety about unwanted pregnancy. With this anxiety-provoking aspect of sexual relations removed, couples who have undergone sterilization might be expected to report an increase in desire for sexual intercourse. Evidence in-support of this idea is found in a study of vasectomized males (Kohli and Sobrero, 1973) who attributed their increased desire for sexual relations following surgery to freedom from worry about pregnancy. This increase in sexual desire would be expected to occur in approximately the same magnitude among both males and females as well as among sterilized and nonsterilized spouses.
Gender-specific Hypotheses.--It is also possible that the sexual consequences of sterilization involve patterns of effects that are different for men and women. Two such patterns in particular suggest themselves. One results from conditions that might limit the applicability of the compensatory hypothesis to males, and the other derives from factors that might

188

Bean et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

neutralize for sterilized women the salu-

TABLE 1

tary effects anticipated by the fear of preg- ALTERNATE HYPOTHESES FOR PREDICTION OF

nancy hypothesis. To take the first possi-

EFFECTS OF STERILIZATION ON REPORTED

bility, for example, if males, whether from

SEXUAL DESIRE

biological propensity or through socializa-

tion, tend to be more preoccupied with sexuality and with sexual competence

PREDICTED RELATIVE CHANGE*

than females, then sterilization might rep-

HYPOTHESIS

SM SMS SF SFS

resent a greater threat to continued sexual 1. Fear of pregnancy adequacy among sterilized males than 2. Compensatory

++++ +0+0

among sterilized females. In this event, one might expect the prediction of the

3. Gender-specific a. Male-specific compensatory

+000

compensatory hypothesis to hold for b. Female physical trauma.. + + 0 +

males but not for females. In the case of

the second possibility, among women

·SM = Sterilized males; SMS = Spouses of sterilized males; SF = Sterilized females; SFS = Spouses of sterilized females.

(particularly those undergoing vaginal hy-

sterectomies for contraceptive purposes)

sterilization may be a more traumatic sur- four military hospitals in either San Anto-

gical experience that operates to suppress nio, Texas (Brooke Army Hospital) or

sexual desire long after physical discom- Washington, D.C. (Walter Reed Army,

fort has subsided. In this event, one might Malcom Grow Air Force, and Bethesda

expect the prediction of the hypothesis Naval hospitals). The data were collected

based on the idea of removal of fear of in military hospitals and thus the research

pregnancy to be less likely to apply to suffers the potential deficiency that the

sterilized females.

findings may be inapplicable to the broad-

The alternative hypotheses may be er population of persons obtaining sterili-

summarized as follows: The fear of preg- zation. However, longitudinal data of the

nancy hypothesis predicts an increase in type collected for this study are difficult to

self-reported desire for sexual relations obtain, and the selection of military hospi-

among both sterilized and nonsterilized tals as the site for the research undoubt-

males and females (that is, it predicts a edly improved the rate of participation in

uniform increase across groups). The the study. Free medical care for military

compensatory hypothesis predicts an in- personnel offers the additional advantage

crease in sexual desire only among those that respondents were free to select a

sterilized. The gender-specific hypotheses sterilization procedure without regard to

predict different effects of sterilization de- the cost of surgery. This removes any po-

pending upon gender. These patterns are represented in Table 1. In the following

tentially confounding influence from this factor.

analysis, we test for each of these possibili- Couples entering the Urology and Ob-

ties. stetrics/Gynecology clinics at the hospitals

in order to obtain a sterilization procedure

MATERIALS AND METHODS

were asked if they would be willing to complete a questionnaire while waiting to

The data for this research are drawn consult with a physician about surgical

from a sample of men and women and sterilization. Almost all of the couples

their spouses who obtained either a male agreed to participate. Husbands and wives

or female sterilization procedure at one of independently filled out the question-

Vol. 27, No. 3

Sexual Desire and Sterilization

189

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

naire, and altogether data were obtained for 855 individuals. Of this group, 122 were members of couples that either never obtained a sterilization procedure or delayed their decision to obtain sterilization beyond the time-frame of the present study. These persons are thus excluded from the present analysis. Another twenty are also deleted, seven women (and their husbands) who obtained postpartum sterilizations and three couples wherein both spouses obtained procedures. This left altogether 713 individual husbands and wives who initially completed a questionnaire prior to obtaining sterilization.
One of the questions the respondents were asked was whether or not they would be willing to complete a follow-up questionnaire six months after surgery. Approximately 65 per cent agreed to do so and six months after the sterilization procedure was obtained, these individuals were sent a second questionnaire. In addition to those respondents who did not agree to respond to a follow-up, other respondents from the first wave could not be reached because they did not provide correct addresses. Altogether, the six-month follow-up questionnaire was successfully mailed to 427 respondents. Of these, 267 returned completed questionnaires, thus yielding a response rate among those who agreed to participate and could be reached of 62.5 per cent. It is this group of respondents, less those with missing data on the analysis variables, that constitutes the sample (N=224) for the present report.
These respondents are compared with respondents completing the initial questionnaire to see if they are different in any important respect. In general, few differences emerge. The proportion of males and females responding to the follow-up is about the same as the proportion of males and females in the original sample (54.5 per cent and 45.5 per cent respectively versus 49.8 per cent and 50.2 per cent;

X2 = 1.97, p = n.s). Vasectomized males are more prevalent in the follow-up than in the original sample, and women with a female procedure slightly less so (75.6 per cent of the males versus 67.6 per cent and 24.4 per cent of females versus 32.4 per cent; X2 = 11.4; p<0.01). Also, the age distribution of the two samples is nearly identical (X age = 32.9 for original sample, X age = 32.3 for the follow-up sample; t = 1.18, p = n.s.). The followup sample shows a slightly higher educational_distribution than the original sample (Xed = 14.3 versus Xed = 13.9; t = 1.94;p<0.10). This is not surprising since more highly educated persons are more likely to take the time to respond to this type of follow-up inquiry.
In thé follow-up questionnaire, respondents were asked whether the desire for sexual intercourse had increased, remained the same, or decreased since sterilization. Answers to this question comprise the chief dependent variable of interest in the analysis. Responses to the question asking whether the desire for sexual intercourse had changed are dichotomized into two categories--"increased" versus "remained the same." Since only two respondents indicated that their desire for sexual intercourse had diminished, these are categorized with those answering "remained the same."
Our primary independent variable is sterilization status. This is treated as a dummy variable and scored " 1 " if s/he received the sterilization procedure and "0" otherwise. We also introduce two control variables into the analyses, age and education, in order to adjust for any differences that might obtain from these factors (Presser and Bumpass, 1972). The former was measured in years and the latter in years of school completed.
In order to investigate the hypotheses outlined above, multiple regression analysis is employed with the expression

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

190

Bean et al.

Social Biology

of increased desire for sexual intercourse regressed on the dummy variable for sterilization status and the two control variables, age and education, separately for males and females. The estimation of separate regression equations for males and females provides a more satisfactory basis for assessing the two alternative patterns predicted by the gender-specific hypothesis than would a test for interaction based on a single equation since it allows a more straightforward examination of whether sterilized and nonsterilized persons report significantly different increases in desire separately by gender. Since we report separate equations by gender, we present the unstandardized coefficients (Blalock, 1967).
RESULTS
The correlations among the variables, together with their means and standard deviations, are presented in Table 2. The first result of interest is the proportion of males and females reporting an increase in desire. These are indicated simply by the mean values on this variable reported in

the table. Approximately the same proportion of both males and females report an increase in sexual desire following voluntary sterilization (0.30 and 0.25 respectively). This result is thus consistent with the findings of other investigators (Kohli and Sobrero, 1973) and suggests that removal of fear of pregnancy may have a salutary effect on sexual desire. It does not tell us, however, whether the tendency to report increases in desire occurs uniformly by gender and sterilization status.
For these results, we look at the regression analyses presented in Table 3. Examining first the effects of the control variables, we find that age and education both reveal significant coefficients. In the case of males, the higher the education the less likely the respondent is to report an increase in desire for sexual intercourse; in the case of females, the older the respondent, the less the likelihood of a reported increase. These patterns of relationships are not surprising and indicate the utility of controlling these variables in the analysis.
Turning to sterilization status, we see in Column 1 that sterilized females are

TABLE2
INTERCORRELATIONS, MEANS, AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR VARIABLES USED IN REGRESSION ANALYSES

Sex of Respondent and Variables
Females (A/= 102) 1. Education 2. Age 3. Sterilization status 4. Reported increase in desire for intercourse
Males (N= 122) 1. Education 2. Age 3. Sterilization status 4. Reported increase in desire for intercourse

0.206

-0.052 -0.072 -0.050 -0.233
. . . -0.191
... ...

13.26 30.87 0.30
0.25

0.152

0.101 -0.252 -0.049 -0.092
. . . 0.073
... ...

15.24 33.47 0.79
0.30

2.15 5.98 0.46
0.44
2.62 6.47 0.41
0.46

Vol. 27, No. 3

Sexual Desire and Sterilization

191

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
REGRESSIONS OF SELF-REPORTED POSTOPERATIVE CHANGE IN SEXUAL DESIRE ON CONTROL VARIABLES AND STERILIZATION STATUS, MALES AND FEMALES SEPARATELY
(Unstandardized Coefficients)

PREDICTOR VARIABLES
Control variables Education Age
Independent variables Sterilization status
Constant /?2 (AO F
·p<0.01 tf><0.05.

DESIRE CHANCE
12 (Females) (Males)

-0.007 -0.044* -0.017t -0.003

-0.1941
0.941
0.097 (102) 3.497t

0.108
1.002
0.076 (122) 3.216t

significantly less likely than nonsterilized females to report an increase in sexual desire. The insignificant coefficient for the dummy variable for sterilization in Column 2 indicates that sterilized males are no more likely than nonsterilized males to report an increase. In the case of females, it should be remembered that this doesnot mean that they perceived a decrease in desire, but rather that they were less likely than nonsterilized females to perceive an increase.
Because the sterilized female group includes women who had received hysterectomies as well as women who had received tubal ligations, it is of interest to consider that one or the other of these groups might tend to account for this pattern among the sterilized women. To check this possibility, the analysis was repeated twice, first excluding one type of female sterilization and then the other. Both analyses yielded similar results. This indicates that the pattern of a lesser likelihood of reporting a perceived increase in sexual desire holds

for women receiving either type of procedure.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The major finding to emerge from this investigation is that the effect of sterilization on desire for sexual intercourse varies depending on whether it is the male or the female who is sterilized. Among females, having been sterilized is negatively related to the likelihood that an increase in sexual desire will be reported; among males, however, no significant differences between sterilized males and males whose wives have undergone sterilization emerge in the tendency to report an increase.
While our findings are not inconsistent with the hypothesis that removal of fear of pregnancy through sterilization results in an increase in desire among spouses, this increase is not uniform, thus suggesting that other factors are also at work. That the increase in desire does not vary by sterilization status irrespective of gender, but rather by sterilization status contingent on gender, suggests little support for the compensatory hypothesis, at least insofar as this hypothesis might provide a basis for explaining outcomes for both sterilized males and females.
The version of the gender-specific hypothesis predicting that the effect of sterilization is less likely to make for an increase in sexual desire among females, however, is supported by the results. That is, sterilized females are found to be less likely than females whose husbands are sterilized to report an increase in desire, but having been sterilized does not predict a significantly greater increase among males. This pattern is consistent with the idea that surgical sterilization may involve a greater degree of physical trauma for some women than for men.
Thefindingsthat both women undergo-

192

Bean et al.

Social Biology

ing laparoscopic tubal ligations and those obtaining hysterectomies were less likely to report an increase in sexual desire, however, makes this interpretation suspect. While it appears plausible to assume that vaginal hysterectomy might have this effect, it isless clear why laparoscopic tubal ligation, which is often equated with vasectomy in degree of physical trauma, would also result in alesser increase in expressed desire.
A more compelling explanation for this findingmay be provided by research into the quality of marital interaction among spouses choosing male or female sterilization procedures. Couples reporting lower levels of husband-wife communication have been found to besignificantly more likely to select a female sterilization procedure over vasectomy (Bean etal., 1981). Thisfindingis consistent with other research reporting that husbands in mar-

riages characterized by low communication and sex-segregated activities tend to relegate reproductive decisions to wives (Hill et al., 1959; Rainwater, 1965; Hollerback, 1980). Inthe absence of effective marital communication and shared decision-making, husbands are less likely to be involved in family planning, thus leaving their wives to undergo sterilization.The lesser reported increase in sexual desire reported by sterilized women may bea reflection of their relative lack of choice in selection of the procedure and of the quality of the marital relationship asit affects the sexual life ofthe couple.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research wassupported by Grant HD10678 from the Center for Population Research, National Institute ofChild Health and Human Development.
The authors are listed alphabetically.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BEAN, F., M. CLARK, G. SWICEGOOD, and D. Wil-

National Survey ofFamily Growth, 1973. Pa-

LiAMS. 1981. Marital communication and se- per presented at the Annual Meetings of the

lection ofa male or female sterilization proce-

Population Association of America.

dure. Ms.

PRESSER, H., ANDL. BUMPASS. 1972. Demo-

BLALOCK, H. 1967. Causal inferences, closed

graphic and social aspects of contraceptive

populations, and measures of association, p.

sterilization in the United States: 1965-1970,

139-151. In H. M. Blalock (ed.), Causal

p. 505-568. In C. F. Westoff and R. Parke

models in the social sciences. Aldine,Chi-

(eds.), Demographic and social aspects of

cago.

population growth and theAmerican future,

EKBLAD, M. 1961. The prognosis after steriliza-

research papers, Vol. 1. Government Printing

tion on social-psychiatric grounds, a follow-up

Office, Washington, D.C.

study of 225 women. Acta Psychiatric Scan- RODGERS, D., and F. ZIEGLER. 1968. Changes in

dinavica. Suppl. 161,Vol. 37.

sexual behavior consequent to use of non-

FORD, K. 1978. Contraceptive utilization in the coital procedures of contraception. Psycho-

United States: 1973 and 1976. Advance data

som. Med. 30:495-505.

from vital and health statistics, No. 36. Public

. 1973. Psychological reactions to surgical

Health service, Rockville, Maryland.

contraception, p. 306-326. In J. Fawcett

HILL, R., J. STYCOS, and K. BACK. 1959. The fam-

(ed.), Psychological perspectives on popula-

ily and population control. Univ. of North

tion. Basic Books, New York.

Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

RAINWATER, L. 1965. Family design: Marital sex-

HOLLERBACK, P. 1980. Power in families, com-

uality, family size, and contraception. Aldine,

munication and fertility decision-making.

Chicago.

Center for Policy Studies, Working Papers, TRUSSELL, J., and C. WESTOFF. 1980. Contracep-

No. 53. The Population Council, New York.

tive practice andtrends in coital frequency.

KOHLI, K., and A. SOBRERO. 1973. Vasectomy: A

Fam. Plan. Persp. 12:246-249.

study of psychosexual and general reactions. WESTOFF, C., and N. RYDER. 1977. The contra-

Soc. Biol. 20:298-302.

ceptive revolution. Princeton Univ. Press,

PRATT, W. 1975. Preliminary findings from the

Princeton.

Vol. 27,No.3

Sexual Desire and Sterilization

193

WHITEHOUSE, D. B.1971. Letter. Brit. Med.J.2 (June): 707.
WIEST, W., and L. JANKE. 1974. A methodologi-
cal critique of research on psychological effects of vasectomy. Psychosom. Med. 36 (Sept.-Oct.): 438-449.
WILLIAMS, D., G. SWICEGOOD, M. CLARK, and F.

BEAN. 1980. Masculinity-femininity and the desire forsexual intercourse after vasectomy: A longitudinal study. Soc.Psychol. Quart. 43 (Sept.)
ZIEGLER, F., D. RODGERS and R. PRENTISS. 1969.
Psychosocial response to vasectomy. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 21:46-54.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

