Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Observations on "a reexamination of the heritability of fertility in the British peerage," by Williams and Williams
Russell M. Reid
To cite this article: Russell M. Reid (1975) Observations on "a reexamination of the heritability of fertility in the British peerage," by Williams and Williams, Social Biology, 22:3, 285-287, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988179 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988179
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Observations on "A Re-examination of the Heritability of Fertility in the British Peerage," by Williams and Williams
Russell M. Reid
Department of Anthropology University of Texas Austin, Texas

Williams and Williams (1974) have provided us with a very useful re-examination of the question of heritability of fertility. Their analysis points to secular trends in fertility as a major factor contributing to familial correlations in sibship size. Partialing out these secular effects leaves the familial correlations in the range around zero, suggesting little heritable variance. This result raises doubts about the validity and reliability of earlier attempts to assess the heritability of Darwinian fitness. With this fact in mind, the authors conclude, "Since a measurement of selection is differential fertility, it may be futile to attempt a measure of the heritability of the measure of Darwinian fitness" (p. 230).
This last point, which links the measure of selection to the problem at hand, requires further amplification. I t may easily be shown that the genetic equilibrium which results from natural selection is also a state in which the heritability of fitness is zero. Following Crow and Kimura (1970, p. 270) we see that for one locus with two alleles as in Figure 1, we can predict that at genetic equilibrium

and q=и

(W2

If we now treat the fitness values as phenotypic values, we may describe their additive genetic (heritable) component by the commonly used formula:
VA=2pqaz.
Li (19SS, p. 31) provides us with a particularly convenient way of representing a as follows:

where, for our example, ^ = {W2 -W3)
and h2 = -(W2-Wt
Therefore, at equilibrium,

and

(W2-Wz)

285

-h2 hi--- h2

286

Communications

Social Biology

h2=Wi-W2 oo

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

oo

oo
UJ

и h1=w2-w3

GENOTYPES

W3 " ии
aa

L LJ
tAa

FREQUENCY BEF. q 2 SELECTION

2pq

FREQUENCY AFT. q2w3 SELECTION

2pqw2

FIG. 1.--Fitness values in one locus with two alleles.

At genetic equilibrium,

after partialing out secular and social effects.

a= и

hi -- h2

Therefore, at genetic equilibrium, theheritable component of variance in fitness is zero. This is not a new observation; indeed, it is implied by Fisher's fundamental theorem of natural selection, "the rate of increase in fitness of any organism at any time is equal to its genetic variance in fitness at that time" (Fisher, 1930,p. 37). This result does not necessarily imply that selection results in fixation, since an examination of heterozygous advantage will show that even there the heritability of fitness goes to zero, or that all genetic components of fitness have been eliminated at equilibrium, because dominant and epistatic components will persist. Such dominance components will produce correlation between numbers of births to siblings even

What then are we left with? 1. A non-zero heritability of fitness implies transient polymorphisms due to selection. 2. A zero heritability implies the absence of such transient polymorphisms, but not necessarily the absence of selection.
Thus, the futility of studying selection by examining the heritability of fitness extends beyond the question of the validity and reh'ability of estimates of heritability to theproblem of alternative interpretations of zero heritabilities. Thestudy of heritability of fitness might be a much more productive tool for demonstrating the action of selection if applied to populations that are not expected to be in equilibrium. Hybrid populations of recent origin might be prime candidates.

Vol. 22, No. 3

Communications

287

REFERENCES

CROW, J. F., and M. KIMURA. 1970. An intro-
duction to population genetics theory. Harper and Row, New York.
FISHER, R. A. 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection. 19S8 ed. Dover, New York.

Lr, C. C. 1955. Population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
WILLIAMS, L. A., and B. J. WILLIAMS. 1974. A
re-examination of the heritability of fertility in British peerage. Soc. Biol. 21:225-231.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Reply to Reid's Observations on "A Re-examination of the Heritability of Fertility in the British Peerage"
B. J. Williams and L. A. Williams
Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles, California; and World Fertility Survey, International Statistical Institute, London,England

We are in agreement with most of the points made by Reid. We differ in our conclusions as to the utility of treating fitness measures as phenotypes in demonstrating the action of selection.
The major point of our earlier article (Williams and Williams, 1974) was to demonstrate that Fisher's (1930) estimate of the heritability of fertility was in error. The correlations he used in making his estimates were due largely or perhaps totally to secular changes in fertility. Our minor point was that, on a priori grounds, we do not expect the heritability of fertility to differ much from zero. It is this second point which Reid quotes and explores further.
The heritability estimates used by Fisher were based on correlations between lineal descent categories and therefore dealt only with the additive component of variance in fertility. Selection on an additive component is directional and will act to keep this component low. In the usual situation, we would expect the additive component of fitness to be low enough that, as a practical matter, it could not be shown to dif-

fer from zero. This was the reason Fisher's estimate needed reinvestigation.
Reid's demonstration is in accord with the view that the additive variance should remain low. Reid goes further and suggests that a dominance component in fitness may be revealed by studies of the heritability of fitness (if heritability is now defined in the broad sense). We agree; but we point out that such a dominance component has not been successfully demonstrated in human populations. Studies reporting heterosis effects in fertility are few and suffer from the problem of uncontrolled social variables to an even greater extent than is the case with secular change in fertility.
Franz Boas studied the fertility of the offspring of Indian-white marriages and compared it to that of Indian and white controls (Boas, 1894). He found the "hybrid" mothers to have more children than Indian mothers living in the same villages (a mean of 7.9 compared to S.9). Problems with this study include the fact that only one parental control (Indian) was present. Also, his environmental control was simply

