Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The correspondence of data gathered from husband and wife: Implications for family planning studies
Josefina Jayme Card
To cite this article: Josefina Jayme Card (1978) The correspondence of data gathered from husband and wife: Implications for family planning studies, Social Biology, 25:3, 196-204, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988338 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988338
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

The Correspondence of Data Gathered from Husband and Wife: Implications for Family Planning Studies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Josefina Jayme Card

American Institutes for Research Palo Alto, California

ABSTRACT: Demographic information, nondemographic information, and attitudinal data were gathered from Filipino and Caucasian married couples in an effort to understand cross-cultural differences in the antecedents of contraceptive behavior. While the correspondence of demographic data gathered from husband vs. wife was high for both ethnic groups studied, the correspondence of nondemographic information and of attitudinal data was moderate at best, especially for Filipinos. Consideration of husband data accounted for discrepancies between wife's motivation for fertility control and couple contraceptive behavior and, for Filipinos, enhanced the predictability of contraceptive behavior over that achievable by looking at wife data alone. These findings point to the importance of collecting and analyzing data from husbands if one is to understand fertility-related behavior, particularly in those cultures where couple communication is low and marital relationships are characterized by husband dominance.

Respondents in fertility-related surveys have generally been women. One can speculate on several causes for this sex bias: (1) Since it is women who bear and raise children, the ultimate responsibility for fertility control is traditionally thought of as lying on their shoulders. (2) Women are more readily available during the day than men to serve as study subjects because fewer of them work outside the home. (3) Women cooperate more freely with interviewers, especially on sensitive topics such as contraception and family planning.
The almost complete dependence of surveys on data gathered from a single sex should be examined for potential consequences. In the first place, conception is of necessity the product of the actions of two individuals. Since the partners may not equally desire or wish to prevent a conception, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that knowledge of the husband's motivation for fertility control would enhance the predictability of a couple's contraceptive

behavior. In the second place, there are ample data in the literature to demonstrate the importance of couple communication and interaction in effective family planning (Rainwater, 1960; Hill et al., 19S9; Michel, 1972).
The present paper will analyze data gathered from stratified samples of married Filipino migrants and Caucasian controls living in the San Francisco Bay Area (1) to determine the extent to which information gathered from husband and wife agree; (2) to examine whether and to what extent data gathered from the husband can enhance the predictability of the couple's contraceptive behavior; and (3) to investigate whether cross-cultural differences exist in the extent to which husband and wife data correspond.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLE
One hundred Filipino and fifty Caucasian married couples between the ages of

196

Vol. 25, No. 3

Correspondence of Data

197

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

20 and 40 residing in the San Francisco Bay Area formed the study sample. All couples were racially homogeneous, i.e., husband and wife were either both Filipino or both Caucasian. The Filipino sample was stratified by number of years lived in the United States (less than four years; four years or more). Both the Filipino and Caucasian samples were then further stratified by age of wife (20-30, 31^0) and by socioeconomic status (low, high1) in an effort to assure that a variety of age and socioeconomic groups were represented in the study.
The Filipinos were recruited by random selection from immigrant entry listings at the Philippine consulate for 1965-76. The Caucasians were recruited by random selection from telephone street directories of the Filipinos' neighborhoods. These methods were augmented by personal referral methods for about one-fourth of the cases for cells in the sampling design difficult to fill.
Husbands and wives were interviewed separately but simultaneously by a pair of interviewers matched for race and sex with respondents. All interviews were conducted in the language of respondents' choice. For the vast majority of cases (95 per cent of Filipinos and 100 per cent of Caucasians), the choice was English; a small number of interviews were conducted in Tagalog, the Philippine national language.
Because stratification procedures were used in designing the sample and because nonrandom (personal referral) methods were used to recruit a small proportion of the cases interviewed, findings from the
1 Socioeconomic status was computed as a linear combination of husband's education and occupation (cf. Hollingshead and Redlich, 1958). For purposes of stratification, a couple was considered to be of high socioeconomic status if the husband either (1) had some post-college education or (2) worked as an executive, proprietor, manager, administrator, or professional. All other couples were considered to be of low socioeconomic status.

study dealing with means and percentages should not be generalized to the entire population of Caucasians or Filipino migrants in the San Francisco area. However, findings dealing with relationships among the variables studied (as is the case with most results presented in this paper) are on much firmer ground.
VARIABLES
A model of fertility-related decision making was developed from a review of the literature on determinants of individual fertility and contraceptive use. The model (Card and Wood, 1977) postulated that fertility is a function of a gamut of individual, dyadic, and environmental factors, to wit: the international and national political and socioeconomic context; individual demographic background factors; individual personality traits and general value orientation; individual life events and experiences; husband-wife communication patterns; cultural norms regarding family size; individual values of children; the availability of family planning clinics, supplies, and information; individual knowledge and attitudes about birth control; individual motivation for fertility control; and contraceptive behavior.
In constructing the interview questionnaire, we spelled out salient variables typifying each factor in the model and then used each one as one or more interview items. Table 1 lists the attitudinal scale variables created by combining interview items and provides their coefficient alpha reliability index. For purposes of this paper, the contents of the interview were categorized into three variable types--demographic information (e.g., husband's job, number of children); nondemographic information (e.g., extent of communication between husband and wife on specific topics, composition of their friends); and attitudinal information

198

Card

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
RELIABILITY OF ATTITUDINAL SCALE VARIABLES

Scale Variable
Planfulness* Planfulness: Family planning subscale People orientation Preference for American culture! Modernity^ Family size concept Belief in egalitarianism of sex roles Role of children Attitudes toward children§ Attitudes toward abortion Attitudes toward population control|| Motivation for fertility control
* From Miller, unpublished, t From Jayme, 1971. t From Smith and Inkeles, 1966. 8 From Arnold et al., 197S. II From Gough, 1974.

Interpretation of High Score on Variable
High High High High High Large Strong Active Favorable Favorable Favorable Strong

No. of Items
in Scale
8 4 4 7 6 2 8 7 14 6 7 8

Coefficient Alpha
Reliability
0.61 0.74 0.47 0.S9
O.SS
0.S4 0.70
0.S1
0.82 0.84 0.69 0.91

(e.g., attitudes toward abortion, attitudes toward children). The degree of overlap between husband's and wife's responses to each of these variable types was then compared and contrasted. It was hypothesized that the degree of overlap would be greatest for the factual demographic information variables and lowest for the subjective attitudinal variables. Of special interest was the degree of overlap between husband's and wife's reportings of nondemographic information about their life together. To the extent that this overlap resembled that of the demographic information, such data could reasonably be gathered from one spouse alone. To the extent that this overlap resembled that of the subjective attitudinal variables, it would seem advisable to gather such data from both spouses.
RESULTS
CORRESPONDENCE OF DATA GATHERED FROM HUSBAND AND WIFE
Table 2 presents the correlations between husband and wife scores separately for Filipino and Caucasian couples for 4 demographic information variables, 25

nondemographic information variables, and 21 attitudinal variables. As expected, the correlation for the demographic information variables was extremely high for both groups (average correlation, 0.95 for the 100 Filipino couples and 0.98 for the 50 Caucasian couples), and the average correlation for the attitudinal variables was much lower (0.2S for Filipinos; 0.4S for Caucasians). The degree of overlap between husband's and wife's responses to nondemographic information items resembled that obtained for the subjective attitudinal variables to a much greater extent than it did that obtained for the demographic variables (0.2S for Filipinos; 0.38 for Caucasians),
Caucasian couples had higher correspondence correlations than Filipino couples on 38 of the 46 (82.6 per cent)
variables for which data from both ethnic groups were available. There are several possible explanations for this finding. (1) Filipinos may have had more difficulty than Caucasians in understanding the interview questions because of their poorer mastery of English, even though precautions were taken to attenuate the influence of language on the study's findings. Each respondent chose the lan-

Vol. 25, No. 3

Correspondence of Data

199

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
RELATIONSHIP B E T W E E N DATA GATHERED FROM HUSBAND VS. W I F E , BY T Y P E OF DATA AND E T H N I C BACKGROUND OF COUPLE

Name of Variable

r, Fil. Husbands & Wives (.V = 100 couples)

r, Cauc. Husbands & Wives (.V = 50 couples)

Name of Variable

r, Fil. Husbands & Wives (.V = 100 couples)

r, Cauc. Husbands & Wives (N = SO couples)

Demographic information variables Husband's job Wife's job No. of years married No. of children from present marriage
Average: All demographic information variables....

0.90 0.94 0.99
0.96
0.95

Nondemographic information variables

Able to save money

monthly?

0.17

Frequency of birth

control usage

0.70

Job or health changes

in past year?

0.25

Problems with children

in past year?

0.32

Per cent social time

spent with Americans

0.31

Per cent social time

spent with Filipinos

0.26

Per cent close friends

who are Filipinos

0.19

Which spouse responsible

for:

Childcare

0.36

Child discipline

0.25

Birth control decisions

0.16

Cleaning home

0.23

Home repairs

0.27

Cooking

0.48

Earning a living

0.44

Financial management . . . . 0.42

To what extent do husband

and wife talk about:

Children

-0.02

Politics .

0.24

Work

0.37

Relatives

-0.08

Life goals

0.15

Money

0.18

Birth control

0.08

No. of children

0.27

Sex 0.13

0.97 0.94 1.00
0.99
0.98
0.42
0.75
0.28
0.36
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.30 0.41 0.12 0.54 0.21 0.76 0.65 0.60
0.70 0.36 0.15 -0.12 0.29 0.46 0.31 0.24 0.26

Nondemographic information variables

--Continued

Making sex interesting . . . . 0.07

Average: All nondemo-

graphic information

variables

0.25

Attitudinal variables
Educational aspirations for sons
Educational aspirations for daughters
Happiness self-rating Ideal family size Number preference for
children Sex preference for
children
Want another child? No. of additional
children wanted Satisfaction with birth
control method used Planfulness* Planfulness: family
planning subscale* People orientation* Preference for American
over Filipino culture* . . . . Modernity*
Family size concepts* Belief in egalitarianism
of sex roles* Role of children* Attitudes toward
children* Attitudes toward
abortion* Attitudes toward population
control* Motivation for fertility
control*
Average: All attitudinal variables

0.05
0.14 0.00 0.08
0.15
0.18 0.71
0.57
0.44 0.29
0.37 0.03
0.34 0.29 0.05
0.10 0.14
0.29
0.24
0.04
0.61
0.24

0.35
0.39
0.40 0.30 0.25 0.36 0.53
0.28 0.84
0.75
0.57 0.32
0.44 0.06 N/A 0.41 0.28
0.68 -0.08
0.44
0.81
0.63
0.80
0.45

* These variables were measured by combining responses to several interview items into a single scale score. Psychometric properties of the scales are given in Table 1.

guage in which the interview was conducted and also was told that individual items could be rephrased in the native dialect if not completely understood. Despite these precautions, this explanation remains a possible one. (2) Filipino couples may not communicate with each other to

the extent that Caucasian couples do. This explanation is congruent with findings from other studies (see Rosario's 1970 review of the literature) which show that couples from developing countries do not communicate as much as couples from developed countries. (3) Filipino husbands

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

200

Card

Social Biology

and wives may have lower correspondence correlations because they come from more diverse backgrounds than do Caucasians. The correlation between parents' socioeconomic status for husband and wife was 0.23 for Filipinos and 0.37 for Caucasians. The correlation between husband's and wife's educational attainment was 0.27 for Filipinos and 0.77 for Caucasians. Thus, Filipino husbands and wives are demographically more different from one another than are Caucasians. Their discrepant backgrounds could lead to differences in their perceptions of various aspects of their joint lives.
These explanations are not mutually exclusive. All may contribute in varying degrees to the finding that the correspondence between data gathered from Filipino husbands and wives is lower than the correspondence of data gathered from Caucasian husbands and wives. Whatever the appropriate explanation(s), the finding has important methodological implications for fertility studies in developing countries. It is important in these settings to gather any nondemographic data, whether informational or attitudinal, from both spouses, whenever feasible. This section has shown that such data may not always correspond. The next sections will show that husband data enhance the predictability of couple contraceptive use over the predictability possible with wife data alone. Indeed, in the case of Filipinos, husband data alone are a better

predictor of such behavior than are wife data alone.
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN WIFE'S MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL AND COUPLE'S
CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR
Table 3 presents the relationship between the wife's motivation for fertility control and the "strength" of the couple's contraceptive behavior, separately for Filipino and Caucasian women in the sample. Motivation for fertility control was conceptualized as the perception that the disadvantages of having a child at a particular time outweigh the advantages, i.e., the strength of a couple's resolve not to have a child at a particular time. It was measured by eight items. Six items asked for respondents' perceptions of the advantages, disadvantages, and degree to which a child was wanted at present and within the next five years. The remaining two items asked respondents if they ever wanted another child and, if so, how many more children they wanted. Female respondents were divided into three motivation subgroups depending on whether their motivation scale scores were lower than, within, or greater than one-half standard deviation from the female respondent mean. (If the variable were normally distributed, this classification scheme would put approximately onethird of respondents in each subgroup.)
Strength of contraceptive behavior was operationally defined as a combination of

TABLE 3
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL AND STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR FOR FILIPINO VS. CAUCASIAN WIVES

MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY
CONTROL
Low Medium High

FILIPINO WIVES (.V = lOO) STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

Low Medium High

24 14 7 16 77

g 9 8

CAUCASIAN WIVES (.V = SO) STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

Low Medium High

73 23

4 8

2 2 19

Vol. 25, No. 3

Correspondence of Data

201

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

husband's and wife's responses to two behavior medium or high; motivation me-

interview items: (1) Do you and your dium but behavior high); 21 per cent had

husband/wife use birth control at present? behavior scores lower than their motiva-

(four response options ranging from "yes, tion warranted (motivation high but be-

all of the time" to "no"). (2) Which meth- havior low or medium; motivation me-

ods, if any, are you and your husband/wife dium but behavior low). The correspond-

using at present? (response options: con- ing percentages for the SO Caucasian

dom, diaphragm, foam, I.U.D., pill, wives in the sample were 58, 30, and 12

rhythm, male sterilization, female sterili- per cent. These figures show that Cauca-

zation, withdrawal, other).

sian women succeed in translating their

The first item was scored on a S-point scale: 5 = yes, all the time; 3 = yes, most of the time; 1 = yes, sometimes; 0 = no. The second item was also scored on a S-point scale: S = male or female sterilization; 4 = IUD or pill; 3 = condom or

motivation into behavior to a greater extent than do Filipinos. Only 12 per cent of Caucasian women had contraceptive behavior weaker than their motivation warranted. For Filipino women, the figure was 75 per cent higher (21 per cent).

diaphragm; 2 = foam; 1 = rhythm or withdrawal; 0 = none. When more than

USING HUSBAND DATA TO ACCOUNT FOR DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN WIFE'S MOTIVATION

one birth control method was being used, FOR FERTILITY CONTROL AND COUPLE CON-

the one with the lower score was deemed

TRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

to be the operative one. When contradic- Can husband's motivation for fertility

tory information on either the first or sec- control account for the discrepancies in

ond item was obtained from husband and wife's motivation and behavior noted in

wife, the response with the lower score Table 3? Table 4 presents relevant data.

was deemed to be the operative one. Column 2 of Table 4 gives the average

Scores on both items were summed to get difference between motivation scores of

the strength of contraceptive behavior Filipino husbands and wives for (1)

score. As can be seen from the scoring couples in which contraceptive behavior

method, only one strength of contracep- was stronger than wife's motivation war-

tive behavior score was assigned per ranted; (2) couples in which contraceptive

couple. This score was then attributed to behavior was in keeping with wife's moti-

both husband and wife. To obtain the vation; (3) couples in which contraceptive

subgroup categories given in Table 3, con- behavior was weaker than wife's motiva-

traceptive behavior total scores were used tion warranted; and (4) the total Filipino

to divide wives into low, medium, and sample. Column S gives analogous data

high subgroups in a manner analogous to for Caucasians. Notice that for both ethnic

that described for the motivation for fertil- groups, a husband's motivation for fertil-

ity control variable.

ity control was, on the whole, lower than

The cross-tabulation of motivation and his wife's (total sample data). This finding

behavior subgroups in Table 3 shows that is possibly attributable to the fact that it is

of the 100 Filipino wives in the sample 48 the wife who will bear the brunt of rearing

per cent had contraceptive behavior "con- any children to be born. Children affect a

gruent" with their motivation for fertility woman's life more than her husband's, so

control (motivation and behavior both her motivation to control future births is,

low, both medium, or both high); 31 per generally speaking, stronger.

cent had behavior scores higher than their Of interest to this paper is the clear conmotivation warranted (motivation low but tribution of husband's motivation for fer-

202

Card

Social Biology

TABLE 4
CONTRIBUTION OF HUSBAND'S MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL TO STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WIFE'S MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL AND COUPLE'S STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

CAUCASIANS

No. (%) of Husbands

Average Differences No. (%) of Husbands

Average Differences with Motivation

Between Husband's & with Motivation

Between Husband's &

Less than

No. Wife's Motivation

Less than Wife's No. Wife's Motivation

Wife's

Behavior > motivation . 31

Behavior = motivation . 48

Behavior < motivation . 21

Total

100

1.06 -1.32 -4.74 -1.30

19(61.3) 31(64.6) 16(76.2) 66(66.0)

15 29 6 50

0.16 -1.37 -5.21 -1.37

8 (S3.3) 18(62.1) 5(83.3) 31(62.0)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

tility control to contraceptive behavior, as shown in Columns 2 and 5 of Table 4. For the Filipino and Caucasian subgroups in which couple contraceptive behavior was stronger than wife's motivation, husband's motivation was also stronger than wife's motivation (presumably influencing use of stronger contraceptive methods). For the Filipino and Caucasian subgroups in which contraceptive behavior was congruent with wife's motivation, husband's motivation was about equal to the husband mean (slightly less than wife's motivation). For those subgroups in which contraceptive behavior was weaker than wife's motivation, husband's motivation was significantly lower than wife's motivation. The data in Columns 3 and 6 lead to the same conclusion. Overall, 66 per cent of Filipino and 62 per cent of Caucasian husbands had lower scores on motivation for fertility control than did their wives. For subgroups in which couple contraceptive behavior was stronger than wife's

motivation, this percentage was lower (61.3 per cent for Filipinos; S3.3 per cent for Caucasians). For subgroups in which couple contraceptive behavior was weaker than wife's motivation, this percentage was significantly higher (76.2 per cent for Filipinos; 83.3 per cent for Caucasians).
Table S shows that the impact of motivation for fertility control on contraceptive behavior (as measured by the r correlation and the regression beta weight) was moderately strong, especially for Caucasians. As mentioned earlier, Caucasians appear to be more able than Filipinos to translate their motivation for fertility control into appropriate contraceptive behavior. When spouse's motivation level was controlled for (see the relative magnitude of the beta weight in Row 2, Table 5), the relative contribution of Caucasian wives' motivation to contraceptive behavior increased slightly, but the relative contribution of Filipino wives' motivation decreased significantly. These findings indi-

TABLE s
STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR AS A FUNCTION OF HUSBAND'S VS. WIFE'S MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL

STRENGTHIOF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR
AND MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL
r strength of contraceptive behavior and motivatior| for fertility control
Beta weight in regression equation: Strength of contraceptive behavior = male motivation and female motivation for fertility control

FILIPINOS
0.37 0.33 0.22 0.13

Husbands
0.53 0.25

0.54 0.31

Vol. 25, No. 3

Correspondence of Data

203

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

cate that Filipino wives' motivation does not influence couple contraceptive behavior directly, but rather operates via husbands' motivation. Caucasian women exert more independent influence on couple contraceptive behavior.
A stepwise regression of strength of contraceptive behavior was conducted, separately for Filipino and Caucasian wives. Those variables listed in Table 2 which had a significant correlation with strength of contraceptive behavior were used as predictor variables in the regressions. The five best wife predictors explained 31 per cent of the variance in couple contraceptive behavior for the Filipino sample, and 61 per cent of the variance for the Caucasian sample.2 After adjusting for differential number of cases and predictor variables input, we find these figures shrink slightly (to 26 per cent and 55 per cent, respectively), but the overall pattern of results remains the same, i.e., Caucasian wife data can explain about twice as much of the variance in couple contraceptive behavior as Filipino wife data.
Husbands' motivation for fertility control was then added to each regression equation to determine if this single variable could enhance the predictability of couple contraceptive behavior over that achievable with wife data alone. For Caucasians, husbands' motivation did not add anything to the amount of explainable variance (adjusted R2 = 0.55; F = 1.19, not significant) in contraceptive behavior. For Filipinos, husband's motivation added slightly to the amount of explainable variance (adjusted R2 = 0.28, F = 4.21, p < 0.001); consideration of the next four husband predictors continued to add even more predictive power (adjusted R2 = 0.36). These findings reinforce the previously mentioned recommendation that fertility surveys, especially those in devel-
2 The content of obtained regression equations lies outside the scope of this paper (see Card, 1977).

oping countries, include data from husbands to enhance understanding of fertility-related behavior.
SUMMARY
Most fertility surveys have concentrated on data collected from females alone. In the present study 100 Filipino and 50 Caucasian married couples living in the San Francisco Bay Area were interviewed, separately but simultaneously, in an effort to document cross-cultural differences in antecedents of contraceptive usage. Interview data were analyzed: (1) to determine the extent to which information gathered from husband and wife agreed; and (2) to examine whether and to what extent data gathered from the husband could enhance the predictability of couple contraceptive usage over the predictability possible using wife data alone.
With respect to the first objective, the findings were as follows. (1) The correspondence between husband and wife reports of demographic information was extremely high for both ethnic groups (^ 0.95). (2) Interspouse correspondence on nondemographic information (aspects of their life together) was, however, no higher than the correspondence between their individual attitudes (between 0.25 and 0.45). (3) On all variable types, the correspondence between information provided by Caucasian husbands and wives was higher than the correspondence for Filipino couples.
With respect to the second objective, the findings were as follows. (1) The relationship between fertility control motivation and behavior was stronger for Caucasian wives, i.e., Caucasian wives were better able than their Filipino counterparts to translate their motivation for fertility control into congruent contraceptive behavior. (2) For both ethnic groups, consideration of husbands' motivation for fertility control was able to account for con-

204

Card

Social Biology

tradictions between wife's motivation for fertility control and couple contraceptive behavior. (3) Adding husband's motivation for fertility control to the regression equation of best wife predictors did not contribute significantly to the predictability of contraceptive behavior for the Caucasian group, but it did for the Filipino group, possibly because wife data alone could account for over half of the variance in Caucasian contraceptive behavior but less than a third of the variance in Filipino contraceptive behavior.
These findings point to the importance of collecting and analyzing data from husbands in fertility studies, especially when

these studies take place in developing countries like the Philippines where couples may communicate with less scope and frequency than do couples in developed countries and where husbands may dominate family-related decision making.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was conducted with funds provided bytheNational Institute of Child Health and Human Development (Contract HD52808 and Grant HD-10684). The author wishes to thank Dr. David E. Gross for his help with computer analysis of the data gathered and Dr. Warren B. Miller for his helpful critique of an earlier version of this paper.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ARNOLD, F., R. A. BULATAO, C. BURIPAKDI, B. J. HILL, R., J. STYCOS, and K. BACK. 1959. The fam-

CHUNG, J. T. FAWCETT, T. IRITANI, S. J. LEE, ily and population control. University of North

and T. S. Wu. 1975. Thevalue of children: A Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

cross-national study. East-West Population Insti- HOLLINGSHEAD, A. A., and F. C. REDLICH. 1958.

tute, Honolulu.

Social class andmental illness. Wiley, NewYork.

CARD, J. J. 1977. Cross-cultural differences in the antecedents and consequences of the motivation for fertility control, p. 41-76. In J. J. Card (ed.), Antecedents andconsequences of the motivation for fertility control: A cross-cultural study of Filipino migrants and Caucasian controls. American Institutes for Research, Palo Alto.

JAYME, J. 1971. Demographic and socio-psychological determinants ofthe migration ofhighly trained Filipinos to the United States. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh.
MICHEL, A. 1972.Prediction of a theoretical model in family planning sociology. In B. E. Cogswell and M. B. Sussman (eds.), Cross-national family

CARD, J. J., and W. J. WOOD. 1977. Determinants of
individual fertility and contraceptive use: A review and synthesis of theliterature, p. 1-40. In J. J. Card (ed.), Antecedents andconsequences of the motivation for fertility control: A cross-cultural study ofFilipino migrants and Caucasian controls. American Institutes for Research, Palo Alto.

research. E. J. Brill, Leiden, The Netherlands. MILLER, W. B. Description ofinstruments used in a
research project on the psychological aspects of fertility behavior in women. Unpublished. RAINWATER, L. 1960. And the poor get children. Quadrangle Books, Chicago. ROSARIO, F. Z. 1970. Husband-wife interactionand

GOUGH, H. G. 1974.Population policy andsocial family planning acceptance: Asurvey ofthe litera-

attitude questionnaire. Paper presented at sym- ture. East-West Population Institute, Honolulu.

posium on cross-cultural psychology, Western SMITH, D. H., and A. INKELES. 1966. The O.M.

Psychological Association meetings, San Fran- scale: Acomparative socio-psychological measure

cisco.

of individual modernity. Sociometry 29:353-377.

