Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Do women's breastfeeding experiences with their firstborns affect whether they breastfeed their subsequent children?
Julie DaVanzo , Ellen Starbird & Arleen Leibowitz
To cite this article: Julie DaVanzo , Ellen Starbird & Arleen Leibowitz (1990) Do women's breastfeeding experiences with their firstborns affect whether they breastfeed their subsequent children?, Social Biology, 37:3-4, 223-232, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988762 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988762
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 8
View related articles
Citing articles: 13 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

Do Women's Breastfeeding Experiences with Their First-borns Affect Whether They Breastfeed Their Subsequent Children?

;r~-7--: 'J J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

aJulie DaVanzo, bEllen Starbird, and aArleen Leibowitz
aEconomics and Statistics Department, The RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California; and bAgency for International Development, Washington, D.C.

ABSTRACT: Data on women with at least two children are used to examine how the breastfeeding experience with the first child affects whether subsequent children are breastfed. Our results indicate that women most often repeat with later children the feeding decision they made with their first child. That is, those who breastfed their first child are very likely to breastfeed a later child and those who did not breastfeed their firstborn are unlikely to breastfeed a later-bom. Among those who did not breastfeed their first child, education beyond high school increases the likelihood that they will switch to breastfeeding with a later-born. Those who breastfed their first child are less likely to breastfeed a later-born if the first breastfeeding experience was of short duration or was perceived to be unsuccessful or unsatisfactory or if the woman had not gone beyond high school or received anesthesia at the later birth. Hence, educational differences are greater at higher parities than at first parity.

The American Academy of Pediatrics has consistently encouraged breastfeeding of infants as the "foundation of good feeding practices" and has detailed the benefits of breastfeeding for both the mother and the child (AAP, 1982; AAP Committee on Nutrition, 1980). Breastfeeding is the natural form of infant nutrition, confers passive immunity, and is believed to promote motherchild bonding (AAP Committee on Nutrition, 1976). Nonetheless, many children are not breastfed.
It is a consistent finding that, at a point in time, higher-order children are less likely to be breastfed than first-born children (Hirschman and Butler, 1981; Martinez and Dodd, 1983; Gussler et al., 1984). This differential has been found during periods of both high and low national breastfeeding rates. For example, in 1981in the United States, 62.4 per cent of first-borns and 53.0 per cent of later-borns in hospitals were breastfed (Martinez and Dodd, 1983).

In 1971, 28 per cent of first-born children and 22 per cent of second-born children were breastfed. In the early 1950's, the rates were 52 per cent for first-borns and 44 per cent for laterborns (Gussler et al., 1984).
Such cross-sectional studies, however, do not provide information on parity differences withinfamilies. None of these studies actually looked at thepersistence of individual women's breastfeeding behavior,yet, to effectively target breastfeeding promotion effort, it is important to understand how women make decisions about feeding first-born and later-born children. For example, if women tend to repeat with later children the breastfeeding decision they made with the first child, efforts to increase breastfeeding should focus on primiparas and those who did not breastfeed the first child.
We hypothesize that primiparas are more likely to breastfeed the greater their awareness of, or receptivity to, in-

223

224

DaVanzo et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

formation about the health benefits of breastfeeding and the higher the average breastfeeding rate at the time or among others of the same educational attainment, race, or region, who serve as role models (Raphael 1969; Starbird, ms.). These same factors will lead a woman to breastfeed a subsequent child unless she receives information that causes her to revise her view of breastfeeding. Since the medical profession has been promoting breastfeeding and, in fact, a higher proportion of new mothers are breastfeeding, we hypothesize that personal rather than societal factors are most likely to cause a woman who breastfed her first child not to breastfeed a second child. Such personal factors may include obstacles to breastfeeding, such as administration of anesthesia during labor, or an unfavorable impression of the first breastfeeding experience.
Women who did not breastfeed their first child are also likely to repeat their behavior, but they should be more likely to switch to breastfeeding the more receptive they are to information about the benefits of breastfeeding.
In this paper we study these issues using unique data on individual women that report on the breastfeeding of each woman's first child and her most recent child and that provide information on several key factors that may affect breastfeeding decisions. We address the following questions:
To what extent do women feed their later-born children in the same way they fed their first child?
Which women are most likely to persist with the way they fed their first child? Which are most likely to change? What are the effects of socioeconomic variables such as educational attainment? What are the effects of birth-specific events such as anesthesia during delivery? What is the influence of the woman's perception of the first breastfeeding experience?

MATERIALS AND METHODS
DATA
The data used here come from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (HIE) (Newhouse et al., 1982).1 The HIE, designed to determine the potential effects on health and health care utilization of alternative methods of financing health care, was fielded between 1974 and 1982 in six areas of the United States (Seattle, Washington; Dayton, Ohio; Georgetown County and Charleston, South Carolina; and Franklin County and Fitchburg-Leominster, Massachusetts) chosen to represent all four census regions, a range of city sizes, and both urban and rural areas. Our goal is to make inferences about the probability of breastfeeding and, given that the sample is not highly selected in some manner, the inferences should be robust.
A total of 2,756 families were selected at random and assigned to one of several different health insurance plans for either a three- or a five-year period. In 1980, as a part of the HIE, a Child Development Questionnaire was mailed to women aged 16 and over to elicit information on the infant feeding of: (1) their children under four years old at the time; and (2) each respondent's first child (if different from [1]). Hence, the data provide information on the infant feeding of several children within a family. The overall response rate to the Child Development Questionnaire was 91 per cent.
The HIE Child Development Questionnaire documents the reported reason why breastfeeding of the first child was discontinued and such potential in-
1Families with incomes in excess of $63,400 in 1987 dollars were excluded from the HIE. This was 3 per cent of all families contacted.

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Breastfeeding Experiences

225

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

fluences on breastfeeding as the use of ciated with extremely short durations of

anesthesia during labor and delivery. breastfeeding. Some women in this sam-

We also have information from other ple "tried" to breastfeed but continued

RAND HIE data files concerning the for less than one week. Of first-time

demographic and socioeconomic char- mothers who "tried" breastfeeding, 6

acteristics of these mothers and their per cent continued for less than one

families.

week; by contrast, all those who "tried"

METHODS

with a later-born breastfed at least a week. When no other variables are con-

trolled, there is no significant difference

Sample for Analysis.--To address the questions posed, we consider the sample of 157 white women with second- or higher-order children born during the study period for whom we also have information on whether their first child was breastfed. The sample is limited to white women because over 90 per cent of the 50 black women in the sample lived in one geographic area and their behavior cannot be claimed to be representative of blacks across the United States. Although some women gave birth to more than one higherorder child during the study period, we compare the breastfeeding decisions for only one pair of children--the oldest and the youngest--per mother, which avoids the problem of clustering that would occur if some women had more children in the sample than others. Forty-six per cent of the first births also occurred during the study period, while the remainder occurred earlier, some as early as 1956. Fifty-six per cent of the higher-order children are second-order births and the rest are third or higher or-

in breastfeeding rates with first-borns and later-borns, either for women who "tried" breastfeeding (61 per cent vs. 54 per cent) or among those who continued for at least one week (57 per cent vs. 54 percent).
Explanatory Variables Considered.--TheHIE data document a number of potential influences on infant feeding: mother's age at the child's birth; mother's education; the year of the child's birth; the type of provider of prenatal care; whether the mother attended birth preparation classes; the infant's gestational age; whether anesthesia (either complete or partial) was administered during labor or delivery; whether the child was sick, received light treatment for jaundice, or was in an incubator during the first week of life; whether the mother first held or fed her child within six hours after birth; and the number of other children in the family. Only mother's education and anesthesia were found to be significant independent predictors in this analysis.

der. Table 1 gives the definitions of the

The Breastfeeding Variables.--The variables we consider and presents their

dependent variable in most of these means for the later-birth sample. For

analyses is an indicator of whether the education, the key distinction in ex-

mother breastfed her child for at least plaining breastfeeding initiation was be-

one week, the cutoff often used in the tween women who had attended some

literature (Martinez and Dodd, 1983; college and those who had only a high-

Gussler et al., 1984; Starbird, ms.; Mar- school education or less. We are using

tinez and Krieger, 1985). It is doubtful education as a proxy for receptivity and

that there are many health benefits asso- access to new information (Schultz,

226
Variable Breastfed Some college Anesthesia

DaVanzo et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 1
DEFINITIONS AND MEANS OF VARIABLES USED
(Sample = 157later births)
Definition Indicator = 1 if:
The child was breastfed one week or more Mother has education past the highschool level Anesthesia (some orcomplete) was administered during labor or delivery

Proportion with Characteristic
0.54 0.39 0.56

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

TABLE2
LOGISTIC REGRESSION SHOWING PREDICTORS OFBREASTFEEDING OFTHE HIGHER-ORDER CHILD, CONTINGENT UPON BREASTFEEDING OFTHE FIRST CHILD

VARIABLE
Somecollege Anesthesia Intercept Loglikelihood X2

WOMEN WHO BREASTFED THEIR FIRST CHILD (/V=90)

Coefficient

/-stat.

1.617 -1.752
1.706 -38.30
13.48

2.56 -2.79
3.47 ... ...

WOMEN WHO DID NOT BREASTFEED THEIR
FIRST CHILD (N=61)

Coefficient

r-stat.

1.607 -0.758 -1.560 -28.48 6.02

2.31 -1.08 -2.71

/-TEST FOR DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN COEFFICIENTS
0.01 -1.05
4.31

1975). Thirty-nine per cent of the Methods of Analysis.--We begin by

women in our sample have more than a examining the bivariate relationshipbe-

high-school education.

tween breastfeeding initiation of the

Anesthesia during delivery can im- first-born child and the later-born child.

pair the mother's ability to breastfeed We then perform a multivariate analy-

successfully andthe child's ability to sis, using logistic regression, to assess

suckle (Brazelton, 1961;Winikoff and each factor's independent influenceon

Baer, 1980). The HIE distinguished be- the later breastfeeding decision. We hy-

tween three categories of anesthesia: pothesize that the influences of factors

complete, partial, andnone. Theimpor- that affect whether thelater child is

tant difference for the purposes ofthis breastfed differ depending onwhether

study was between those who received the first child wasbreastfed. Therefore,

anesthesia of any kind and those who we examine theinfluences separately for

did not. We also investigated whether those women who did anddid not

anesthesia at thefirst birth influenced breastfeed their first child. These regres-

later behavior, but found no significant sions arepresented in Table 2.

effect. Anesthesia was administered The logistic regression results are

during labor for 56per cent of the later presented graphically in the form ofad-

births. (Sixteen percent of those who re- justed predicted probabilities, which

ceived anesthesia with the later birth control for the potentially confounding

had Caesarean sections; half of these influence of other factors (e.g., we con-

women breastfed, andhalf did not.) trol for anesthesia when we are examin-

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Breastfeeding Experiences

227

TABLE3
BREASTFEEDING OF LATER-BORN CHILD BY WHETHER FIRST CHILD WAS BREASTFED"

FIRST-BORN CHILD
Breastfed Not breastfed
82.56.

LATER-BORN CHILD

Breastfed (N=90)

Not Breastfed (JV=67)

80.0 20.0 17.9 82.1

TOTAL
100.0 100.0

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

ing predicted probabilities based on educational attainment). The means of these adjusted predicted probabilities lated for groups that differ in important independent variables. For example, when computing the adjusted predicted probability for those with higher education, we set the dichotomous highereducation indicator equal to one for all members of the sample, but allow the anesthesia indicator to vary as in the actual sample. We then repeat this same exercise setting the dichotomous education indicator equal to zero. We do this separately for the sample of those who did breastfeed their first child and those who did not, since separate regressions were estimated for those two groups. We present r-tests for the significance of these adjusted predicted probabilities (the effect of particular independent variables), as calculated from the logistic regression, and also ^-statistics testing whether the effect of the variable on the adjusted probability of breastfeeding the later child differs between those who did and did not breastfeed their first child (i.e., whether the coefficients of a particular variable differ between those who did and did not breastfeed their first child). A 5-per-cent level of significance (two-tailed test) is used.
We also examine how women's decisions to breastfeed a later child vary by their reported reasons for discontinuing

breastfeeding of their first child and by the duration of breastfeeding of thefirst child.
RESULTS
PERSISTENCE OF BREASTFEEDING BEHAVIOR BETWEEN FIRST ANDLATER
BORNS: BLVARIATEANALYSIS
The cross-tabulation of breastfeeding of the first-born child and the later-born child, in Table 3, shows a strong persistence in breastfeeding behavior: Eighty per cent of those who breastfed their first child breastfed the later-born also; 82 per cent of those who did not breastfeed their firstborn did not breastfeed the later-born either. The probability of repeating the breastfeeding decision made with the first child does not differ significantly between those who breastfed their first child and those who did not.
ANALYSIS OF LATER BREASTFEEDING BEHAVIOR CONTINGENT UPON FIRST DECISION: MULTIVARIATEANALYSIS.
The logistic regression in Table 2confirmsthe results in Table 3. Other things the same, women whobreastfed their first child are significantly more likely to breastfeed a later childthan womenwho did not breastfeed their first child (i.e.,

228
A. Education

DaVanzo et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015
djuste edict lity

0.8-

S3

ID
a

0.7-

ac..

aa> 0 . 6 -

0.5 -
ca .
0.4-

0.3-

0.2-

0.1 -

nSome college

No college

Some college

No college

Breastfed First Child

Did Not Breastfeed First Child

J - 2.56

J_= 2.31

B. Anesthesia

- t - f o r difference = 0.01

i-

0.9-
S °-8-
I 0.7-
Oa. ·a 0.6 -
(U
o S 0.5-
u
aL..
·o 0 . 4 -
u
t 0.3-
·a
0.2 -

0.1-

n-

Same or complete

No anesthesia Some or complete

No anesthesia

anesthesia

anesthesia

Breastfed first child

Did not breastfeed first child

t - -2.79

t =-1.08

^ _ o r difference --1.05

FIG. 1.--Adjusted predicted probabilities of breastfeeding the later child, by whether the first child was breastfed: Effects of education and anesthesia.

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Breastfeeding Experiences

229

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

the intercepts differ significantly between the two samples).
The adjusted probabilities of breastfeeding a later child are presented in Fig. 1 for alternative values of the two covariates--mother's education and anesthesia at the child's birth. We present these probabilities separately for those who did and those who did not breastfeed their first child.
Regardless of how women fed their first child, higher education significantly increases the probability that they will breastfeed a higher-order child. Women without breastfeeding experience who have some college education have a 39per-cent adjusted probability of breastfeeding their later-born child, compared with only 12 per cent for similar women who have only a high-school education or less. Women who breastfed their first child and have college experience have a 90-per-cent adjusted probability of breastfeeding their later-born child, compared with 68 per cent for women who breastfed their first child but have not attended college.
For women who did not breastfeed their first child, administration of anesthesia has no significant effect on subsequent breastfeeding. Their average probability of breastfeeding their later child is 20 per cent. Women who did breastfeed their first child, however, are significantly less likely to breastfeed a later child if they received anesthesia at the later birth. Their predicted probability of breastfeeding is 66 per cent, compared with 91 per cent for women who did not receive anesthesia.
How BREASTFEEDING OF LATER-BORN
CHILDREN VARIES BY REPORTED
REASON FOR STOPPING BREASTFEEDING
OF FIRST CHILD
To investigate further which women abandon breastfeeding, we considered

the subsample of women who breastfed their first child (at least one week) and examined their reported reasons for discontinuing breastfeeding of that child. For this subsample, Table 4 presents breastfeeding rates for later-born children classified by the women's reported reasons for suspending breastfeeding of the first child. These were responses to the survey question: "Why did you stop breastfeeding this child?" The most frequently given reasons are that the child no longer needed to breastfeed and that the mother perceived that there were problems with the quantity or quality of her breastmilk.
Although sample sizes are small in some cells, women's subjective evaluation of the first breastfeeding experience appears to be an important influence on whether the feeding decision will be repeated. Women who perceived the initial experience to be successful were more likely to breastfeed a later child than were women who reacted less positively. If the reason for discontinuing breastfeeding of the first child was a feeling of inability to produce enough or acceptable milk, only 61.5 per cent repeated the decision to breastfeed. Women who gave "self-centered" reasons for stopping--inconvenience, laziness--were even less likely to breastfeed again (50 per cent). By contrast, nearly all women who stopped breastfeeding the first child for other reasons--because the child seemed ready to stop, because they returned to work, because the mother was sick, or a medical person advised stopping-- breastfed again.2
2Women who breastfed their first child for less than one week gave the following reasons for stopping: child was ill (n = 1); perceived problems with milk quality or quantity (n = 2), medical person advised stopping (n=2), and sore nipples (n = 1). Only the woman who stopped because of sore nipples breastfed again.

230

DaVanzo et al.

Social Biology

BREASTFEEDING RATES FORLATER BORNS BY THE DURATION OF
BREASTFEEDING OFTHE FIRSTBORN
Table 5 shows that the likelihood of breastfeeding a later-born child is positively related to the duration of breastfeeding of the first child: 91 per cent of women who breastfed their first child for at least six weeks breastfed again, compared with only 46 per cent of those who

breastfed 1-5 weeks the first time and 17 per cent of those who breastfed less than one week. Eighteen per cent of women who did not breastfeed their firstborn at all breastfed a later child. Although cell sizes are small, these results suggest that breastfeeding for less than one week is no better than not breastfeeding at all in terms of its effect on the likelihood of initiating breastfeeding with a later child.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

TABLE4
BREASTFEEDING OF LATER CHILD, BY REASON FOR DISCONTINUING BREASTFEEDING OF THE FIRST CHILD" 6

Reported Reason for Stopping Breastfeeding
of First Child
Child no longer needed to breastfeed

Per Cent Who Breastfed Most Recent Child at Least One Week
92.8

N
28

Perceived problems with quantity or quality of breastmilk

61.5 26

Inconvenient, lazy, tired, wanted freedom, shyness, frustration

50.0

6

Mother returned to work

100.0

5

Medical person advised stopping

100.0

3

Motherwasill

100.0

1

Others

100.0

3

Missing/no reason given

83.3 18

Total 8O0 90
"Sample = those who breastfed the first child at least one week. V = 20.5,P < 0.039. cResponses in this category include lack of information, twins were too difficult to nurse, excessive weight loss, new pregnancy.

TABLE5
BREASTFEEDING OF LATER CHILD, BY DURATION OF BREASTFEEDING OF THE FIRST CHILD"

Duration of Breastfeeding of First Child

Did not breastfeed Less than one week 1-5 weeks 6 weeks or more

...

V = 73.5,P < 0.000.

...

Per Cent Who Breastfed Most Recent Child at Least One Week
18.0 16.7 45.5 91.2

N
61 6 22 68

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Breastfeeding Experiences

231

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

the likelihood of breastfeeding a laterborn both for the sample of those who breastfed their first-born and those who

For individual women, the best pre- did not. On average, the odds of breast-

dictor of later breastfeeding behavior is feeding a later child are five times as

the breastfeeding decision made with great for women with some college edu-

the first child. Eighty per cent of women cation compared with those without.col-

in this sample who breastfed their first lege experience. (By comparison, for

child breastfed a later child, while 82 per cent of those who did not breastfeed their first child repeated that decision with the later child.
It is noteworthy thatfirst-bornsin this sample were somewhat more likely to be breastfed than later-borns (57 per cent vs. 54 per cent) despite the fact that the first births occurred during a period (average birth year = 1972) when the

women giving birth for the first time between 1970-79, the odds of breastfeeding for those with some college education are twice those for women who completed only high school [Starbird, ms.].) These differentials are consistent with the notion that educated women continue to be more receptive to outside information (which over this period was very positive toward breastfeeding).

average national breastfeeding rate was Although the probability of repeat-

much lower (25.9 per cent) than in the ing the decision to breastfeed is high, es-

birth years covered by the later-birth pecially among more educated women,

sample (average birth year, 1978; aver- those who breastfed their first child are

age national breastfeeding rate over pe- less likely to breastfeed a later child if

riod = 45.1 per cent) (Gussler et al., the first breastfeeding effort was per-

1984). Alternatively viewed, it is inter- ceived to be unsuccessful or unsatisfac-

esting that more women did not switch tory, if the duration of that breastfeed-

to breastfeeding, given that the average ing was short, or if they received

national rate was so much higher in the anesthesia with the later birth. A posi-

years when the later-born children were tive benefit of a trend away from medi-

born. This evidence is consistent with a cation during labor and delivery should

conclusion that primiparas led the resur- be an increase in breastfeeding.

gence in breastfeeding in the United States, and that, once they have given birth, women are influenced much more by their own previous experience than by the national average prevalence of breastfeeding at the time of their subsequent birth.

Of first-time mothers who "tried" breastfeeding, 6 per cent continued for less than one week, suggesting that they were motivated to breastfeed but were not successful at doing so. Very few (only 17 per cent) of these women breastfed a later child--an initiation

The positive relationship between rate no different from that for women

educational attainment and breastfeed- who did not even try to breastfeed their

ing of first-borns is well documented first child. Given their initial interest in

(Starbird, ms.; Hirschman and Butler, breastfeeding, special efforts should be

1981; Hirschman and Hendershot, made to help such mothers establish suc-

1979). We find here that educational dif- cessful lactation with their first child.

ferentials are evengreater at higher pari- Similarly, women who perceived an un-

ties, since higher education increases successful experience with the first child

232

DaVanzo et al.

Social Biology

were less likely to breastfeed a second child. Efforts to support primiparas who breastfeed by providing reassurance and advice can not only increase the likelihood that they will continue to breastfeed their first-born, but can also increase the breastfeeding rates of later-borns.
The findings here imply that special effort should be made to encourage primiparas in general to breastfeed and to help them succeed in doing so, since women are likely to repeat a successful breastfeeding experience. Lesseducated women are especially unlikely to breastfeed and may merit special tar-

geted programs. A number of studies (summarized by Winikoff and Baer, 1980) have demonstrated that interventions can be very effective in increasing the prevalence and duration of breastfeeding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research reported herein was supported by grants R01-HD20538 and P50HD12639 from the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development to the Rand Corporation. The authors would like to thank John Haaga, Jean-Pierre Habicht, and Linda Waite for their comments and suggestions.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS. 1982. The MARTINEZ, G. A., and D. A. DODD. 1983. 1981

promotion of breast-feeding. Pediatrics 69:654-661.

Milk feeding patterns in the first twelve months oflife. Pediatrics 71:166-170.

AMERICAN ACADEMY OFPEDIATRICS COMMITTEE MARTINEZ, G. A., and F. W. KRIEGER. 1985.

ON NUTRITION. 1980. Encouraging breast-

1984 Milk-feeding patterns in the United

feeding. Pediatrics 65:657-658.

States. Pediatrics 76:1004-1008.

. 1976. Commentary on breast-feeding NEWHOUSE, J. P., W. G. MANNING, and C. N.

and infant formulas, including proposed

MORRIS, et al. 1982. Some interim results

standards for formulas. Pediatrics 57:278-

from a controlled trial of cost sharing in

285. health insurance. R-2847-HHS. The

BRAZELTON, T. B. 1961. Psychophysiologic re-

RAND Corporation, Santa Monica.

actions inthe neonate: II. Effects of mater- RAPHAEL, D. 1969. Thelactation-sucking proc-

nal medication on theneonate and his be- ess within a matrix of supportive behavior.

havior. J. Pediat. 58:513-518.

Ph.D. dissertation. Columbia University,

GUSSLER, J. D., M. A. WOO-LUN, and N. M.

New York.

SMITH (eds.). 1984. The international SCHULTZ, T. W. 1975. The ability to deal with

breast-feeding compendium. Vol.2. Third

disequilibria. J. Econ. Lit. 13:827-846.

ed. Ross Labs, Columbus, Ohio.

STARBIRD, E. H. Comparison of influences on

HIRSCHMAN, C., and M. BUTLER. 1981. Trends
and differentials in breast feeding: An up-

breastfeeding of first-born children, 196069 vs. 1970-79.Ms.

date. Demography 18:39-54.
HIRSCHMAN, C., and G. E. HENDERSHOT. 1980.
Trends in breast feeding among American mothers. Vital and Health Statistics 59.

WINIKOFF, B., and E. C. BAER. 1980. The ob-
stetrician's opportunity: Translating "breast is best" from theory to practice. Amer. J. Obst. Gynecol. 138:105-117.

