Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Intrauterine diagnosis and genetic counseling in psychiatry
Gilbert S. Omenn
To cite this article: Gilbert S. Omenn (1976) Intrauterine diagnosis and genetic counseling in psychiatry, Social Biology, 23:2, 142-157, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988220 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988220
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling in Psychiatry

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Gilbert S. Omenn
Division of Medical Genetics Departmentof Medicine University of Washington Seattle, Washington
ABSTRACT: Genetic counseling has an important place in the care and follow-up of patients and families with disorders of mental development and of mental function. Amniocentesis, obtaining a small amount of amniotic fluid with fetal cells for biochemical and chromosomal tests, has greatly advanced the precision of genetic counseling for a growing list of testable conditions. Currently, the major indications are the Down syndrome (trisomy 21), numerous rare inborn errors of metabolism, and neural tube closure defects in "high-risk" families. In the future, additional behavioral syndromes associated with abnormal chromosomes or biochemical markers may be suitable for such very early detection. The social and psychological problems arising in testing and counseling for genetic and chromosomal diseases require wider recognition.

There are many psychological burdens associated with pregnancy, one of the most distressing being the fear of bearing a deformed or defective baby or a child who will develop psychiatric illness. Approximately 3 per cent of all live births will be severely retarded in mental development or will have serious congenital malformations. For the family in which a child or another relative already has been affected, the risks may be much higher. In the past two decades, genetic counseling clinics have been established to deal with the medical, genetic, and emotional aspects of such disorders.
The first requirement for genetic counseling is precise diagnosis in order to predict the course of the illness. Determination of the risk of recurrence in subsequent children requires clear differentiation of heterogeneous causes of similar syndromes, relying upon the detailed family history and upon various laboratory analyses such as radiologic studies,

chromosome karyotypes, and enzyme assays.
Even with the most detailed evaluation, families usually can be provided only with a statistical statement. For examples, the risk of recurrence in subsequent children is about 1 per cent for most cases of the Down syndrome (mongolism), about 5 per cent for many birth defects, 25 per cent for inborn errors of metabolism inherited as autosomal recessive disorders, or 50 per cent for autosomal dominant conditions. Often, however, counseling is complicated by the variable severity of the illness, uncertainty of diagnosis, or the possibility that the affected child had a fresh mutation.
For many common disorders, including schizophrenia and depression, there is good evidence of genetic factors of unknown mechanism. However, all that can be offered is an empirical risk figure based upon reports of the frequency of recurrence in large series of families. It must

142

Vol. 23, No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

always be stressed that these risks for spe- nancy, the more fluid and greater likeli-

cific disorders are in addition to the ap- hood of obtaining an adequate sample for

proximately S per cent of mental retarda- study. On the other hand, amniocentesis

tion or birth defects that every couple must be carried out early enough so that

takes when having a child.

laboratory studies can be completed and

In the past few years, there has been a dramatic development in counseling for some genetic disorders. For a small but rapidly increasing number of diseases, it is now possible to diagnose the condition in

abortion can be safely (and legally) done if termination of pregnancy is indicated. The best time for amniocentesis is at 13 to 14 weeks of pregnancy, and laboratory tests usually require three additional weeks.

utero early enough in pregnancy to permit The major current indications are the

selective abortion of affected fetuses (Na- Down syndrome (trisomy 21), numerous

dler and Gerbie, 1970; Milunsky et al., rare inborn errors of metabolism, and

1970; Bergsma and Motulsky, 1971). Un- neural tube closure defects. The latter in-

fortunately, treatment is unsatisfactory for clude anencephaly, meningomyelocoele,

so many conditions, especially those af- spina bifida, and hydrocephalus. A test for

fecting mental development, that preven- the normal fetal protein alpha-fetoprotein

tion of birth of an affected child appears in amniotic fluid has become a routine

highly desirable to many parents and to diagnostic measure for defects of neural

their physicians. Diagnosis depends on tube closure. Presumably, the serum pro-

specific determination of chromosome tein leaks out through the neural tube de-

karyotype or enzyme assays in cells of fetal fect. Early efforts even indicate the feasi-

origin obtained from the amniotic fluid bility of screening maternal serum for

around the fetus and grown in tissue cul- transplacental alpha-fetoprotein levels

ture medium in the laboratory. While above normal, with follow-up testing of

there is much speculation about the poten- the amniotic fluid (Brock et al., 1974).

tial feasibility of "genetic engineering" by manipulation of the DNA in cells, many specific disorders can be prevented already by what might be called "reproductive engineering" (Omenn, 1973).

The hazards of amniocentesis are not yet fully evaluated. Reports of more than 1,600 procedures (Milunsky, 1973) are remarkably free of serious immediate complications. There are no known cases of

severe maternal bleeding, infection, or

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS: AMNIOCENTESIS

uterine rupture; no induced miscarriages; and no increase in the number of congenital malformations in the offspring. Poten-

Amniocentesis is a procedure for obtain- tial long-term hazards of amniocentesis

ing amniotic fluid, which contains fetal are much more difficult to evaluate. The

cells desquamated from respiratory and effect, if any, of disturbing the volume and

urinary tract endothelia and from skin and possibly the dynamics of the amniotic fluid

amnion. A small gauge "spinal" needle is is simply unknown.

inserted through the abdominal and It would be a tragedy if normal babies

uterine wall into the amniotic cavity. The later suffered mild depression of IQ levels

procedure is done "blindly," so the success or some other subtle damage because of a

depends upon the skill and experience of diagnostic procedure aimed at detecting

the obstetrician. The time at which am- an abnormal fetus. For this reason, in

niocentesis is carried out must be a com- pregnancies with less than 1 per cent

promise. The more advanced the preg-. recurrence risk for a given disease, parents

144

Omenn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

at this time are being counseled that the risk of the procedure may be sufficient that amniocentesis should not be carried out. Depending on how abhorrent the particular disorder is to the parents, they may agree to forego amniocentesis or they may insist on accepting the risk of the procedure, or else they may elect to have no more pregnancies.
Since amniocentesis is still considered an investigative procedure, current knowledge about the procedure and the tests required for prenatal diagnosis are discussed as fully as possible with the parents. They are asked to read and sign a consent form containing the following major points (Epstein et al., 1970; Maclntyre, 1971).
1. There is an unknown but apparently quite low risk to mother and fetus. 2. More than one amniocentesis may be required to obtain sufficient fluid. 3. Cell cultures may fail to grow, and two or three weeks will have passed before this result is known. 4. Chromosomal or biochemical analyses may be unsuccessful. 5. In vitro laboratory results may not reflect the status of the fetus, especially if a twin pregnancy is sampled. 6. Normal chromosomal or biochemical results on the tests that are performed cannot eliminate the possibility of birth defects and/or mental retardation from other causes. Any condition not ruled out by a specific test can be expected to occur with a frequency similar to that in the general population.
TYPES OF BEHAVIORAL SYNDROMES SUITABLE FOR PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS
By far the greatest progress in prenatal diagnosis has come in the area of those chromosomal and metabolic disorders that grossly disrupt the normal processes of neurological and mental development in the central nervous system. The reason is simple. The "phenotype" of mental retardation has been sorted on clinical and laboratory grounds into numerous specific etiologic mechanisms, for which specific

diagnostic tests can be applied. I strongly believe that similar processes of sorting out of multiple mechanisms will be essential to our understanding and to our diagnostic approach for the other common behavioral phenotypes, including schizophrenia, affective disorder, and perhaps even addictability to drugs.
CHROMOSOMAL DISORDERS CAUSING MENTAL
RETARDATION
The single most important disorder suitable for prenatal diagnosis is the Down syndrome (mongolism) (Down, 1866; Penrose and Smith, 1966; Smith and Wilson, 1973). One of every 660 births is a child with the Down syndrome, recognizable at birth by the clinical features of hypotonia, slanted palpebral fissures, flat facial profile, speckling of the iris, single crease in the palms, and congenital heart defects.
The risk of mongolism increases strikingly with age of the mother, from about 1/2,000 at age 20, to 1/500 at age 35, 1/100 at age 40, and 1/40 at age 45. More than 95 per cent of cases are due to trisomy 21, meaning that 47 chromosomes are present, with the No. 21 set occurring in triplicate rather than as a pair. The mechanism of trisomy 21 is nondisjunction, i.e., the pair of No. 21 chromosomes in the mother's egg failed to separate normally. The single No. 21 chromosome added from the father's sperm produces a fertilized egg with three No. 21 chromosomes.
Nearly one-half of all the babies with mongolism are born to mothers over 35 years old. The number of children born with the Down syndrome could be decreased simply by social practices that reduce the average age of mothers or that discourage women from having children after age 35. Alternatively, it is feasible for those couples who accept selective abortion to prevent the birth of such children by monitoring pregnancies of older women for trisomy 21. The age for monitoring

Vol. 23, No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

pregnancies is now arbitrarily set at age 38 to 40, but is expected to fall to age 35 as genetics centers develop the capacity to handle more cases and if evaluation of the potential hazards of amniocentesis indicates that the risks of the procedure are sufficiently small.
There are other circumstances in which amniocentesis should be carried out for the Down syndrome. If the family has already had one child with the Down syndrome due to trisomy 21 and the parents appear normal, the recurrence risk is estimated to be about 1 per cent. The level of risk combined with the emotional, social, and financial impact of one child already affected with the Down syndrome usually leads the parents and physicians to seek prenatal diagnoses of subsequent pregnancies.
About 2 to 5 per cent of children with the Down syndrome have a chromosome karyotype with "translocation pattern," 46 chromosomes that include a structurally abnormal chromosome. The "extra" No. 21 chromosome is attached to one of the "normal" chromosomes, making the equivalent of a triplicate of the No. 21 chromosome. When a translocation pattern is found in the child, it is imperative to study the chromosomes of the parents. If one of the parents carries the translocation in a balanced form, the risk for the Down syndrome in live-born children may be anywhere from S per cent to as high as 100 per cent (in certain rare translocations). These abnormalities of translocation can be recognized reliably in the cultured amniotic cell chromosome karyotype. Therefore, prenatal diagnosis is quite feasible for the translocation type of the Down syndrome.
The mean IQ for older patients with the Down syndrome is 24, with an upper limit of about SO (Smith, 1970). Many children and most adults require institutionalization; in many states, the Down syndrome

accounts for almost half the adult patients in institutions for the mentally retarded. The annual cost to society for custodial care is so high that extensive prenatal diagnostic screening and abortion for trisomy 21 could be justified on a cost/ benefit basis alone.
Other chromosomal disorders of the autosomes occur much less frequently or are lethal early in life and need not be discussed further here. We should note, however, that seemingly harmless chromosomal translocations and chromosomal variations are found among "normal" individuals. Sometimes the abnormality is found first in a mentally retarded or psychotic child, but then the same chromosome abnormalities are identified in cells of his unaffected siblings or parents. Several such variants of uncertain significance have been discovered already while testing amniotic fluid specimens for trisomy 21 or for inborn errors of metabolism. Unfortunately, given the pressure of time to make a decision either to allow the pregnancy to proceed or to terminate the pregnancy, these complicating findings can be very distressing.
INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
More than a dozen enzyme deficiencies inherited as autosomal recessive or X-linked recessive diseases have been demonstrated in amniotic fluid cell specimens, allowing abortion of affected fetuses (Omenn and Motulsky, 1975). Most of these disorders are associated with mental retardation. Analogous enzymatic assays are feasible for many other conditions (Milunsky et al., 1970). For several of these disorders having a recurrence risk of 25 per cent, pregnancies at risk (meaning that a previous child was affected) have been monitored, and parents were correctly informed, on the basis of normal enzyme assays, that the fetus would be unaffected.
As we noted earlier, one can never

146

Omenn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

guarantee that the child will be "normal" because of all the other untested disorders which may occur. Testing for inborn disorders of metabolism, each of which is rare, is ordinarily restricted to families in which a case has already been diagnosed. In the past, without the option of prenatal diagnosis, most families faced with a 25 per cent risk of a serious genetic disorder have elected to forego further pregnancies (Casey et al., 1966). Prenatal diagnoses and abortion make it possible for such parents to have a normal child without fear of recurrence of that disease.
However, certain autosomal recessive conditions are not rare, especially when one considers particular ethnic or racial groups. Three examples are cystic fibrosis, which occurs in 1/2,000 Caucasians; Tay-Sachs disease, which occurs in 1/4,000 Ashkenazi Jews; and sickle-cell anemia, which occurs in 1/400 Blacks in the United States. Prenatal diagnosis is not yet feasible for cystic fibrosis, since there is no suitable test. By contrast, Tay-Sachs disease, which causes severe mental and neurological disintegration and death by the age of 4 years, is due to deficiency of an enzyme which is demonstrable in cultured amniotic cells. In fact, this enzyme can be measured accurately in human blood serum samples, allowing detection of the heterozygous carriers.
As a result, extensive screening of Jewish populations in the BaltimoreWashington, Los Angeles, and Philadelphia areas has been initiated. High frequency of the gene in the Jewish populations there has been confirmed, and young couples in which both spouses are carriers have been identified and have been offered the option of prenatal monitoring for Tay-Sachs diseases during pregnancy.
Extensive screening is also under wayin many cities for carriers of the sickle hemoglobin trait. The carriers are healthy; but if two carriers marry, their children

have a 25 per cent risk of sickle-cell anemia. In this case, carrier detection is technically very reliable, but no method is available to obtain fetal blood cells for prenatal diagnosis. The educational imperative to distinguish between a sicklecell trait carrier and a person with the disease and the complicated issue of family planning in the Black population have led to quite emotional controversies about the sickle-cell screening programs.
One rare X-linked recessive disorder which merits special discussion here is the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, consisting of elevated uric acid in the blood, choreoathetoid involuntary movements, and a compulsive self-mutilating behavior (Kelley and Wyngaarden, 1972). These boys bite their lips and fingertips until the structures are destroyed. I have seen such a youngster with sufficient intelligence to ask that he have his arms restrained even after his teeth were extracted, so that he would not impulsively poke his own eyes.
The behavior somehow results from a metabolic defect due to deficiency of the enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (better known as HGPRT). The highest activity of the enzyme in normal individuals is found in the basal ganglia of the brain, providing an excellent correlation with the major neurologic abnormality of this syndrome--the involuntary movements. But the basis for the impulsive behavior is beyond understanding at present. There is no very effective therapy, though uric acid production can be controlled to prevent damage to the kidneys from uric acid stones. It is likely that understanding of this disorder might provide some clues to other impulsive and violent behaviors.
The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome can be detected in utero by testing amniotic fluid cells for HGPRT enzyme activity (DeMars et al., 1969). Since the gene is carried on the X-chromosome, only boys will be to-

Vol. 23, No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

tally deficient in HGPRT; girls may be normal or be carriers of the abnormal gene.
PSYCHOPATHIC AND SOCIOPATHIC
PERSONALITY
There is no doubt that familial and social milieu contribute importantly to personality disorders and criminality. Nevertheless, in similar environments there is remarkable individual variation in personality and in likelihood of getting into trouble with the law. Twin studies (Shields, 1962) indicate that even for indices of personality and temperament genetic factors are involved, though the genetic component seems much smaller than has been demonstrated for IQ measures. Among men imprisoned for criminal behavior, chromosomal screening has identified individuals with sex chromosomal abnormalities at frequencies much higher than those in the general population Qacobs et al., 1965; Casey et al., 1966). Considerable controversy about the medical and legal interpretation of such findings has been generated with the XYY syndrome, even though little attention was paid to the more frequently found XXY or Klinefelter syndrome.
The Klinefelter syndrome consists of testicular atrophy and infertility, occasional gynecomastia, tall eunuchoid appearance, and variable behavior; patients range from altogether normal men through individuals with mild to moderate mental deficiency to those with psychopathic and criminal problems. Screening for the XXY karyotype can be carried out simply with smears of the buccal mucosa and staining for the sex chromatin or Barr body, indicating an extra X chromosome.
Among 942 mentally abnormal inmates with a tendency toward criminal behavior, 1.3 per cent were found to have the XXY karyotype and 0.7 per cent had the XYY karyotype, compared with 0.2

per cent and 0.02 per cent respectively in the general population (Jacobs et al., 196S). It has been suggested that the psychopathology is secondary to mental deficiency or to hypogonadism, rather than an independent result of the chromosomal abnormality.
Rather than sampling a prison or psychiatrically abnormal population, Nielsen evaluated hypogonadal male patients with normal 46 XY karyotype and with 47 XXY karyotypes from a sterility clinic in Denmark (Nielsen et al., 1969; Theilgaard et al., 1971). The XXY patients had significantly more psychiatric symptoms and were particularly differentiated from the XY patients by signs of immaturity, insecurity, boastful and selfassertive behavior, and record of legal offenses. Differences in testis size, gynecomastia and IQ were not related to the indices of psychopathology.
The overall frequency of XXY births is 1 in 450 males, so we are sure to find some cases of XXY syndrome as we continue to screen pregnancies. It is likely that a family in which amniocentesis is done and an XXY karyotype is found would seek an abortion, given the likelihood of miia mental retardation and the approximately five-fold increased risk of psychopathology, plus the infertility.
The story of the XYY syndrome is one of the most curious in the genetics of behavior. XYY karyotypes were first reported in association with a variety of gonadal abnormalities. In 196S, an excessive incidence of XYY males was described from screening among very tall men in maximum-security prisons in Scotland (Jacobs et al., 196S). Presumably because males are considered more aggressive than females and because an extra Y seemed intuitively to be a reasonable basis for greater height and greater aggressiveness, stories from Australia and France about accused murderers having XYY

148

Oirjenn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

karyotypes made front-page news in the United States.
Behavior geneticists took increased interest in the XYY syndrome for another reason. A psychosocial evaluation with family data on 9 XYY and 18 XY prisoners at the maximum-security prison at Carstairs in Scotland indicated that XYY criminals could be distinguished from XY counterparts by a lack of broken families, a lack of criminal records among their siblings, a tendency to get into trouble with the law earlier in their teens with crimes against property rather than people, and a greater lack of concern about their criminal behavior (Price and Whatmore, 1967). In other words, such individuals seemed to represent chromosomal accidents that made them "black sheep" of otherwise upstanding families.
The analogy to mental retardation syndromes was obvious: A severely mentally retarded child in a family of normal parents and siblings is often the result of a particular chromosome or metabolic abnormality, while a mildly or moderately retarded child in a family with parents and siblings of a similar IQ usually reflects the interplay of multiple genetic and environmental influences.
Unfortunately, subsequent studies have failed to confirm this striking differentiation between XYY and XY criminals (Money et al., 1970). Furthermore, population screening by the laborious preparation of full chromosomal karyotypes has demonstrated that approximately 1/800 male births is XYY, many times the frequency of tall criminals in Western society. At present, it appears that the XYY karyotype is associated with a small but definitely increased risk of psychopathology and criminality (Hook, 1973). No particular populations are known to have an increased risk of producing XYY children. However, while screening women of age 40 or older for the Down syndrome,

Nadler (1971) encountered one case of the XYY syndrome.
Should a family desperately want a baby or disapprove of abortion, the knowledge that the child is born with an XYY karyotype may interfere seriously with normal attitudes toward childbearing. It is obvious that moral, ethical, and legal problems arise from such situations especially when our knowledge of the natural history of the chromosomal syndrome is incomplete or derived from biased data. What do we tell the parents in such situations, when we are uncertain ourselves of the consequences of a particular test result?
DISORDERS OF SEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION OF
BEHAVIORAL INTEREST
Genetic and chromosomal disorders have been described that affect every stage of differentiation and function of the gonads and the tissues responsive to sex hormones. Several excellent reviews are available (Federman, 1967; Rimoin and Schimke, 1971). Patients range from true hermaphrodites (containing functioning ovarian and testicular tissue) to those with less severe disorders. Evidence in rats, guinea pigs, monkeys, and man demonstrates that sex hormones have important influences in the development of attitudes and many specific behaviors in addition to those directly involved in reproductive behavior (Goy, 1970). Money and his colleagues (Money and Ehrhardt, 1972) have investigated in detail a variety of chromosomal disorders and inborn errors affecting sexual development, as well as other behavioral patterns for which no biologic basis is yet known (homosexuality, trans-sexuality).
The most intriguing findings are those from studies of patients with gonadal dysgenesis or the Turner syndrome (Alexander et al., 1966). These girls have short stature (almost always less than 5 feet),

Vol. 23, No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

lack functioning ovarian tissue, and hence The girls with the adrenogenital syndrome

lack menstruation or breast development. had a much higher incidence of interest in

Nevertheless, they have essentially normal masculine-associated clothing and toy

intelligence and normal female gender preference and very little interest in infant

identity. IQ testing revealed that scores for care and feminine-associated clothing and

verbal performance regularly exceeded toys. They considered themselves and

those for nonverbal subtests, but the dif- were considered by others to be tomboys.

ference lay in the tests of space-form per- It was postulated that the tomboyish traits

ception, in which at least 80 per cent of are a product of androgenization of the

these girls are remarkably deficient. They hypothalamus or related areas of the brain

draw bizarre and poorly formed outlines in utero. There was considerable individ-

on the figure copying and Draw-a-Person ual variation, suggesting an interplay of

test. At the clinical level, many of these social conditioning and fetal androgenic

girls have difficulty finding their way in effects. Although these patients were re-

and out of the maze in our own outpatient ported to have higher than normal IQ's

clinic.

(Money and Lewis, 1966), our own studies

It is not at all clear how a chromosomal abnormality present in all the cells (45 XO) could so strikingly affect one particular cognitive function. The 45 XO karyotype can, of course, be recognized in am-

have demonstrated that the IQ's of such female patients do not exceed the values predicted by a family study of the IQ's of parents and siblings (McGuire and Omenn, 1975).

niotic cells; however, nearly half of the Since the enzymes responsible for this

cases of gonadal dysgenesis are mosaics, disorder are not normally expressed in fi-

leading to problems in diagnosis. A broblasts or amniotic fluid cells, direct

couple's decision about a pregnancy with a assay in early pregnancy for these enzymes

45 XO fetus will be influenced by their is not feasible. However, treatment is

attitudes about abortion and their willing- quite effective and reasonably simple, so

ness to accept a "less than perfect" child. many families would be willing to accept

Another interesting category of disor- the birth of an affected child, especially if ders is congenital adrenal hyperplasia, due diagnostic and therapeutic measures were to enzyme deficiencies at one of the several instituted promptly. Other families, in our

steps in the biosynthesis of cortisol. Stimulation of the adrenal by pituitary ACTH leads to high levels of cortisol precursors, including androgenizing compounds that

experience, have decided against further pregnancies, because they would not consign 25 per cent of their children to lifelong treatment with cortisone.

cause the external genitalia of a female Yet another instructive syndrome is tes-

fetus to become masculinized. Often such ticular feminization (Rimoin and Schimke,

female babies are mistakenly identified as 1971). These genetic males have a 46 XY

boys. When the metabolic abnormality is karyotype, two intra-abdominal testes,

recognized, sex should be reassigned to and produce testosterone, but their target

female.

tissues are "insensitive" to the action of

In one study, 15 girls with the adrenogenital syndrome who had been treated early with cortisone and raised as girls were compared with a control group matched for age, sex, IQ, and father's occupational level (Ehrhardt et al., 1968).

testosterone. Phenotypically, these males appear at birth and through puberty to be females, then seek medical attention in their teens for lack of menstruation or for infertility. The external genitalia are those of a normal female. The vagina ends

150

Omenn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

blindly. Breast size varies as in normal women. Psychologically, a series of ten such patients showed unmistakably feminine behavior and outlook with regard to marriage and maternalism. For four married patients, interviews of the husbands confirmed these conclusions (Money et al., 1968).
The treatment of choice is to inform the "woman" that she is infertile, that the "gonads" (not "testes") in the inguinal hernia should be removed because they are not functioning normally and may become malignant, and that any difficulty with intercourse may be improved by plastic surgery procedures. It is unwise in the extreme to advise such a person that "she" is cytogenetically a male, since physiologically, psychologically, socially, and legally she is a female. This seems to be one of those rare situations where the physician can clearly justify withholding detailed medical results.
If the syndrome of testicular feminization is recognized in a family, it is possible for a couple to avoid having affected children. Since the trait is inherited as an X-linked or sex-limited disorder, affecting only males, amniocentesis and determination of the fetal sex from the chromosomes would permit the parents to abort male fetuses (which have a 50 per cent risk of being affected) and allow female fetuses to be born.
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS NOT NOW
FEASIBLE FOR PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS
Let us turn briefly to some of the more common psychiatric phenotypes and look ahead in the hope that there will be progress in our understanding, treatment, and prevention of these disorders.
DEPRESSION (AFFECTIVE DISORDERS)
There is considerable evidence from twin and family studies that depression

and especially manic-depressive psychosis is conditioned by genetic factors (Winokur et al., 1969; Gershon et al., 1971). Among the relatives of a patient with manicdepressive psychosis, approximately 10 per cent of parents, 10 per cent of children, and 12 per cent of siblings have affective disorders. At present, there is considerable excitement among some psychiatrists with family studies that seem to indicate linkage of a putative gene for manic-depressive illness to known genetic markers on the X-chromosome. Thus, in a number of selected families it has been possible to infer linkage either to color blindness (Mendlewicz et al., 1972) or to the blood group Xg marker (Reich et al., 1969; Mendlewicz et al., 1973).
To us as geneticists these findings are most surprising, because color blindness and Xg loci are not detectably linked to each other on the X-chromosome (Sanger, 1970). Therefore, the gene postulated for manic-depressive illness would have to lie between these two markers in order to show linkage to both of them; and there would have to be a sizeable distance between the manic-depressive gene and the marker gene, leaving a substantial risk of recombination in the female, who has two X chromosomes.
As a result, it may be hazardous to predict the transmission of the manicdepressive gene from the transmission of color blindness or Xg blood group phenotype. Furthermore, we must note that neither colorblindness nor the Xg phenotype can presently be determined in utero. On the other hand, it would be a tremendous boost to biochemical research in manic-depressive illness if genetic studies can indicate that a single gene abnormality carried on the X chromosome is responsible for at least some cases of manic-depressive illness.
Also, there is growing evidence that biogenic amine metabolism may be altered

Vol. 23, No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

in depression (Bunney et al., 1972). As more knowledge is gained about the biochemistry of depression, it may become possible to assay specific enzymes or to use pharmacologic challenges in in vitro systems to identify healthy individuals or even fetuses at higher-than-normal risk of developing depression later in life (Omenn, 1973).
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Statistical analyses of family and twin data and comparisons of the incidence of schizophrenia in biologic and adoptive relatives of probands who were adopted early in life suggest a major role for genetic factors also in schizophrenia. The exact mechanism(s) of inheritance is unknown, and no specific metabolic abnormalities have been discovered as the basis of such a predisposition in the vast majority of cases. Therefore, genetic counseling for relatives of a schizophrenic patient rests on empirical risk figures (Rosenthal and Kety, 1968).
One sure sign of heterogeneity is the mimicking of schizophrenia by specific inborn errors of metabolism, such as the adult form of metachromatic leukodystrophy (Austin et al., 1968). At least two dozen patients with this rare disease have been recognized, with diagnosis after age 21 years, in whom mental and emotional changes were so severe that the patients were institutionalized with a diagnosis of schizophrenic illness. Only years later did neurologic deterioration become manifest and lead to pathologic demonstration of storage of sulfatides in the brain. Probably these patients have a less severe deficiency of the same enzyme, cerebroside sulfatase, that is deficient in the infantile form of metachromatic leukodystrophy.
It would not be surprising if many other enzymes whose complete deficiency grossly disrupts the development of central nervous system function were found to

be involved in late-onset neurological dysfunction and psychoses, either as a result of a different mutation causing less severe deficiency or because the patient was a half-deficient heterozygous carrier of the gene causing infantile onset. Very few studies of the parents or siblings of children affected with autosomal recessive inborn errors of metabolism have been made. Let us note, however, that a disease like phenylketonuria, in which the abnormality lies in a liver enzyme and effects on the brain are secondary to accumulated toxic metabolites, would not be a good choice for such studies. Instead, a disorder in which the affected enzyme normally has high activity in the brain should be selected for study.
Such a disorder is homocystinuria, in which there is deficiency of cystathionine synthetase (Mudd et al., 1970). Cystathionine is normally present in remarkably high concentrations in brain, though its function is unknown. It is one of many amino acids now considered possible neurotransmitters. Individuals affected with homocystinuria have skeletal abnormalities, ectopic lens, marked tendency to venous and arterial thromboses, and about half are retarded. Why only half are retarded is not at all clear. Those who are considered of normal intelligence might have had higher IQs if not for the homocystinuria. Among the unaffected relatives in certain families, an apparent excess of schizophrenia has been noted, but no systematic studies have been performed with carriers of the homocystinuria gene. Homocysteine and methionine are involved in methylation reactions in the brain, offering possible connection to schizophrenia if methylated neurotransmitter metabolites are really involved in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.
The enzyme deficiency of cystathionine synthetase can be demonstrated in amniotic fluid cells, and recent studies of stimu-

152

Omenn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

lated peripheral lymphocytes in our de- al., 1973). It is possible to predict the in-

partment make detection of heterozygotes heritance of myotonic dystrophy from the

by blood test feasible (Goldstein et al., secretor status of the amniotic fluid, since

1972). Even for this rare recessive disease the gene for this disease is closely linked to

(frequency about 1/40,000), the frequency the gene that determines secretion of the

of heterozygous gene carriers is 1 per cent ABH blood group substances.

in the general population.

Two of the dominantly inherited disor-

Another rare autosomal recessive condi- ders can present with depressive psy-

tion that can present with schizophrenic- choses, suggesting genetic heterogeneity

like symptoms in the early stages is pro- for affective disorders. Acute intermittent

gressive myoclonic epilepsy, Unverricht- porphyria is a metabolic disorder of heme

Lundborg syndrome (Slater and Cowie, biosynthesis in the liver (Marver and

1971). Centrencephalic epilepsy with petit Schmid, 1972). Episodes of colicky ab-

and grand mal seizures is accompanied by dominal pain with constipation occur to-

deposition of amyloid-like Lafora bodies gether with variable central nervous sys-

in the brain, retina, nerves, muscle, heart, tem involvement, including paralysis,

liver and fibroblasts. This condition agitated and paranoid depression, or

should become diagnosable in utero when schizophrenic behavior. Biochemical di-

the biochemical abnormality is elucidated. agnosis during an acute attack is highly

reliable. There is increased production

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT DISORDERS

of delta-aminolevulinic acid and por-

It is characteristic of dominantly inherited conditions that the clinical manifestations vary considerably from patient to patient, and their appearance may be delayed even for decades into middle life. Unfortunately, the biochemical basis for these disorders is still unknown. Autosomal dominant diseases that may produce mental retardation or less gross psychopathology include neurofibromatosis,

phobilinogen due to partial deficiency of uroporphyrinogenl synthetase (URO-S) in the liver. Several commonly utilized drugs induce higher activity of the rate-limiting enzyme (ALA synthetase), causing attacks in predisposed individuals. These drugs include barbiturates, certain sulfonamides, and the anti-fungal agent griseofulvin. The liver enzyme involved (URO-S) can be demonstrated in amniotic cells.

tuberous sclerosis, and myotonic dystrophy. Genetic counseling depends on making the diagnosis, and then informing an affected parent that his children have a 50 per cent risk of receiving the abnormal gene. Among those with the abnormal gene, about 10 per cent will be retarded, and probably a larger proportion will have other psychopathology.

The second condition is Huntington's disease, a degenerative neurologic and psychiatric disorder that is one of the major problems in counseling in medical genetics. Over a period of ten to twenty years, the affected person undergoes progressive deterioration of personality and of mental function, eventually requiring institutional care because of psychotic be-

Prenatal diagnosis for these conditions havior or dementia or both. Irresponsible

must wait for the development of specific social behavior may lead to psychiatric

biochemical tests or for the discovery of evaluation and a diagnosis of affective

linkage of the gene for the disease to an- or schizophrenic processes before the

other marker gene, whose product can be neurologic signs become manifest, or be-

detected in utero. One application of the fore the importance of the family history is

linkage approach can be cited (Schrott et appreciated.

Vol. 23, No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

The age of onset of involuntary movements is usually in the 30's or 40's, but may be delayed even longer. Thus, individuals at risk (SO per cent risk if a parent was affected) have the dual misery of not knowing whether they will be transmitting the disease to their children and of worrying that any twitches or behavioral problems may be early signs of the disease in themselves.
The pathophysiology of this disease is uncertain, and no specific diagnostic test is yet available. The use of L-dopa as a provocative test (Klawans et al., 1970) raises crucial ethical questions, since the patient is able to see the test result in a mirror. In the absence of treatment, individuals at risk for this disease differ in their desire to know or not to know whether they will become affected later.
ANTICIPATED TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENTS
As enzymatic assays are adapted to micromethods, the delay between the time of amniocentesis and the report of results should be shortened, relieving some of the tension of the wait. As biochemical mechanisms of more diseases are elucidated, the list of conditions for which prenatal diagnosis will be feasible should continue to grow. Detailed evaluation of the potential hazards of amniocentesis will make more exact the patients' and physicians' balancing of benefit and risk in undertaking amniocentesis for disorders of low frequency. It is hoped that better methods of terminating pregnancies in mid-gestation may be developed.
For the common psychiatric phenotypes, it is expected because of heterogeneity that the mass of cases will be attacked only gradually, as has been our experience with mental retardation syndromes. Promising approaches include the application of new staining methods for abnormal chromosomal banding patterns, the evaluation of heterozygous carriers of genes

that cause mental retardation in the homozygous state, the possibility of demonstrating linkage to easily tested genetic markers, and the development of in vitro methods for pharmacogenetic differentiation of cell responses. Many biochemical functions of responses that are characteristic of the nervous system may not be expressed in amniotic fluid cells. Progress must then depend upon "turning on" the unexpressed genes in the amniotic cells or upon safe methods for biopsy of superficial tissues or organs of the fetus.
Certain neurological conditions may be associated with congenital anomalies visible through a fiberoptic amnioscope or even visualized by X-ray of the fetus. We have recently used radiography of the forearm bones for intrauterine diagnosis in a family where thrombocytopenia and absent radii had been inherited by a previous child and thrombocytopenia had led to a devastating intracerebral hemorrhage (Omenn et al., 1973).We may expect more widespread monitoring of pregnancies and population screening for heterozygous carriers, possibly requiring computerized data evaluation and regional or national networks for counseling of family members.
SPECIAL ISSUES INVOLVING THE PSYCHIATRIST IN GENETIC COUNSELING
STRESSES OF MONITORING A PREGNANCY
With popularization of amniocentesis and prenatal diagnosis in lay magazines, many families have initiated contact with their physicians or counseling centers with the unfortunate expectation that tests can assure them of a normal baby or that many specific conditions can be tested for which no tests are available. Sometimes a couple has tried for years to have a child or has waited many years after an affected child for the possibility of such prenatal

154

Omenn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

monitoring. The many weeks of waiting until amniocentesis can be performed and until test results are available can be exceedingly stressful, especially when the hazards of a late abortion loom as a distinct possibility and the couple realizes that mistakes can be made in the testing procedures. Occasionally a couple will seek amniocentesis in the hope that something will be found to be wrong with the baby, so that they can justify to themselves terminating the pregnancy.
It is highly desirable that counseling be provided before the woman is pregnant. Sometimes extensive arrangements for specific enzymatic assays must be made or complicated testing of the woman for possible carrier status with regard to an X-linked disorder must be carried out. In any case, the stress is bound to be less if the couple can consider the genetic information and plan the pregnancy in advance.
SEVERITY OF DISEASE AND THE INDICATIONS
FOR ABORTION
If the risk of recurrence is high and the disorder severe, most couples will desire amniocentesis, unless they seek no more children. But when the risks are low, as in the case of advanced maternal age or previous trisomy 21, the couple must decide whether to take the high probability (about 99 per cent) that the fetus will not have trisomy 21 or whether to take the unknown risks associated with the procedure. Couples differ in their responses to this predicament. Therefore, it is important that detailed genetic counseling be offered before the obstetrician performs the amniocentesis.
In one series, 27 of 83 couples decided against amniocentesis after receiving counseling (Epstein et al., 1970). Many were reassured by the low recurrence risks; in three cases, the condition could not be detected by available tests; in one

case, the woman had no desire to have her pregnancy terminated whatever the outcome; and in another, there was not time to do all the necessary tests because of the advanced state of the pregnancy at which the woman presented.
With the behavioral disorders of adult onset, the definition of "genetic disease" and of tolerable severity is complicated. The available information from population, family, twin, and adoption studies suggests that genetic factors predispose to affective disorders or to schizophrenia but do not define the probability of such a predisposed person developing severe disease.
Similarly, in the cases of sex chromosomal abnormalities for which prenatal detection is already feasible, most men with XYY karyotypes are not psychopathic criminals and most individuals with XYY or XXY or XO karyotypes do not suffer serious mental impairment. Is the infertility associated with XXY or XO karyotypes a basis for the parents to insist upon abortion? Or the possibility of behavioral problems associated with XYY? The problem is vexing, because firm data on the absolute risks of such behavioral problems are not available, and there is no basis for predicting which offspring will be affected later in life.
By analogy, the discovery of Huntington's disease in a patient brings a pall over the family, because there is no treatment for the disease and no advantage of early diagnosis except the prevention of further offspring and the establishment of a diagnosis that saves the family fruitless medical inquiry. On the other hand, vigorous investigation of the family with polyposis of the colon is considered essential, since prophylactic removal of the affected colon will prevent fatal carcinoma.
Although genetic counselors seek to provide detailed information and meaningful advice, the responsibility for de-

Vol. 23, No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

riding the course of action rests with the individual couple. It is our impression that families fear behavioral disorders even more than somatic anomalies and that the majority of families would request abortion of a XYY or XXY or XO fetus, if informed of the results of the chromosomal tests.
Abortion nowadays is discussed by some people as a simple and innocuous matter. Psychologically, of course, it is not; each couple must be evaluated sympathetically. Also, there may be technical options about the type of abortion or legal obstacles in the state where the couple lives.
SCREENING FOR HETEROZYGOUS CARRIERS
An alternative to selective abortion of affected fetuses is detection and counseling of unmarried teenagers and young adults who are heterozygous carriers for such diseases as Tay-Sachs and sickle-cell anemia. These young people could avoid the birth of affected children by avoiding marriage with carriers for the same disease. Most authorities agree that a massive educational effort would be required to affect mating patterns. It is not known whether the knowledge that one is a carrier for such a disease would influence a person to avoid marrying someone who is also a carrier, and it is not known how such an educational effort should be mobilized to properly inform, and yet not frighten, these healthy carriers.

profession and lay people are becoming increasingly aware of the nature and variety of genetic diseases that require hospitalization, cause deaths, and influence the lives of people in contact with those affected with the disease. Until recently, society has disapproved of abortion as a means of preventing unwanted children. Now most people approve of abortion, at least to prevent the birth of defective children. Will amniocentesis be required for women above a certain age, just as testing for phenylketonuria is required by law in almost all states? How will society look upon the couple who refuses abortion and delivers a child with severe mental retardation who is dependent upon the society for his existence? We should emphasize that amniocentesis is usually a life-saving procedure, reassuring a couple that the fetus is unaffected by a disease, the high risk for which might have led that couple to demand termination of all pregnancies.
Many of our questions transcend the realm of medicine. It is likely that such questions will be most distressing and emotional in the area of psychiatric disorders. We must hope to bring the advancing frontier of research into meaningful contact with practicing physicians and psychiatrists in the community so that there will be better understanding within the profession and better communication with patients as we seek to serve their needs in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

SOCIETY'S POSITION WITH REGARD TO GENETIC DISEASE
With the decrease in deaths from acute infections and the recognition of so many specific inherited conditions, the medical

Supported by Grant 15253 and by a Research Career Development Award (GM43122) from the United States Public Health Service. This paper was prepared for a conference on Genetic Counseling in Psychiatric Disorders: State of the Science and the Art, May 17, 1973, at the University of Indiana, Indianapolis.

REFERENCES

ALEXANDER, D., A. A. EHRHARDT, and J. MONEY.
1966. Defective figure drawing, geometric and

human, in Turner's syndrome. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 142:161-167.

156

Omenn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

AUSTIN, J., D. ARMSTRONG, S. FOUCH, C. MITCH- intrauterine diagnosis. In D. Bergsma and A. G.

ELL, D. STUMPF, L. SHEARER, and O. BRINER. Motulsky (eds.), Symposium on intrauterine diag-

1968. Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) VII. nosis. Birth Defects: Original Article Series 7:20-

MLD inadults; diagnosis and pathogenesis. Arch. 21.

Neurol. 18:225-241.

MARVER, H. S., and R. SCHMID. 1972. The por-

BERGSMA, D., and A. G. MOTULSKY (eds.). 1971. phyrias, p. 1087-1140. In J. Wyngaarden andD.

Symposium on intrauterine diagnosis. BirthDe- Fredrickson (eds.), The metabolic basis of inher-

fects: Original Article Series 7:1-36.

ited disease. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.

BROCK, D. J. H., A. E. BOLTON, and E., MENDLEWICZ, J., and J. L. FLEISS. 1974. Linkage

SCRIMGEOUR. 1974. Prenatal diagnosis of spina studies with X chromosome markers in bipolar

bifida and anencephaly through maternal (manic-depressive) and unipolar (depressive)

plasma-alpha-fetoprotein measurement. Lancet illnesses. Biol. Psychiat. 9:261-294.

1:767-769.

MENDLEWICZ, J., J. L. FLEISS, and R. R. FIEVE.

BUNNEY, W. E., JR., F. K. GOODWIN, D. L. MUR- 1972. Evidence forX-linkage in the transmission

PHY, K. M. HOUSE, and E. K. GORDON. 1972. of manic-depressive illness. J. Amer. Med. Assn.

The "switch process" in manic-depressive illness. 222:1624-1627.

II. Relationship to catecholamines, REM sleep, MILUNSKY, A. 1973.Analyses of amniocentesis

and drugs. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 27:304-309.

samples. In L. G. Jackson and L. A.Peris (eds.),

CASEY, M. D., L. J. SEGALL, D. R. K. STREET, and Symposium on prenatal diagnosis. W. B. Saun-

C. E. BLANK. 1966. Sex chromosome abnor- ders, Philadelphia.

malities in two state hospitals forpatients requir- MILUNSKY, A., J. W. LITTLEFIELD, J. N. KAUFER,

ing special security. Nature 209:641-642.

E. H. KOLODNY, V. E. SHIH, and L. ATKINS.

DEMARS, R., G. SARTO, J. J. FELIX, and P. S. 1970. Prenatal genetic diagnosis. NewEng. J.

BENKE. 1969. Lesch-Nyhan mutation: Prenatal- Med. 283:1370-1381, 1441-1447.

detection with amniotic fluid cells. Science MONEY, J., and A. A. EHRHARDT. 1972. Man and

164:1303-1305.

woman, boy and girl. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,

DOWN, J. L. H. 1866. Observations on an ethnic Baltimore.

classification of idiots. Clinical Lecture Reports, MONEY, J., and V. LEWIS. 1966. IQ, genetics, and

London Hospital 3:259.

accelerated growth: Adrenogenital syndrome.

EHRHARDT, A. A., R. EPSTEIN, and J. MONEY. Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 118:365-373.

1968. Fetal androgens and female gender identity MONEY, J., A. A. EHRHARDT, and D. N. MASICA.

in the early-treated adrenogenital syndrome. Johns 1968. Fetal feminization induced byandrogen in-

Hopkins Med. J. 122:160-167.

sensitivity in thetesticular feminizing syndrome:

EPSTEIN, C. L., E. L. SCHNEIDER, F. A. CONTE, Effect onmarriage and maternalism. Johns Hop-

and S. FRIEDMAN. 1970. Prenatal detection of kins Med. J. 123:105-114.

genetic disorders. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 1:267- MONEY, J., R. J. GASKIN, and H. HULL. 1970.

296. Impulse, aggression, and sexuality in the XYY

FEDERMAN, D. D. 1967. Abnormal sexual develop- syndrome. St. John's Law Rev. 44:220-235.

ment: Agenetic and endocrine approach to differ- MUDD, S., W. E. HARLEY, P. M. LOEB, M. S.

ential diagnosis. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.

BROWN, and L. LASTER. 1970. Homocystinuria

KLAWANS, H. C., G. W. PAULSEN, and A. BAR- due to cystathionine synthase deficiency: The ef-

BEAU. 1970. A predictive test for Huntington's fect of pyridoxine. J. Clin. Invest. 49:1762-1773.

chorea. Lancet 2:1185-1186.

NADLER, H. L. 1971. Indications for amniocentesis

GERSHON, E. S., D. L. DUNNER, and F. K. GOOD- in the early prenatal detection of genetic disorders.

WIN. 1971. Toward a biology of affective disor- In D. Bergsma and A. G. Motulsky (eds.), Sym-

ders. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 25:1-15.

posium on intrauterine diagnosis. Birth Defects:

GOLDSTEIN, J. L., B. K. CAMPBELL, and S. M. Original Article Series 7:5-9.

GARTLER. 1972. Cystathionine synthase activity in NADLER, H. L., and A. GERBIE. 1970. Role of am-

human lymphocytes: Induction by phytohemag- niocentesis inthe intrauterine detection of genetic

lutinin. J. Clin. Invest. 51:1034-1037.

disorders. New Eng. J. Med. 282:596-599.

GOY, R.W. 1970. Early hormonal influences on the NIELSEN, J., and A. SORENSEN, A. THEILGAARD,

development of sexual and sex-related behavior,p. A. FROLAND, and S. G. JOHNSEN. 1969. A

196-206. In F. O. Schmitt (ed.), The neurosci- psychiatric-psychological study of 50 severely

ences, second study program. Rockefeller Univ. hypogonadal male patients, including 34 with

Press, New York.

Klinefelter's syndrome, 47, XXY. Acta Jutlandica

HOOK, E. B. 1973. Behavioral implications of the 41:1-183.

human XYY genotype. Science 179:139-150. OMENN, G. S. 1973. Genetic engineering: Present

JACOBS, P. A., M. BRUNTON, M. M. MELVILLE, R. and future, p.48-63. In R. H. Williams (ed.), To

P. BRITTAIN, and W. F. MCCLEMONT. 1965. Ag- live and to die: When, why, and how. Springer-

gressive behavior, mental subnormality, and the Verlag, New York.

XYY male. Nature 208:1351-1352.

OMENN, G. S., and A. G. MOTULSKY. 1973.

KELLEY, W. N., and J. B. WYNGAARDEN. 1972.

Psychopharmacogenetics, p. 5-26.Yearbook of

The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. In J. Stanbury, J. drug therapy. Yearbook Med. Publ., Chicago.

Wyngaarden, and D. Fredrickson (eds.). The met- OMENN, G. S., and A. G. MOTULSKY. 1975. Intra-

abolic basis of inherited disease. 3rd ed. uterine diagnosis and genetic counseling: Implica-

McGraw-Hill, New York.

tions forpsychiatry in the future. In D.A.Ham-

MCGUIRE, L., and G. S. OMENN. 1975. Congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (adrenogenital syndrome). I. Family studies of IQ. Behav. Genet. 5:165-173. MACINTYRE, M. N. 1971. Chromosomal problems of

burg and H. K.H.Brodie (eds.), American handbook of psychiatry, Vol. 6. 3rd ed. Basic Books, New York.
OMENN, G. S., M. M. FIGLEY, C. B. GRAHAM, AND

Vol. 2 3 ,No. 2 Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

157

W. L. HEINRICHS. 1973. Prospects for radiog- SCHROTT, H. G., L. KARP, and G. S. OMENN. 1973.

raphic intrauterine diagnosis--the syndrome of Prenatal prediction in myotonic dystrophy:

thrombocytopenia with absent radii. New Eng. J. Guidelines for genetic counseling. Clin. Genet.

Med. 288:777-778.

4:38-45.

PENROSE, L. S., and G. F. SMITH. 1966. Down's SHIELDS, J. 1962. Monozygotic twins brought up

anomaly. Little Brown, Boston.

apart and brought up together. Oxford Univ.

PRICE, W. H., and P. B. WHATMORE. 1967. Crimi-

Press, London.

nal behavior and the XYY male. Nature 213:815. SLATER, E., and V. COWIE. 1971. The genetics of

REICH, T., P. J. CLAYTON, and G. WINOKUR. 1969.

mental disorders. Oxford Univ. Press, London.

Family history studies: V. The genetics of mania. SMITH, D. W. 1970. Recognizable patterns ofhuman

Amer. J. Psychiat. 125:1358-1369.

malformation. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.

RIMOIN, D., and R. N. SCHIMKE. 1971. Genetic SMITH, D. W., and A. A. WILSON. 1973. The child
disorders of the endocrine glands. C. V. Mosby, with Down's syndrome (mongolism). W. B. Saun-

St. Louis.

ders, Philadelphia.

ROSENTHAL, D., and S. S. KETY (eds.). 1968. The THEILGAARD, A., J. NIELSEN, A. SORENSEN, A.

transmission of schizophrenia. Pergamon Press, FROLAND, and S. G. JOHNSEN. 1971. A

London.

psychological-psychiatric study of patients with

SANGER, R., and R. R. RACE. 1970. Towards map- Klinefelter's syndrome, 47, XXY. Acta Jutlandica ping the X chromosome, p. 241-266. In A. E. H. 53:1-148.

Emery (ed.), Modern trends in human genetics. WINOKUR, G., P. J. CLAYTON, and T. REICH. 1969.

Pergamon Press, London.

Manic-depressive illness. C. V. Mosby, St. Louis.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

