Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Patterns of psycholinguistic development in the severely mentally retarded: A hypothesis
David B. Burr & Art Rohr
To cite this article: David B. Burr & Art Rohr (1978) Patterns of psycholinguistic development in the severely mentally retarded: A hypothesis, Social Biology, 25:1, 15-22, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988314 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988314
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Patterns of Psycholinguistic Development in the Severely Mentally Retarded: A Hypothesis

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

David B. Burr and Art Rohr

Department of Anthropology University of Colorado Boulder, Colorado

ABSTRACT: We hypothesize that the loss of psycholinguistic skills in some cases of severe mental retardation caused by prenatal disruption closely approximates ontogenetic patterns of language acquisition and phylogenetic patterns of cognitive development. This hypothesis was tested on 131 trainable mental retardates divided into four etiological classes. The results support the hypothesis and show that certain patterns of loss occur only in mental retardation resulting from prenatal disruption and characterized by postnatal developmental delay and do not occur in postnatal environmentally caused retardation.

Research into the psycholinguistic abilities of the trainable mentally retarded (IQ 30-60) indicates that not all psycholinguistic abilities are affected by retardation in a similar manner. Mueller and Weaver (1964) and Hermelin and O'Connor (1961) report great difficulty among trainable mental retardates (TMR) in verbal expression when compared to other aspects of language and note that the visual-motor channel is developed to a greater degree than the verbal-auditory channel. Bilovsky and Share (196S) confirm this finding for Down's syndrome (DS) individuals.
This differential development of psycholinguistic skills may be caused by developmental differences which closely approximate the phylogenetic development of the cognitive systems involved. Visual-manual skills most likely developed phylogenetically in response to the hunting-toolmaking way of life prior to skills in the verbal-auditory channel. Therefore, psycholinguistic abilities in visual-motor and verbal-auditory channels may develop at different rates.

There is some evidence to suggest that these developmental patterns of psycholinguistic skills vary depending on the medically defined cause of retardation (e.g., genetic, biological brain damage, environmentally induced damage). Lyle (1960, 1961a,fr) found that retardates with DS had lower verbal ability than nonMongoloid retardates, a finding confirmed by Mein (1961) and Blanchard (1964). Furthermore, Spreen (1965) found auditory discrimination to be inferior in brain-damaged retardates and motor expression and visual reception to be major strengths among DS individuals. Smith (1962) has reported similar conclusions for educable mental retardates.
No hypothesis has been presented previously which can explain the consistent nature of differential developmental patterns among psycholinguistic abilities in different etiological classes of TMR. We hypothesize that the loss of psycholinguistic skills in some cases of severe mental retardation caused by prenatal disruption closely approximates ontogenetic patterns of language acquisition and phylogenetic

15

16

Burr and Rohr

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

patterns of cognitive development. Thus, we anticipate that verbal-auditory skills will be more greatly affected than skills in the visual-motor channel.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
One hundred and thirty-one trainable mentally retarded subjects were administered the Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities (ITPA). The ITPA interrelates processes of psycholinguistic function which operate during communication. It tests two channels (verbal-auditory and visual-motor), each of which defines sensory input and expressive output. Three processes operate within each channel. The receptive process (auditory and visual) concerns recognition and understanding of sensory input. The expressive process (verbal and manual) deals with skills necessary for communication output. The organizing process (auditory and visual) relates to the ability to recognize and use relationships among input stimuli. The organizing process includes association (the ability to relate concepts), sequential memory (the ability to reproduce sequences of stimuli from memory), and closure (the ability to identify an object from an incomplete visual or grammatic presentation). Using these channels and processes, languageability, as opposed to speech ability, can be tested and the underlying cognitive structures analyzed (Kirk and Kirk, 1971).
The subjects were divided into four categories according to the medically diagnosed cause of retardation: Down's syndrome (37 persons), biological brain damage (34 persons), known environmental cause (7 persons), and no diagnosed cause (53 persons). The "known environmental cause" group consisted of individuals whose retardation stemmed from lead paint poisoning, battered child syndrome,

postnatal head injuries, and injuries occurring at birth. Biologically braindamaged individuals all had etiologies stemming from congenital conditions, some of which disrupted prenatal development (premature birth) and some of which did not (birth hypoxia). The S3 persons in the "etiology unknown" group had never had the cause of their retardation diagnosed.
Sex, race, and socioeconomic status were used as control variables, and all 131 subjects were classified within each. A three-way analysis of variance with ITPA subtests, race, and socioeconomic level as factors showed that the only significant effect was ITPA subtests. Neither race nor socioeconomic level, nor any of the interactions, were significant. A two-way analysis of variance showed etiology and subtests to be significant factors.
RESULTS
Figure 1, which presents the differences among the ten ITPA subtests for the 131 subjects, demonstrates that the visual channel is substantially more highly developed than the auditory channel. With the exception of the association process, each visual process (e.g., visual reception) is distinctly higher than its auditory counterpart (e.g., auditory reception). If the subjects are divided into a Down's group and a non-Down's group, both groups retain the significant difference between the auditory and visual channels, with the difference more marked for the Mongoloids. In contrast to the findings of Mueller and Weaver (1964) and Hermelin and O'Connor (1961), the expressive process (verbal and manual expression combined) is stronger for both Down's and nonDown's than is either the associative or receptive process.
The relationship of psycholinguistic skills to one another can be demonstrated

Vol. 25, No. 1

PsychoHnguistic Development

AUDITORY

I VISUAL

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

3-9

3-6

FIG. 1.--The relationship of the auditory to the visual channel. The means for all ten subtests are plotted, with raw scores converted to age scores in years and months. All four etiologies are combined for a total sample size of 131.

by converting raw scores into scale scores based on the subject's mental age. Figure 2 shows the relationships among the ten abilities for each of the four etiologies. Since the mental ages used to construct the scale scores are different for each group, the pattern of abilities for each etiology must be considered independently. Each of the four groups shows a similar pattern,

with verbal and manual expression the strongest abilities in relation to the others and auditory memory the weakest. This pattern, which is accentuated among the Mongoloids, agrees with the findings of McCarthy (196S) and Bilovsky and Share (1965). Table 1 presents the results of paired <-tests used to contrast the relationship of each visual ability with its auditory

18

Burr and Rohr

Social Biology

AUDITORY

VISUAL

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

FIG. 2.--The relationship among the ten psycholinguistic abilities for each etiology. Since the scale scores were constructed on the basis of mental age, the pattern of each etiology must be considered separately. D, Down's syndrome; B, biological brain damage; E, environmental; U, unknown.

counterpart for each of the four etiologies. The most striking result is that for DS cases each visual ability is significantly higher than its auditory counterpart, whereas no such differences exist for the known environmental etiology group. The evironmental etiology group shows no substantial differences among the subtest

scores, in contrast to the DS group with its varying abilities.
Figure 3 and Table 1 demonstrate the differences among the four etiologies for each of the ten subtests. The groups were contrasted using ten Newman-Keuls tests, one for each ITPA subtest. The DS group is significantly different from each of the

Vol. 25, No. 1

Psycholinguistic Development

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
RELATIONSHIP OF THE AUDITORY CHANNEL TO THE VISUAL CHANNEL IN FOUR ETIOLOGICAL CLASSES OF MENTAL RETARDATION

CATEGORIES

DOWN'S
M.A.* Signif.

BIOL. BRAIN DAMAGE

M.A.

Signif.

ENVIRON. DAMAGE

M.A.

Signif.

CAUSE UKNOWN

M.A.

Signif.

^ BETWEEN
GROUPS

Reception Auditory Visual
Association Auditory Visual
Expression Verbal Manual
Memory Auditory Visual
Closure Grammatic . . . . Visual

3-6 4-10
3-9 4-6
4-11 6--9
2-9 4-3
3-10 4-8

° -Q0Q0 5?
n0 0n0ncS
. ,,,
0UU5
,,,,, °005

4-7 S- 5
4-11 4-10
5-4 6-1
4-0 4- 7
4-10 5- 3

00U5 XNTo
NNa
""^

5-6 5-10
5-8 S-6
S-10 6--9
4-10 6-6
S-10 6- 4

,,
No XNTo No WN o JNN o

4-7 S- 7

auu5

S-1 S-0

XNTo

5-10 6-1

N

3- 7 5- 1

U-UQU05S

5-2 6-4

.
UUU5

0.01 No
0.01+ No
DOS No
0.01 0.0S
0.01 0.01

* Mental ages in years and months. t Homogeneity of variance violated as tested by Hartley's F-max. When the degrees of freedom are reduced by two-thirds, the analysis of variance remains significant at 0.01.

other three groups for all processes in the changes both in the brain (e.g., crossauditory-verbal channel, while differences modal transfer of learning) and in the among the other three groups are rare, vocal tract (e.g., development of a speciThere arenodifferences among thegroups ous pharyngeal resonator) while skills in for three of the five visual abilities. The the former channel do not. According to environmental group is significantly dif- Haeckel's (1866) Theory of Recapitulaferent from the other groups in visual tion, this fact suggests that the anatomical memory, and the DS group differs from and cognitive basis for visual-manual the environmental and the unknown skills develops ontogenetically prior to groups in visual closure. A clear pattern structures associated with verbal speech emerges in the auditory channel. The DS and audition. If this is true, the results group is significantly lower than the other presented in this paper suggest that the groups on all abilities. No distinct pattern first psycholinguistic abilities lost in genetemerges in the visual channel, and the ically based mental deficiency andin some Mongoloids do not show as great a weak- congenitally based biological brain damness as they do in the auditory channel. age mayhave been the last psycholinguis-
tic abilities gained phylogenetically.

DISCUSSION
It is generally accepted that visualmanual skills most likely developed in response to the hunting-toolmaking way of life prior to skills in the auditory-verbal channel (see Hewes, 1961, for an excellent discussion of this point). Skills in thelatter channel necessitate additional anatomical

*n t n o s e individuals in whom retardation is known to have been caused genetically (DS), all abilities within the visualmotor field are more highly developed than are auditory-verbal abilities (Table l). Genetically based retardation affects the total verbal-auditory channel, not just a few aspects. In those individuals in whom retardation is definitely not genet-

20

Burr and Rohr

Social Biology

AUDITORY

VISUAL

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

6-9 6-5 6-1

5-9 5-5

5-1 U-9

i*-5

U-1 3-9 3-5

3-1

2-9
FIG 3 --The differences among the four etiologies for each of the ten subtests. The means for all ten subtests are plotted, with raw scores converted to age scores in years and months. D, Down s syndrome; a, biological brain damage; E, environmental; U, unknown.

ically based but rather of a known environmental etiology, retardation affects both channels equally. Biologically brain-damaged individuals demonstrate no consistent pattern. This etiological group is composed of two subgroups differentiated by the point of interference of the developmental process. One group

consists of individuals whose development was disrupted prenatally; the other group is formed by individuals whose development was disrupted at the time of birth. The inconsistent pattern within the group as a whole is therefore compatible with the hypothesis and is created by the nature of differences in the prenatal developmental

Vol. 25, No. 1

Psycholinguistic Development

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

process. The inconsistent pattern within is retarded in cases of DS and which halts

the unknown etiology group may be ex- at puberty. Both the linguistic data col-

plained on similar grounds.

lected by Lenneberg and the psycholin-

The conclusion is clear. Individuals guistic data presented here demonstrate

whose retardation is caused either genet- that this developmental schedule is grossly

ically or by mid-term disruptions in fetal patterned according to the phylogenetic

development first lose those faculties of development of these skills.

language and cognition developed last Neuroanatomical considerations sup-

phylogenetically. Retardation not caused port this hypothesis. In cases of DS, the by fetal disruption will affect visual-motor frontal and temporal convolutions are and verbal-auditory channels equally. poorly developed, and the poor develop-

Since the ontogenetic development of ment of the middle cerebellar lobes is

the fetus follows in a gross manner the functionally related to the reduced frontal

phylogenetic development of the species, convolutions (Kirman, 1969). These are

disruptions of fetal development will most the areas most highly developed in H. sa-

greatly affect those structures and cogni- piens, those portions of the brain which

tive processes, and behaviors controlled control the unique human functions of

by them, which develop last ontogeneti- auditory analysis and intersensory assocically. These are the systems least estab- ation, and those areas which develop in lished in the species, and those without the final stages of gestation. which the individual can more easily sur-

vive. They are less vital to the viability of the organism. Based on the time element

CONCLUSIONS

alone, fewer disruptions are to be expected These results suggest that differences in

in systems developing early in gestation. the development of psycholinguistic skills

Any disruption of fetal development will in certain groups of severely mentally re-

affect biological-behavioral systems which tarded individuals can be explained by

are programmed genetically to develop prenatal disruptions in pregnancy which

last ontogenetically.

lead to general retardation in the post-

It is likely that DS is a developmental natal developmental process. This process

anomaly manifested by slowed or incom- closely approximates ontogenetic patterns

plete embryological and postnatal behav- of language acquisition and phylogenetic

ioral development (Benda, 1969; Len- patterns of cognitive development. Since

neberg, 1967). Based on linguistic data an individual's cognitive language devel-

collected on DS cases by Lenneberg, et al. opment is stopped about puberty, before

(1964), Lenneberg (1967) suggests that language acquisition has been completed

language acquisition among Mongoloids is among some mentally retarded individ-

not random, but rather is patterned be- uals, skills which develop last ontogeneti-

havior which can be explained in terms of cally and phylogenetically--primarily

language arrest at "primitive, but 'normal' skills in the verbal-auditory channel--are

stages of development" (1967, p. 320). lost. These specific patterns of loss occur

This arrest happens about puberty, after only in mental retardation characterized

which further development does not oc- by postnatal developmental delay as a re-

cur. The psycholinguistic data presented sult of prenatal disruption and do not

in this paper support the idea of a genetic occur in environmentally caused retarda-

schedule of language development which tion.

22

Burr and Rohr

Social Biology

The results ofthis study provide insight guage ability reached, the onset of puberty

into the evolutionary development oflan- signals the decline in theability to learn

guage and cognitive behavior in H. sa- language. This study demonstrates that

piens. It is clear from this research that specific patterns of language acquisition

retardation characterized byprenatal dis- are followed in the severely mentallyre-

ruption and developmental delay does not tarded, and these patterns not only ap-

create random language behavior but pat- proximate, at a delayed rate, patterns of

terned behavior which must be under- language acquisition in thenormal child,

stood before effective methods can bede- but also approximate ontogenetic and

veloped to teach theretarded individual. phylogenetic cognitive development.

Furthermore, it is often not articulation

(speech) which is affected by retardation,

but language, primarily within the

verbal-auditory channel. The results also

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

lend credence to Lenneberg's (1967)hy- The authors wish to thank Dr. Lorna Moore

pothesis of a critical period for language learning. Regardless of the level of lan-

for her helpful suggestions in the analysis phase of this research and for hercritical comments on themany drafts of this manuscript.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BENDA, C. E. 1969. Down's syndrome, Mongolism ders of communication, Vol. 42. Research Publi-

and its management. Grune and Stratton, New cations, A.R.N.M.D.

York.

LYLE, J. G. 1960. The effect of an institution envi-

BILOVSKY, D., and JACK SHARE. 1965. The ITPA ronment upon the verbal development of imbecile

and Down's syndrome: An exploratory study. children: II. Speech and language. J. Ment. Defic.

Amer. J. Ment. Defic. 70:78-82.

Res. 4:1-13.

BLANCHARD, I. 1964. Speech pattern andetiology

. 1961a. Comparison of the language of nor-

in mental retardation. Amer. J. Ment. Defic. mal andimbecile children. J. Ment. Defic. Res.

68:612-617.

5:40-51.

HAECKEL, E. 1866 Generelle morphologie der or-

. 1961b. A comparison of theverbal intelli-

ganismen. Allgemeine Entwicklungsgeschichte der gence of normal and imbecile children. J. Genet.

Organismen, Vol. 2. Reimer, Berlin.

Psychol. 99:227-234.

HERMELIN, B., and N. O'CONNOR. 1961. Shape MCCARTHY, J. M. 1965. Patterns ofpsycholinguistic

perception and reproduction in normal children development of Mongoloid and non-Mongoloid

and Mongol and non-Mongol imbeciles. J. Ment severely retarded children. Ph.D. dissertation,

Defic. Res. 5:67-71.

University of Illinois, Urbana.

HEWES, G. 1961. An explicit formulation of the re- MEIN, R. 1961. Astudy of the oral vocabularies of

lationship between tool-using, tool-making, and severely subnormal patients. J. Ment. Defic. Res.

the emergence of language. Visible Lang. 7:101- 5:52-59.

127. MUELLER, M. W., and S. J. WEAVER. 1964.

KIRK, S. A., and W. D. KIRK. 1971. Psycholinguistic Psycholinguistic abilities of institutionalized and

learning disabilities: Diagnoses and remediation. non-institutionalized trainable mental retardates.

Univ. of Illinois Press, Urbana.

Amer. J. Ment. Defic. 68:775-783.

KIRMAN, B.H. 1969. Down's syndrome. Ment. Re- SMITH, J. O. 1962. Group language development for

tard.: Ann. Rev. 1:57-75.

educable mental retardates. Except. Children

LENNEBERG, E. H. 1967. Biological foundationsof 29:95-101.

language. Wiley, New York.

SPREEN, O. 1965. Language functions in mental re-

LENNEBERG, E. H., I. A. NICHOLS, and E. F. tardation: A review. I. Language development,

ROSENBERGER. 1964. Primitive stages oflanguage types of retardation and intelligence level. Amer.

development inMongolism, p. 119-137. In Disor- J. Ment. Defic. 69:482-494.

