Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Natural selection and differential population growth of human races
Frederick S. Hulse
To cite this article: Frederick S. Hulse (1972) Natural selection and differential population growth of human races, Social Biology, 19:2, 171-179, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987981 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987981
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

Natural Selection and Differential Population Growth of Human Races

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Frederick S. Hulse
Department of Anthropology University of Arizona Tucson, Arizona

It is most appropriate, I think, that this symposium should honor the memory of Charles Darwin on the hundredth anniversary of the publication of his remarkable book The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex (1871). Quite commonly, this work is referred to simply as The Descent of Man; but, in fact, approximately two-thirds of its pages are devoted to sexual selection. In Darwin's view, the connection between them was and still remains most intimate. It is most interesting to note that during the era of Victorian prudery he had the courage and the honesty to advance the thesis that selection in relation to sex has been an effective mechanism for evolutionary change. I t is also interesting to note the degree to which this aspect of Darwin's thought has been neglected-- even avoided--by most of his successors. Possibly the taboos of the past have not yet been overcome. The idea of sexual selection still seems to shock many scientists. Indeed, one of my colleagues wrote me that Darwin was a notorious ladies' man, as though this allegation were enough to refute his thesis.
Now, what is the relevance of Darwin's view concerning sexual selection to "Natural Selection and the Differential Population

Growth of Human Races"? The answer is
simple. Having been unable to prove to his own satisfaction that natural selection could account for the differences between the races of man, Darwin proposed that sexual selection could account for at least some of the observed variations. In his own words (Darwin, 1871):
. . . the differences between the races of man, as in color, hairiness, form of features, etc., are of a kind which might have been expected to come under the influence of sexual selection.
He then devotes more than five hundred pages to a review of the evidence concerning selection in relation to sex among other species before returning to the study of the secondary sexual characteristics of the human species.
Before proceeding further, it might be well to state exactly what Darwin had in mind in distinguishing sexual selection from natural selection. In his view, both are unconscious processes which happen "independently of any wish or expectation on the part of the members of the group concerned." However, he continues:
Sexual selection depends upon the success of certain individuals over others of the same sex, in relation to the propagation of the species; whilst natural selection depends

171

172

Hülse

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

upon the success of both, at all ages, in re- tion has been an effective instrument in the

lation to the conditions of life (Darwin, 1871).

past evolution of our species, it must have operated within the context of the social

In other words, sexual selection depends groupings within which our ancestors lived.

upon the favor or preference of members of And, contrary to Darwin's view, it can not

the other sex -within one's population in have been the major factor in the sub-

contrast to natural selection which depends specific differention of the stock. Other

upon the favor of natural forces exterior to aspects of culture, including the techno-

one's population. Sexual selection takes logical ones, have served to modify the

place when some males have traits which human environment in ways which seem

attract the females of the group to a greater not to have occurred to him or to his con-

degree than do other males; or when some temporaries; and I suspect culture has

females have traits which attract the males modified the human environment in ways

of the group to a greater degree than do which have not been noticed even yet. Also,

other females. These may or may not be in my opinion, Darwin did not pay enough

traits which are useful in the struggle attention to climate and geography, operat-

against adverse conditions of life; but their ing either directly or at second hand

chances of preservation will be enhanced through diet and disease, as selective factors

if they promote propagation of offspring. during the course of human evolution.

Sexual selection therefore can only operate He did note the reduction in the size of

among bisexual species; and among them, jaws and the frequent noneruption of wis-

only in species of which the members are dom teeth among what he called the "Civil-

capable of distinguishing by sensory re- ized Races." He did remark upon the body

ceptors and of discriminating in action build typical of Andean populations. He

between one another on an individual basis. wrote of the influence of diet and of ha-

Inasmuch as patterned social cooperation bitual occupation upon the size and pro-

may frequently be useful in overcoming portions of different peoples. And he

adverse conditions, it may well be that stressed the fact that as much individual

sexual and natural selection overlap in variation is found among the members of a

many cases, or even merge into one another. tribe of savages as among the members of

It seems to me, therefore, that one great a civilized nation (this must have surprised

contribution of Darwin's theory of selec- most of his readers). He considered, but

tion in relation to sex is its implicit recog- rejected, the thesis of a causal connection

nition of the vital importance of social life between skin color and climate. He empha-

to the survival of a species. On the other sized the fact that esthetic standards vary

hand, I am not able to see sexual selection from tribe to tribe, and its corollary, that

as something distinct from or contrary to most people consider their own tribe the

natural selection. After all, the members of best looking.

one's society, including those of the opposite sex, are a vital part of anyone's environment. The social structure of a population is an aspect of the natural environment to which its members must accommodate, and sexual selection is one of the functions of social structure. If, in fact, sexual selec-

His final conclusion, if I may rephrase it in modern terms, is that genetic drift, and perhaps especially the founder effect, led to the initial differences in biological traits between human populations which became separated from one another; and that these differences were accentuated by preferential

Vol. 19, No. 2 Natural Selection and Population Growth

173

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

mating as the generations went on. This conclusion has not met with general acceptance among anthropologists and other students of evolution, and the evidence available to Darwin was all too meager. Nonetheless, sexual selection, within the framework of cultural predispositions and social structure, is clearly going on all the time, just as are selection by diet, by disease, by climate stress, by occupational hazard, as well as by other environmental conditions and by chance in very small breeding populations.
As a matter of fact, several forms of natural selection are more than likely to be interacting under most circumstances. A troop of baboons, for instance, if it is to continue to exist for generations, must be composed of individuals who are able to subsist on grass roots for weeks at a time, can run and climb fast, resist endo- and ecto-parasites, infections, contagions, heat and cold, and who are able to recognize and get along with one another--and nowadays, tolerate a visiting ethologist every so often.
Traits which are helpful in one respect may be irrelevant or deleterious in another. For defense, adult males should be large. They will therefore need more food, so that a given range cannot support too many of them. They should be aggressive, but at the same time have enough common sense to be friendly with at least a few other adult male baboons. This seems to require quite a long growth period in which they can learn their manners, which in turn necessitates a larger number of breeding age females to keep the troop viable. The females, busy with their babies, need not be as large as the males, but they must be able to attract male sexual interest at the appropriate times. We are told that only a few of the males become fathers (Devore and Washburn, 1962). This is obviously sexual selection, and I wonder whether it

may not be responsible for the very late eruption of the adult canine teeth. To have such large fangs before one is strong enough to use them may be socially hazardous.
Thus, we see that the various demands imposed upon baboons as individuals, and upon baboon populations as troops, must be fitted together into a pattern if we are to understand how selection has operated during their evolution. To remove any one of the stresses could lead to a considerable rearrangement of the pattern. A lessening of the hazard of prédation, for instance, would reduce the need for impressive-appearing males. A constantly adequate food supply would reduce the need for a concentrated breeding season. In thinking about the course of our own evolution from a prehuman primate stock, we may find it useful to consider such factors.
After all, one of the major distinguishing features of human evolution, from the earliest times, has been the increasing predominance of our species over other forms of life. As Darwin wrote one hundred years ago: "Man in the rudest state in which he now exists is the most dominant animal that has ever appeared on earth. He has spread more widely than any other highly organized form" (Darwin, 1871). The evidence of archeology now demonstrates that this has been true for dozens if not hundreds of millenia. The hazards of prédation --except for our prédation upon one another--long ago ceased to be important. A constantly adequate food supply became available as human technological skill increased. We no longer need to be arboreal acrobats. At the same time, with increasing population density, infections and contagions have become very important selective stresses in the human species. As man has spread more widely over the land surface of the globe, we have had to adjust to or overcome a great variety of climatic stres-

174

Hülse

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

ses. We no longer require large canines either for combat or display--although the impulse to snarl, when provoked, has not yet vanished. The meager canines which our snarls reveal erupt earlier in the sequence of permanent dentition than do those of apes and monkeys in general. There is, to be sure, some quite legitimate questioning as to whether our prehuman ancestors had really projecting canines such as those of baboons and the Pongidae in general (Kinzey, 1971); but there can be little doubt that some reduction in size has taken place.
Despite the constantly growing importance of culture as a selective mechanism guiding the direction of human evolution, our species continues to be subject to the same sorts of forces which guide the evolution of other bisexual animals. One of these may properly be designated as orthoselective or progressive; another, as radiative or divisive (Simpson, 1949). Orthoselection, leading to better adaptation to the ecological niche of a species, seems to be universal. When we approve of the results, we call this "Progress"; when we worry about the results, we call it "Overspecialization." Adaptive radiation takes place when a species spreads so widely that differences in habitat become great enough to be significant in the life of the species. One of the interesting and important things about human culture is that it tends, in many ways, to reduce the importance of climatic and other geographical differences. As Dobzhansky and Ashley-Montagu (1947) pointed out more than twenty years ago, good judgment and intellectual acumen in general are useful in all societies and cultures. One might reasonably expect that natural selection--including sexual selection --would have favored brains over brawn among all the peoples of the world since the time of Australopithecus at the very latest. All pertinent data available support

this expectation. A helpless infancy, quadrupling of brain size after birth, early acquisition of linguistic skills, prolonged childhood, a relatively brief proportion of the female life span devoted to reproduction, the survival of the elderly are characteristic of human populations native to all different regions of the globe. So are quite a few other items of a biocultural nature: the prevalence of right-handedness; the stigmata of sexual dimorphism; the degree of nervous coordination and muscular skill; the basic {not the detailed) bodily proportions; the continual interest in sex, not only throughout the year, but at all times of the month by males and females alike from pubescence onward; the appreciation of esthetic and ethical standards, which leads to value judgments. This is the sort of world in which all human beings live. Culture governs our behavior, including our misbehavior, because our ideas are the lenses through which we view the outside world.
Nevertheless, despite the influence of universal adaptation to culture which characterizes all the populations of the human species, the fact that we have spread into all sorts of climatic zones, and come to occupy not only diverse habitats but many quite remote and isolated regions, has had effects upon our biology as well. The expectable result has been, of course, that cultural and biological variety within the species have been promoted. Barriers to gene flow inevitably arise when any species spreads so widely. Mating is bound to be more frequent among individuals who are readily accessible to one another. As human beings with ideas and standards, we have been able to erect new barriers to gene flow. Social distance as well as geographical distance separates us. Thus, in the Near East, Moslems and Christians almost never marry and are not even very likely to live in sin with one another. In the United

Vol. 19, No. 2 Natural Selection and Population Growth

175

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

States, blacks and whites marry very rarely and reproduce without marriage less than one might expect. In Europe, India, Japan, and most other parts of the world we find similar walls erected to separate people, although the excuses given differ from culture to culture.
Rules derived from our cultural preconceptions have governed human mating for thousands of generations at least, perhaps beginning with the incest taboo which forbids the union of mother and son. Therefore, a purely random exchange of genetic information within a breeding population of our species can not be expected. Selection in relation to sex is bound to go on all the time. This selection need not be in reference to any standards of beauty, to be sure. It may be determined by rules of kinship, social status, or by other factors. Yet the fact that human breeding is selective rather than random is bound to have both demographic and genetic consequences.
Let us take, for example, the contrasting results of three sorts of polygyny. Due to the relatively equal sex ratio which characterizes human populations, not only during childhood but also during adulthood, any form of polygyny tends to favor some males at the expense of others. However, the group of males who are favored depends upon the rules of the society. When, for instance, all men who live long enough are able to accummulate several wives and thereby succeed in excluding younger men, any alíeles favoring longevity are bound to increase in frequency as the generations go on, since most children will be fathered by older men. Of course, any mating system which includes the postponement of marriage and discourages premarital reproduction should also select for alíeles favoring longevity; but we have no evidence that such a system existed until rather recent times. Polygyny by older men, however, is well attested among the native Australians

and seems to be suitable to the conditions of life faced by many hunting and gathering peoples.
In some other societies, authority is exercised by a restricted hereditary class, or by leaders called kings, chiefs, or some such title. It has always been common for men with hereditary authority to accumulate extra women, whether they be called wives, concubines, or mistresses. King Solomon, of course, is the standard example. It will be recalled that he had sevenhundred wives, but only three-hundred concubines, which indicates the importance of political considerations in this sort of mating system. Gene flow between the leaders of different societies is the expectable result of such practices as this. If it lasts long enough, an international royal or noble caste may evolve, perhaps possessing biological traits which differ from those which characterize the subordinate classes in each of the separate societies concerned.
At the same time, unless the hazards and stresses encountered by members of the ruling group are much greater than those of their subjects, the frequency of any genetic traits which distinguish the rulers from the ruled should increase. Although the scanty data available (all from Africa) show that each wife in a group of wives who share a single husband has fewer offspring than the sole wife of a monogamous spouse, a polygynous human begets a greater number of children than average (Dorjahn, 1958). A further result of such a mating system is an increase in the amount and speed of gene flow from the upper classes into the rest of the population, since not all of the offspring of polygynous males are accepted as members of the upper classes.
In still other societies, wealth rather than ancestral prestige is what really matters. The importance of family alliances by the exchange of women is then reduced, and a

176

Hülse

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

man who can afford to support several wives or mistresses has more freedom of choice to seek out those whom he finds most charming in one way or another. Physical attractions can assume a great deal of importance in this case, which is what Darwin seems to have been thinking about when he described the results of sexual selelction in the human species. The different standards of beauty found in different cultures will then come to influence the course of evolution in each breeding population in such a way as to accentuate population differences. If such standards are adhered to, for the most part, and if they change little as the centuries pass, later generations in each population should approximate the ideal more and more closely.
We have evidence which suggests that this has indeed taken place in a number of instances. The Charleston Negro population described by Pollitzer (19S8) approximates the white more closely in morphology, which can be seen, than in blood-type frequencies, which are invisible to the eye of a suitor. In the countries of Central Europe, the incidence of blood type B suggests a degree of Asian ancestry which does not agree with the evidence of morphological features (Manuila, 1956). Seven centuries after the reconquest of Andulsia from the Moors, I found the more prosperous classes there to be less brunette than the peasantry (Hülse, 1960), just as the more prosperous Japanese are more fairskinned than the poor (Hülse, 1967). The degree to which polygyny is concerned varies from place to place, but it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that sexual selection has been taking place with respect to traits which can be perceived by other members of the population. And it does seem to have led to evolution in the direction of the standard of the dominant group, whether this group be gerontocrats, aristocrats, or plutocrats.

It is a matter of some interest that as technology has improved, social structure has altered. One need not adhere to the evolutionary explanations give by Morgan or Marx, White or Steward, to recognize this. When no one has accumulated many goods, the only possible form of polygyny is the accumulation of extra wives by old men. When food production developed, some families or individuals could and commonly did acquire a disproportionate share of power, prestige, or produce. When commerce developed, individual wealth rather than ancestral prestige became emphasized. And the lives of the rich provide stresses quite different from the lives of the poor. New mating systems, including but by no means restricted to the forms of polygyny just mentioned, came into existence. With the invention of power machinery, the production of huge quantities of goods became possible, leading to more commerce and more plutocracy than ever. This, in turn led to better nutrition and health in the upper classes than in the lower, which may come to differ from one another a good deal.
As everyone knows, new inventions do not occur simultaneously in all parts of the world, although many items have undoubtedly been separately devised in more than one place. Some technological advances take place in one area, some in another. They all lead to easier exploitation or greater production, or both, which give an advantage in the struggle for existence to the group concerned. This in turn facilitates an increase in population because the carrying capacity of the area inhabited increases. Sometimes, previously uninhabitable areas may come to support a considerable human population after an advance in technology has been achieved. The continued occupation of Europe during the Wiirm glaciation is an early example. Clothing had been invented, and the kit

Vol. 19, No. 2 Natural Selection and Population Growth

177

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

of stone tools much improved. The occupation of Polynesia is a much later example. Outrigger canoes, improved fishing techniques, and efficient government had been devised. The extraordinary increase in population in the Near East after the cultivation of crops began, and throughout the world after the application of public health methods, need to be mentioned in this connection. There is no evidence that Neolithic peasants were biologically superior to Mesolithic hunters, or that modern man is an improved version of his Paleolithic ancestor. Technological advance has made the difference, as I pointed out quite a few years ago in my paper on "Technological Advance and Major Racial Stocks" (Hülse, 1955).
It is worth mentioning now, however, that the selective stresses which operate upon different populations are subject to modification depending upon the prevalent social structure as well as upon the economy and technology in current use, and that these two factors are often associated. Social structure influences the manner in which genes are channeled and redistributed within a breeding population, as I mentioned earlier in speaking of the effects of different forms of polygyny. The economy of hunters and gatherers whose technology is meager precludes the accumulation of women by wealthy men, because such men do not exist. Monogamy, or polygyny by older men, are both found in such groups. Quite commonly, the birth rate is comparatively low, and infanticide --especially of baby girls--has frequently been reported. Almost all females who live to be twenty years old or more have children, as do almost all males who live to be thirty. Older people, if there are any, have the socially useful roles of childcare and the passing on of traditional lore. Genetically, selection in favor of longevity should be brought about, although the hazards of

existence may prevent its expression in many cases. Preferential mating is exceedingly difficult, except for the avoidance of incest as locally defined, because not many potential mates are available.
During the past few millenia, and especially the last few centuries, very few tribes have lived this sort of life. They are found, as a rule, in remote and inhospitable environments, and none of them are now numerous. If genetic drift ever has the chance to operate effectively, it should be upon such small populations. But do they really typify an earlier stage, through which our ancestors all passed before the development of food production? This has often been assumed, rather rashly in my opinion. A thousand generations ago, when hunting and collecting were universal, many bands lived in very hospitable environments and could easily have been in genetic communication with neighbors leading the same sort of life. Nevertheless, compared to the populations of modern industrial nations, free choice of mates and polygyny by a small class must have been restricted.
An economy based upon agriculture or even horticulture does permit such selective mating patterns to a greater extent. It also expands, geographically, as the archeological record shows. Migration and cultural diffusion have both taken place upon innumerable occasions in the past. Migration can spread genetic characteristics very rapidly, and to great distances. Modern Australia and New Zealand have alíele frequencies indistinguishable from those of the British Isles, for instance. Cultural diffusion works more slowly. Gene flow trickles outward from the diffusion center as the generations pass, but its effects may be contradicted or at least delayed by natural selection in many instances. Europe, for example, learned about food production and later about metallurgy from the Near East without coming to resemble the

178

Hülse

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Near East in genetic characteristics. In on the dank and chilly altiplano of Peru,

both cases, however, new mating patterns for instance, send out their young sons to

were made possible by the accumulation of herd the livestock. Growth is slow and

wealth and power.

maturity delayed in this population. An

The demographic structure of an agri- entire household huddles in a heap at night

cultural society depends upon the interac- to keep warm. This seems to work, but it

tion of mating systems and environmental is also a splendid way to spread contagions

stresses, both of which are different from (Hanna, 1968). How it affects gene flow

those of hunting and gathering bands. A I have not been told. In any case, one can

few men are likely to contribute much see that climatic effects are mediated by

more to the gene pool of the next genera- cultural practices, not just by the tech-

tion than average, simply because of their nology available.

social position, not because of their bio- The warm and humid climates of the

logical superiority or their sexual prowess. Amazon and of the Congo basin have not

The infant death rate is likely to be high, been dealt with in the same ways by the

because of the ease with which contagions cultural and especially the technological

spread in crowded, unsanitary settlements. practices of the native populations. Ama-

The birth rate is likely to be high as well; zonian Indians, lacking metal tools, found

if it is not, the tribe becomes extinct. Can it more difficult to clear the jungle for their

we say that selection is relaxed under these crops. They produced less, and there were

circumstances? I suggest that it is simply far fewer of them. At the same time, they

redirected. New stresses require new adap- did not create conditions favorable for

tations. In some cases, new foods may have mosquitoes, and malaria does not seem to

had a strong selective effect, as McCracken have become endemic. Selection in favor of

(1971) claims to be the case with respect the sickle cell was not promoted by their

to milk. This may have been true of the way of life, whereas, as Livingstone (1958)

fava bean, and even of rice. New work has so elegantly demonstrated, it was pro-

habits may also have a selective- effect. moted by African agricultural techniques.

Myopia, for example, may not interfere Even today, ten generations after Negro

with raising crops, but it may interfere slaves began to escape into the South

with successful hunting.

American rain forest, the sickle-cell trait is

In a commercial society, still further changes take place. Preferential mating is encouraged. Gene flow is stimulated by the traveling of traders. With the exchange of

almost if not totally absent among the native Indians, and the density of the population remains low in contrast to that of Equatorial Africa.

knowledge as well as of material goods, A biologist who was blind to the cultural

comfort and health are improved. The factors in human adaptation might say--

death rate, and later the birth rate, are in fact, one of them did say to me--that

likely to decline, so that the population this difference in numbers must be due to

pyramid begins to resemble an obelisk. inherited biological adaptations to the stres-

Population density increases, as does dis- ses peculiar to the humid tropics, perhaps

tant migration.

body build or skin color. But if we continue

Biological adaptation to such a natural our journey around the equator, we reach

force as climate, therefore, will depend Indonesia and Indochina. In these areas,

upon the manner in which the culture at- the native population is even denser than

tempts to deal with the climate. Farmers in Africa, although in body build and pig-

Vol. 19, No. 2 Natural Selection and Population Growth

179

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

mentation the people approximate the death rate is commonly thought of as the

Amazonians rather than the Central Afri- typical cause of population increase. The

cans. The cultivation of rice, long estab- present population explosion which threat-

lished and skillfully conducted, can support ens us is largely the result of a drop in

a far greater population than can the food infant mortality. Obviously, fewer deaths

production methods of Africa or of the must mean that some individuals survive

Amazon valley. Clearly, it is technology who would have died under other condi-

rather than biology that is responsible. The tions, presumably including those who have

materials utilized and the organization of some genetic weakness.

production, rather than tools alone, are in- However, an increased birth rate, with

volved in the obviously different densities no change in thedeath rate, also leads toa

of these populations.

speeding up of population growth. And, in

And, of course, population density is large populations the role of genetic drift

among the environmental factors which is bound to be reduced, whereas the selec-

serve as selective stresses upon thepeoples tion of mates becomes easier when there

concerned. When we observe that some are many individuals of the opposite sex

populations have increased in numbers available, rather than only a few. Thus,

much more rapidly than have others, it is natural selection, including selection in

easy, quite natural, and not illogical to relation to sex, seems to be themajor force

jump to the conclusion that natural selec- leading to the continued evolution of the

tion has been relaxed. A reduction ofthe human species in the world today.

REFERENCES

DARWIN, CHARLES. 1871. The descent of man and
selection in relation to sex. John Murray, London.
DEVORE, I., and S. L. WASHBURN. 1962. Baboon
ecology. Film from University of California, Berkeley.
DOBZHANSKY, T., and M. F. ASHLEY-MONTAGU.
1947. Natural selection and the mental capacities of mankind. Science 105:587-590. DORJAHN, V.R. 1958. Fertility, polygny andtheir interrelationships in Temme society. Amer. Anthrop. 60:838-860. HANNA, J. M. 1968.Cold stress andmicroclimate in theQuechua Indians of southern Peru.Ph.D. dissertation, University of Arizona, Tucson. HULSE, FREDERICK S. 1955. Technological advance and major racial stocks. Hum.Biol. 27:184-192.
. 1960.Adaptation, selection andplasticity. Hum. Biol. 32:63-79.
. 1967. Selection for skin color among the

Japanese. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 27:143155. KINZEY, W. J. 1971. Evolution of the human canine tooth. Amer. Anthrop. 73:680-694.
LIVINGSTONE, FRANK B. 1958. Anthropological
implications of sickle-cell gene distribution in West Africa. Amer. Anthrop. 60:533-562. MCCRACKEN, R. D. 1971. Lactase deficiency: An example of dietary evolution. Curr. Anthrop. 12:479-517. MANUILA, A. 1956. Distribution of ABO genes in Eastern Europe. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 14: 577-588. POLLITZER, W. S. 1958. The Negroes of Charleston (S.C.), a Study of Hemoglobin Types, Serology and Morphology. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 16:241-263. SIMPSON, G. G. 1949.Themeaning of evolution. Yale University Press, New Haven.

