Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Public policy and adolescent sexual behavior in the United States
Madelon Lubin Finkel & David J. Finkel
To cite this article: Madelon Lubin Finkel & David J. Finkel (1983) Public policy and adolescent sexual behavior in the United States, Social Biology, 30:2, 140-150, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988528 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988528
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 14
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Public Policy and Adolescent Sexual Behavior in the United States

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Madelon Lubin Finkel and David J. Finkel
Department of Public Health, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York; and Research Consultant, 292 Sarles Lane, Pleasantville, New York
ABSTRACT: In the past decade, significant policy and legal changes have occurred that affect sexually active minors, pregnant adolescents, and adolescents who have become parents. This paper examines U.S. governmental policies and laws relating to (1) the development and dissemination of sex-related health services and information for male and female adolescents and (2) the formal teaching of sex education in the public schools. It is maintained that despite the progress that has been made during the 1970's, a need for sex-related services and information to the adolescent population still remains. Much remains to be done to formulate more relevant, effective policies and programs for adolescent males and females.

The prevention of adolescent preg- cian would treat any medical condition, nancy is far less expensive, economically pregnancy-related or otherwise.

and psychologically, than the alternatives (birth or abortion). Unfortunately, the majority of American teenagers who are at risk of becoming pregnant do not receive family planning services from public or private agencies or from private physicians (Dryfoos and Heisler, 1981). While most teenagers would prefer to avoid an unplanned pregnancy, present policy limits, restricts, and, in some cases, denies adolescents access to birth control information which they need; that is, institutional barriers often serve to limit the dissemination of birth control information and services to teenagers (Finkel and Finkel, 1981). In the past, for example, teenage girls had difficulty obtaining effective methods of birth control unless they first became pregnant (Sklar and Berkov, 1974), and family planning clinics rarely considered including the

In the last decade, much attention has been given to the adolescents' rights to exercise control over certain aspects of their lives. Significant legal changes have occurred that affect sexually active minors, pregnant adolescents, and adolescents who have become parents. Sexual intercourse is occurring at earlier ages for more teenagers than was the case a decade or two ago. Also, venereal disease and other sex-related problems are occurring frequently in an increasingly younger population, and a greater number of teenagers are becoming pregnant. Predominantly as a result of changes in social mores among the teenage population and partly as a result of changes in adult attitudes toward teenage sexual behavior, substantial changes in laws and policies relating to the provision of sex-related services1 and infor-

teenage male in their programs. Furthermore, adolescents of both sexes had to have parental consent before a physi-

1Sex-related services refer to the treatment for venereal disease, pregnancy testing, and fitting/insertion of birth control devices.

140

Vol. 30, No. 2

Adolescent Sexual Behavior

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

mation to the adolescent population have taken place.
This paper presents an overview of the changes in public policy during the 1960's and 1970's. Examination of U.S. governmental policies and laws relating to (1) the development and dissemination of sex-related health services and information for male and female adolescents and (2) the formal teaching of sex education in the public schools will show that from the early 1960's to the late 1970's, such policies and laws have become more favorable to the adolescent. This trend has made it easier not only for adolescents of both sexes to consent to and receive sex-related health care, but also for physicians to dispense such care without fear of legal recriminations.
The government's role in the provision of sex-related services and information to the adolescent also has become increasingly important and constructive during the 1970's as compared to the 1960's. Nonetheless, the government is content to design programs which assist the pregnant teenager during and following her pregnancy rather than formulating policies and programs to aid both the adolescent male and female in the prevention of unintended pregnancies. While policies have begun to address the need to provide teenagers with straightforward information to help them understand human sexuality and to behave responsibly, there is little evidence of strong commitment by state legislatures, boards of education, or the federal government in developing a school curricula on sex/family life education.

to services to prevent or to terminate unwanted conceptions. Unemancipated adolescents of both sexes had to have parental consent before a physician would treat any medical condition, pregnancy-related or otherwise, except in cases of emergency. The mature minor doctrine,2 however, has superseded parental consent requirements.
An epidemic of venereal disease among sexually active minors in the 1960's led many states either to remove the age limit or to lower the age at which minors would consent by themselves to medical treatment without parental consent. During the late 1960's and early 1970's numerous court rulings expanded a minor's right to obtain sex-related medical care. However, it was not until the mid-1970's that a coherent body of law emerged. Two legal principles now exist: (1) Mature minors have a constitutional right to obtain reproductive health services on their own consent, and (2) all minors have a constitutional right to have an alternative to parental involvement in implementing their decision about such health care (Paul and Pilpel, 1979). The Supreme Court recognized that minors have a basic constitutional right of privacy which extends to their use of contraceptives as well as to their obtaining an abortion.
Access to abortion and contraception is related to the legal evolution of the right of privacy. In the case of Griswold v. Connecticut,3 the Supreme Court struck down a Connecticut statute making the use of contraceptives a criminal offense as violating the constitutional

JUDICIAL ACTIONS
Until very recently, laws, policies, and programs denied teenagers access

2A minor who is deemed sufficiently intelligent and mature and who is able to understand the nature and consequences of his/her health problem and the treatment prescribed is considered to be a "mature minor."
3Griswold v. Connecticut 381 U.S. 479 (1965).

142

Finkel and Finkel

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

right of privacy. The Court decision, risks than do those of adult women, it

however, was directed toward the right was felt that Roe v. Wade should be ap-

of privacy among married adults and plied to unwed teenagers.

was concerned with the restriction on It was in the Supreme Court deci-

use of contraceptives only. It was in sions of Planned Parenthood of Central Eisenstadt v. Baird4 that the Court re- Missouri v. Danforth7 and Bellotti v.

solved the issue of access to contracep- Baird8 that the principles that minors

tives by unmarried adults. It was held have rights to access to sex-related

that unmarried adults have the same right to privacy as married adults and the states cannot prohibit the sale of contraceptives to single adults.

health care was firmly established. In Danforth, both spousal consent and parental consent were held unconstitutional. The Bellotti decision invalidated

The Supreme Court took the same statutes requiring that parents be no-

rights enumerated in Griswold and tified in all cases before an abortion was

Baird and extended them to women performed on their minor daughter. seeking abortion. In Roe v. Wade,5 the That is, the Court ruled that a minor ca-

Court held that the right of privacy in- pable of giving informed consent may

cludes the right of a woman to terminate obtain a court order without parental

her pregnancy free from state intrusion. consultation if state law requires paren-

During the first trimester of a preg- tal consultation and consent. The Court

nancy, the decision to terminate the also ruled that the law permits a minor

pregnancy and to carry out an abortion incapable of giving an informed consent

is a decision that must be made by the to obtain an abortion without parental

woman and her physician. After the first consultation when it is shown that an

trimester, the state may adopt regula- abortion is in her best interest. That is,

tions for abortion that are reasonable immature minors seeking abortion must

for the purpose of promoting the health be provided with a "swift and confiden-

and well-being of the mother. In Doe v. Bolton,6 the Court ruled that a Georgia

tial alternative" to parental involvement if a court decides that the abortion is in

law restricting abortions to state resi- her best interest.

dents who have obtained approval from The Bellotti decision initially was

a committee of doctors was unduly bur- given a strict interpretation and the case

densome. Therefore, the Roe and Doe decisions firmly established the right of an adult woman to decide whether to have an abortion or not without state interference.

was appealed again to the Supreme Court. In Baird v. Bellotti9 (commonly referred to as Bellotti II) the Court made clear that the state laws which require parental consent for abortions for

The law regarding the right of a mi- minors are unconstitutional. The Bel-

nor to consent to an abortion without lotti II ruling is important because it

parental knowledge or consent was still holds that mature minors have a right to

unresolved. Since teenage pregnancies make their own. decisions about abor-

and childbirth involve greater medical

4Eisenstadt v. Baird 405 U.S. 438 (1972). 5Roe v. Wade 410 U.S. 113 (1973). 6Doe v. Bolton 410 U.S. 179 (1973).

7Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth 428 U.S. 52 (1976).
8Bellotti v. Baird 428 U.S. 132 (1976). 9Baird v. Bellotti 99 S.Q. 3035 (1979).

Vol. 30, No.2

Adolescent SexualBehavior

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

tion and that no one can override that the Medicaid program. Both programs

decision. It also recognized that it was are subsidized by federal funds and reg-

the interests of the minor that must gov- ulated under the Social Security Act of ern the decision whether an abortion 1935. In Jones v. T. H.,11 however, the

may be authorized for an immature mi- Supreme Court held that Utah's written

nor. The sole criterion for an abortion is requirement of written consent by a mi-

whether it is in the immature minor's nor's parent before family planning

best interest or not.

services could be dispensed was incon-

In March, 1981, however, the Su- sistent with federal law. Indeed, it is preme Court ruled in H. L. v. Mathe- stipulated in federal law that states parson10 that a state may require a physician ticipating in AFDC or Medicaid proto inform a teenage girl's parents before grams must provide family planning asan abortion is performed if the daughter sistance to program recipients which is living at home and dependent on her includes sexually active minors who deparents. The decision was limited in that sire such assistance. Agencies providing it applies only to a narrowly defined contraceptive services that receive funds group of minors, those minors living at under Title XX (Social Services) and unhome and dependent upon their parents der Title XX of the Social Security Act for support, not to emancipated or ma- are required to provide such services to ture minors. The Court did not address eligible persons, minors included, rethe issue of whether a state may require gardless of age or marital status.

parental notification for minors who are sufficiently mature to give informed consent to abortion or who are emancipated. This issue is certain to reach the Supreme Court within the next few years.

New York State, however, did have a law which prohibited the sale of nonprescription contraceptives to anyone younger than 16 years. In Carey v. Population Services International,12 the Court ruled in 1977 that the state statute

In addition to clarifying the rights of which forbade nonphysicians (primarily

minors to seek an abortion without pa- pharmacists) from distributing nonha-

rental consent, the court has also ruled zardous (nonprescription) contracep-

on the constitutionality of minors to ob- tives to anyone under the age of 16 was

tain nonprescription contraceptives unconstitutional. New York State ar-

with their own consent. It would seem to gued that the free availability of nonpre-

follow from past Supreme Court rulings scription contraceptives would lead to

that mature minors have a constitutional increased sexual activity among the

right to decide whether or not to use younger teenagers. However, the Court

contraceptives. In general, the Court ruled that New York State failed to

rulings have affirmed this right. For ex- demonstrate that prohibiting the distri-

ample, the State of Utah had required bution of contraceptives to minors de-

parental consent for the distribution of terred them from having sexual inter-

contraceptives to minors with particular course. Moreover, New York State

reference to the AFDC program (Aid to conceded that there was no evidence

Families with Dependent Children) and

10H.L. v. Matheson 101S.Ct. 1164(1981).

11Jonesv. T.H. 96 S. Ct. (1976). 12Careyv. Population Services International 97 S.Ct. 2010(1977).

144

Finkel and Finkel

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

that teenage sexual activity increases in proportion to the availability of contraceptives.
Since the Court had ruled that a state may not impose a blanket prohibition or blanket requirement of parental consent on the choice of a minor to terminate her pregnancy, the Court held in the Population Services case that blanket prohibition against the distribution of nonprescription contraceptives to minors was not permissable. The Population Services case gives minors the right of access to nonprescription contraceptives regardless of their age or maturity. The Court also held that any blanket prohibition of advertising and/or display of contraceptives was unconstitutional.
The Population Services case did not deal directly with either the issues of parental consent or prescription contraceptives. However, following the Danforth and Bellotti II cases, it would seem that at least a majority of justices on the Court would agree that mature minors have a constitutional right to seek and to receive both prescription and nonprescription contraceptives without parental consent or notification. Indeed, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in 1980 ruled in Doe v. Irwin13 that parents do not have a constitutional right to receive prior notice that their minor daughter is getting birth control information and contraceptives from a state-operated family planning clinic. This unanimous ruling reversed a U.S. district court opinion that parents have a constitutionally protected right to be notified that their minor daughter is seeking contraceptives services.
Even though parental consent is now not required, in reality compliance with the law can be easily circumvented. For
13Doe v. Irwin No. 78-1056 (6th Cir.).

example, in Tennessee, adolescents can obtain birth control services without parental consent, yet the state legislature has not always appropriated enough money to establish meaningful family planning services. Moreover, the private provider who receives no public funds is under no obligation to provide sex-related services with or without parental consent.
In summary, very recent Supreme Court decisions have made it clear that minors do have constitutional rights regarding the provision of sex-related health services. The Court recognized that minors have a basic constitutional right of privacy which extends to their use of contraceptives as well as to their obtaining an abortion. These decisions are particularly important in that they provide a framework for all laws and regulations as well as invalidate numerous conflicting state laws (federal law automatically supersedes any contrary state law). Indeed, a number of states have instituted policies which permit minors to make their own decisions about sex-related health care and have provided safeguards or assistance to minors which do not include any parental consent requirements. Court rulings have generally upheld principles preserving the interests of the individual adolescent. However, the New Right's "profamily" philosophy has had an impact on fertility-related state laws. More laws relating to minors' access to medical care in general, and contraceptive and abortion services in particular, were enacted in 1981 than in any year since 1972 (Donovan, 1982). Many of these laws are clearly designed to discourage, restrict, or limit by parental notification or consent requirements minors' access to abortion. Whether this trend will continue remains to be seen.

Vol. 30, No. 2

Adolescent Sexual Behavior

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE ACTIONS
The role of the legislative and executive branches also has become increasingly important and, to a certain extent, more constructive in the 1970's than was the case in the 1960's. In the 1970's the government began to assume a more active role in providing and financing sexrelated programs, particularly for the adolescent population and for those with low income. Of note is the passage of Title X of the Public Health Services Act of 1970 and Title V of the Social Security Act (passed in 1935 but amended by the Child Health Act of 1967) which led to a substantial increase in monies allocated for support of family planning service projects. The Family Planning Service and Population Research Act of 1970 authorized funds for the support of new and better methods of birth planning, for manpower training, and for the preparation of informational materials. Since 1977, the emphasis has been to create and expand accessibiity to voluntary family planning services for adolescents.
The Adolescent Health Services and Pregnancy Prevention and Care Act of 1978 (PL 95-626), was the first legislative initiative to deal explicitly with issues of adolescent sexual behavior. Passage of this legislation clearly indicates the awareness of policy makers regarding the problems of adolescent pregnancy and teenage sexuality. In 1979, the Office of Adolescent Pregnancy Programs was established in the Public Health Service to administer the Adolescent Pregnancy Prevention and Care Program mandated by the Act of 1978 and to coordinate all programs in the Department of Health and Human Services concerned with various aspects

of adolescent pregnancy. Unfortunately, there are over 85 federal programs designed to assist adolescent parents and their children, and these programs are uncoordinated and in some cases duplicative.
The government has, then, assumed a more active role in providing and financing sex-related programs, particularly for the adolescent population and for those with low incomes. Empirical research has shown that government policies are achieving their objectives. Moore and Caldwell (1977) conducted a study designed to test whether government programs had consequences other than those officially intended. They found that the availability of contraception and abortion did not seem to encourage teenagers to initiate sexual activity and that the availability of subsidized family planning services did apparently lower pregnancy rates, especially among black teenagers. The availability of abortion seemed to reduce substantially the incidence of out-ofwedlock childbearing, especially among the white adolescents. Moreover, the level of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) benefits did not appear to serve as economic incentives to childbearing outside of marriage for either the black or white teenagers. Previously, the availability of AFDC had been thought to encourage teenagers to become pregnant in order to form their own households to escape parental control and/or conflict (Sklar and Berkov, 1974; Connolly, 1975).
SEX EDUCATION POLICIES Although public policy has shifted over the years from a "do nothing" attitude to one of substantial financial and administrative involvement in the provision of sex-related services to the adoles-

146

Finkel and Finkel

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

cent population, policy regarding the dissemination of information (sex education) has not been as substantial. A coherent policy regarding the teaching of sex education to the teenage population has yet to be adopted. In fact, the existence and the scope of sex education have been challenged and questioned on national, state, and local levels (Kirby et. al., 1979). Sex education, as used in this report, refers to the teaching of the biological process of reproduction, contraception, human sexual development; sociocultural and psychosocial aspects of sexual behavior; and interpersonal relationships.
The rationale behind formal sex education instruction is that increased knowledge about human reproduction, sexual behavior, and contraception could dispel misconceptions, myths, and half-truths while encouraging more informed, responsible decision-making about individual sexual activity and behavior and helping to create satisfying interpersonal relationships. Sex education programs are not intended to override or to replace the moral teachings of the parents; rather, such instruction is designed to provide the adolescent with an understanding and knowledge of human sexual relationships.
The decision to offer a course or unit on sex education has traditionally been under the auspices of the state governments, which have the authority to regulate educational matters. Yet the approach of state governments to local decisions varies from detailed policy statements of guidelines to proclamations stressing the exclusive responsibility for local decisions in educational matters. State government Boards of Education may issue "guidelines" or "policy statements" which are meant to serve as recommendations to local

boards and school authorities. In reality, such an arrangement often results in haphazard, uneven policy. While state guidelines tend to support sex education, such support is generally weak, and local autonomy in policy-making content and subject matter is strongly encouraged.
While no state prohibits the teaching of sex education (Louisiana was the last state to repeal its law in 1979), Maryland, Kentucky, New Jersey, and the District of Columbia are the only ones to require courses in family life and sex education (Kenney and Alexander, 1980). Six states14 encourage local school districts to offer family life and sex education courses but do not require it, and 22 states allow the decision to be made at the local level. However, of those 31 states with policy statements, the content of what is taught and the number of hours spent in class on the subject varies considerably among local school districts. The remaining 20 states do not require family life and sex education courses and have no policy statements.
The actual number of public school systems offering sex education is difficult to assess. In 1973 the National Institute of Education (NIE) took a random sample of U.S. public high schools and found that 36 per cent offered a "separate course" in sex education (National Institute of Education, 1978). However, this estimate has been judged to be any unit on sex education within any semester's course. Moreover, the percentage of schools is less than the percentage of school districts offering sex education, and since sex education is usually not a required course, the number of students receiving sex education instruction is a fraction of the total num-
14DeIaware, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, and Utah.

Vol. 30, No.2

Adolescent SexualBehavior

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

ber of students in each school. Moreover, Huether and Gustavus (1977) reported that the majority of sex education "courses" are actually units within another course and typically last less than ten hours.
Not surprisingly, there is wide variation in the topics covered in sex education courses. A1976 nationwide study of high school teachers who taught any population-related subject found that only one-third of those polled taught something about human reproduction or about sex and abortion. Roughly 30 per cent reported teaching something about birth control. The study showed that three-quaters thought that human reproduction and sex-related topics were "controversial" subjects and that 9 out of 10 thought that birth control and abortion were "very controversial" subjects (Gustavus and Huether, unpublished data).
In summary, while restrictive laws have been modified or repealed by Supreme Court decisions and governmental policy has shifted from benign neglect to one of substantial financial and administrative involvement, the teaching of sex education in the public schools, in general, remains haphazard and inadequate with state guidelines and local autonomy creating variations in the scope and content of the subject matter taught. The hesitancy of school officials to design and to implement effective curricula has yet to be overcome, and parental involvement is minimal at best.
EXTENT OF THE PROBLEM
In comparison to rates in other developed and developing countries, the proportion of births per thousand women younger than twenty years is higher in

the United States than in any of the Western European countries, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and Canada. The U.S. rate is about three times higher than that of the Soviet Union and is higher than the rate in developing countries such as Tunisia. Only Thailand, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Yugoslavia, Romania, Hungary and Bulgaria have higher rates (Demographic Year Book: 1978, 1979). These high rates are believed to be the result of adolescents engaging in sexual intercourse at earlier ages than was the case in the early 1970's.
Empirical studies on American adolescent sexual behavior, contraceptive utilization, and knowledge of human reproduction show that teenagers are engaging in sexual intercourse at young ages (< 15 years) and that the proportion of teenagers who have had intercourse has increased from the beginning of the 1970's to the mid to late part of the decade (Zelnik and Kantner, 1977, 1978; Finkel and Finkel, 1975). Use of contraceptives is still haphazard although more teenagers are using effective contraceptives at the end of the 1970's than was the case during the beginning of the decade (Zelnik and Kantner, 1977; Finkel and Finkel, 1978; Shah et al., 1975). Zelnik and Kantner (1979) for example, calculated that the difference between "no use of contraception" and "always use of contraception" (by those who do not want to conceive) is roughly one million pregnancies. Although crude, this estimate gives an indication of how many premarital pregnancies could be prevented if policy-makers, educators, and program directors could increase the number of teenagers who use contraception regularly and effectively to prevent unintended conception. The Alan

148

Finkel and Finkel

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Guttmacher Institute estimates that in 1976 had all sexually active teenagers (who didn't want a baby) used some method of contraception consistently, approximately 467,00 premarital pregnancies would have occurred. As it is, in 1976, 780,000 premarital pregnancies occurred (Alan Guttmacher Institute, 1981).
From a medical, social, psychological and economic perspective, teenage pregnancies have negative consequences for both mother and infant (Furstenberg, 1981). Yet, the most farreaching consequence is the interruption or curtailment of education. Most teenage mothers never obtain a high school diploma, and largely because of educational deficits, teenage parents have a harder time getting a job. Those who do find employment are more likely to have low-status, low-paying jobs. Their income tends to be much lower than their counterparts who have completed school and obtained occupational skills.
More often than not, however, teen parents are unemployed and are dependent on public welfare for support. In 1975, $4.7 billion in Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) payments (or 49 per cent of the total $9.4 billion went to families in which the woman had given birth before age 20. Currently about one-fourth of the teen mothers are receiving AFDC.
The cost of teenage childbearing to society is felt in other ways. Teenagers are more dependent upon the government to pay for deliveries than are mothers over age 20. Medicaid, for example, is the source of funding for 19per cent of deliveries to teenagers, but 5 per cent of births to females 20 years and older.
Although most teenage girls want to

complete their high school education, they are hampered by economic and childcare problems. But social and educational programs cost money; just to establish networks of existing programs for teenage mothers would cost over $150 million a year (Alan Guttmacher Institute, 1981). Although there are a growing number of special programs for pregnant teenagers and teen mothers, such programs are small in scope and serve less than 20 per cent of the pregnant teenage population. Ironically, job trainng programs could do much to reduce adolescent pregnancy and to break the cycle of poverty.
THE ADOLESCENT MALE: THE FORGOTTEN PARTNER
A review of the literature demonstrates that it is the adolescent female who has been the subject of empirical review. The paucity of data on the adolescent male's sexual behavior was evident after several computerized literature searches were conducted (Bibliographic Retrieved Services Inc., Cornell University Medical College Computerized Literature Search; Ogden, 1978; Beckstein, 1978; Oresky and Ewing, 1978). Those studies which have included the adolescent male in their purview have shed comparatively little light light on either sexual behavior or on contraceptive use. This omission becomes more serious when one realizes that a larger percentage of contraceptive use among teenagers is accounted for by methods used by the male partner.
CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE
Reduction in federal assistance to pregnant teenagers and adolescent

Vol. 30, No. 2

Adolescent SexualBehavior

149

mothers went into effect October 1, fective contraceptives reduce the rate of
1981. Some contend that the budget cuts premarital pregnancies among this co-
will increase the dependence ofadoles- hort. While thehesitancy to teachsex
cents on governmental entitlement pro- education inthe schools isslowly being
grams such as welfare, food stamps and modified, a much more effective policy
medicaid. A study by the New York directive is needed in order to designef-
City Task Force on Adolescent Preg- ficacious curricula. To deny the need for
nancy reports that these cuts will ulti- sex education instruction is, inthe long
mately cost the government more than run, self-defeating.
they will save (New York City Task Teenage pregnancy isnot a problem Force on Adolescent Pregnancy, 1981). that can besolved through one oreven
Although laws and policies have be- several publicly or privately funded procome more responsive to theneedsof grams. Only by experimenting with a adolescents, the empirical evidence(in broad range of programs can we begin the form of small-scale and nationwide to deal effectively with the issues. While surveys) clearly illustrates that much re- great progress has been made during the mains tobe done toformulate more ef- past decade, particularly within the judifective policies and programs. The prev- cial system, much needs to be done to alence of sexual activity among the provide sex-related services and inforteenage population will not disappear mation to the adolescent population. nor will teenagers' haphazard use of ef-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ALAN GUTTMACHER INSTITUTE. 1981. Teenage
pregnancy: The problem that hasn't gone away. Alan Guttmacher Institute,New York. BECKSTEIN, D. 1978. An annotated bibliography of selected materials concerning men and family planning. DOCHMC, Clayton, Mo.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC RETRIEVED SERVICES, INC. Cor-
nell University Medical College computerized literature search. Ithaca, New York. CONNOLLY, L. 1975. Little mothers. Hum. Behav. 4:17-23.
DEMOGRAPHIC YEARBOOK, 1978. 1979. TABLE
11. United Nations, New York. DONOVAN, P. 1982. Fertility-related state laws
enacted in 1981. Fam. Plan. Persp. 14:6367.
DRYFOOS, J. D., and T. HEISLER. 1981. Contra-
ceptive services for adolescents: An overview, pp. 394-408. In F. Furstenberg et al. (eds), Teenage sexuality, pregnancy and childbearing. Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
FINKEL, M. L., and D. J. FINKEL. 1975 Sexual

and contraceptive knowledge, attitudes, and behavior of male adolescents.Fam. Plan. Persp. 7:256-60.
. 1978. Male adolescent contraceptive utilization. Adolescence XIII:443-451.
. 1981. Public policy and adolescent sexual behavior in the U.S. Paper presented at the population association of America Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C.
FURSTENBERG, F. F., R. LINCOLN, and J.
MENKEN. 1981. Teenage sexuality, pregnancy, and childbearing. Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
GUSTAVUS, S. O., and C. A. HUETHER. Unpub-
lished data from the 1976 National Teacher Survey as reported by the Alan Guttmacher Institute.
KENNEY, A. M., and S. J. ALEXANDER. 1980.
Sex/family life education inthe schools: An analysis of state policies. Fam Plan/Pop Report 9:44-52.
KIRBY, E., et. al. 1979. An analysis of U.S. sex education programs andevaluation methods. Final report #200-78-0804. DHEW, PHS, CDC, Atlanta, Ga.

150

Finkel and Finkel

Social Biology

MOORE, K. A., and S. B. CALDWELL. 1977. The
effect of government policies on out-ofwedlock sex and pregnancy. Fam. Plan. Persp. 9:164-169.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION. 1978. Un-
published data. Washington, D.C. OGDEN, C. 1978. Adolescent fertility: Selected,
annotated resources for the international community. International Clearinghouse on Adolescent Fertility, Washington, D.C.
ORESKY, D., and E. EWING, 1978. Review and
annotated bibliography of literature on male involvement in family planning.National Institute for Community Development, Inc., Arlington, Va.
PAUL, W. W., and H. F. PILPEL. 1979. Teenag-
ers and Pregnancy: The law in 1979. Fam. Plan. Persp. 11:297-302.
SHAH, F., M. ZELNICK, and J. F. KANTNER.
1975. Unprotected intercourse amongun-

wed teenagers. Fam. Plan. Persp. 1:39-44.
SKLAR, J., and B. BERKOV. 1974. Teenage fam-
ily formation in postwar America.Fam. Plan. Persp. 6:80-90.
THE NEW YORK CITY TASK FORCE ON ADOLES-
CENT PREGNANCY. 1981. Impact of the
Reagan administration's proposed budget cuts on adolescent pregnancy programs.
ZELNICK, M., and J. F. KANTNER. 1977. Sexual
and contraceptive experience of young unmarried women in the United States, 1976 and 1971. Fam. Plan. Persp. 9:55-71.
. 1978. First pregnancies to women aged 15-19: 1976 and 1971. Fam. Plan. Persp. 10:11-20.
. 1979. Contraceptive patterns and premarital pregnancy among women aged 15 to 19 in 1976, pp. 289-305. InS. Gordon et al. (eds). The sexual adolescent. Duxbury Press, N. Scituate, Mass.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

