Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Heredity of progressive muscular dystrophy: Reflections on a case study
Paul Thomas Young
To cite this article: Paul Thomas Young (1971) Heredity of progressive muscular dystrophy: Reflections on a case study, Social Biology, 18:3, 260-267, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987928 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987928
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

Heredity of Progressive Muscular Dystrophy: Reflections on a Case Study
Paul Thomas Young*
Department of Psychology University of Illinois Urbana, Illinois

Y P. ·J Í *? X
\ 'mm
J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

The term muscular dystrophy is a general label for a variety of forms of muscular disease. Many investigators recognize nine clinical types, each with a characteristic mechanism of inheritance (Zelweger and Hanson, 1967). There are variations in the group of muscles affected, the age of onset, the severity of symptoms, and the type of hereditary transmission.
Gates (1946) cites a monograph in which 1,341 cases of progressive muscular dystrophy have been recorded in 272 pedigrees. The data indicate that muscular dystrophy can be transmitted in any of the three principal modes of human inheritance: as a dominant, or a recessive, or as a sex-linked trait. In the sex-linked type of transmission the victims are usually short-lived, dying during the second or third decade of life. In the dominant type the affected individuals may live to an old age while their muscular weakness progresses slowly.
The outstanding symptom of muscular dystrophy is loss of muscle power followed by contractions of muscle-tendon systems, often localized to particular anatomic
* Retirement address: 336 Notre Dame Road, Claremont, Calif. 91711

areas. There is occasional failure of muscle tonus especially with fatigue. Microscopic examinations of muscle tissue, obtained through biopsy or necropsy, show degeneration of muscle fibers, often with fatty infiltration. With advancing age there is progressive weakening of the muscles which makes walking and other activity difficult. Many victims sooner or later are confined to wheel chairs. For a technical medical review, see Pearson (1963).
The present case study describes a family containing 13 cases of progressive muscular dystrophy in four generations. The disorder is of a rare and extraordinarily benign type which is transmitted as an autosomal Mendelian dominant. In this benign form of dystrophy the disease progresses slowly, the condition being a physical handicap rather than a fatal disorder. The condition is a true myopathy without involvement of the central nervous system. Muscular dystrophies can be distinguished from atrophies which depend upon lesions in the spinal motor nerves.
BACKGROUND OF THE PRESENT CASE STUDY
In 1914-16, while a graduate student at Princeton University, I made a study of

260

Vol. 18, No. 3

Heredity and Muscular Dystrophy

261

the heredity of progressive muscular dystrophy. My interest was personal since the individuals afflicted are close relatives. I have known personally seven of the 13 cases and learned about the others (deceased) from relatives who remembered them well. To make the record impersonal, however, I have omitted names and designated all individuals by number.
Figure 1 shows the heredity of progres-

scriptive of our better American families in both their talents and defects, is growing at a very satisfactory rate. But this particular study which you have made has been carried out with such rare care and intelligence that it ranks among the best in quality of those which we have thus far received.
Now, more than fifty years later, the
present study was made to bring the ac-
count up to date. There have been further

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

èro éjD è ôpÓ T Q D O e ja

è ô i h o è ÔÉAraô oïn

9 lo II I! 13 14 I

15 IS 17 Is 19 ¡g 21

ÙTOÉÛÉ*
·?·» 24 25 ¡S 27

ÓDÚ Ö
¡a 29 30 31 32

«ûôpûôû 42 43 \ 44 45 46 47 4a 49 SO \

51 52 S3 54

55 se S7

FIG. 1.--Heredity of progressive muscular dystrophy. Individuals with muscular dystrophy are shown in black; normal individuals, in white. Circles represent females; squares, males.

sive muscular dystrophy in a family that was first described by Dr. Walter Timme (1917). Timme examined five of the members who were afflicted with muscular disorders and published an account of his clinical findings.
In 1918 I filed a report of the genetic findings with Charles B. Davenport, then Director of the Eugenics Record Office, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, New York. The Superintendent, Harry H. Laughlin, in a letter dated August 9, 1918, wrote:
It may interest you to know that our collection of family record studies, de-

medical studies which will not be reviewed here. The chart of heredity has been extended from the third to the sixth filial generation. And I will add some reflections on the control of this and similar hereditary disorders.
AN ANOMALOUS CASE
The medical study of Dr. Timme was extended by an autopsy performed on individual No. 14 by Drs. Butt, Hall, and Courville (1939). Their report gives many details regarding the physical condition of this patient at the time of his death, confirming the diagnosis of Dr. Timme but

262

Young

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

rejecting his hypothesis that this form of muscular dystrophy is an endocrinopathy.
In furnishing a pedigree for the autopsy report I represented individual No. 32 as normal. Also in Figure 1 I have shown individual No. 32 as normal. A somewhat detailed consideration of this individual is in order since Dr. Timme believed that No. 32 was an atypical case of muscular dystrophy, and so represented him on his published chart of heredity.
This anomalous case when a boy of IS was examined by Dr. Timme who gave the following account:
His difficulty seemingly followed an attack of chickenpox four years ago. He has no difficulty in squatting down or in arising from the floor, thereby differing from every other member with the disease. Within six months of the onset of the disease, his joints became stiff and the seat of calcareous deposits. Various tendon contractions followed, notably the Achilles and the flexors of the fingers. Muscular atrophies, especially of the deltoids, pectorals, trapezius, biceps, and sternocleidomastoids succeeded. The pectorals are very deficient, the sternocleido muscles also, almost like a lead-pencil in thickness. The entire bodily musculature seems to be deficient in volume and gives the appearance of a big bony frame with insufficient covering . . . . The foot cannot be flexed dorsally on account of a short Achilles tendon, or yentrally on account of a short tibialis anticus. This gives the patient a rather queer shuffling gait. There are calcareous nodules on many of the phalanges, especially at the terminal joints. On account of atrophie supinators, supination can be carried out only to a very limited extent by the biceps assisting. This syndrome is rather different from that of the other members, in that it began at the comparatively late age of 11 and that it was not accompanied by difficulty in arising or in going upstairs and in its marked disposition to affect the bony skeleton . . . .
Although No. 32 undoubtedly showed symptoms of muscular atrophy and a disturbance of bone metabolism, the syndrome, as Dr. Timme pointed out, was different from that of the other members of the tribe. In all the cases of muscular

dystrophy shown on the chart the weakness developed during the first 3 or 4 years of life and progressed steadily throughout the life cycle.
From the genetic point of view there is a major difference between No. 32 and other members of the tribe. This boy's father (No. 22) and grandmother (No. 6) were free from muscular dystrophy, although all were descended from the original progenitor (No. 1). Further, the son and daughter of No. 32 are normal. Apparently the dominant type of hereditary transmission is absent in the relatives of this individual.
In an attempt to clarify the matter, now more than 50 years after the original clinical examination by Dr. Timme, I communicated with this man to learn whether muscular weakness had progressed and to check upon the hereditary aspect. The patient wrote (Jan. 14, 1968):
My condition is not muscular. It is a rheumatic condition of the joints--ankles, wrists and fingers . . . . I have had no weakening of the muscles in any way at any time . . . . My present health is good and the only trouble I have with locomotion is that I just don't move as fast as I might like to due to age (67 yrs.) and stiff ankle joints along with being flat-footed.
Again, in a follow-up letter (Sept. 14, 1969):
In answer to your question, "Do any of the children of yourself or your brothers have the hereditary muscular weakness?" the answer is no, nor any of the grandchildren.
In this case, therefore, there was apparently a temporary muscular atrophy from which the patient recovered along with a disturbance of bone metabolism but there was no typical muscular dystrophy that appeared in early childhood, progressed with aging, and that was transmitted according to the dominant pattern shown in all the other cases. I feel justified, therefore, in correcting Dr. Timme's origi-

Vol. 18, No. 3

Heredity and Muscular Dystrophy

263

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

nal chart of heredity. I t remains a moot

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF

question, of course, as to whether there PROGRESSIVE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

was an hereditary factor that produced

¡I t i s a m a t t e r o { i n t e r e s t t f a a t n t h i s

this individual's muscular weakness. We t r i b e ^ l o n g e v i t y o { p e r s o n s a f f l i c t e d ^

do not know the correct clinical diagnosis p r o g r e s s i v e m u s c u l a r dystrophy is not in

or what caused remission of symptoms in a n y w a y r e d u c e d b y ^ d i s e a s e > T h e a g e s

later lite.

a t d e a t j j o j e i e v e n persons with dystrophy

plus the attained ages of two persons who

EXTENSION OF THE PEDIGREE

.,, . . .

, . .f , ., .

are still living are shown in the following

Figure 1 extends the original chart of tabulation: No. 1, age 88; No. 3, age 83;

heredity from the third to the sixth filial No.4> a g e g 1 ; No. 5, age 69; No. 10, age generation. The extended pedigree gives 1 0 ; No. 11,age 81; No. 12, age 79;No. a broader basis for testing the hypothesis u> a g e 7 8 . No. 17, age 53; No. 18, age that this form of progressive muscular dys- 6 9 ; N o . 24, age 78 (living) ; No. 26,age trophy is transmitted as a Mendelian 75 (living); No. 27, age73.

dominant trait.

Number 'lO, a boy, died of dysentery

According to Mendelian theory, if a at age 10. His death was obviously not

person carries a dominant trait, there is a caused by muscular dystrophy,

probability of 0.50 that the trait will ap- Some corresponding ages of normal sibs

pear in half the offspring and a probability from a dystrophic parent are shown as fol-

of 0.50 that the other half will not possess lows: No. 6, age 80; No. 7, age 75;No.

the trait. The theoretical expectation is 8, age 49; No. 13, age 85; No. 23,age 80

realized in the 23 offspring of four matings (living) ; No. 25, age 77 (living),

as follows: Offspring of No. 1 Offspring of No. 3 in F1 Offspring of No. 4 in Fj Offspring of No. 14 in F2 Totals

These ages indicate that the family 3 with dystrophy and 3 normal 4 with dystrophy and 3 normal 2 with dystrophy and 3 normal 3 with dystrophy and 2 normal
12 with dystrophy and 11 normal

In F2 three individuals (Nos. 9, 15, 19) stock is robust and long-lived. Many died in infancy or at an early age with no members of the tribe, whether afflicted

sign of dystrophy. They are assumed to with muscular dystrophy or normal, have

be normal but, of course, might have de- survived to a ripe old age.

veloped dystrophy had they survived.

The presence of muscular dystrophy has

There are two tests of the principle that not greatly interfered with living a pro-

if an individual is free from a dominant ductive life despite the physical handicap,

trait, his offspring will be normal: (1) the The disease affects the muscles specifically

descendants of No. 6 in F i ; and (2) the and not the nervous system and other

descendants of No. 23 in F3. I t is clear organs. In this tribe persons with muscular not only that the children of these normal dystrophy have remained in reasonably

parents are free from progressive muscular good health, slept well, had normal appe-

dystrophy but also that the trait does not tites, and remained mentally alert. All

reappear during three or four successive have been decent, law-abiding citizens, and

generations. This is a confirmation of an several have had distinguished careers

important Mendelian principle--one which (see the book by Nellie May Young,

has profound eugenic significance.

1967).

264

Young

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

At the start of life the presence of muscular dystrophy is usually detected at the age of 3 or 4 by the peculiar method of rising from the floor--climbing up on the thighs rather than rising directly. With advancing age this difficulty in rising from the floor increases until finally it becomes impossible to rise without help. The disability is shown also by increasing difficulty in going over stairs, rising from a chair of ordinary height, lifting weights, walking and running, and doing tasks that require muscular strength and endurance.
In some cases there is shortening of the muscle-tendon systems. With Cases 26 and 27, for example, at an early age the heels were as much as three inches above the floor when the patients stood erect. Special shoes were needed until an operation on the Achilles tendons lengthened the tendons and corrected the condition.
With advancing age muscular weakness increases. Cases 11 and 12, however, were able to stand and walk until their terminal illnesses, but others lost the ability to stand and walk without help. No. 3 was quite sedentary during her later years and finally was unable to roll over in bed.
The disease appears to progress by steps or stages. A patient may remain for years on a plateau of physical strength and then suddenly discover that he cannot rise from the floor or watt: without help or go over stairs or get up from a chair. As weakness increases the patients use secondary aids-- canes, seat cushions, spring-booster chairs, walkers, wheel chairs, etc. (see the report by Young, 1949).
A constant fear in these cases is the fear of falling. This fear of falling is so great that constant caution is required in carrying out ordinary activities. In advanced years if a patient falls, he is unable to rise. Physical work produces fatigue with loss of muscle tonus and this condition increases the likelihood of falling.

DISCUSSION

There are some familiar social implications, needs, and problems that are apparent in this study.
Need for permanent records and adequate diagnosis. How did the original parent (No. 1) acquire progressive muscular dystrophy? In my study of heredity I traced the ancestors of Nos. 1 and 2, the husband of No. 3, and the wife of No. 14, back for three or more generations but could find no indication of muscular disability. The family records were meager. There were simply names, dates of births, marriages, and deaths. I t was impossible back in 1916, when the original genetic study was made, to find any evidence of progressive muscular dystrophy prior to the original progenitor.
Family tradition has it that this man when a boy of 12 was injured, partly crushed while working in the field, and never recovered; this injury was the familyassigned cause of his muscular disability. The disorder was later incorrectly diagnosed by a local doctor as "Thomsen's disease." The first case (No. 1) could have arisen as a mutation, but more likely there was an hereditary background which is impossible to discover because of the lack of adequate records.
I traced the ancestors of the original parent (No. 1) back three generations to a pioneer (1670-1740) who came to America from County Donegal, Ireland, with his family, accompanied by three brothers and a sister. They were Scotch-Irish. They settled in eastern Pennsylvania.
The approximate chronology of the tribe shown in Figure 1 can be indicated by giving the dates of a few individuals in the pedigree:

No. 1

1789-1877

No. 3 in F! 1817-1900

No. 14 in F2 1859-1937 No. 24 in F3 1892-

Vol. 18, No. 3

Heredity and Muscular Dystrophy

265

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Nos. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 were born in the decade 1890-1900.
The failure to trace the heredity of progressive muscular dystrophy prior to the original parent (No. 1) is obviously due to lack of adequate records. Further, the anomalous case of No. 32, which was discussed above, demonstrates a need for objective tests and accurate medical diagnosis. Empirical observations can be recorded and made permanently available. The facts can be recorded even though the diagnosis may change from doctor to doctor.
The absence of objective records of physical and behavioral data indicates a need that can be filled. With computer memories which are now available this need could be met and removed.
Need for family planning. Of the 13 cases of progressive muscular dystrophy shown in Figure 1, nine failed to reproduce. In filial generation F3 two individuals (Nos. 24 and 26) married but voluntarily had no children in the light of their known heredity. No. 27 did not marry. It can be claimed, therefore, that the propagation of progressive muscular dystrophy in this tribe was permanently stopped by voluntary limitation of families--by family planning.
The record clearly shows, however, that prior to filial generation F3 several individuals with progressive muscular dystrophy married and had large families. Consider the families of individuals Nos. 1, 3, 4, and 14. It is only fair to say that family planning and medical genetics were unknown to these early progenitors of muscular dystrophy.
In view of the total record one can argue that planned parenthood and genetic counseling (based on adequate records) are essential in the control of dominant dysgenic traits such as progressive muscular dystrophy. One can not argue, how-

ever, that planned parenthood will be sufficiently effective to guarantee final elimination from the population of this or any other autosomal dysgenic trait.
Need for genetic counseling. Persons suffering from progressive muscular dystrophy encounter repeated frustrations at all stages of life. In childhood there is conflict over physical inferiority with frustrations in school and at play; the dystrophic child becomes keenly aware of his defect and may turn to solitary activities rather than group play. In adolescence and early maturity there is conflict over love, marriage, and procreation. As an adult the affected individual has frustrations over employment and professional status. In old age there are increased medical and custodial expenses. In many situations throughout life the muscular dystrophy is a source of embarrassment and unhappiness. In view of these problems it is clear that some form of personal and genetic counseling is needed to help the victims cope with their difficulties.
Need for eugenic considerations in population control. The Muscular Dystrophy Associations of America are spending millions of dollars to discover the cause and possible cure of muscular dystrophy and related neuromuscular disorders. When a cure has been found it will be a boon to individuals afflicted with progressive muscular dystrophy, but a cure of symptoms will not change the genetic basis of the disorder.
The situation is similar to that in diabetis mellitus and other hereditary dysgenic conditions. The discovery of insulin was a life-saving boon to diabetic patients but the administration of insulin does not change the hereditary diathesis of this disease. A cure of symptoms which does not remove the genetic basis of a disorder favors continued propagation and even increase of the defective germ plasm rather than improve-

266

Young

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

ment of the human stock through elimination of the hereditary defect.
The facts presented in Figure 1 give a strong argument for the support of medical genetics and social eugenic programs.
The problem of eugenic control is related to the broader problem of controlling a rapidly expanding population. Berelson (1969) has considered various proposals for controlling population that go beyond family planning. Some of the proposals advocate coercive sterilization and restriction of the freedom to breed. Berelson is mainly concerned with the quantitative aspect of population control. A strong case can be made, however, for qualitative control of the reproduction of individuals that carry dysgenic genes. If coercive sterilization or some other technique of birth control is utilized, why not begin with individuals that carry dysgenic genes? Berelson considers the difficulties of coercive sterilization and, indeed, they are great.
Hardin (1968), writing about the "tragedy of the commons," points out that the problem of controlling population has no technical solution; it requires a fundamental extension in morality. Hardin argues that an appeal to individual conscience in planning the size of a family is not a permanent solution of the population problem. Widespread birth control may bring temporary relief in certain areas, Hardin states, but voluntary control of family size cannot be depended upon as a

universal solution of the population problem. However, people have sentimental and moral objections to coercive sterilization and limitation of the freedom to reproduce. Sterilization is relatively safe and harmless, though commonly misunderstood and confused with castration (see Gamble, 1948).
I suggest that voluntary sterilization along with eugenic counseling should be encouraged when individuals possess dysgenic hereditary traits such as progressive muscular dystrophy. Our society is not yet ready for a system of involuntary or coercive sterilization.
If persons with progressive muscular dystrophy limited the size of family to a single child, the trait would sooner or later be eliminated from the human stock. The success of such a plan, however, would be contingent upon the willingness of affected individuals to limit family to a single child. If the single child developed muscular dystrophy, the parents would feel pangs of conscience and remorse for bringing it into the world. It would be wiser to limit family completely.
SUMMARY
The pedigree of a rare and extremely benign form of progressive muscular dystrophy is presented. The author reflects upon the record and points out some social implications, needs and problems relating to the medical and genetic control of dominant dysgenic traits.

REFERENCES

BERELSON, B. 1969. Beyond family planning. Science 163:533-543.
BUTT, E. M., E. M. HALL, and C. B. COURVILLE.
June, 1939. Progressive muscular dystrophy (dystrophia myotonica). Bulletin of the Los Angeles Neurological Society, No. 4:58-68. GAMBLE, C. J. 1948. Why fear sterilization? Hygeia: The Health Magazine of the American Medical Association. January.

GATES, R. R. 1946. Human genetics. Macmillan, New York.
HARDIN, G. December 13, 1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162:1243-1248.
PEARSON, C. M. 1963. Muscular dystrophy; Review and recent observations. Amer. J. Med. 35:632-645.
TIMME, W. 1917. Progressive muscular dystrophy as an endocrine disease. Arch. Int. Med. 19:79104.

Vol. 18, No. 3

Heredity and Muscular Dystrophy

267

YOUNG, NELLIE MAY. 1967. William Stewart Young: Builder of California institutions. The Arthur H. Clark Company, Glendale, California.
YOUNG, P. T. 1949. Mechanical aids for patients

with muscular disability. J. Bone Jt. Surg. 31-A:428-430.
ZELLWEGER, H., and J. W. HANSON. 1967. Slowly
progressive X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy (Type III-b). Arch. Int. Med.120:525535.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

