Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
To cite this article: (1994) Book notes, Social Biology, 41:3-4, 283-287, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1994.9988882 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1994.9988882
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

HEALTH AND SOCIAL CHANGE IN INTER-
NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE: Edited by Lincoln C. Chen, Arthur Kleinman, and Norman C. Ware. Harvard Series on Population and International Health. Harvard University Press, Boston, 1994. 508 pages. $15.00, paperback.
This edited volume brings together eighteen essays by demographers, epidemiologists, economists, anthropologists, and public health scientists focusing on the social dimensions of health change around the world.
In exploring the social causes and consequences of health change, the authors reach consensus in some areas, while engaging in critical debate in others. Questions addressed are: What are the forms and structures of health transitions? Do these changes assume universally recognized patterns, or are health transitions particularistic with regard to space, time, and community? What are the methodological issues in definition and measurement? How can understanding improve health policy, interventions, and the research agenda?
The five sections of the volume are: (1) Patterns of Change, (2) Conceptual and Methodological Issues; (3) Rediscovering the Social Nature of Mortality Change; (4) Social, Behavioral, and Cultural Mediators; (5) Health, Policy and Promotion.
As the editors state in the foreword (p. vii), "Transitions in health, positive and negative, characterize the human condition in our time. The challenge for research is not simply to produce knowledge for health action, but also

to advance understanding of the factors--social and biological--that have accompanied these health transitions."
The volume is the product of a seminar series on the Health Transition that was held at the Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies from 1987-1990, supported by the Rockefeller Foundation. The scope was global, with special emphasis given to developing countries. A major objective was to foster interdisciplinary dialogue across a range of relevant fields.
The health transition concept which evolved in the seminar series and is presented in this volume moves beyond previous theories of the "demographic transition" and the "epidemiologic transition." The editors comment:
"A major argument of this volume is that these demographic and epidemiologic theories are woefully inadequate for understanding health and social change. For us, the concept of the health transition moves beyond demography and epidemiology to explore sociocultural, economic, political, historical, and public health dimensions of health change. . . . Generalizations are difficult; it is not easy to come to terms with global processes that affect radically different societies."
Section I, Patterns of Change, consists of three chapters which examine the theory and empirical evidence related to health, mortality, and social change. The works as a whole challenge the primary thrust of current thinking regarding the universality of mortality and cause-of-death change.

283

284

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Section II, Conceptual and MethodologicalIssues, grapples with the definition of health itself. Its four chapters challenge the established wisdom that we understand how to define health and know how it should be measured.
The three chapters in Section III, Rediscovering the Social Nature of Mortality Change, examine the history of health improvements in industrialized societies and the socio-behavioral dimensions of health transitions.
Section IV, Social, Behavioral, and Cultural Mediators, is comprised of three chapters on the social constructs of illness, the impact of maternal education, and the nature of patriarchal societies and their consequences for health.
Health, Policy and Promotion is the topic of the five chapters in Section V. Two chapters examine health policy from the perspective of economic theory and political science, a third provides a case study of Kenya, 19871900, a fourth examines health education, and the fifth chapter proposes practical ways of applying the health transition concept to health policy formulation and implementation.
Authors include: David E. Bell, Nancy Birdsall, Jose-Luis Bobadilla, John Caldwell, Pat Caldwell, Lincoln C. Chen, Nicholas A. Christakis, Gretchen Condran, Clara Sunderland Correa, Goran Dahlgren, Veena Das, Tomas Frejka, Julio Frenk, Kris Heggenhougen, Arthur Kleinman, Stephen J. Kunitz, Robert A. LeVine, Sara E. LeVine, Rafael Lozano, David Mechanic, Christopher J. L. Murray, Joseph E. Potter, Samuel H. Preston, Michael R. Reich, Amy Richman, Amartya Sen, Claudio Stems, Jonathan A. Sugar, F. Medardo Tapia Uribe, and Norma C. Ware.

FINDINGS FROM TWO DECADES OF FAM-
ILY PLANNING RESEARCH: By John A. Ross and Elizabeth Frankenberg. The Population Council, New York, 1993. 101 pages. $12, paperback.
This monograph presents a selection of empirical conclusions, or findings, from the body of family planning research that has accumulated over the last two decades. Twelve topics of current interest are reviewed, as a sequel to three similar publications issued in 1971, 1972, and 1974.
A "Findings" document compresses what has been learned into straightforward declarative statements, giving summary evidence to support each statement. In cases where a conclusion is quite well founded, with extensive supporting evidence, only illustrative or summary references are needed. In other cases citations are required for individual studies. Generalizations that are unsupported or too ambiguous to permit a definite statement do not qualify for inclusion. Methodology and theory are not the primary concern; the focus is on research results that merit particular attention.
Twenty years ago the first "Findings" report was introduced, for reasons that remain true today. As new workers enter the field they encounter an oral tradition consisting of mixed opinions, prejudices, and information. Lacking a concise compilation of empirical results, the newcomer faces a plethora of material of varying quality, too much ever to be fully absorbed. Furthermore, conclusions that seemed certain a few years ago have undergone a shifting base of support as past studies have been forgotten, rejected, and supplanted. It has seemed important,

Vol. 41, 3-4

Book Notes

285

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

therefore, to establish a record outlin- sponsible for a large percentage of ma-

ing evidence that indeed underlies each ternal deaths in the developing world.

finding, with identification of which The final three chapters, Contracep-

country or region it comes from. With tion, Fertility Patterns, and Infant/

time, this record should evolve, and Child Mortality; Contraceptive Use

then the current compilation will serve and Maternal Morbidity/Mortality;

as a point of departure for restatement. and Contraceptive Use and Health,

The 12 chapters fall naturally into pertain to the health advantages of

four groups. The first two chapters, contraceptive methods, as well as to

Prevalence of Contraceptive Use and the risks they may carry.

Fertility Patterns, and Large-scale Partial funding for the project was

Family Planning Programs, give an provided by the United Nations Popu-

overall view of the massive changes lation Fund and by the Rockefeller

that have occurred in reproductive be- Foundation. In developing countries,

havior and in the organized programs professionals may obtain single copies

designed to service and encourage from The Population Council free of

them.

charge by writing John Ross Research

The next four chapters follow natu- Division, One Dag Hammerskjold

rally, to present approaches taken by Plaza, New York, NY 10017 or by FAX

the programs: Community-Based Dis- at (212) 755-6052.

tribution; Contraceptive Social Mar- This monograph, with its invaluable

keting; Postpartum Programs; and tables, figures, and references, belongs

Charges and Payments. These chapters in the library of every scholar, student,

deal with prominent features in the ex- and clinical or case worker involved

tension of services to different publics. with population issues. The three years

The matter of charges, and cost recov- the authors worked to compile, assess

ery in general, has received increasing and condense this vast body of infor-

attention and is an issue for the first mation and to present it succinctly

three types of programs. All four chap- were well spent indeed.

ters concern program approaches for

which considerable experience has ac-

cumulated and extensive data are

available.

'

The next three chapters, Contraceptive Continuation and Effectiveness; Sterilization; and Induced Abortion, relate to specific birth-control methods. Contraception, including sterilization, has produced most of the historic

GLOBAL COMPARATIVE ASSESSMENTS IN
THE HEALTH SECTOR: DISEASE BUR-
DEN, EXPENDITURES AND INTERVEN-
TION PACKAGES: Edited by C. J. L. Murray and A. D. Lopez. World Health Organization, Geneva, Order no. 1150420, 1994. 196 pages. $18, paperback.

fertility decline throughout the devel- The eight articles collected in this

oping world, but all contraceptive volume show how a new way of assess-

methods carry some risk of failure, and ing the world health situation can be

abortion is often used as a back-up used to generate health data unprece-

method or, more often, as a separate dented in their completeness, compa-

recourse. Septic abortion is a leading rability, and objectivity. Already rec-

public health problem, one that is re- ognized as capable of revolutionizing

286

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

the processes of priority setting and resource allocation in the health sector, the approach was first used to develop the empirical basis for the World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. Close to one hundred disease experts collaborated in this project.
The book, which has two parts, discusses the methods, findings, and implications of the first comprehensive assessment of the global burden of disease, of the financial resources available to the health sector in every country, and of the options for costeffective interventions.
Articles in Part One describe the concept, applications, and results of the use of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for measuring the global burden of disease. The indicator, which measures the time lived with a disability and the time lost due to premature mortality, has been used to estimate the burden of disease due to more than a hundred causes, for five age groups, by sex, throughout the world. Detailed information is given on the technical basis of DALYs, global and regional cause-of-death patterns, methods for quantifying the health consequences of disabilities, and the main findings and implications of the global burden of disease approach. Articles and authors are:

The Global Burden of Disease in 1990: Summary Results, Sensitivity Analysis and Future Directions (C. J. L. Murray, A. D. Lopez and D. T. Jamison)
Articles in Part Two provide comparative assessments of financial resources available to the health sector and the range of interventions that can be purchased with these resources. These assessments allow identification of a minimum package of essential public health and clinical interventions, which are highly cost-effective and capable of reducing the disease burden in low-income developing countries by about 25% at a cost of US $12 per person per year. Articles and authors are:
Part Two: Health Expenditures and Intervention Packages: A Global Overview
National Health Expenditures: A Global Analysis (C. J. L. Murray, R. Govindaraj and P. Musgrove)
External Assistance to the Health Sector in Developing Countries: A Detailed Analysis, 1972-90 (C. Michaud and C. J. L. Murray)
Design, Content and Financing of an Essential National Package of Health Services (J. L. Bobadilla, P. Cowley, P. Musgrove and H. Saxenian)
Cost-effectiveness Analysis and Policy Choices: Investing in Health Systems (C. J.L. Murray, J. Kreuser and W. Whang)

Part One: Global Burden of Disease
Quantifying the Burden of Disease: The Technical Basis for Disability-adjusted Life Years (C. J. L. Murray)
Global and Regional Cause-of-death Patterns in 1990 (C. J. L. Murray and A. D. Lopez)
Quantifying Disability: Data, Methods and Results (C. J. L. Murray and A. D. Lopez)

Christopher Murray is Associate Professor of International Health Economics at the Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, USA. A physician and health economist, he has worked extensively on tuberculosis, cost effectiveness, and health status assessment. He is currently Chairman of the WHO Tuberculosis Operational Research Steering Committee.

Vol. 41,3-4

Book Notes

287

Alan Lopez is a scientist in the Programme on Substance Abuse at the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland. A specialist in medical statistics and epidemiology, he has

worked at WHO for over ten years on the analysis of mortality data and, more recently, on the quantification of the global tobacco epidemic,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

