Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Effect of number, order, and spacing of siblings on child and adult outcomes: An overview of current research
David M. Heer
To cite this article: David M. Heer (1986) Effect of number, order, and spacing of siblings on child and adult outcomes: An overview of current research, Social Biology, 33:1-2, 1-4, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988617 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988617
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 22
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

Effect of Number, Order, and Spacing of Siblings on Child and Adult Outcomes: An Overview of Current Research

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

David M. Heer
Population Research Laboratory University of Southern California Los Angeles, California

ABSTRACT: One of the most important decisions facing married couples is how many children to have and when to have them. Unfortunately, research to date on how the number and spacing of siblings affects the outcome for each child does not provide parents with the information they ought to have. Two reasons for the relative inadequacy of current research are outlined and shown to be remediable. The first of these is that research has been conducted by scholars in different fields between which there have been substantial communications barriers. The second is that research has been performed on data sets gathered for other purposes which do not contain sufficient information, particularly concerning the IQ of the parents and the spacing between siblings.

One of the most important decisions facing married couples is how many children to have and when to have them. A very important consideration in making these decisions is the trade-off between the number of children and the potential quality of each child's life. Parents need to know how an increase in the number of their children and/or a particular spacing between them will affect the outcome for each child. Social science research ought to be able to help parents make these decisions intelligently. Unfortunately, research to date on how the number and spacing of siblings affects the outcome for each child does not provide parents with the information they ought to have. This statement should not be taken to imply that no valuable research has been conducted on this topic. That is far from the case. However, in view of the importance of the topic to parents, I believe that the qual-

ity and quantity of research in this area can and should be substantially enhanced.
There are two reasons for the relative inadequacy of the current research endeavor; both of them are remediable. The first is that the impact of the number, order, and spacing of siblings on child and adult outcomes has been the topic of research by scholars in four separate fields: human biology, psychology, sociology, and economics. As is well known, the barriers to communication between academic disciplines are strong. The quality of the research on the impact of sibling variables will be improved if there are more avenues of dialogue among the scholars from the several disciplines who have engaged in it. For example, psychologists have been intent on investigating whether the number, order, and spacing of siblings has a significant effect on IQ. However,

1

Heer Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

human biologists are in possession of the each child. A relatively new theory

data sets which are best suited to investi- states that account must be taken not

gate this topic and so far these data sets only of parental resources but also of the

have not been extensively used. Sociolo- resources given to each child by his sib-

gists have been primarily interested in lings. A third theory contends that there

how sibling variables affect adult educa- is no causal relationship between num-

tional attainment, occupational status, ber, order, and spacing of siblings and

and income. Economists have also been child outcomes and that any apparent

interested in the effect of these variables relationships are spurious.

upon adult income but one of them has also made a valuable contribution in showing the extent to which these variables affect investments in child-care

In light of these theories, how should the sibling variables be measured? The most important aspect of sibling number is that it is a variable over time. Consider

time on the part of parents and other siblings. Nevertheless, some sociologists are not sufficiently aware of the work done by economists, and vice-versa.

first an eldest child who will eventually have four siblings. He will begin his life as an only child; perhaps only by adolescence will he have four siblings. The

The second reason for the inade- spacing between the various siblings will

quacy of the current level of research is determine the total number of years in

that most researchers have had to work which a first-born has each given num-

with data sets gathered for other pur- ber of siblings from none to four.

poses. The value of future research will Now consider the last-born child in

be substantially advanced if data sets this same family. He will begin his life

can be collected with the specific pur- with four siblings. If none die, he will

pose of studying sibling variables. In continue to have four siblings. How-

particular, these data sets should in- ever, the number of his siblings who re-

clude the IQ of both parents and the main financially dependent may de-

spacing between all siblings.

crease with time. To determine the

I will not dwell on the need to include sibling number at each point in the

the IQ of the parents in data sets analyz- child's life, we must know--in addition

ing the effect of sibling variables on child to the final sibling number--the child's

and adult outcomes. I do however, want birth order, the spacing between each

to point out why we need to have more birth, and the age at which each child in

data sets in which the spacing between the family became financially indepen-

siblings is recorded.

dent or died. All of the information

Social scientists have three theories about the sibling number of each child in

for explaining the facts observed thus far the family will be contained in a graph in about the relationship between the which we plot the number of financially

number, order, and spacing of siblings dependent siblings against the age of the

and child and adult outcomes. The old- child.

est theory states that an increase in the However, the proper measurement

number of siblings or a decrease in the of sibling number has an additional com-

spacing between them dilutes the time plication. According to all existing theo-

and material resources that parents can ries, the ages of the other siblings are

give to each child and that these re- relevant for the outcome for the given

source dilutions hinder the outcome for child. All of the relevant information is

Vol. 33, No. 1-2

Number, Order, and Spacing of Siblings

now available only when it is possible to construct a matrix in which the rows present the age of the given child and the columns the age grouping of the siblings for whom a count of sibling number will be made. Many such matrices could be developed, some much more elaborate than others. Perhaps only a small amount of information would be lost if a matrix were constructed in which the rows would present the age of the given child as follows: 0, 3, 6,12, and 18, and the columns would present the number of financially dependent siblings whose age was one of the following: under 3,3 to 6,6 to 12,12 to 18, and 18 and over.
An illustration should be helpful. Table 1presents the matrix of the number of siblings for a child who is the firstborn among five children, all of whom

are spaced exactly three years apart and all of whom are financially dependent only up to exact age 21. Table 2 presents the matrix for the last-born child among fivechildren with characteristics identical to those in Table 1. It can be inferred from these tables that the oldest child in the family, as compared to the youngest child, will probably suffer from a diminution of parental resources, probably financial resources, in adolescence. The youngest, on the other hand, will likely suffer, as compared to the oldest from a reduction of parental resources, probably time resources, in infancy and early childhood.
I use the term siblingnumbermatrix to denote any matrix that presents the number of financially dependent siblings of defined ages at defined ages of a

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
MATRIX OF NUMBER OF FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS FOR THE FIRST-BORN AMONG FIVE CHILDREN, EACH CHILD SPACED EXACTLY THREE YEARS APART

EXACT AGE OF GIVEN
Child
n3
P 18

FlNANCIA LLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS BY AGE GROUP

Under 3

3-6

6-12

12-18

18-21

00000 10 0 0 0 1 10 0 0 1 12 0 0 00220

TOTAL SIBLING
Number
0 1 2 4 4

TABLE2
MATRIX OF NUMBER OF FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS FOR THE LAST-BORN AMONG FIVE CHILDREN, EACH CHILD SPACED EXACTLY THREE YEARS APART

EXACT AGE OF GIVEN
Child
0 3 6 12 18

FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT SIBLINGS BY AGE GROUP

Under 3

3-6

6-12 12-18 18-21

0 I 2 1 0~~

00220

0 0 12

1

0 00 11

00000

TOTAL
SIBLING
Number

Heer

Social Biology

given child. I consider that research concerned with the consequences of the number and spacing of children should be based on data sets for which some version of this matrix can be constructed. Unfortunately, most of the data sets which have been used to study the effect of sibling variables on various child outcomes have only contained information on birth order and sibling number at time of interview; almost none contains data on birth spacing. For data sets without birth spacing no version of the sibling number matrix can be constructed.
Despite the fact that further research utilizing specially collected data sets may be costly, I feel that it is worth-

while. Choosing the number and spacing of children may be one of the most important ways a married couple can affect child outcomes. Thus, parents should have access to accurate knowledge of how these decisions will affect their children's future. If such knowledge demands a considerable expenditure of funds for data collection, these funds will be well spent.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper was given as the Introduction to the Symposium on Effect of Number, Order, and Spacing of Siblings on Child and Adult Outcomes at the Annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Los Angeles, May 27,1985.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

