Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Comment on "the probability of conception after discontinuance of oral contraception," by Wolfers
Charles F. Westoff , Larry Bumpass & Norman B. Ryder
To cite this article: Charles F. Westoff , Larry Bumpass & Norman B. Ryder (1970) Comment on "the probability of conception after discontinuance of oral contraception," by Wolfers, Social Biology, 17:1, 60-61, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987844 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987844
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

60 Communications
Comment on "The Probability of Conception after Discontinuance of Oral Contraception," by Wolfers
Charles F. Westoff, Larry Bumpass, and *Norman B. Ryder
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, and *University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Wolfers takes our \x column for the first six months and calculates from it a ipx column. Then he compares the variations of ipx over x, for "Pill" and for "Other." (His values of \px are slightly inaccurate arithmetically, but that is a trivial aside.) We had done this also and chose to comment on the difference between "Pill" and "Other" for i/>o (in addition to 16). Wolfers observes that i/>5for "Other" is low and attributes that to misreporting; but observes that ip% for "Pill" is low and erects a theory to explain it.
We don't think our data can stand the burden of such detailed scrutiny. They were collected from respondents by interviewers who were untrained in the ordinary scientific sense. Although the instruction was to record the response to the particular question as a number of months, examination of the interviews and of the coding instructionswhich were required shows that frequently the response was non-quantitative (such as "right away" or "not long after") and that frequently it took the form of a range. In such a circumstance, we think it unwise to place dependence on the month-by-month fluctuations in probability of survival; accordingly, we chose to report two average values for the first six months taken in toto and avoided discussing the series in detail.

There were two specific reasons for being wary of month-by-month changes. One was our strong suspicion (supported by the evidence of a re-interview with some 400 women) that reports of the circumstances of conception (accidental or planned) were highly unreliable and almost certainly not in a random way. Specifically, we think it quite plausible that a considerable number of reportedly planned conceptions which took place immediately upon cessation were in fact accidents. Wolfers cites a figure of "52 more pregnancies" than would be expected under certain assumptions. This would translate into some 20% of women who said they planned a conception actually being in the accident category; the statistic is not out of line with other evidence of unreliability in this study.
The second specific reason is that there is likely to be a difference, either real or an artifact of reporting habits, consequent upon the circumstance that the pill is not related to the occurrence of coitus, whereas almost all other methods are. There are many ways of interpreting or misinterpreting how long it takes to get pregnant, and the calendar month is not a particularly good unit of measurement. The beginning point of the waiting interval may be considered as the last act of protected coitus, or the first act

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 1

Communications

61

of unprotected coitus, or the last actof problems of coding, and even, for many

protected coitus in the neighborhood of women, of defining the responses for this

ovulation time, or the first act of unpro- particular interval remove even thispos-

tected coitus in theneighborhood of ovula- sibility from our grasp.

tion time. On the other hand, itmight be the Wolfers chooses to interpret the nuances

beginning ofthe first intermenstrual interval of month-by-month changes as meaningful

in which coitus is unprotected. Pill-users and proceeds to create a model, involving a

may well differ from others in the way they dichotomization of women into those who do

think, about their beginning point. They and those who do not have some characteris-

may start with thelast daythey took the tic. Theonly measure of the characteristic

pill, or, since they tend to be somewhat proposed is the observed behavior. What

more sophisticated than others, they may Wolfers has done, in effect, is to fit a model,

start with the time of ovulation in that based on three or four parameters, to a set

month (58% of pill-users were correct,but of six points--roughly equivalent to fitting a

only 48% of others, on a narrow definition second or third degree polynomial to a set of

of thecorrect response to a question about six points. Accordingly, it is scarcely sur-

ovulation time). Since it is obvious that prising that hegets a good fit.

many women don't know their time of Those of us who have hadmany painful

ovulation, they will have trouble figuring years of experience with rough-and-ready

out how many months to sayin answer to survey data, burning our fingers repeatedly

the question of howlong it takes to get from over-interpretation of putative find-

pregnant. Moreover, many women do not ings, are finally learning to approach the

know inwhich month they get pregnant and output of such crude data-collection instru-

may very well report the time when they ments with the dueamount of skepticism.

first learned that they were pregnant, or perhaps the time of their first missed period.
Given this array of considerations, we see no difficulty in defending our decision to

It iseasy to understand how a person from a tradition of careful measurements made by people who were highly trained for the task

stick to a gross level of detail. The oneex- (rather than by respondent, interviewer, and

ception which would be interesting as an coder, asin our case) would tend togive our

addition to ourknowledge of the effects of data more credit than they are really due.

the pill would be whether the low proba- The error was probably ours. We should not

bility of conception in the first month for even have published the 1*values month by

pill-users as against others reflects a con- month, and we should have included a

tinuing effect of the pill; regrettably, the longer statement onthe pitfalls of our data.

Symposium on Genetic Counseling in Mental Retardation

A symposium on Genetic Counseling in Mental Retardation will beheld during the annual meetings of the American Association on Mental Deficiency which will be

held this year in conjunction with the annual meetings ofthe American Academy on Mental Retardation at the Sheraton-Park Hotel in Washington, D.C. The symposium will

