Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Founding of the behavior genetics association
To cite this article: (1970) Founding of the behavior genetics association, Social Biology, 17:2, 147-148, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987863 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987863
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

Behavior Genetics

\ nmmiv,kai l
J,

y
j

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Founding of the Behavior Genetics Association

The initial organizational meeting for an The name of the proposed organization

association of behavior genetics was held at was discussed at length, aswas the fact that

the University of Illinois onMarch 30,1970 it wasimportant that the organization be

with Jerry Hirsch as host and R. D. Bock open to behavior scientists whowerebio-

and R. J. Rose assisting in the arrangement logically oriented but who were not geneti-

of an agenda.

cists in the narrow sense. Although other

As had been decided at the informal meeting in December in Boston, allpersons who had indicated an interest in participating in the organization of the association were invited to attend the March meeting. Mr. Frederick Osborn, on behalf of the American Eugenics Society, pledged transportation

names were proposed, the name "Behavior Genetics Association" polled a strong majority of votes when a written vote was taken. Subsequently the seventeen members of the organizational group unanimously approved this choice as the name for the organization.

for twenty people to Urbana. Travel ex- It was agreed that in addition to a con-

penses were offered preferentially to those stitution committee, committees should be

who had received the highest number of formed to deal with issues of membership,

nominations to an organizing committee for program, communications, and public and

the association on an earlier questionnaire. professional affairs. I t was suggested that a

For practical reasons, this was restricted to small group of individuals be invited tobe

persons presently resident in the United charter members of the new organization

States. Richard H. Osborne made arrange- and asked to contribute dues sufficient to

ments for invitations and transportation provide initial operating funds for the or-

expenses to themeeting.

ganization. Invitation to charter member-

A group of seventeen individuals participated in the organizational meeting at the Ulini Union. Three others who had planned to attend were unable to do so because of airline strikes. Present were Gordon Allen, V. Elving Anderson, R. Darrell Bock, Jan Bruell, Arthur Falek, Irving I. Gottesman, J. P. Hegmann, Kenneth E. Henry, Leonard

ship would follow nomination by theprovisional membership committee andapproval of the executive council. Suggested criteria for membership were the possession of an advanced degree or professional position, active research activity, and demonstrated commitment tothe purposes of the organization. International representation is desired.

L. Heston, Jerry Hirsch, Arnold R. Kaplan, I t wasdecided that a provisional nomi-

Seymour Kessler, John C.Loehlin, Richard nating committee was notnecessary in that

H. Osborne, Richard J. Rose, Steven G. the organizing committee would function as

Vandenberg, and George Winokur. R. H. a committee-of-the-whole, and the constitu-

Osborne acted as informal chairman for the tion could subsequently specify the func-

meeting.

tion, nature, andmembership of the nomi-

147

148

Behavior Genetics

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

nating committee. For the present, an executive council was created consisting of the chairmen of the five established provisional committees with Jerry Hirsch as an exofficio member. Richard H. Osborne was unanimously elected President-pro-tem.
Present at the organizational meeting were the editors of Social Biology, Behavior Genetics, and Animal Behavior. Gordon Allen pointed out that the organization could align with any or all of these publications rather than publish a separate journal. Examples of professional societies which have never had a journal were cited. The possibility of a newsletter to provide a service to the membership was discussed favorably by several individuals. I. I. Gottesman proposed that Social Biology continue as the communication medium for the organization for the coming year, and this proposal was unanimously approved by the organizing committee.1
The program committee proposed the Easter recess of 1971 as the time for the first meeting of the organization. Offers of a possible program site had been received from B. E. Ginsburg at the University of Connecticut, and also from J. R. Royce at the
1 This proposal was approved by the Board of Directors of the American Eugenics Society at their meeting on May 22, 1970.

University of Alberta. Notice of the finalized program site and agenda will appear in a future issue of Social Biology.
The major work of the afternoon session was the specification of the charge to each provisional committee and designation of its full membership. The executive council and the committees with their chairmen and members are as follows: Executive Council, Richard H. Osborne, President-pro-tem, Gordon Allen, R. Darrell Bock, Irving I. Gottesman, Jerry Hirsch, Seymour Kessler, Richard J. Rose; Constitution Committee, R. Darrell Bock, Chairman, V. Elving Anderson, John C. Loehlin, R. C. Nichols, J. P, Scott; Membership Committee, Gordon Allen, Chairman, J. P. Hegmann, Leonard L. Heston, Jerry Hirsch, G. C. McClearn, V. A. McKusick; Program Committee, Seymour Kessler, Chairman, L. Erlenmeyer-Kirnling, Benson Ginsburg, Kenneth E. Henry, J. R. Royce, David Rosenthal; Public and Professional Affairs Committee, Irving I. Gottesman, Chairman, Jan Bruel, J. C. Defries, Th. Dobzhansky, Arthur Falek, Gardner Lindzey, Sheldon Reed, George Winokur; Communication Committee,Richard J. Rose, Chairman, Arnold R. Kaplan, Lissy F . Jarvik, Delbert D. Thiessen, Steven G. Vandenberg.

