Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Social aspects of genetic screening for TaySachs disease: The pilot community screening program in Baltimore and Washington
David V. McQueen
To cite this article: David V. McQueen (1975) Social aspects of genetic screening for TaySachs disease: The pilot community screening program in Baltimore and Washington, Social Biology, 22:2, 125-133, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988157 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988157
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 4
View related articles
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Social Aspects of Genetic Screening for Tay-Sachs Disease: The Pilot Community Screening Program in Baltimore and Washington

s,J*89
3E&IM
A

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

David V. McQueen
Department of Behavioral Sciences The Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, Maryland

A large well-delineated group of diseases have been related to genetic origins. Usually, medicine has concerned itself with the more obvious or severe genetic pathologies, such as muscular dystrophies, hereditary ataxias, genetic anemias, hereditary myocardial abnormalities, birth defects, and genetic metabolic abnormalities. In addition, the question of the possible genetic origin of psychological disorders such as some schizophrenias, manic-depressive illness, antisocial personality, and alcoholism has been raised. Discovery of genetic causation of certain types of mental illness and antisocial behavior would have profound significance for medical intervention.
To the extent that patterns of disease and aberrant behavior are based on genetic make-up and that intervention is possible, part of the task of medicine will be the identification of those individuals who possess the unusual genetic constitution. As with many other diseases, identification may involve screening. The general literature reveals that screening in

medicine is still in its infancy, largely because of the magnitude of the problems involved. Our concern is to consider some of the social aspects of problems associated with mass genetic screening.
Screening for Tay-Sachs disease illustrates several general aspects of mass genetic screening. Investigation of the social dimensions of the disease itself and of its screening possibilities may serve as a prototype study for some of the more common genetic disorders. There are sufficiently developed techniques (c) to screen all potential bearers of the recessive gene and (b) to prevent the disease. The technical medical problems which hamper screening programs for many other diseases are minimal.
With the availability of mass genetic screening, the social consequences of TaySachs disease have been modified. When it was not possible to prevent the Tay-Sachs disorder, there was a need to understand and empathize with the difficult psychological and social problems faced by par-

125

126

McQueen

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

ents of afflicted children. Now we must consider the problems unique to the application of genetic screening. The implementation of new genetic screening techniques raises a number of questions--about the consequences of learning that one or one's spouse is a carrier or that both are carriers, of how one views his responsibility to society with respect to his potential offspring, and of the attitude of carriers to the elimination of future carriers.
To the individual contemplating screening, the possibility of being found a carrier may be threatening. One might expect such individuals to experience anxiety related to the perceived threat of being a carrier. The beliefs of those screened undoubtedly affect their attitudes towards preventive medical actions. We should therefore expect the health beliefs of those individuals to be consistent with willingness to be screened and with perceptions of threat. One should also expect these beliefs and perceptions to be related to general ideological beliefs such as religion and personal philosophy and to be reflected in attitudes toward engendering children who might be carriers.
A theoretical orientation for understanding an individual's response to genetic screening is the health behavior model, originally developed by Kasl and Cobb (1965) and elaborated by Rosenstock (1966). Health behavior is defined as "any activity undertaken by a person who believes himself to be healthy, for the purpose of preventing disease or detecting disease in an asymptomatic stage." Rosenstock has attempted to elaborate this behavior and to understand its constituent properties, especially the variables involved in the patient's perception of the disease. Rosenstock concluded from a review of seven studies that "health decision-making is a process in which the individual moves through a series of stages or phases. Inter-

actions with persons or events at each of these stages influence the individual's decisions and subsequent behavior" (Rosenstock, 1966, p. 97).
Rosenstock's criticism of the reviewed studies indicates the unique significance of Tay-Sachs screening for understanding health behavior. The reviewed studies were limited to individuals seeking health care after the appearance of some symptoms. Rosenstock writes that his model to explain health behavior "includes two classes of variables: (1) the psychological state of readiness to take specific action and, (2) the extent to which a particular course of action is believed, on the whole, to be beneficial in reducing the threat" (Rosenstock, 1966, p. 98).
Specifically, Rosenstock isolates the importance of perceived susceptibility and perceived seriousness in the individual taking health action. In terms of Tay-Sachs screening, these variables consist of psychological projections by the person screened of susceptibility of offspring to the disease or to being a potential carrier. Rosenstock's "perceived seriousness of the disease" may, in our case, be viewed as a projection of seriousness of the disease to a potential child with Tay-Sachs and the potential of that affliction to disrupt the family.
What is not yet well understood is the seeking of preventive health care, before or in the absence of any symptoms in those being screened. Even the conceptualization of being a carrier for a genetic disease requires considerable cognitive understanding of what it means to possess a trait, and this understanding must come in the absence of any recognizable manifestations in oneself. Thus, symptoms as a cause for health action with respect to Tay-Sachs screening are at least two steps removed from the individual who must ultimately take the preventive action. The individual

Vol. 22, No. 2

Social Aspects of Genetic Screening

127

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

must not only conceptualize the symptoms for some other person, a potential offspring, but he must also empathize with the individual having those conceptualized symptoms. These remarks concerning the conceptual nature of genetic health behavior lead one into a thicket of subjectivity. Thus, one must become concerned with subjective motivations for a health action. These subjective considerations are difficult to operationalize, if not impossible to measure.
Pursuing the Rosenstock model further yields another interesting idea, that of "cues to action." What are the mechanisms which produce the desired behavior of individuals who are targets for screening, and how intense must they be in order to induce him to be screened? One could theorize, because of the highly cognitive nature of susceptibility and seriousness, that rather intense and therefore largely interpersonal stimuli would be needed to trigger an action toward participation in genetic screening. While the Rosenstock model appears theoretically plausible, research has shown very mixed empirical results with respect to the importance of perceived seriousness and susceptibility. This study of Tay-Sachs screening should help explain the results of such research and contribute to understanding of information gathered at the time of health action. No studies exist that have gathered information on the individual's perception of genetic screening at the time of screening.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
In our study of screened populations in Baltimore and Washington, perceived susceptibility to and seriousness of Tay-Sachs disease were measured as ordinal variables. The dimension of perceived susceptibility was obtained from the answer to the question "How likely do you think it is that

you might be a Tay-Sachs carrier?" The response comprising this variable (although originally the precoded response contained four classifications) may be considered as a dichotomy of "hardly likely" and "somewhat likely." The precoded response is in terms of the probability of one's being a carrier, and undoubtedly this variable is affected by the individual's knowledge about Tay-Sachs disease. The assessment of the role of knowledge in the screened population must await a thorough study of the background genetic knowledge of the screened population at some future time. The dimension of perceived seriousness was measured by the question "If you or your spouse were found to be a Tay-Sachs carrier, how much do you feel it would matter to you?" Response categories range from "hardly at all" to "a great deal."
In addition to perceived susceptibility and seriousness, motivation is related to the screened person's perception of the relative advantage accruing from taking action as opposed to remaining unscreened. That is, we see motivation as produced by compatibility of the screening with the ideology of the person screened combined with a perceived advantage in the long run of taking action. Compatibility between the consequences of the Tay-Sachs screening and the personal ideology of the person screened should therefore provide motiva-, tion. That is, screening for a disease within the Jewish community might draw on social values and general health beliefs conducive to screening. One could cite the work of Zborowski (19S2) in which he states that Jewish patients respond to disease because of concern about its meaning. One might therefore assume that the highly educated and high-social-status Jewish communities of both Washington and Baltimore would be attuned to preventive health innovations in general. Conse-

128

McQueen

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

quently, beliefs about a disease such as Tay-Sachs, which strikes predominantly Jewish families and is characterized by severe disruptions of these same families, would presumably result in compatibility of the genetic screening program with the Jewish community.
Three ordinal variables were used to measure the health beliefs of the persons screened: (1) the respondent's self-rating of his own health, (2) the respondent's report of when he last consulted a physician, and (3) the respondent's report of how often he thinks about his health. The person screened ranked his health on a scale from excellent to poor; but because no respondent screened ranked his health as poor, this variable was dichotomized as "excellent" and "good." The persons screened were also asked when they had last seen a physician. Their answers to a question on how often they thought about their health were recorded on a four-point scale reading from "hardly ever" to "very often."
The religious affiliation and religiosity of the persons screened was obtained. In particular, the branch of Judaism followed by the respondent was ascertained, and an ordinal variable of religiosity was obtained by asking the respondents to what extent they observed religious requirements.
In order to tap that aspect of motivation activated by the desire for children, we asked the respondents if they planned to have any additional children. A separate study of potential people to be screened showed that many declined to be screened on the basis of having already completed their family (McQueen, 1973). If the person screened planned to have additional children, we then asked two questions which were designed to ascertain the impact of carrier status' on future reproductive decisions.
The first question asked the respondent

to consider himself a Tay-Sachs carrier. In posing this question, we were interested in measuring if individuals were concerned with the possibility of producing carriers of the Tay-Sachs gene and would therefore alter their decision to reproduce in some manner. The second question asked the respondent to consider himself and his spouse as carriers, which would mean that potential offspring would have a 25 per cent risk of Tay-Sachs disease. This second question was concerned with the actions that at-risk couples would take in planning additional children. Both of these questions tapped elements of knowledge about genetics and about Tay-Sachs disease, in particular. The latter question provided a guide to the screened person's knowledge of available health actions because it offered in the response categories the option of amniocentesis monitoring of pregnancies.
THE BALTIMORE-WASHINGTON-PILOT TAY-SACHS PROGRAM
The planning and development of the Baltimore-Washington Tay-Sachs screening program consisted of several stages: (1) development of and procurement of methods, funds, and personnel; (2) education and enlistment of medical and religious communities; (3) organization of manpower in the community, volunteer task force instruction and orientation; (4) public education (mass media, organization communication systems, public forums); and (5) mass testing at temples and Jewish community centers. At the inception of the program, these stages were tentatively projected, since the planners felt that no precedents or guidelines were available. The first stage focused on the accuracy of the methodology employed in Tay-Sachs screening. After experimentation, the planners found the test "highly accurate, reproducible, and adequate for

Vol. 22, No. 2

Social Aspects of Genetic Screening

129

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

screening 300 persons daily in the Baltimore facility" (Kaback and Zeiger, 1973). The planners also studied the degree of commitment and responsibilities of the professional personnel, and an attempt was made to provide personnel for ongoing and appropriate genetic counseling.
The second stage of planning focused on obtaining the support of medical and religious professionals. The planners were especially concerned that physicians within the Jewish community understood the usefulness of a screening program for a rare Jewish disease. Similarly, it was felt that the religious leaders should fully understand the nature of the disease and possible social ramifications. The rabbinate were considered instrumental in any ongoing program, especially as a link in counseling newly married Jewish couples.
The third stage of planning involved organizing the community in order to obtain necessary manpower for the screenings. By using over one-hundred organizations in the Baltimore and Washington Jewish communities, it was possible to generate a ten- to twenty-member TaySachs task force in each community. These small task forces were educated in the practical aspects of the screening program, that is, they were familiarized with the characteristics of Tay-Sachs, carrier rates, the meaning of being at risk for the disease, and the justification for the program.
The fourth stage of public education began only after the prior stages were well established. A multi-faceted saturation approach to genetic education was utilized by the program. Jewish physicians were given informational brochures; rabbis were encouraged to communicate with their congregations concerning Tay-Sachs screening; pamphlet mailings were made; and the mass media were contacted.
The final stage, mass testing, was begun approximately one and one-half years after

the program was formulated, and the community testing facilities were efficiently utilized. The time necessary for a man and wife to complete the entire screening process generally was no more than ten to twenty minutes at testings attended by up to a thousand persons.
COLLECTION OF DATA
This study is based on perceptions of individuals at time of screening rather than on retrospective data. Previous data on the adoption of innovations have not been collected at the moment of adoption. The major data for Washington and Baltimore were obtained as individuals were screened in two cities. There was thus no chance for the person screened to develop post-screening "rationalizations" for his actions and to present reasons which were possibly spurious to his real reasons for attending.
A two-page self-administered sociological questionnaire was part of the "screening packet" which contained information necessary for implementation of the screening. This packet was given to each person as he entered the screening center. The great advantage of this procedure from the social scientist's standpoint was that the completion rate was extraordinarily high (greater than 99 per cent). The confidential sociological questions, being physically attached to the medical information questionnaire, in a sense came under a "medical umbrella." Such "return rates" are uncommon in social science research.
RESULTS
Table 1 shows selected health findings in the Baltimore and Washington screened populations. We are interested in how the persons screened perceived their health and asked them to rate their health on a scale from excellent to poor. We hoped to discover whether or not persons coming to be

130

McQueen

Social Biology

TABLE 1
SELECTED HEALTH FINDINGS FROM THE BALTIMORE-WASHINGTON TAY-SACHS SCREENING

VARIABLE AND CLASS
Health rating* Excellent Good Fair
When doctor last seent Years ago Months ago Weeks ago Days ago
Thoughts about health* Hardly ever Once in a while Fairly often Very often

BALTIMORE
NO. %
141 62 81 36 42
33 IS 145 64 34 IS 13 6
21 9 88 39 93 41 23 10

WASHTN0T0N
No. %
536 62 317 36 17 2
143 16 510 58 148 17 67 8
63 8 398 46 313 36 83 10

TOTAL
No. %
677 62 398 36 21 2
176 16 6S5 60 182 17
80 7
89 8 486 45 406 37 106 10

* Excluding 3 Baltimore and 4 Washington nonrespondents. + Excluding 4 Baltimore and o Washington nonrespondents. t Excluding 4 Baltimore and 12 Washington nonrespondents.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

screened were responding to some symptoms and thus exhibiting "illness behavior." In fact, as the response to this question shows, both the Washington and Baltimore groups regard themselves as having excellent or good health. No persons in either group believed their health to be poor. The fact that most respondents reported that they had not recently seen a physician lends further credence to their high self-rating of health. Nevertheless, although they did not often visit a physician, they apparently often thought about their health.
The health status of the group may also be inferred from the number of medications reported. As a group, they reported taking little medication. I t was rare for any individual to report taking medications, and few prescription drugs were reported. Most of the medicine described was routine over-the-counter medication for colds, headaches, upset stomachs, and the like. A large percentage of women on birth control pills augmented the number of medications taken by females.
In our concern with how religious affili-

ations affected willingness to be screened, we compared Washington (third Washington testing, early adopters) with Baltimore (seventh Baltimore testing, later adopters) with respect to religion. This comparison is iUustrated in Table 2. It is

TABLE 2
RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION OR PREFERENCE*

WASHINGTON

AFFILIATION

NO. %

Jewish Reform Jewish Conserv. . . . Jewish Orthodox . . Other (specified a
religion)
Other (specified no religion)
No answer . . . . . . . .

253 486 77
31
IS 12

28.9 SS.6 8.8
3.S
1.7 1.4

BALTIMORE
No. %
70 36.6 90 39.3 55 24.0
7 3.1
1 0.4 5 2.2

·When religion is trichotomized into Reform, Conservative, and Orthodox, there is a significant difference between Washington and Baltimore at the 0.001 level (Gamma = 0.10).

notable that the religious affiliation of our adopters in Baltimore did not significantly differ from that of the Baltimore target population (all married Jewish individuals aged 18-44 in the metropolitan area). In

Vol. 22, No. 2

Social Aspects of Genetic Screening

131

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

terms of practicing religious requirements, the Baltimore screened sample was significantly more religious than the general target population (significant at the 0.001 level). This finding is undoubtedly related to the use of the synagogue as a testing place. While it may be reasoned that the synagogue does form a sort of natural community center, has certain locational advantages, and has certain access to the Jewish' community, those persons affiliated with it may also not best represent the target population. Given the fact that our primary target population is young and more religiously liberal than the Jewish community in general, it is the author's opinion that much of the target population is being missed by having the screening so closely tied to the religious aspect of the Jewish community. Possible alternatives would be more extensive use of Jewish Community Centers and the aid of other secular Jewish organizations.
One of the strongest factors involved in attendance at the screenings was family planning. Tables 3, 4, and 5, illustrate the findings of our study with respect to the impact of family planning on attendance. Clearly, most persons screened planned to have additional children. In some cases, where only one person was projected as a carrier, the couple screened considered the use of the Tay-Sachs prevention program even though the amniocentesis procedure of pregnancy monitoring would not be ap-

TABLE 3
RESPONSE TO QUESTION 11: "Do You PLAN TO HAVE ANY ADDITIONAL CHILDREN?"

WASHINGTON

RESPONSE

No. %

No 133 Yes 732 Don't Know . . . . 16
13

14.9 81.9
1.8 1.S

BALTIMORE
No. %
31 13.6 189 82.9
2 0.9 6 2.6

TABLE 4
RESPONSE TO QUESTION 11A: "SUPPOSE YOU OR YOUR SPOUSE WERE FOUND TO BE TAY-SACHS CARRIERS, HOW DO YOU FEEL THAT WOULD AFFECT YOUR PLANS TO HAVE (ADDITIONAL) CHILDREN?"

WASHINGTON

RESPONSE

NO. %

I would not change

my plans

532

I would still have

children, but

fewer

62

I would decide not

to have anymore . . 41

I would adopt

6

Other (specified)* . . 85

Total

726

73.3
8.S
S.6 0.8 11.7 ...

BALTIMORE No. %
110 S9.4
19 10.3 16 8.7 8 4.4 32 17.3 185

* Use of amniocentesis, etc

TABLE S
RESPONSE TO QUESTION 11B: "SUPPOSE YOTJ AND YOUR SPOUSE WERE FOUND TO BE TAY-SACHS CARRIERS, H O W WOULD THAT AFFECT YOUR PLANS FOR ADDITIONAL CHILDREN?"

WASHINGTON

RESPONSE

NO. %

Would not change... Fewer children No more children . . . Adopt Other (specified)* . .

295 93 148 15 156

Total

707

41.7 13.1 20.9 2.1 22.1
...

BALTIMOKE
No. %
57 32.6 19 10.9 47 26.8 9 5.1 43 24.6
175

* Use of amniocentesis, etc.

plicable for such couples. If both parents were carriers, then the risk of a Tay-Sachs child would be one chance in four. As may be seen, there is significant difference (p < 0.01) in these responses to the questions on carrier status and having additional children.
As discussed earlier in this paper, we were particularly interested in considering the Rosenstock variables of perceived susceptibility and perceived seriousness as motivating factors in attending a genetic screening. We directly asked the persons screened how likely it was that they would

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

132

McQueen

Social Biology

be carriers of the Tay-Sacbs gene (susceptibility) and how serious it would be to be found a carrier of the gene (seriousness). The results of this inquiry are seen in Table 6.
In general, respondents reported low perception of susceptibility for Tay-Sachs carrier status. In a group which rates itself so highly in terms of health, one might expect a low perceived susceptibility of disease in general. However, it is difficult to understand why they would consider their susceptibility for Tay-Sachs trait to be so low. This finding is puzzling. Given the fact that the group is a highly educated one, and given that the circulated literature exactly specifies the carrier rate for Ashkenazi Jews, one would predict a high degree of concordance between perceived susceptibility and the true rate. It is difficult to speculate what attitudinal components are operating. Perhaps it is the low observability of the disease. Perhaps it is the conceptual difficulty of making a mental image of oneself as a TaySachs carrier. More than likely, it is a combination of both. In genetic disease, we are dealing with a different kind of conceptualization of disease on the part of the individual, and it is evidently dif-

ficult to perceive oneself as a possible carrier.
The most puzzling result to come out of the Baltimore data is the very low perceived susceptibility, even less than that of Washington. One would hypothesize that perceived susceptibility would be greater in Baltimore for a number of reasons. Over a series of nine testings, a large number of carriers would have been identified and would have become "observables" in the innovation-decision cycle. Therefore, a gradual realization of the actual rate should begin diffusing through the community. That is, as interpersonal networks diffuse the knowledge of carrier identifications, the perceived susceptibility of community members should increase considerably. The fact that this does not appear to have happened provides ground for speculation about the impact of screening on the diffusion of further knowledge of genetic screening. In addition, the decreasing perceived susceptibility suggests the possibility of a loss of motivation for people in the entire target community. That is, a person might simply argue, "Why bother? It's so rare. No one I know is a carrier." Hence, a lack of "observables" in the population may foretell a

TABLE 6
BALTIMORE AND WASHINGTON G R O W S COMPARED ON "ROSENSTOCK" VARIABLES

VARIABLE AND CLASS
Perceived susceptibility* Hardly likely (1/3,600) Somewhat likely (1/900) Fairly likely (1/30) t Very likely (1/10)
Perceived seriousness, "caring"J Hardly at all Somewhat Moderate amount Great deal

BALTIMOKE
NO. %
137 65 SO 24 21 10 31
36 16 25 11 61 27 102 46

WASHINGTON
No. %
441 SS 224 28 124 IS 13 2
111 13 172 20 188 22 387 44

TOTAL
No. %
S78 57 274 27 14S 14 16 2
147 14 197 18 249 23 489 4S

·Excluding 18 Baltimore and 72 Washington nonrespondents. Gamma =r-|-0.22, p < 0 . 0 5 . 11/30 is the current best estimate of carrier rate among Ashkenazi Jews. t Excluding 5 Baltimore and 16 Washington nonrespondents. Gamma = -fO.11, £ < 0 . 0 5 .

Vol. 22, No. 2

Social Aspects of Genetic Screening

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

"running down" of the program. The declining diffusion rates for the Baltimore population and the unique diffusion curves for the two populations are discussed in considerable detail in McQueen (1973).
Surprisingly, perceived susceptibility was little related to perceived seriousness. Being a carrier was considered by most as a serious matter. If any factor in the Rosenstock sense of motivation for health behavior was operating, then this one is a likely candidate. Knowing the recessive character of the disease, one would assume that being a carrier would not matter so highly, for it is true that most individuals carry many recessive traits any one of which might be lethal in combination with a spouse who is a carrier with the same trait.
Together, the outcome of the results for

perceived susceptibility and perceived seriousness raise serious questions for future mass genetic screenings. In the opinion of the writer, these findings indicate that even a highly sophisticated population has considerable difficulty in conceptualizing what it means to be a carrier and what constitutes the risk of being a carrier. If, in fact, these findings reflect some confusion on the part of these highly educated individuals, then what must one infer about genetic programs which are oriented towards less-educated populations? The clear implication is that in planning mass genetic screening programs much thought must be given to ancillary counseling services in order to assure that the meaning of carrier status for a recessive gene is well understood by the client.

REFERENCES

KABACK, M. M., and R. S. ZEIGER. 1973. The
John F. Kennedy Institute Tay-Sachs Program: Practical and ethical issues in an adult screening program. In B. Hilton and D. Callahan (eds.), Ethical issues in human genetics. Plenum Press, New York.
KASL, S. V., and S. COBB. 196S. Health behavior, illness behavior, and sick-role behavior. Arch. Environ. Hlth. 12:246-266.
MCQUEEN, D. V. 1973. The diffusion of the inno-

vation of genetic screening: Tay-Sachs screening in Baltimore and Washington, D.C. Ph.D. thesis, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore.
ROSENSTOCK, I. M. 1966.Why people use health services. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 44:94127.
ZBOROWSKI, M. 1952. Cultural components in responses to pain. J. Soc. Issues 8:16-30.

