Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Genetic counseling as an occupational specialty: A sociological perspective
Marvin Dicker & Lois Dicker
To cite this article: Marvin Dicker & Lois Dicker (1978) Genetic counseling as an occupational specialty: A sociological perspective, Social Biology, 25:4, 272-278, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988348 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988348
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Genetic Counseling as an Occupational Specialty: A Sociological Perspective

r~
[· if : J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Marvin Dicker and Lois Dicker
10803 Georgia Avenue Silver Spring, Maryland
ABSTRACT: Observations of client-counselor interaction during genetic counseling sessions at a metropolitan hospital on the West Coast identified five major problems with which genetic counselors had to deal. Their clients needed: (1) a diagnosis of the disease condition; (2) an evaluation of the genetic nature of the condition; (3) to be taught biomedical information; (4) assistance in coping with psychological stress; and (5) information on available community resources and social service support. The genetic counselors under observation tended to satisfy the clients' first two needs, the need for a diagnosis and for a genetic evaluation, but they tended not to satisfy the clients' needs in the areas of education and psychosocial counseling. Genetic counseling appears to demand a synthesis of five different professional skills, those of the medical doctor, the geneticist, the educator, the psychotherapist, and the social worker. These findings are discussed in terms of their relevance for creating programs for training genetic counselors.

Genetic counseling has developed from an esoteric branch of genetics to a widely utilized clinical specialty practiced by persons trained in a variety of disciplines including pediatrics, medical genetics, and nursing. The need and demand for genetic counseling services has grown with the rapidly improving technology and knowledge concerning genetic screening techniques, and with the portrayal of these techniques in the mass media. It is important, therefore, to know the skills required of a genetic counselor in order to properly design training programs in genetic counseling.
But what skills are needed by genetic counselors? This specialty is a relatively new one. Only a few years ago, genetic counseling was primarily by geneticists associated with academic departments. Today, it is increasingly provided by pediatricians within a hospital setting. In short, it is a medical role in the process of developing. As a consequence, it is not yet clear exactly what skills are needed for perform-

ing the duties of the specialty or what specific training a genetic counselor should have.
One approach to discovering what skills should be taught in a curriculum for training genetic counselors is to investigate the client-counselor interaction with the purpose of answering the following questions: First, what are the problems clients bring into the genetic counseling situation which should be alleviated by the genetic counselor? Second, what kinds of skills should a genetic counselor have to effectively alleviate the problems presented?
MATERIALS AND METHODS
One of the authors (L.D.) collected data on client-counselor interaction during genetic counseling sessions by the staff of the genetics division of a university-affiliated urban medical center on the West Coast (called Pacific Urban Medical in this paper). The data were collected during the month of November, 1975. The staff con-

272

Vol. 25, No. 4

Genetic Counseling

273

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

sisted of seven pediatricians who also doubled as genetic counselors. Data were gathered from 25 counseling sessions by six of the staff members. L.D.'s role was that of a passive observer who took no part in the counseling sessions. Her presence appeared to have no affect on either the content or the outcome of the sessions.
THE CLIENT POPULATION
As a genetic counseling session involves an interaction between a counselor and a client, the nature of the client population may have an effect on the type of counseling that occurs. In the counseling sessions used for this analysis, the population being counseled included a large percentage of working-class Mexican-American families. Although this client population is largely peculiar to the southwestern United States, it did not appear that the types of problems which the clients brought to the counseling sessions differed greatly from those that would have been found in any other county hospital dealing with a working-class population.

RESULTS
PROBLEMS REQUIRING COUNSELING
The data from tapes and personal observations of counseling sessions indicated five major problems with which genetic counselors had to deal. Moreover, all five problems were found in the typical genetic counseling session. The five problems can be listed under the following descriptive headings:
1. diagnosis of the disease condition; 2. evaluation of the genetic nature of the
condition; 3. the teaching of biomedical information; 4. the alleviation of psychological stress; 5. the dispensing of social service and com-
munity resource information.
A cursory examination of the above problem areas suggests that genetic counseling is a syncretic activity needing the utilization of skills developed in several independent professions. Let us examine each of the above problem areas more fully to see to what extent this conclusion is justified.

THE COUNSELOR POPULATION
In a similar manner, the nature of the population of genetic counselors available may have an effect on the type of interaction that occurs in a genetic counseling session. Here we are referring to such factors as the particular professional training the counselors have had--the norms of their profession, the skills they have learned, the characteristic professional response to a problem situation--as well as the personalities and social backgrounds of the people recruited to perform as counselors. As previously pointed out, the counselors were trained as pediatricians, and most probably, the fact that they had been trained as medical doctors in general, and pediatricians in particular, is the most salient factor to keep in mind in interpreting the material that follows.

DIAGNOSIS OF THE DISEASE CONDITION
Most of the clients entered the genetic counseling sessions following the diagnosis of an abnormal condition; that is, either a defective birth had recently occurred or the client had become aware that a family member (or the client), had developed a disease condition which a physician had diagnosed as possibly having a genetic origin. The skills needed for dealing with this problem are the skills taught in medical schools and schools of osteopathy and further developed in the practice of medicine. Under law, the diagnosis and treatment of disease conditions can only be performed by (or under the supervision of) a certified medical doctor or osteopath.
At Pacific Urban Medical, the pediatrician-genetic counselors functioned both as diagnosticians and genetic coun-

274

Dicker and Dicker

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

selors. Their medical training made them particularly capable as diagnosticians, and they diagnosed most of the disease conditions which brought clients into counseling. Occasionally, however, clients were referred to the genetics division by outside physicians who requested confirmation of a diagnosis, specific genetic analyses, and/or genetic counseling sessions for their patients. In these latter instances, the functions of diagnostician and genetic counselor were separated.

ically derived diseases to many diverse problems.
At Pacific Urban Medical, the pediatrician-genetic counselors appeared to understand the relationship of genetics to the disease condition, to the extent that it could be understood. In all the observed situations, they prepared a genetic profile (or had one prepared in advance) and attempted to discuss the genetic and medical implications of the disease condition with the client.

EVALUATION OF THE GENETIC NATURE OF THE
CONDITION
Once a diagnosis has been made which specifies a disease condition known to have, or possibly having, genetic origins, a genetic profile is compiled. A genetic profile consists of a family pedigree derived from information obtained by interviewing family members and/or checking past family records. This was a routine part of every initial counseling session, often taking up to thirty minutes to complete. Using the family pedigree information, physician's diagnosis of the disease condition, laboratory test results, and any previously recorded genetic data concerning the disease condition, the counselor makes an assessment as to (1) the mode of inheritance of the condition and (2) the probability of the same or a similar condition occurring again within the same family. The counselor then communicates this information to the client or family.
The work-up and analysis of a genetic profile requires some knowledge of the skills of a geneticist. Although genetic counselors need not be capable of doing research in genetics, they must understand enough genetics to read and interpret the literature, comprehend and utilize new findings, interpret laboratory test results, prepare a genetic profile, and apply the known facts of the inheritance of genet-

THE TEACHING OF BIOMEDICAL INFORMATION
After a disease has been diagnosed and a genetic evaluation has been made, the client must come to understand the implications of this knowledge for his or her individual and family life situation. This means that the genetic counselor is faced with the problem of teaching biomedical facts and theories to the client in a manner which insures a high probability that learning will take place. However, there are numerous barriers to successful teaching.
One set of barriers is common to all situations wherein a highly trained, specialized professional must deal with a largely untrained, nonprofessional, heterogeneous clientele. These may be considered general societal barriers to communication. They include, but are not limited to, differences in the general level of education of those involved; differences in their knowledge of biology, medicine, and science; differences in values, norms, cognitive patterns, and belief systems associated with differing social class, ethnic and religious subcultures, and sometimes, compounding all of the above, differences in language.
The usual solution to the problem of communication presented by such barriers is for the professional to give authoritative directions to the client. It is assumed that the client does not have the ability to cor-

Vol. 25, No. 4

Genetic Counseling

275

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

rectly understand the complexities of the situation and make a proper decision as to a future course of action. Within the field of medicine, for example, it is the culturally normative procedure in the doctorpatient relationship for a future course of action to be planned on the basis of the patient's acceptance of the legitimate right of the doctor to unilaterally make the necessary decisions.
But this normal (and normative) solution to the professional-client communication problem is not applicable within a genetic counseling interaction because it has come to be an axiom of the genetic counseling profession that the counselor should not give authoritative directions to the patient. Such direction is considered an infringement of the patient's right to make a moral choice as to whether or not to gamble with the probabilities of producing defective offspring. As a consequence, the genetic counselor is faced with the problem of educating the client so that the client can independently make an informed decision.
It follows from the above that training in genetic counseling should emphasize the "methodology of teaching" to an extent not usually thought necessary in the training of professionals who are noneducators. The genetic counselor is not only a diagnostician and a geneticist, but also an adult education teacher of biomedical science. In every counseling session, the counselor must teach the client how a disease condition occurred and the probability of its recurrence in the same family. This process involves the communication of sophisticated ideas in biology, embryology, physiology, genetics, statistics, and the philosophy of science.
Teaching in a genetic counseling situation is difficult not only because of the general societal barriers to communication discussed above, but also because of the specific conditions under which teaching

must take place. These conditions may be considered special situational barriers to communication. To begin with, the client comes into the genetic counseling session expecting the usual doctor-patient relationship wherein authoritative directions will be given. Therefore, teaching must take place within a situation where normative expectations are being violated, and the client is unprepared for an altered relationship and unmotivated to accept it. Second, a genetic counseling session is the epitome of the short course as it has been developing in adult education. Often it may involve only one counseling session, and all the material must be taught and learned in this one session. Third, learning almost always takes place under conditions of psychological stress derived from the nature of the disease condition and its effect upon the family being counseled. Finally, in many cases, the material being taught is difficult to learn.
Our observations of genetic counseling at Pacific Urban Medical indicated that while the pediatrician-genetic counselors of the genetics division were conscious of a need to communicate their understanding of the biomedical parameters of the situation to the client, they did not conceive of this task as presenting a major teaching problem. Consequently, they tended not to have prepared the lesson beforehand, but instead gave it spontaneously. They also tended not to use lesson outlines; not to have thought through the problem of how to present difficult statistical ideas to a population without any knowledge of statistics; not to have specially prepared visual aids which would have made the teaching of the lesson much simpler; and, finally, not to have arguments to counter statements from the folk culture concerning biology and/or the nature of causation. For example, several clients suggested the following two theories of causation: (1) the defective birth was caused by an eclipse of

276

Dicker and Dicker

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

the moon; and (2) the defective birth was caused by an act of infidelity by a marital partner. To counter these theories, the counselors simply made authoritative statements denying their validity, rather than presenting an alternative theory of causation.
In short, our observations indicated that genetic counseling involved a teaching function, but that the counselors did not approach the genetic counseling session as a teaching situation demanding the same kind of approach as more orthodox teaching situations. As a result, a very difficult teaching situation was made even more difficult, and it is our opinion that the clients did not sufficiently grasp the relevant biomedical and statistical facts.
THE ALLEVIATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS
As previously pointed out, one of the barriers to successful communication in genetic counseling sessions is the extreme psychological stress experienced by the individuals and families who come to the sessions (Antley and Hartlage, 1976). This was a phenomenon affecting all the counseling sessions examined for this report.
An individual or family does not usually enter genetic counseling unless a defective birth has occurred or is thought to have a high probability of occurring in the near future. The birth of a child, because of its social importance and crisis nature, has been universally a cause for anxiety within the individual and of intense concern among family and larger society. As a consequence, all known human societies have elaborated rituals, myths, and norms to control, explain, and evaluate all activities remotely associated with birth. Throughout history, a malfunctioning in this area has had dire consequences for the self-concept of the individual, for the stability of family relationships, and for the status of the family in the larger society. Given this central position of the birth event in

human life, it is not surprising that the counselees normally are under extreme psychological stress.
The genetic counselor is usually the first professional (and often the only professional), to whom the family can express some of its feelings after a defective birth has occurred. Individual family members may find themselves overwhelmed by feelings of guilt, resentment, anger, anxiety, despair, and so on. The genetic counselor should be prepared to deal with these emotional states as well as with the initial shock and disbelief that occurs when family members first hear about the child's condition. If the child will remain alive for some time, the counselor should be prepared to counsel the family about the difficult and traumatic psychological stages the family will pass through in the process of accepting (or rejecting) the child. In the case of a chronically degenerative condition such as Tay-Sachs disease, the counselor should be able to advise the family on the psychological dynamics that will accompany such a condition. Finally, the counselor should be capable of counseling the family on ways of coping with the myriad of social problems that may arise, such problems as social stigmatization, economic hardship, family instability, and so on.
The above suggests that genetic counseling should also include the utilization of that set of skills that have traditionally been considered the defining characteristic of the professional role of the counseling psychotherapist. It follows that either a psychologist or psychiatrist should be involved in the counseling in some way, or the genetic counselor should at least be prepared to undertake minimum psychological counseling.
At Pacific Urban Medical, the pediatrician-genetic counselors tended not to deal adequately with the extreme psychological stress exhibited by the individuals and

Vol. 2 5 , No. 4

Genetic Counseling

277

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

families they counseled. Despite the obvious emotional stress being experienced by many of the clients, the counselors made no referrals of clients to psychotherapists for follow-up treatment. Only one of the six counselors spent any time during a counseling session discussing the psychological implications of the genetic disorder. It may have been that the pediatrician-genetic counselors at Pacific Urban Medical did not consider the alleviation of psychological stress a major aspect of their functional role.
Whatever the reason, this failure to confront the psychological problems associated with the occurrence of genetic defects should be recognized as a failure to alleviate stress which creates blocks to successful communication and which leads to irrational behavior in making genetic decisions. If the goal of genetic counseling is extended to include not only rational choices concerning the birth of defective children but also assistance to the family in coping with such births, then the failure to address the psychological problems attending such births means a failure in this area also.
THE DISPENSING OF COMMUNITY RESOURCE INFORMATION
Not only are families under psychological stress which inhibits the achievement of rational solutions to the problems associated with the occurrence of a defective birth, but they are also usually ignorant of the range and type of community resources available to help them. Such resources include rehabilitation centers, developmental centers, family planning clinics, special education centers, adoption services, special hospital facilities, inhouse institutional care, day care centers, home care services, family counseling clinics, financial aid services, and supportive community groups such as parent's organizations concerned with a specific

disability. These services are often instrumental in assisting a family to overcome the many problems associated with genetic defects and defective births.
As the genetic counselor is usually one of the first professionals seen by the family after the birth of a child with a genetic defect, it is imperative that the genetic counselor include community resource counseling as a routine, preplanned part of the counseling experience, so as to direct the family as early as possible to the resources discussed above. Yet, it was not clear that this was being done at Pacific Urban Medical. None of the pediatrician-genetic counselors was observed voluntarily giving social service resource counseling during the counseling sessions, nor were referrals made to a social worker or other professional who might do this. If during the counseling session the client requested such information, the pediatrician-genetic counselor proved knowledgeable of the available resources and adequately counseled the client.
Social service resource counseling can be done either by a routine referral of the family to a social worker or by the counselor including this task in his counseling role. To the extent that the latter pattern is followed, the training of a genetic counselor should include some exposure to the disciplines concerned with social work and community services. At the very least, the counselor should have the training and experience necessary to know when a family needs such services and where to refer the family for assistance.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The pediatrician-genetic counselors observed in this study tended to utilize the skills of the geneticist and of the diagnostician which they had learned in medical training. They met the needs in these areas brought to the counseling sessions by the clients. However, they tended not to use

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

278

Dicker and Dicker

Social Biology

the skills of the teacher, the The conclusion of this paper is that the

psychotherapist, and the social worker. As genetic counselor must either be an inter-

a consequence, they tended not to satisfy disciplinarily trained generalist or that a

the needs of the clients in these areas. genetic service must be composed of a

Given the above findings, what kind of team of professionals having in aggregate

training should a genetic counselor have? the skills found in this paper to be neces-

What kind of service should a genetic sary for successful genetic counseling. But

counseling service be?

the evolution of an occupational specialty

Marks and Richter (1976) in their sug- does not necessarily follow rational lines.

gested curriculum for the degree of genetic Pediatricians and other medically trained

associate have suggested that a genetic genetic counselors have displaced non-

counselor be trained primarily as a genet- medically trained geneticists from genetic

icist. By implication, the genetic service at counseling because the former have had

Pacific Urban Medical suggests that ge- control of the hospital where most counsel-

netic counselors should be trained in med- ing takes place. It seems likely, therefore,

icine, particularly in pediatrics. Headings that most genetic counseling will continue

(1975) and Antley (1976) have suggested to be done under the guidance of medically

that genetic counselors be trained in the trained personnel. The real question is

skills used by counseling psychologistsand whether the emphasis in genetic counsel-

counseling social workers. Fraser (1976) ing should be biomedical or psychosocial-

has suggested that instead of a single ge- educational. If Pacific Urban Medical is

netic counselor there should be a genetic an example of most genetic services, then

service composed of a team of profes- this paper suggests that in most genetic

sionals representing all of the skills found services the biomedical aspect of the ser-

necessary for successful genetic counsel- vice is being stressed to the detriment of

ing. the psychosocial-educational.

REFERENCES

ANTLEY, RAY M. 1976. Variables in the outcomeof genetic counseling. Soc. Biol. 23(2): 108-115.
ANTLEY, R. M., and L. C. HARTLAGE. 1976. Psy-
chological responses to genetic counseling for Down's syndrome. Clin. Genet. 9(3):257-265. FRASER, F. C. 1976. Current concepts in genetics. New Engl. J. Med. 295:486-488.

HEADINGS, VERLE E. 1975. Alternative models of counseling for genetic disorders. Soc. Biol. 22(4):297-303.
MARKS, J. H., and M. L. RICHTER. 1976. The ge-
netic associate: A new health professional. A.J.P.H. 66(4):388.

