Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Introduction: Methodologies in human behavior genetics
Arthur Falek & L. ErlenmeyerKimling
To cite this article: Arthur Falek & L. ErlenmeyerKimling (1973) Introduction: Methodologies in human behavior genetics, Social Biology, 20:3, 239-240, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988048 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988048
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

Introduction: Methodologies in Human Behavior Genetics

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Arthur Falek and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling
Human and Behavioral Genetics Research Laboratory, GeorgiaMental Health Institute, and Departments of Psychiatry and Anatomy, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia; and Department of Medical Genetics, New York State PsychiatricInstitute, New York, New York

At the Behavior Genetics Association meeting in April, 1971, it was decided that it would be opportune to organize a symposium on behavior genetics to be held at the Fourth International Congress of Human Genetics in Paris in the fall of that year. Based on that resolution, a meeting entitled "Methodologies in Human Behavior Genetics" was organized as part of the Congress activities by Arthur Falek and L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling. The papers presented at the meeting are compiled in this issue of Social Biology.
Papers by two eminent workers in psychiatric genetics--Dr. Eiji Inouye, Institute on Brain Research, University of Tokyo, School of Medicine, Japan, and Dr. Marat Vartanian, Department of Human Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry, Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, U.S.S.R.--and by two authorities from the field of statistical genetics--Dr. Luigi Cavalli-Sforza, Department of Genetics, University of Pavia, Italy and Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, California, and Dr. David Fulker, Department of Psychology, University of Birmingham, England-- are included with a discussion by Professor Robert Elston, Department of Statistics, University of North Carolina.

Inouye's article deals with the different approaches employed in investigations of human behavior genetics and evaluates some of the methodological issues and limitations associated with each of them. The underlying assumptions of the biometrical approach with application to analyses of the genetic aspects of intelligence and schizophrenia are presented by Fulker. It is of interest that Cavalli-Sforza also chose schizophrenia as his area of concern on genetic analysis. The paper by CavalliSforza and his colleague, Kidd, as compared with that of Fulker, demonstrates that despite the fact that much information on this disorder has been collected in many studies, in a variety of ways and repetitively analyzed with up-to-date statistical techniques, this complex syndrome defined by marked abnormal behavior patterns still defies resolution. Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza conclude their paper with the suggestion that the answers to the many problems which need to be dealt with in understanding the basis of schizophrenia lie in methodological approaches to be found in biochemistry, physiology, and toxicology. The paper by Vartanian and Gindilis augments this suggestion with several promising find-

239

240

Falek and Erlenmcyer-Kiraling

Social Biology

ings and fascinating leads based on a variety of biological methods.
Elston's pointed remarks not only review the four presented papers, but offer new

evidence pertinent to genetic aspects of schizophrenia based on data showing a linkage with a well-known polymorphic genetic trait.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

