Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Sociocultural factors and the genetic diversification of Amazonian Indians: A brief overview
Gilberto F. Souza Aguiar
To cite this article: Gilberto F. Souza Aguiar (1993) Sociocultural factors and the genetic diversification of Amazonian Indians: A brief overview, Social Biology, 40:1-2, 38-47, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1993.9988834 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1993.9988834
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 6
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:45

Sociocultural Factors and the Genetic Diversification of Amazonian Indians: A Brief Overview

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Gilberto F. Souza Aguiar

Departamento de Ecologia Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi Belém, Pará, Brazil

The manner in which a society defines its strategies of preservation, subsistence, and relations with other societies may result in peculiar patterns of the expression of sociocultural traits. Theoretically, the more diversified such strategies, the more complex their effects on the social organization of the group, at any level of analysis (Vayda and Rappaport, 1976; Moran, 1982).
Sociocultural traditions constitute one of the ways in which the lifestyle of a people may be expressed. According to Hughes (1988), their evolution does not occur randomly or as a simple reflection of direct external influences, but above all as a result of individual and group necessities related to biological survival. The framework of modern human sociobiology shows that the expression of social behavior and cultural manifestations in our species are influenced by basic strategies of adaptation to the contingencies of the natural world and to the peculiarities inherent in the lifestyle of the communities.
But the relationship biology versus culture does not occur in an unidirectional way. If many human sociocultural practices result from adaptive necessities of a biological nature,

there are also those that affect the genetic features of populations, modifying them and acting as determining agents of biological differentiation. Some of these practices are capable of causing dramatic changes in the genetic profile within and between human groups (Neel and Salzano, 1967; Chagnon et al., 1970; Neel et al., 1972). Although they are currently reduced by some geneticists to the level of "stochastic phenomena" (namely, random genetic drift), they can act in a directional manner, which is perceptible only if it is possible to know the variables governing them.
Amazonian Indian groups and those of neighboring areas in South America present a great heterogeneity of linguistic (Loukotka, 1968), demographic (Aguiar, 1990a), and sociocultural (Galvao, 1960) patterns. Their recent histories are also diversified, although changes derived from the impact of the acculturation process are a common trait among them (Schaden, 1969). However, even when we take into account this impact, tribal groups seem heterogeneous, for they did not suffer the disruptive influences of the national society with the same intensity and in identical historical periods (Ribeiro, 1947; Whitehead, 1988).

38

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

Amazonian Indians

39

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

Sociocultural and historical particularities of native populations of the northern part of South America appear to influence their genetic profile in several ways. Recent studies show, for instance, that the degree of intergroup genetic diversity is not the same when we consider tribes of distinct linguistic stocks, these differences being related to demographic and ethnohistorical variables. Callegari-Jacques and Salzano (1989) reveal that the average genetic distance among eight Tupi groups is about two or three times greater than the average genetic distance among nine Carib groups. The authors note that sizes of present Tupi tribes are significantly smaller than those of the Carib tribes. They associate the two facts, considering the greater Tupi genetic dispersion as a consequence of probable effects of random genetic drift. Salzano and Callegari-Jacques (1988) referred to the fact that Tupi constitutes the only linguistic stock already studied that presents a within-stock genetic distance greater than between-stock distances, a probable result of the migratory behavior of this group. These Indians have covered large geographical distances in relatively short periods, spreading from the Andes to the Atlantic Coast, from Rio de la Plata to the Guianan highlands. Therefore, they supposedly maintained contact with several other peoples and were exposed to a great variety of environments (Radin, 1942; Pericot and Garcia, 1962). This would favor the process of gene flow and selection that may be responsible for the great genetic diversity within the stock (Salzano and Callegari-Jacques, 1988). But such an argument does not explain

why geographically neighboring Tupi tribes can be genetically very dissimilar, such as the Parakana, the UrubuKa'apor, and the Assurini, for instance.
Another study (Aguiar, 1990a) supports the hypothesis that the present demographic situation of Tupi and Carib groups does not constitute specific population patterns of these stocks, but rather reflects mainly recent ethnohistorical changes. Tupi groups have suffered from a much more accentuated process of depopulation than Carib groups in the last two centuries. According to Ribeiro (1957), the more pronounced demographic decline among the Tupi is a result of a relatively smaller cultural distance between these groups and representatives of the national society, which by making communication easier thereby intensified contacts, concentrating the disruptive pressures generated in each stage of integration. The author emphasizes that other linguistic stocks suffered from a "ponderably smaller" demographic decline. Besides their intense depopulation (61.4 per cent on average, in seven tribes of the Amazon basin and Bolivia), which could have favored intergroup genetic diversification, through a "bottleneck" effect, tribes of the Tupi stock showed a rate of intergroup contact significantly smaller than that of Carib tribes in the last two generations. Demographic decline and the relative isolation of the Tupi may have contributed, therefore, to the highly differentiated biological profiles presented by the Tupi stock today.
Evidence on the genetic intragroup diversity of the Carib and Tupi tribes suggests that genetic drift should not

40

Aguiar

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

be considered the major factor responsible for the biological structure of native Amazonian peoples. As demonstrated mathematically (Wright, 1951), drift produces an increase in the variance of inter-generation gene frequencies in populations with small effective size, causing the fixation or extinction of alleles and a greater dispersion of gene frequencies. The consequence is a reduction in the degree of genetic variation.
A recent study (Aguiar, 19906) shows that, despite their distinct demographic patterns, mean heterozygosities of Carib and Tupi tribes are not statistically different. No association between demographic size and heterozygosity was found for a total of 18 South American populations belonging to three linguistic stocks (Tupi, Carib, and Ge). On the other hand, a significant correlation was found between the degree of intragroup diversity and number of contacts (trade, warfare, and intermarriage) maintained by each tribe with the remaining tribes of all those studied since the end of the eighteenth century. As the occurrence of contacts implies gene flow, intragroup genetic variability of South American tribes seems to be less influenced by recent demographic patterns than by historical relationships between populations.
A tendency in the last fifteen years among geneticists who study South American Indian tribes is the search for patterns of association between linguistic and genetic factors. Such studies have met with little success, however (Black et al., 1983; Black et al., 1990; Aguiar, 1990a). Black and Claus (1990) believe that one of the reasons for the failure of this approach is that

the genetic markers usually employed (monogenic systems) are not adequate for a satisfactory understanding of Amerindian genetic diversity. In their opinion, complex markers such as those of the HLA and Ig systems would provide more reliable and accurate information on the genetic structure of these peoples, allowing for the identification of more realistic relationships between geography, linguistics, and genetics.
However, the suggestion of Black and Claus (1990) does not seem to be valid in all situations. In some cases, the complexity of observed genetic patterns in tribal groups is not due to factors linked effectively to linguistic classification and, irrespective of using simple monogenic or haplotypic markers, results tend to furnish the same picture of genetic differences. For example, the Assurini, Parakana, Waiapi, and Emerillon Tupi Indians, who maintained recent relations with the Ge (the two former, through warfare) and with the Carib (the two latter, through warfare, trade, and intermarriage) are genetically much more similar to tribes from these two linguistic stocks than to the tribes of the Tupi stock. In a recent study based on seven polymorphic loci (Aguiar, 1990a), the Assurini and the Parakana were shown to have an average genetic distance (Nei, 1987) of 0.121 with five other Tupi groups and of 0.046 with eight Ge groups (Mann-Whitney: U = 7; p < 0.01). On the other hand, the Tupi of Oiapoque (Waiapi and Emerillon), settled in traditional Carib Indian territory, are far more similar to these Indians (about 2.6 times) than they are to the remaining Tupi tribes (U = 36; p < 0.01). In conclusion, in the case of

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

Amazonian Indians

41

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

the Tupi Indians, who constitute one of the more disperse and culturally most complex linguistic stocks of South America, genetic affinities with other groups are much more closely linked to sociocultural and ethnohistorical factors than to simple linguistic relationships.
A socioculturally defined phenomenon that can modify the genetic structure of a population is differential fertility, generally resulting from the practice of polygyny. Such a practice is common among many native Amazonian groups, where polygynous men are normally the tribal headmen or other individuals of high social status (Betzig, 1986). One of the most important genetic consequences of differential fertility is a decrease in effective population size, by virtue of a significant increase in the variance of the number of children from the adult male segment (Salzano et al., 1967). As a result, conditions for the occurrence of genetic drift are created.
Chagnon et al. (1970) described an important microevolutionary process involving gene flow and differential fertility in Yanomami and Makiritare villages from Northern Brazil and Southern Venezuela. In the case study carried out by the authors, only one Yanomami Indian village exhibited the alleles DI*A (Diego system) and ACPPA (acid phospohatase system) with frequencies of 0.06 and 0.08, respectively, while in the remaining 40 villages the former allele was absent and the latter was present at much lower frequencies. The source of these genes was attributed to a Makiritare village. Frequencies of DI*A and ACPi*A were very similar in the "atypical" Yanomami village and in the Ma-

kiritare village. The explanation for this unusual fact would depend on "demographic, social, and cultural parameters influencing marriage and reproduction." Phenomena peculiar to the social organization of these tribes, such as polygyny being limited to tribal headmen and more numerous descendents to captive women, would thus constitute a fundamental aspect of the interpretation of these genetic findings. According to the authors, this effect is random in the genetic sense (genetic drift) but not in the sense of the social organization of many tribal populations. They note also that the probability of a captive individual introducing a gene into a population with sociocultural patterns similar to those of the Yanomami is a function of the sex that initially carries the gene.
Differential fertility can also arise after the founder effect. In the context of Amazonian tribes, this generally occurs as a consequence of fissions through intragroup tension or the necessity of population expansion (Chagnon, 1976; Gallois, 1981,1986; Gallois and Ricardo, 1983). When fission occurs, the new population can present a high degree of differentiation in comparison with the original (Spielman et al., 1972; Ward, 1972; Thompson and Neel, 1978). Although the possibility of the survival of a new mutation is low, the discovery of several rare genetic variants at high or intermediate frequencies in only one or a few tribes indicates that the founder effect may have been relevant in the shaping of the gene pool of these populations (Salzano and Callegari-Jacques, 1988).
A dramatic case of differential fertility in an expanding population was observed among the Karitiana Indians

42

Aguiar

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

of Rondonia State, Brazil (Aguiar et al., 1990). By studying the polymorphism of the CHE2 locus of serum cholinesterase in this tribe, Guerreiro et al. (1989) found the highest frequency of the phenotype C5+ (determined by a dominant allele) recorded in human populations, about 50 per cent. By analyzing the Karitiana pedigree, they suggested a probable explanation for the phenomenon. This situation was traced to a deceased individual of one of the first generations in the pedigree, who was married to seven women and thus appears to have disseminated his genes to almost all the group. The serum typing of individuals in each of the seven progenies revealed the presence, in five of them, of the variant phenotype C5 + . Kidd and Kidd (1990), studying 21 polymorphisms of nuclear DNA in this Amazonian tribe, observed a relatively low mean heterozygosity, in agreement with the high degree of kinship among the members of the population, directly related to the extraordinary fertility of the ancient headman. The example of the Karitiana, such as that of Chagnon et al. (1970), indicates that the factors usually classified in population genetics as the result of random processes, may be best studied at the level of social structure and cultural practices.
Neel and Salzano (1967) point to the process of fission-fusion as another socioculturally determined event that may have important consequences for the genetic structure of Amazonian Indian populations. Its evolutionary significance has been studied by using mathematical models, computer simulations, and through empirical experiments (Chagnon, 1976; Thompson,

1979; Smouse et al., 1981). As Chagnon (1976) suggests, fission of a group into two or more segments is due to ecological and political factors or to questions of internal tribal organization in the majority of cases. It generally occurs according to kinship lines and can lead to a process of highly nonrandom migration (lineal effect) and to a significant reduction in the effective size of the group. The smaller product of the fission, summing about 40 to 60 individuals, may join other villages or form a new population. If a new tribe is founded by a group of related individuals, initial intergroup genetic differences can be substantially greater than would be expected by equal division or even founder effect. Ward (1972) argues that the most important difference between the lineal effect and the founder effect is the lack of a random component in the former. Non-representative samples of the gene pool of a parental village can lead to divergent gene frequencies in a recently founded population.
The fission-fusion model leads to a break of isolation and to intergroup gene flow, modifying the genetic composition of a population. Neel and Salzano (1966), commenting on the relatively high morphological diversity of Xavante Indians obtained in a previous study (Neel et al., 1964), hypothesize that the genetic diversity of hunter-gatherer populations should be smaller than that of modern urban conglomerates, but the pattern of fissionfusion of these Indians would be a factor increasing the degree of variability. In other cases, the pattern offission may involve less migration between sister villages, as occurs among the Yanomami, through a centrifugal

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

Amazonian Indians

43

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

pattern of expansion. In comparison with Wright's island model (1943) and the stepping-stone model of Kimura (1953), the fission-fusion model seems to explain a great part of the genetic heterogeneity of primitive peoples.
The lineal effect is a kind of random event in a genetic sense but is deterministic in social sense and is specially applicable to populations of primates (Neel, 1970; Cheverud et al., 1978; Cheverud and Buikstra, 1978). The basic feature of this effect is that the social structure of tribal populations usually implies that the breakdown (fission) of groups will lead to a number of independent genomes smaller than the number of individuals (Neel, 1967; Neel and Salzano, 1967; Fix, 1975). With respect specifically to the lineal effect, an important case study based on a quantitative trait was described by Fleischman (1980) for the Warao Indians. The author asserts that the significantly higher stature in individuals from one village of this tribe in comparison with that of the remaining five villages resulted mainly from this genetic effect. High stature constitutes an unusual polygenic marker among the Warao. Its high frequency in the differentiated village was associated with a large number of individuals genetically related to a local patriarch who is morphologically atypical (exceptionally taller than the tribal average). The physical environment of the Warao is such that very close villages can be socially isolated, inhibiting gene flowbetween neighboring settlements. Warao villages and society are linearly organized resulting in biologically and socially related men marrying within the same preferential enclave. Stature distribution in the village studied by

Fleischman (1980) was considered to be a result of contributions through kinship lineages, preserved by the physical and social environment. This is one more demonstration of how an aspect of the recent history of a human group may influence its present biological profile.
Sociocultural factors do not always influence the differentiation of entire populations, but also differentiation in specific population segments. Physical anthropologists have searched for associations between biological variability and postmarital residential practices in prehistorical groups, on the basis of nonmetrical skeletal features, attempting to reconstruct aspects of the social organization of our ancestors (Lane and Sublett, 1972; Spence, 1974; Neves, 1984). They assume that the degree of biological homogeneity among the males and females of a village/tribe may reflect marriage and residence rules. Where exogamy is associated with a virilocal residential practice, it is reasonable to assume that biological continuity occurs through the male line, while if exogamy is followed by uxorilocality, continuity is through the female line. Similarly, intergroup within-sex heterogeneity would tend to be more accentuated in the less mobile sex.
Konigsberg's formal model (1989) suggests that this process may effectively occur in the male and female segments of subpopulations of a larger population whose postmarital residence system is unilocal. According to this model, in populations where the residence pattern leads to a higher rate of postmarital male mobility and the permanence of females in their native villages (in other words, uxorilocal

44

Aguiar

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

populations), greater intergroup genetic diversity would be observed among females than among males. Virilocal populations would present the opposite effect.
Aguiar and Neves (1991) performed a case study on the relations between residence system and within-sex genetic heterogeneity in four UrubuKa'apor villages, a uxorilocal Tupi tribe of Northern Brazil, where traditional inter-individual, interfamilial and intergroup relationships are largely maintained. The results obtained from an intergroup genetic analysis of 20 polymorphic loci agreed remarkably with the theoretically expected pattern. Average genetic distance among village females (0.235) was significantly greater than the average distance among males (0.143), when the method based on a genie covariance matrix (Harpending and Ward, 1982) was used for the calculation of distance. By using Nei's method (1987), the difference became more accentuated, with the average genetic dispersion for females about 2.5 times greater than that of males.
The effect of the residence system of Ka'apor villages on the genetic heterogeneity of males and females became more evident when only groups belonging to the same network of mate exchange were included in intergroup analysis. Geographical and ethnographic data on the Ka'apor tribe show that three of the four villages studied by Aguiar and Neves (1990) are located in the same river basin, while the fourth is located in a different basin. The geographically isolated village is also genetically isolated from the others. William Bale"e (personal communication) asserts that its exogamic net-

work involves only villages located within the same river basin or otherwise within close proximity. Because of this particular fact of the Ka'apor social organization, genetic diversity in female segments is much more accentuated when only the three villages belonging to the same exogamic network are included in the intergroup analysis. In this case, the Fst value of the female fractions (0.061) was significantly greater than the Fst of the male fractions (0.022). Besides this, Nei's genetic distance is extraordinarily greater (about 13 times) among females of the three villages than among their males. Detection of greater or smaller withinsex diversity resulting from unilocal residence systems thus appears to depend on the identification of groups involved in the same exogamic circuit.
As Neel (1990) emphasizes, investigation of the genetic structure of primitive South American human populations may make a major contribution to our understanding of the mechanisms that have governed the evolution of our species. Chagnon et al (1970) assert that small evolutionary events related to sociocultural factors would be important in establishing different allelic frequencies in an emergent tribe. Neel (1990) considers it is highly probable that ancient man lived in social aggregates similar to, or even smaller than the present small villages of hunter-gatherer or primitive farming tribes, and that populations expanded by successive fissioning of these aggregates. The fundamental role of sociocultural factors in this process demands that they be considered not only as merely "random" events of the "genetic drift" kind, but as deterministic agents capable of producing more or

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

Amazonian Indians

45

less quantifiable degrees of intra- and man--and, by extension, ofHomo sa-

intergroup differentiation inthe native piens sapiens--can be understood in all

peoples of the continent. Although its complexity.

such a treatment had already been fol-

lowed in some cases (Thompson and

Neel, 1978; Thompson, 1979; Smouse

et al., 1981; Fix, 1982), it is still necessary toextend its applicability andto test each method in a systematic manner in real situations. Only then the process of differentiation of Amazo-

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper was presented atthe symposium "Lifestyles" of the First Congressof the Asociación Latinoamericana de Antropológia Biológica, Montevideo, October

nian and South American primitive 29, 1990.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

AGUIAR, G.F. S. 1990a. Ethnohistory, intertribal relationships, and genetic similarity among Amazonian Indians. Paper presented at the symposium Recent trends of bioanthropological research among Lowland South American Indian populations, 59th annual meeting ofthe American Association of Physical Anthropologists, Miami, Florida, April 3-7. . 1990b. Effects of demographic and ethnohistorical factors on average heterozygosities of South Amerindians. Paper presented at the 1st Congress of the Asociación Latinoamericana de Antropológia Biológica, Montevideo, Uruguay, 29-31 oct.
AGUIAR, G. F. S., J. F. GUERREIRO, and S. E. B.
SANTOS. 1990. Fertilidade diferencial, endogamia e alta freqüência do alelo CHE2*C5 + entre os índios Karitiana, Rondônia. Paper included inthe annals of the 36th Congresso Nacional deGenética, Brazil.
AGUIAR, G. F. S., and W. A. NEVES. 1991. Post-
marital residence andwithin-sex geneticdiversity among the Urubu-Ka'apor Indians, Brazilian Amazon. Hum. Biol. 63(4):467488.
BETZIG, L. L. 1986. Despotism and differential reproduction; a Darwinian view of history. Hawthorne, De Gruyter Aldine, New York.
BLACK, F. L. and E. B. CLAUS. 1990. Reasons
for failure of genetic classifications of South Amerind populations. Paper presented at the symposium Recent trends of bioanthropological research among Lowland South American Indian populations, 59th annual meeting of the American Association ofPhysical Anthropologists, Miami, Florida, April 3-7.
BLACK, F. L., J. P. PANDEY, and S. E. B. SAN-
TOS. 1992. Evidências das afinidades inter- e intra-continentais entre populações nativas

da Amazônia com base no sistema HLA e imunoglobulinas. In Origens, adaptações e diversidade biológicas do homem nativo da Amazônia, W. Neves, ed., inpress.
BLACK, F. L., F. M. SALZANO, L. L. BERMAN,
Y. GABBAY, T. H. WEIMER, M. H. L. P.
FRANCO, and J. P. PANDEY. 1983. Failure of
linguistic relationship to predict genetic distances between theWaiãpi and other tribes of Lower Amazonia. Amer. J. Phys.Anthrop. 60:327-335.
CALLEGARI-JACQUES, S. M., and F. M. SALZANO.
1989. Genetic variation within two linguistic Amerindian groups: Relationship to geography and population size. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 79(3):313-320. CHAGNON, N. A. 1976. Genealogy, solidarity, and relatedness: Limits to local group size and patterns of fissioning in an expanding population. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 19:95-110.
CHAGNON, N. A., J. V. NEEL, L. R. WEITKAMP,
H. GERSHOWITZ, and M. AYRES. 1970. The
influence ofcultural factors on the demography and pattern of gene flow from theMakiritare tothe Yanomama Indians. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 32(3):349-399.
CHEVERUD, J. M., J. BUETTNER-JANUSCH, and D.
SADE. 1978. Social group fission and the origin of intergroup genetic differentiation among the Rhesus monkeys of Cayo Santiago. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 49:449-456.
CHEVERUD, J. M., and J. E. BUIKSTRA. 1978. A
study of intragroup biological change induced by social group fission in Macaca mulatta using discrete cranial traits. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 48:41-46. Fix, A. G.1975. Fission-fusion and lineal effect: Aspects of the Semai-Senoi of Malaysia. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 43:295-302.

46

Aguiar

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

. 1982. Genetic structure ofthe Semai, p. versidade de São Paulo, São Paulo.

179-204. In M. H. Crawford and J. H. NEEL, J. V., I. ARENDS, C. BREWER, N. CHAG-

Mielke (eds.), Current Developments in An-

NON, H. GERSHOWITZ, M. LAYRISSE, Z. LAY-

thropological Genetics, Vol. 2, Ecology and population structure. Plenum Press,New

RISSE, J. MACCLUER, E. MIGLIAZZA, W. OLIVER, F. SALZANO, R. SPIELMAN, R. WARD,

York.

and L. WEITKAMP. 1972. Studies on the

FLEISCHMAN, M. 1980. Anunusual distribution

Yanomama Indians, p. 96-111. Proc. 4th Int.

for height among males in a Warao Indian

Cong. Hum. Genet., Paris.

village: A possible case of lineal effect. NEEL, J. V., and F. M. SALZANO. 1966. A pro-

Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 53:397-405.

spectus forgenetic studies onthe American

GALLOIS, D. 1981. Os Waiãpi e seuterritório.

Indians. In P. Baker and J. S. Weiner (eds.),

Belém: Bol. Mus. Par. Emílio Goeldi (sér. The biology of human adaptability. Claren-

Antrop.) 80.

don Press, Oxford.

. 1986. Migração, guerra e comércio: os NEEL, J. V. and F. M. SALZANO. 1967. Further

Waiãpi na Guiana. FFLCH/USP, São Paulo.

studies on the Xavante Indians, X. Some

GALLOIS, D., and C. A. RICARDO. 1983. Povos

hypotheses-generalization resulting from

indígenas do Brasil 3. Amapá/Norte do Pará.

these studies. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.

Centro Ecumênico de Documentação e In- 19(4):554-574.

formação, São Paulo.

NEEL, J. V., F. M. SALZANO, P. C. JUNQUEIRA,

GALVÃO, E. 1960. Áreas culturais indígenas no

F. KEITER, and D. MAYBURY-LEWIS. 1964.

Brasil: 1900-1959. Bol.Mus. Par. Emílio

Studies on theXavante Indians of the Bra-

Goeldi (sér. Antropol.), 8, Belém.

zilian Mato Grosso. Amer. J. Human.

HARPENDING, H. C., and R. WARD. 1982. Chem-

Genet. 16:52-140.

ical systematics and human evolution, p. NEI, M. 1987. Molecular evolutionary genetics.

213-256. InM. Nitecki (ed.), Biological as-

Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

pects of evolutionary biology. Univ. of Chi- NEVES, W. A. 1984. Paleogenética dosgrupos

cago Press, Chicago.

pré-históricos do litoral sul do Brasil. Ph.D.

HUGHES, A. L. 1988. Evolution and human kin-

thesis, University of São Paulo (IBUSP).

ship. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

RIBEIRO, D. 1957. Culturas e línguas indígenas

KIDD, J. R., and K. K. KIDD. 1990. Character-

no Brasil. Educ. Ciências Sociais (Rio de Ja-

ization of the R. Surui andKaritiana at 21 neiro) 2(6):5-102.

polymorphic DNA loci. Paper presented at SALZANO, F. M., and S. M. CALLEGARI-JACQUES.

the symposium Recent trends of bioanthro-

1988. South American Indians; case study in

pological research among Lowland South

evolution. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

American Indian populations, 59th annual SALZANO, F. M., J. V. NEEL, and D. MAYBURY-

meeting of the American Association of

LEWIS. 1967. Further studies on the Xavante

Physical Anthropologists, Miami, Florida,

Indians. I. Demographic data on two addi-

April 3-7.

tional villages: Genetic structure ofthe tribe.

KONIGSBERG, L. W., 1988. Migration models of Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 19:463-489.

prehistoric postmarital residence. Amer. J. SCHADEN, E. 1969. Aculturação indígena. Pio-

Phys. Anthrop. 77:471-482.

neira/EDUSP, São Paulo.

LANE, R. A., and A. J. SUBLETT. 1972. Osteol- SMOUSE, P. E., V. VITZTHUM, and J. V. NEEL.

ogy of social organization: Residence pat-

1981. The impact of random and lineal fission

tern. Amer. Antiquity 37:186-201.

on the genetic divergence of small human

LOUKOTKA, C. 1968.Classification of South

groups: A case study among the Yanomama.

American Indian Languages. Latin Ameri-

Genetics 98:179-197.

can Center, University of California, Los An- SPENCE, M. W. 1974. Residencial practices and

geles.

the distribution ofskeletal traits in Teotihua-

MORÁN, E.F. 1982. Human adaptability; an in- cán, Mexico. Man 9:262-273.

troduction to ecological anthropology. West- SPIELMAN, R., F. DA ROCHA, L. WEITKAMP, R.

view Press, Boulder, Colorado.

WARD, J. V. NEEL, and N. CHAGNON. 1972.

NEEL, J. V. 1967. The genetic structure ofprim-

The genetic structure of a tribal population,

itive human populations. Jap. J.Hum.

the Yanomama Indians. VII. Anthropomet-

Genet. 12:1-16.

ric differences among Yanomama villages.

. 1970. Village and tribal genetic distances

Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 37:345-356.

among American Indians and possible impli- THOMPSON, E.A. 1979. Fission models ofpopu-

cations for human evolution. Proc. Nat.

lation variability. Genetics 93:479-495.

Acad. Sci., 65:323-330.

THOMPSON, E. A., and J. V. NEEL. 1978. Prob-

. 1990. Estrutura populacional ameríndia

ability of founder effect in a tribal popula-

e algumas interpretações da evolução hu-

tion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75:1442-

mana. In W. Neves and R. Nassif (eds.), Ori-

1445.

gens, adaptações e diversidade biológicas do VAYDA, A. P., and R. RAPPAPORT. 1976. Ecol-

homem nativo da Amazônia. Editora da Uni-

ogy, cultural and noncultural. In P. Richer-

Vol. 40, No. 1-2

Amazonian Indians

47

son and S. McEvoy (eds.), Human ecology. Duxbury Press, North Scituate, MA. WARD, R. 1972. The genetic structure of a tribal population, the Yanomama Indians. V. Comparison of a series of genetic networks. Ann. Hum. Genet. 36:21-43.

WHITEHEAD, N. L. 1988. Lords of the tiger spirit; a history of the Caribs in colonial Venezuela and Guiana 1498-1820. Foris Publication, Caribbean series, 10, Dordrecht, Holland.
WRIGHT, S. 1951.The genetical structure of populations. Ann. Eugen. 15:323-354.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:45 08 December 2015

