Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Commodity aspirations in easterlin's relative income theory of fertility
Dennis A. Ahlburg
To cite this article: Dennis A. Ahlburg (1984) Commodity aspirations in easterlin's relative income theory of fertility, Social Biology, 31:3-4, 201-207, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1984.9988575 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1984.9988575
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

Commodity Aspirations in Easterlin's Relative Income Theory of Fertility

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Dennis A. Ahlburg
Industrial Relations Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota

ABSTRACT: This paper presents the preference ordering that underlies Easterlin's relative income theory of fertility. Commodity aspirations are a key component of the theory and the paper explores how the introduction of commodity aspirations into the utility function affects the consumption of commodities and bearing of children. The formation and empirical specification of commodity aspirations are also discussed.

Since the seminal work of Becker commodity aspirations will be discussed

(1960), there has been considerable in- and given empirical content. terest in the application of consumer

theory to the study of fertility. Much of this work, which has been surveyed by Bagozzi and Van Loo (1978), represents

PREFERENCES IN EASTERLIN'S THEORY

refinements of and extensions to Becker's model. Bagozzi and Van Loo (1978, p. 210) note that the work of Richard Easterlin, however, makes "four contributions which represent additions to the theories proposed by Becker and Mincer." These contributions are an emphasis on potential income through time; an explicit recognition of the role of tastes; the indirect role of background characteristics and norms operating through tastes; and the role of relative income as distinct from absolute income. There is, however, one component of Easterlin's theory that has received little attention--the preference ordering on which the theory is based. Easterlin explicitly introduces commodity aspirations into the utility function and shows how they influence an individual's choice of commodities and number of children. This preference ordering and its importance will be dis-

Williams (1977) has argued that Easterlin's writing on fertility suggests a lexicographic ordering of preferences. Under such an ordering, a couple first seeks to meet their aspirations for consumption commodities which defines their standard of living. Any income above the level needed to satisfy this basic consumption is spent on having children. This preference ordering is shown in Figure 1. As we can see from Figure 1, the set does not contain that part of its boundary which lies to the left of Xo. In fact, it can not be represented by a continuous real function S (Malinvaud, 1972, pp. 19-20). Malinvaud argues that such an ordering "hardly seems likely to arise in economics, since it assumes that, for the consumer, commodity 1 [consumer commodities] is immeasurably more important than commodity 2 [children]" (p. 20).1 Williams also thinks the

cussed in the first section of this paper.

1In contrast, Namboodiri, in an exchange on

In the second section, the formation of

the Bagozzi and Van Loo paper, wrote "economic models would become much better suited to han-

201

202

Ahlburg

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

FIGURE 1

FIGURE 2

lexicographic ordering is unrealistic and stitution between goods and children

proposes as an alternative a utility func- and need not be asymptotic to G*, as in

tion of the general form:

the Cobb-Douglas case.

(1)1/ = U(C,G-G*)

However, it is my reading of Easterlin2 that his Relative Income Hypoth-

Where C is the number of children, G is esis of fertility determination is based on

commodities and G* is an indicator of the preference ordering shown in Figure

consumption aspirations or tastes 3. Above G* there is continuous substi-

formed during childhood. A Cobb- tution between children and goods.

Douglas representation of Equation (1) However, if income, Y. is insufficient to

is undefined where G - G* is negative cover G*, then the indifference curves

and an assumption that income is suf-

ficient to cover G* is needed. As an al-

ternative to the Cobb-Douglas repre-

sentation, Williams has suggested a

utility function with a form such that

some positive amount of C can offset

levels of G below G* and thus define

non-negative utility. This formulation is

shown in Figure 2. Since the assumption

of income sufficient to cover G* is

dropped and replaced by a non-

negativity adjustment, the utility func-

tions in Figure 2 exhibit continuous sub-

die 'more economic' phenomena . . . if model builders would recognize... the lexicographic nature of individuals' preference structure" (Namboodiri, 1979, p 292). In a recent study Encarnacion (1982) developed a model of lexicographic choice in which the target variable was a minimum number of surviving children rather than a target level of consumption.

FIGURE 3
2This interpretation is supported by recent work of Easterlin (Easterlin, 1978, p. 115ff).

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 31, No. 3-4

Commodity Aspirations

203

are parallel to the C axis.3 For Y *£ PgG*, then the traditional utility curves of microeconomic theory prevail, although these curves are asymptotic to G*. This representation of preferences, which we refer to as the intrafamily model of endogenous preferences (Easterlin et al., 1976, p. 96) has the general form:4
Equation (2) U = U (C, GIG*) where Y > PgG* (or G > G*) U = U(G/G*) where Y =s pgG* (or G ^ G*).
Such a representation does not run into the non-negativity requirement of the Cobb-Douglas utility function noted above and, in fact, the assumption required by the Cobb-Douglas, namely
Y > PgG*, is counter to one of the basic tenets of the relative income hypothesis. The representation of preferences in Equation 2 also does not need the alternative assumption of Williams that |C| > | G - G * | w h e n G < G*.
To see how our introduction of commodity aspirations into the utility function via relative consumption of commodities affects the consumption of goods and the consumption of children,

consider Figure 4. We see that G* acts as a shift parameter. As commodity aspirations rise, the whole preference set shifts up. Figure 4 considers two families with identical income and same shaped utility functions (identical marginal rates of substitution between children and goods). However, Family A has lower aspirations, G*A, than does Family B, G*B- The income of Family A easily covers the commodities necessary for the attainment of their minimum commodity bundle (or standard of living). Their supernumary income is then divided between children and further consumption. Family B, however, must spend substantially more of their income to cover their minimum standard of living and thus has a smaller supernumary income to divide between children and further consumption of goods. As we can see from the individual consumer equilibrium, Family A has more children than Family B. This is a basic conclusion of the Relative Income Hypothesis: For two families with equal income and identical marginal rates of substitution between commodities and children, the number of children de-

3Horizontal indifference curves mean that utility is a function only of consumer goods. Children have zero utility. The consumer's equilibrium is at a corner and the income-consumption curve below G* is the G axis.
4This general form of the utility function is similar to that used by Duesenberry in his "relative income" model of consumption. Duesenberry writes the utility function as

uIT \ G\

G, Gr

where the G's are a weighted average of the rest of

the population's consumption. This says utility in-

creases only if an individual's consumption rises

relative to the population average. See Duesen-

berry (1949, p. 32). Duesenberry's model is an ex-

ample of what Easterlin, Pollak, and Wachter

(1976, p. 96) refer to as the socialization model of

interdependent preferences (see also Pollak,

1976).

FIGURE 4

204

Ahlburg

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

manded is a negative function of commodity aspirations. Although Family B consumes more commodities than does Family A, its utility is lower, since utility is a function of relative consumption of commodities, not absolute consumption. The higher aspirations of Family B reduce their relative consumption and thus their utility.
While the concept of preferences and relative consumption may be somewhat unfamiliar, it has proven useful in a wide variety of theoretical and empirical studies. For example, it has been used by Duesenberry (1949) in his explanation of empirical difficulties in demand theory; Easterlin (1969), Wachter (1975), and Freedman (1963) in studies of fertility and Wachter (1972 and 1977) in studies of labor force participation and by PoIIak (1976) in studies of the linear expenditure system. Related notions have gained growing theoretical acceptance and empirical support in sociology, political science, and social psychology (see Easterlin, 1976,p. 424 for a list of references). The explicit treatment of tastes as represented by relative consumption is treated most completely in Easterlin et al. (1980) and Pollak (1976).
Perhaps the greatest success of the relative income model, with its explicit treatment of interdependent tastes, is in the explanation of the baby boom and the subsequent baby bust. The relative income model predicted both swings while the Chicago-Columbia model of fertility has been unable to provide a satisfactory explanation of this experience (Easterlin et al., 1980, and Leibenstein, 1976, p. 430).5
5Leibenstein (1976, pp. 428-428) sees this failure as a failure of standard economic theory to "distinguish between committed income and that portion of the income immediately available for

Further empirical support for the importance of relative notions comes from a rather unusual source. In a review of 30 surveys from 19 countries covering the period 1947-1976, Easterlin (1974, p. 118) concluded that "in judging their happiness, people tend to compare their actual situation with a reference standard or norm, derived from their prior and ongoing experience." If we may equate utility with happiness,6 then such findingsstrongly support the utility formulation of Equation 2.
THE DETERMINATION OF COMMODITY ASPIRATIONS
As we have seen above, commodity aspirations, G*, play a significant role in Easterlin's theory of fertility. As aspirations rise, ceterisparibus, the number of children a family has falls. Thus, the determination of commodity aspirations is of particular interest to those interested in the study of fertility. But how are such commodity aspirations formed?
Commodity aspirations are formed by the material environment experienced during childhood (especially adolescence) and are primarily a function of parental income.7 Easterlin (1969, p.
expenditures. This is a basic error in my view." Indeed such an error has greatly impaired the predictive value of the Chicago-Columbia model of fertility.
6Thisseems a reasonable assumption. Survey respondents reported economic considerations as very important in the determination of happiness, though by no means the only consideration (Easterlin, 1974, p. 118).
7Leibenstein (1976, p. 249) emphasizes that G* is unlike the normal notion of consumption: "the consumption choices involved [in G*] are not similar to choosing between hamburgers and cheese sandwiches for lunch but involve commitments associated with neighborhood, housing, school, churches, . . . etc." They are characterized by longer term contractual obligations that are difficult to change.

Vol. 31,No. 3-4

Commodity Aspirations

205

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

135) allows that other factors may be operative (for example, ethnic environment, religious environment, post-parental environment) but emphasizes that "tastes--that is, the goods aspirations of young adults--are . . . determined chiefly by economic conditions; namely, those experienced by young adults in their parents' household as they are growing up" (Easterlin, 1973, p. 197). Given that aspirations for material consumer goods such as housing, education, travel, neighborhood, cars, etc., constitute a target standard of living, is it parental consumption of these goods or is it the child's consumption that is relevant to the production of the child's aspirations? Easterlin (1969), Leibenstein (1976, p. 428), and BenPorath (1975, p. 398) argue that it is the parental consumption or standard of living that determines the child's tastes or aspirations.8 As Ben-Porath says, "the life styles of parents probably affect the tastes of their offspring" and "people who are exposed to a high standard of living in their adolescence develop expectations or tastes with regard to consumption that tend to depress fertility, ceteris paribus." Thus, it is parents' spending on themselves rather than total parental income that can be used as a proxy for the child's commodity aspirations (Williams, 1979, p. 6).
A complication noted by Ben-Porath (1975, p. 348) is that the parents' consumption (and thus a child's consump-
8In Leibenstein's formulation, G* is referred to as "commitment hump." Tastes are a function of three variables: individual characteristics, nurture, and peer group influences. Leibeinstein concedes that "it seems reasonable to presume the nurture effects in some sense determine aspirations with respect to the standard of living that individuals expect to enjoy, as well as aspirations with respect to their ultimate family size" (Leibeinstein, 1976, p. 428).

tion aspiration) is not independent of the number of children in a family. For a given parental income, more children are associated with a lower parental consumption since more children means a higher expenditure on children (assuming that reduced spending per child does not completely offset increases in the number of children). Thus, consumption aspirations are a negative function of the number of siblings. However, as Williams (1979, p. 7) has pointed out, if joint consumption is an important factor, then the number of siblings exert less of a negative effect on aspirations. Examples of joint consumption would be housing, neighborhood, and cultural environment.
In the absence of data on parental consumption, income data may be used. However, unless the parental propensity to consume out of income is constant, bias will be introduced into the empirical application of this concept. The relevant income concept is full family income (combined potential income of husband and wife). The importance of female income has been stressed by Oppenheimer (1976). By ignoring the female's contribution to family income, investigators may underestimate G*, particularly for large parental cohorts. The wife in such a cohort is more likely to be in the labor force than a wife in a small cohort and thus contribute more to family income (assuming, for the moment, husbands' incomes constant across cohorts of different sizes) and thus parental consumption. If we include home produced goods as a component of consumption aspiration, then G* is further underestimated, particularly for small parental cohorts where female labor force participation is low. However, Williams (1979, p. 7) argues that most home-produced goods are for

206

Ahlburg

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

consumption by children and thus would not affect parental consumption very much.

£ <0i i > 0
3 YF

^-^>o 3Y
M

$ >0 9 HPM

Thus, if commodity aspirations are based on parental consumption, the ap-

a HPM

K

propriate equation to generate these as- Thus, if the child forms its commod-

pirations is:

ity aspirations on the basis of parental

Equation (3)G* =f(YF, YM, K),

consumption, the relevant proxy is parental consumption which is a positive

where G* is the aspiration level, YF and YMare income of the father and mother respectively, and K the number of children in the family.

function of family income and a negative function of number of children. However, if the child forms aspirations on the basis of own consumption, then the relevant proxy is total material con-

sumption of that child which is a positive

3 YF

a K function of family income, home pro-
duction, and a negative function of num-

Williams (1979, p. 6) suggests that it may be the child's consumption level rather than that of the parent that determines commodity aspirations. If this

ber of siblings. In either case, if Easterlin's theory is correct, the estimation of demand functions would require data on the family of origin.

were the case, aspirations would rise

with the father's income and decline as the number of siblings increased, as ex-

CONCLUSION

plained above. The role of mother's in- In their survey of theories of fertility,

come is less straightforward. While Bagozzi and Van Loo (1978) identify

mother's market earnings increase fam- four significant contributions made by

ily income and total consumption, mar- Easterlin's theory of fertility. They cite

ket participation reduces the production his stress on potential income flow

of home-produced goods which are pri- through time as being pertinent to

marily for consumption by children. household decision making; tastes being

Thus, female labor force participation an explicit determinant of fertility;

has positive and negative effects on a background characteristics and norms

child's consumption and aspirations. If as to standards of child care and family

the mother works, then the value of size affecting fertility indirectly through

services she performs in the home is less tastes rather than directly; and the fact

than the value of goods and services she that relative income has an effect on fer-

can buy with market earnings. If she tility in addition to the influence of the

does not work, then the reverse holds. absolute level of income.

Thus, if commodity aspirations are A fifth contribution, the introduction

based on own consumption while a child of commodity aspirations into the utility

is young, then:

function, has been discussed here. It is

shown that, ceteris paribus, the number Equation (3)G* = g(YF, Yu, HPM, K) of children demanded is a negative func-

where HPM is the quantity of home pro- tion of commodity aspirations, as is the

duction of the mother and

utility of the family. Commodity aspira-

Vol. 31, No. 3-4

Commodity Aspirations

207

tions are formed by the material envi- income. Studies of the demand for comronment experienced during childhood modities and children should, therefore, and are primarily a function of parental include data on parental resources.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

AHLBURG, D. A. 1979. Alternative approaches to forecasting U.S. fertility. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
BAGOZZI, R. P., and VAN LOO. 1978. Fertility as Consumption: Theories from the Behavioral Sciences. J. Consum. Res. 4:199-228.
BECKER, G. S. 1960. An economic analysis of fertility, p. 209-231. In Demographic and economic change in developed countries. Universities-National Bureau of Economic Research, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
BEN-PORATH, Y. 1975. First generation effects on second generation fertility. Demography 12:397-405.
DUESENBERRY, J. 1949. Income, savings and the theory of consumer behavior. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
EASTERLIN, R. A. 1969. Towards a socioeconomic theory of fertility: A survey of recent research on economic factors in American fertility, p. 127-156. In Fertility and family planning: A world view, S. J. Behrman, L. Corsa, Jr., and R. Freedman (eds.). University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
. 1973. Relative economic status and the American fertility swing, p. 170-223. In Family economic behavior, E. B. Sheldon (ed.). J. B. Lippincott Co., Philadelphia.
. 1974. Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence. In Nations and households in economic growth: Essays in honor of Moses Abramowitz. Academic Press, New York.
. 1976. The conflict between aspirations and resources. Pop. Devel. Rev. 2:417-427.
. 1978. The economics and sociology of fertility: a synthesis. In Historical studies of changing fertility, C. Tilly (ed.). Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
EASTERLIN, R., R. POLLAK, and M. L. WACH-

TER. 1980. Towards a more general model of fertility determination: Endogenous preferences and natural fertility, p. 81-150. In Population and economic change in developing countries, R. A. Easterlin (ed.). University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
ENCARNACION, J. 1982. Fertility behavior and labor force participation: A model of lexicographic choice, p. 287-246. In Research in population economics, Vol. 4, J. L. Simon and P. H. Lindert (eds.). JAI Press, Greenwich, Conn.
FREEDMAN, D. 1983. The relation of economic status to fertility. Amer. Econ. Rev. 53:414-426.
LEIBENSTEIN, H. 1976. The problem of characterizing aspirations. Pop. Devel. Rev. 2:427-431.
MAUNVAUD, E. 1972. Lectures on microeconomic theory. North Holland, Amsterdam.
NAMBOODIRI, N. K. 1979. Fertility as consumption: Comment. J. Cons. Res. 5:290-292.
OPPENHEIMER, V. 1976. The Easterlin hypothesis: Another aspect of the echo to consider. Pop. Devel. Rev. 2:433-457.
POLLAK, R. A. 1976. Interdependent Preferences. Amer. Econ. Rev. 66:309-320.
WACHTER, M. L. 1972. A labor supply model for secondary workers. Rev. Econ. Statist. 54:141-151. . 1975. A time series fertility equation: The potential for a baby boom in the 1980's. Internat. Econ. Rev. 16:609-624. . 1977. Participation rates: Their response to relative income and intermediate swings. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, p. 545-576. Brookings Institute, Washington, D.C.
WILLIAMS, A. 1977. Fertility determinants in the U.S.: A test of the relative income hypothesis. Presented to American Population Association, Philadelphia, 1979.

