Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Physiognomic homogamy: A study of parents and children
Phillip R. Kunz & Robert M. Fernquist
To cite this article: Phillip R. Kunz & Robert M. Fernquist (1990) Physiognomic homogamy: A study of parents and children, Social Biology, 37:3-4, 266-269, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1990.9988765 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1990.9988765
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:43

Brief Reports
Physiognomic Homogamy: A Study of Parents and Children

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

Phillip R. Kunz and Robert M. Fernquist
Department of Sociology Brigham Young University Provo, Utah

ABSTRACT: The concept of physiognomic homogamy between parents and children was tested using 39 photo sets consisting of two sets of parents and one child. These photo sets included black and white slides, black and white photographs, and color slides. Matchings of the parents and child were attempted by 171 introductory sociology students. The results indicate that while the matches were far from universal, the students were able to match the children with their parents frequently enough to be statistically significant at the 0.001 level. There were no differences among the various forms of presentation.

People often remark that a child looks just like his or her parent(s). They may say to the child, "You look just like your mom," or "You look like your dad." It is problematic whether such pronouncements are made because there is an actual physical similarity between parent(s) and the child, or whether the assertion is just one of the appropriate culturally prescribed statements that may be said to a child, much like adults would tell a hostess how wonderful the meal had been, irrespective of the culinary ability of the cook. Conversely, one sometimes may wonder aloud if a particular child can belong to some particular family. For example, this has often occurred when the child has red hair while the parents both have dark hair.
Sometimes the belief that the parents and children are related may evoke such comments even for adopted children. In this case, one may question whether the adopted child has such physical similari-

ties or whether once the assumed relationship is given, some similarity is sought and reported. Thus, one of the authors has often taken two unrelated persons and told a third person that the two are brothers, sisters, brother and sister, or parent and child. The third person will almost always indicate some feature that is the same for the two if a question is asked about whether they look alike. Even a random selection of the two to be compared will seldom evoke a statement from a third person like, "They certainly don't look like each other."
In their study of interpersonal relationships, Clkie and Richards (1960) found that people in general are able to "perceive others accurately" (p. 6). According to Griffiths and Kunz (1973), a person's experiences in these areas seem to be "selective," in that they are based on a "motivational bias(es) of the subject" with which the person is faced (p. 448). Does this mean that people are not

266

Vol. 37, No. 3-A

Physiognomic Homogamy

267

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

able to accurately determine which children belong to a given set of parents? In answer to this question in a related area, these authors found that judges are generally able to match which people are married to one another to a significant degree when shown pictures of persons without their spouses and asked to match which people are married to each other. For couples married less than five years, about five years, and 20-25 years, there is significance in matching couples correctly at the 0.001 level; for those couples married 35 years, the significance level is 0.05.
Chambers et al. (1983) also found in their study of physiognomic homogamy with engaged and newlywed couples that, when shown pictures of couples shown separately, judges were able to match the couples that were actually engaged or married in a significantly larger number than would have been expected by chance. The experiment was carried out for two semesters with students who were primarily in upper-division and graduate classes in sociology and familystudies classes at a large private university, and the matches of both the engaged and married couples for both semesters were significant at the 0.001 level.
We undertook this study with the assumption that many people feel that they are generally able to distinguish accurately between people that belong together and those who do not belong together. That is, they are able to correctly judge that children resemble their parents. But while many have experienced correctly matching parents and children, many have also experienced making mistakes about that relationship. It is therefore problematic whether or not such judgments can be made with any

degree of accuracy. Our hypothesis is that children resemble their parents physically and that matches will be made more often than would occur by chance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
One-hundred and sixty-eight college students in an introductory sociology class (105 females and 63 males, age 18 to 26) were shown a combination of 39 slides and photographs, one at a time. Each of the slides and photographs showed two sets of parents and one other person who was a child of one of the sets of parents. The photographs were taken in a manner that used the same background so that the effects of the background or other identifying features were neutralized.
The selection of the "parents" for the offspring in each set included the real parents and one set randomly selected from a pool of photographs. The students were asked to match the child with the correct set of parents. The make-up of the slides and photographs was such that one set of parents was in the upper left half of the picture, the second set of parents was in the upper right half of the picture, and the child (sometimes already an adult) was in the lower center of the picture.
The attempted matching took place in three parts: First, copies of 15 blackand-white photographs were distributed to each of the students, along with an answer sheet, and the students were asked to match the child with the correct set of parents in each of the pictures. Next, the students were shown nine black-andwhite slides, and were again asked to match the child and parents for each of the slides. Each of the groups of two couples and one offspring on these nine

268

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

slides was also the same as used previously on the black and white pictures. This was done in order to test the consistency of the students' guesses. This permitted testing whether a student's match of the black-and-white picture would also match the black-and-white slide in the same manner. Finally, the students were shown 15 color slides, which were different from the other two sets, and were asked to see whether they could match them. The slides and photographs were arranged so that the nonparents in each display were randomly selected from a pool of pictures.
RESULTS

We were able to examine the consistency of the students' guesses by comparing the photographs that were identical with the slides. Out of the nine black-and-white slides, an average of 3.56 guesses were inconsistent. That is, the match on the photograph was different from the match on the slide. Over half of the guesses (5.44) were consistent in both forms. In other words, slightly more than five times out of the nine possible matches, if a student guessed a match correctly (or incorrectly) on the black and white pictures, he also matched it correctly (or incorrectly) when shown the black and white slides.

For the 39 slides and photographs combined, the mean number of correct matches for the 171 students was 22.030. Since the normal number of correct matches by chance would be half, or 19.5 out of 39, we found that while the ability to match correctly was not overwhelming, there was a significant difference in the number of correct matches at the 0.001 level (t= 10.34). We assumed that the color in the slides would make it easier to determine the correct match, while the black-and-white would be more difficult. Examination of the nine black-and-white slides yielded an average of 5.04 correct matches, which is significant at the 0.001 level (r=4.93). The 15color slides yielded an average of 8.71 correct matches, which is also significant at the 0.001 level (f=8.26). The average for the 15 black-and-white photographs was 8.27 correct matches, which is also significant at the 0.001 level (f=5.44). Thus, the color did not have the predicted value in assisting in making correct matches.

CONCLUSIONS
Based on the results of this study, we would conclude that children do appear to resemble their parents, enough for a match to be made in enough cases to be better than chance. While the assumption of physiognomic homogamy between parents and their children was supported, it was not even close to all of the possible cases. While the characteristics used to ascertain the match were not studied in any detail, most of the students (79 per cent) indicated that what helped them most in matching the parents with their children was the eyes and/or nose.
We were surprised to find that there was no significant difference between the number of correct matches and the type of picture shown. The black-andwhite slides, the color slides, and the black-and-white photographs all yielded results significant at the 0.001 level.
While there seemed to be some inconsistency in the students' matches,

Vol. 37, No. 3-4

Physiognomic Homogamy

269

since more than a third of the nine guesses on the average was inconsistent in matching a child with the appropriate set of parents, it was not as high as had been expected.

Further study is suggested to document the process which permits prediction and accounts for failures in the prediction process.

REFERENCES

CHAMBERS, VICTORIA J., JOHN R. CHRISTIAN-
SEN, and PHILLIP R. KUNZ. 1983, Physi-
ognomic homogamy: A test of physical similarity as a factor in the mate selection process, Soc. Biol. 30(2): 151-157.
CLINE, VICTOR B., and JAMES M. RICHARDS, JR.
1960, Accuracy of interpersonal

perception--a general trait? J. Abnorm. Psychol. 60:1-7.
GRIFFITHS, R. WAYNE, and PHILLIP R. KUNZ.
1973, Assortative mating: A study of physiognomic homogamy, Soc. Biol. 20:448453.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:43 08 December 2015

