Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
History of the American Eugenics Society
Frederick Osborn
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1974) History of the American Eugenics Society, Social Biology, 21:2, 115-126, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988099 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988099
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 24 View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

History of the American Eugenics Society

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Frederick Osborn
Garrison,New York

The American Eugenics Society was incorporated in 1926, the end product, and ultimately the sole survivor, of a number of organizational efforts intended to promote and channel the interests of American eugenists. The period 1904 through 1926 saw a swell in eugenic promotions both in this country and abroad as the new field of genetics stimulated wide public interest in human heredity.
In 1904, the Carnegie Institution of Washington founded at Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, a Station for Experimental Evolution, under geneticists A. F. Blakeslee and C. B. Davenport. Later, Harry H. Laughlin enlisted the interest of Mrs. E. H. Harriman in founding and supporting the Eugenics Record Office adjacent to the Carnegie Institution's Station. The publication of a regular journal was begun by the Eugenics Record Office with Volume 1, No. 1, of the Eugenical News appearing on January 1, 1916. Its purpose was to provide information on the activities of the office and its staff, publish family histories of eugenic interest, and report on research related to eugenics.1 In 1921, the Station for Experi-
1 In 1920, the Eugenical News was acquired by the Eugenics Research Association, an offshoot of the Eugenics Record Office, and continued by them until that organization was discontinued in 1938. Announced as a bimonthly publication, it was for

mental Evolution and the Eugenics Record Office were combined in the Department of Genetics of the Carnegie Institution.
In 1906, the Race Betterment Foundation was organized at Battle Creek, Michigan, by John Harvey Kellogg who gave it a substantial endowment. The Foundation held three conferences between 1914 and 1928, and in 1928 established a Eugenics Registry for keeping biological family records.
At the American Museum of Natural History, a group including a number of eminent scientists organized the Galton Society for the promotion of the study of racial anthropology and kindred subjects. Francis Galton had established the Biometric Laboratory in England under Carl Pearson in 1895 and in 1906 its associated Laboratory for National Eugenics. Meetings of the Eugenics Education Society in London in 1907 and 1908 were precursors of the English Eugenics Society, which like the American Eugenics Society was to be incorporated in 1926.
In 1912, Major Leonard Darwin sent out invitations in the name of the Eugenics
a number of years issued monthly. From 1939 through 1953, Eugenical News was continued as a quarterly and the official organ of the American Eugenics Society. A complete set of the Eugenical News is on file with the Countway Library of Medicine at the Harvard Medical Library.

115

116

Osborn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Education Society of Great Britain for the First International Congress of Eugenics. The Congress was held in London and attended by over three-hundred people from England, Europe, and the United States. The scientific papers and proceedings of the 1912 congress were recorded in two official publications.
A Second International Congress of Eugenics was held in New York in 1921, sponsored by the Eugenics Record Office and the American Museum of Natural History, with Alexander Graham Bell as Honorary President, Professor Henry Fairfield Osborn as President, and Dr. C. C. Little as Secretary-General. It was a large affair, under impressive sponsorship with an attendance again somewhat over threehundred people. Over 108 scientific papers were presented, and there were 131 exhibitors. It resulted in the publication of two volumes of scientific papers, titled Eugenics, Genetics and the Family and Eugenics in Race and State, together with a book of exhibits and an official report.
The idea of an American Eugenics Society originated in 1921 at this Second International Eugenics Congress. Professor Irving Fisher of Yale pointed out the need for some means of promoting a popular educational program in eugenics for the United States. Dr. Fairfield Osborn, President of the Congress, appointed an Interim Committee, which became the Eugenics Committee of the United States, later the Eugenics Society of the United States, and ultimately, on January 30, 1926, the American Eugenics Society, Inc. The incorporators were Harry Crampton, Irving Fisher, Madison Grant, Harry H. Laughlin, and Henry Fairfield Osborn. Professor Irving Fisher became the first President; Dr. Davenport, the first VicePresident; and Professor Henry P. Fairchild, Secretary-Treasurer.
The Society saw a rapid growth in staff

and proliferation of committees under the succeeding presidencies of Irving Fisher (1926), Roswell Johnson (1927), H. H. Laughlin (1928), Clarence C. Little (1929), and Henry Fairchild (1930). The Society acquired an Executive Secretary, Mr. Leon Whitney, a Corresponding Secretary, a Field Secretary for the Committee on Legislation, a Secretary for the Popular Education Committee, a Secretary for the Committee on Cooperation with Congress, and a Secretary for the committees on Birth Regulation, Immigration, and Cooperation with Physicians.
The numerous committees were large and included many of the prominent names of the period. The Committee on Eugenics and Dysgenics of Birth Regulation included highly respected names: Professor O. E. Baker, Professor E. G. Conklin, Dr. Robert L. Dickinson, Dr. Louis I. Dublin, Professor Roswell Johnson, and Dr. Raymond Pearl. The Committee on Cooperation with Clergymen included such men as Dr. S. Parks Cadman, Harry Emerson Fosdick, Bishop McConnell, Bishop Moore, Rabbi de Sola Pool, Reverend Guy Emery Shipler, Dr. Ralph Sockman, and many others of equal prominence. The Committee on Crime Prevention included Judge Harry Olson, Dr. A. L. Jacoby, and New York City Chief of Police Morgan Collins. The Editorial Committee included Professors Samuel Jones and Roswell Johnson. Many of the names on the Finance Committee would have been appropriate to any large foundation today. The Committee on Cooperation with Physicians included many leading physicians. There was a Committee on Formal Education, a Committee on the History and Survey of the Eugenics Movement, a Popular Education Committee, a Committee on Legislation, and the ill-fated Committee on Selective Immigration.
In April, 1929, a regional committee in

Vol. 21, No. 2

American Eugenics Society

117

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

California was organized as an affiliate (the Southern California Branch of the American Eugenics Society), again with responsible financial and scientific backing.
For some time all of these committees were quite active. They made surveys, held meetings, wrote reports, and distributed publications. Many of these distributed publications were of a substantial sort, or at least emanated from authoritative sources, such as Research Studies of Crime as Related to Heredity which had been published by the Chicago Municipal Court in 1925. The reports of the various committees covered an enormous amount of ground and represented a great expenditure of effort. Little remains to indicate the extent of their use or their effect on public opinion, but the importance of the men composing the committees and the activity which they sponsored gives an idea of the vigor of the early eugenics movement.2
In addition to the committees, the Society organized an Advisory Council of 110 men and women representing a broad spectrum of society--scientists, university administrators, church leaders, and many people of wealth and prominence. It included such impressive names as Mrs. Otto H. Kahn; Mrs. Helen Hartley Jenkins; Dean Virginia Gildersleeve of Teacher's College; Dr. Carl Brigham; Dr. Edward Thorndike; President J. C. Merriam of the Carnegie Institute; Dr. Clark Wister, Curator of Anthropology in the American Museum of Natural History; and Dr. Sewell Wright, a leading American geneticist.
In 1928, the American Eugenics Society
2 The authentic history of the activities of the eugenics movement in general, and of the American Eugenics Society in particular, is to be found in publications most of which are still available in specialized libraries. The historical archives of the Society itself have been deposited with the library of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia.

began publication of the monthly journal, Eugenics, with Volume 1, No. 1 appearing in October, 1928. It was the official organ of the American Eugenics Society and was advertised as "The only journal in the world devoted to a dignified popularization of the subject of eugenics." In 1930 publication was taken over by the Galton Publishing Co., and the journal ceased to exist with the demise of that company some time after February, 1931.
In 1930, the Officers of the Society were: Professor Henry Fairchild, President; Dr. Irving Fisher, Vice-President; and Professor Roswell Johnson, Secretary and Treasurer. At the staff level were Leon Whitney, Executive Secretary, and Lilian Armstrong, Corresponding Secretary. The nine members of the board of directors included six scientists, Drs. C. C. Little, Henry P. Fairchild, Roswell H. Johnson, Edward G. Conklin, R. M. Maclver, and Irving Fisher, and three nonscientists, Madison Grant, Harry Laughlin, and Harry Olson.
The Society had 1,260 members in 1930. They represented every state in the Union, but by far the largest number came from New York, followed by California and Massachusetts. The list of membership is remarkable in two respects. It was a veritable blue book of prominent and wealthy men and women and included only a minimum of professional people in the scientific fields actually related to eugenics. A remarkable change was to take place in this respect in the next thirty years. By 1960 the Society's membership was less than 400, but almost without exception was composed of scientists or medical men.
The changes in the officers and board of directors over the years was equally significant. The scientists who were officers and members of the board in 1930 were in general heavily involved with large

118

Osborn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

general ideas based on subjective evaluations, and with a strong propagandist bent. Those who constituted the board and its officers in the 1960's, whether in genetics, psychology, or sociology, were scientists of the new school dealing with the careful analysis of objective material and holding as their purpose the furthering of man's knowledge of the biological and sociological forces affecting human populations and their evolution.
Over the years, the many committees organized in the late twenties with such prominent names remained quiescent, and from year to year members apparently dropped off and the committees shrank into desuetude.
By 1931, when Professor H. F. Perkins became President, the Society had begun to lose much of the luster of its association with prominent people. Perkins had a more limited acquaintance with influential people than his predecessors, but he was deeply interested in the Society and able to give it much of his time and thought. The annual meetings of the members continued, with increasing discussion of what should be the program and activities of the Society.
During Perkins' term, the Third International Congress of Eugenics, again sponsored by the Eugenics Record Office and the American Museum of Natural History, was held in New York in 1932. Attendance was down to 73. I t published one volume, A Decade of Progress in Eugenics, containing the scientific papers and exhibits. The papers were of two kinds. More than half dealt with what one might call eugenics theory, with little statistical or objective support, and carrying some unsupported observations on race and social class. The other group, somewhat smaller in number, dealt with hereditary variations, particularly defects, and appears to have represented much of the best knowl-

edge available at that time. It was a pioneer publication in the field of hereditary defect. Picking at random among the names of those who presented scientific papers, we find Raymond Pearl, Frank Lorimer, Tage Kemp, Dr. H. J. Muller, Dr. Jon Mjoem, C. C. Hurst, and Morris Steggerda.
While Professor Perkins was President (1931-33), close contacts were maintained with the Birth Control League, predecessor of Planned Parenthood, and with the recently formed Population Association of America. Professor Fairchild, then president of the Population Association of America, proposed that the Birth Control League, the American Eugenics Society, and the Population Association of America be combined in a single organization. His proposal gained some support in each organization, but the more general feeling was that whatever efficiencies of operation might be gained by the combination, there would be a loss in clarity of purpose. The proposal fell through, but the fact that it was made and seriously considered gives evidence of the sense of insecurity felt by all three organizations in the early days.
The results of Professor Perkins' more thoughtful approach were soon evident. During his presidency a manuscript of some hundred pages was prepared to be distributed to all members of the Society under the title "Who Is Your Heir? The Answer of Eugenics." We can find no record that "Who Is Your Heir" was actually completed and mailed out to members of the Society; but by 1935 the manuscript had been reduced to a brief Eugenics Catechism, some 12 or 15 pages in length, and was given a considerable circulation. The catechism, which was largely Ellsworth Huntington's work, sets out in question and answer form a number of propositions. There is no mention of race. The question of social class differ-

Vol. 2 1 , No. 2

American Eugenics Society

119

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

ences is treated with respect. Many of the answers would be quite acceptable today with a slight change in emphasis to give a balanced rather than a propagandist picture. To the question, which counts for more, heredity or environment, the catechism gives the proper though simplistic answer, "they are interdependent." But in regard to crime, pauperism, and immigration, there are strong biases heavily overstating the effect of genetic variations and a careless reading might extend these biases to social class differences. The catechism contains a strong plea for the filing of family pedigrees. It is concerned with the decline in the birth rate and urges that "superior" families bear at least four children. It states that abortion, except on strict mental grounds, is murder. It urges the holding of "fitter families" competitions throughout the United States.
Professor Ellsworth Huntington was the Society's President from 1934 to 1938. A geographer at Yale University, Huntington was deeply interested in eugenics and had been associated with Irving Fisher and others active in the Society's work. In the twenties he was active with other members of the Society in urging restrictions on immigration. Starting with what was then called "negative eugenics," he had become by the time of his presidency particularly interested in increasing the number of children among the "better" families. He was convinced that eugenically less able people were in the ascendance and wondered if democracy itself would be able to survive. He was a prolific writer. While President of the Society he published Tomorrow's Children, The Goal of Eugenics and A Eugenic Program for the United States. During his presidency he established an Educational Committee of the Society (1937) seeking to develop eugenic causes in schools and colleges. Its activities were short-lived, but within the

Society there was a continuing interest and discussion of the Society's purposes and methods.
In May, 1937, following the publication of the catechism, the Society had held a "Conference of Experts," to "talk about what each of us believes to be the way in which to make the most progress." The basis for the discussion was a statement prepared by the President, Ellsworth Huntington, and the Secretary, Frederick Osborn, which read "the children of the U.S. must be born of parents who will provide the biological inheritance and the home conditions necessary for the development of character, physique, and intelligence." Chairman Huntington reported that Dr. Davenport, who was unable to be present, objected to this statement on the grounds that it overlooked the importance of heredity. It was apparent that many of the early eugenists felt that any introduction of environmental influences weakened the eugenic approach. (They forgot, perhaps, that Galton once defined eugenics as "the study of factors under social control.")
Dr. Barbara Burks spoke hopefully about the possibilities of negative eugenics. She found the future of positive eugenics clouded because of the difficulty of measuring specific traits in individuals. But she added "I do feel, however, that we can say within a group of families that fulfill certain criteria we will get more eugenically desirable children than we will out of another group of families who fail to meet these criteria." She then goes on to consider the advantages of specific grants for chosen families and of a graded family allowance system. Neither she nor any of those present considered the possibility that a eugenically desirable distribution of births might occur on a voluntary basis under the improvement of social conditions and the wider use of birth control.

120

Osborn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Dr. Lorimer expressed the hope that the eugenics to the fields of recreation, nursing,

word "eugenics" might become under- education, and medicine. The conferences

stood as representing a great humanitarian were attended by a considerable number

motive, an attempt in effect to enlarge the of people well known in these respective

opportunities of life and improve the basic fields. They were reported on and sum-

condition of living. He urged the evalua- marized by Weaver Pangburn for recrea-

tion of public programs in their effect on tion, by Alta Dines for nursing, by Henry

trends in population composition.

Noble McCracken and Lawrence K. Frank

Dr. Louis Dublin, representing views increasingly held by the public at large, attacked the eugenic movement for its background, and while much of what he said was as exaggerated as were the statements of the eugenists of a previous time, he is worth quoting as an example of a widely held liberal opinion of that time:

for education, and by Dr. Haven Emerson for medicine. The meetings were evidently under able sponsorship. The papers were excellent and aroused interesting discussions. However, there was no follow-up, and this first attempt to relate eugenics with social activities made no permanent mark.

This movement was badly born of British scientists and biologists . . . belonging to a society which is horribly stratified. They launched the movement on the assumption that the only way open to the developing of a better society was through eugenic influences. The movement was cursed from the outset by the assumption that the only sure way to a better world was through the processes of selection and breeding--which would take eons of time. This objective for better social order can be achieved very, very quickly (by entirely other means) and with a pretty clear assurance of where we are coming out.

Nonetheless, the Conference on Medicine produced an unexpected by-product in the field of defects. Dr. William Allen of Charlotte, North Carolina, a member of the Eugenics Society, attended the meeting on Eugenics and Medicine and presented a paper on his studies of defect among the mountain people in the Appalachians. This was one of the few spots in the United States where hereditary dis-. ease could be located in adequate quantity and studied. Interest in Dr. Allen's paper

The means Dr. Dublin proposed were better education, housing, recreation, better medical care, and better wages. In later years, Dr. Dublin became converted to the need for a eugenic trend in births and became an ardent supporter of the movement in its changed form.
Dr. Norman Hines pointed out that the eugenic idea long antedated Darwin and Galton. He proposed a housecleaning of eugenics by subordinating, if not casting out, the extreme left-wing hereditarians "without at the same time making such excessive concessions to the environmentalists and social conditioners as to make us lose our identity or our essential purpose."
During the winter of 1937, the Society held four conferences on the relation of

was enhanced by his unusual qualities of character and competence. The Society sent its Secretary into the field with Dr. Allen, and in April, 1939, obtained a grant of $5,000 from the Carnegie Corporation of New York for Dr. Allen to enlarge his work. Additional grants were received from the Carnegie Corporation at the request of the Society which by 1941 made it possible to set up a Department of Medical Genetics in the enlarged Wake Forest Medical School, newly named the Bowman-Gray School of Medicine. Dr. Allen took the Chair of Medical Genetics provided by these grants and trained an able assistant, Dr. Nash Herndon, who for 30 years has been one of the country's leading medical geneticists. Dr. Allen died April

Vol. 21, No. 2

American Eugenics Society

121

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

24, 1943, a pioneer in establishing the Bigelow became President in 1940. The

study of genetics in an American school officers and members of the Society were

of medicine.

soon, like the rest of the United States,

The discussions which took place at caught up in the activities of World War

the meeting of the Society in May, 1937, II. Contributions ceased coming in. Mem-

immediately following these conferences, bership declined. Rudolph Bertheau, then

indicate that, though the Society was going Executive Secretary, resigned, and the of-

through a period of change and reassess- fice was abolished in 1942. Almost alone,

ment, it was making an honest attempt to with great dedication and personal cost,

define its aims in the light of then avail- Dr. Bigelow, during the five years of his

able knowledge. The search continued un- presidency, carried the Society through

der the presidency (1938-40) of Dr. S. J. the war period. A desk was retained for the

Holmes with the publication of the pam- Society in the offices of the American

phlets Practical Eugenics in 1938 and Social Hygiene Association in New York,

American Eugenics Today in 1940. They and the Society's books and papers were

repeated in improved form the program stored at the home of Professor Bigelow

for negative eugenics. With respect to posi- at Croton-On-Hudson, New York. The So-

tive eugenics, they made clear for the first ciety's receipts declined from over $6,000

time that "the larger program of eugenics in 1941 to $3,000 in 1942, and under

cannot logically be based on social class or $1,500 in each of the years 1943, 1944,

economic or racial distinctions." They went and 1945. At the beginning of 1946, avail-

on to urge a wider spread of birth control, able cash was down to $829.64, only two

the removal of handicaps to having and or three hundred members remained, and

rearing children, and the need for reorient- the circulation of Eugenical News was un-

ing human values. They pointed out that der 300.

the broader program of eugenics was a corollary to environmental improvement and conformed to environmental aspirations and democratic ideals.

In 1946 Frederick Osborn was elected President to serve for a five-year term. He was called to the State Department in 1947 and had little time to devote to the

After a lapse of some eight years since Society until 1950. From the minutes of

the demise of the monthly journal Eu- the Board at their meeting in November,

genics, the Society again began to sponsor 1947, we read that "all those present

an official publication. When the Eugenics agreed that the time was not right for

Research Association was discontinued, aggressive eugenic propaganda or any ag-

their monthly publication Eugenical News gressive campaign for increased member-

was transferred to the American Eugenics ship; there should be a period during

Society. The Society continued its publica- which the Society should be a forum for

tion as a quarterly and as the official organ thinking out the problems of eugenics

of the Society, with the first issue, Volume with the help of a well-informed audi-

24, No. 1, appearing in 1939 and the last, ence, and the Eugenical News should be

Volume 38, No. 4, in December, 1953. continued as a digest." At the same time,

The publication of the 1938 and 1940 the office of the American Eugenics So-

pamphlets and the presentation of eugenics ciety was moved to the fifteenth floor of

at conferences held in many parts of the 230 Park Avenue, where it was to remain

country marked the end of the Society's for over 26 years.

work in the prewar period. Dr. Maurice A. Beginning in 1949 efforts were made to

122

Osborn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

raise substantial sums in the form of grants in order to give the Society some financial base for its work. Grants were received from the Dodge Foundation, the Population Council, the Draper Fund, and later from the Milbank Memorial Fund. At the same time substantial contributions came in from individuals. By January, 1953, the Society had capital assets of over $27,000, and for the next twenty years continued in receipt of grants and contributions sufficient for a moderate but continuing operation.
In 1951 the trustees appointed Mrs. Helen Hammons to the office of Managing Editor, working in the Society's office, with Mr. Osborn as President and later Secretary of the Society. The term of Mrs. Hammons as Managing Editor from 195160 marked a period of renewed activity and accomplishment in the publications of the Society. In 1953 the publication of Eugenkal News was discontinued and in 1954 the Society began publication of the journal Eugenics Quarterly devoted to scientific articles, particularly in the field of hereditary defect.
Shortly after the war it became evident that the medical profession, particularly those members engaged in teaching and medical research, had come to realize the importance of genetic variations in relation to a great number of diseases, defects, and abnormalities. For years the Society had been preaching that the field of negative eugenics was the responsibility of medicine and public health. A new tide seemed to be running in favor of such a development, and the Society moved to make its contribution.
As early as 1948 the Society had begun distributing pamphlets and reprints of scientific articles on hereditary defects and diseases. In the two years, 1956 and 1957, 12,065 copies were sold in bulk, and 1,846 copies were sold to individuals, in addition

to those distributed free to authors and for general promotion. Many of these were reprints from the Eugenics Quarterly, and the sale of authoritatively written reprints and pamphlets greatly exceeded their distribution through the sale of the Eugenics Quarterly itself. The attractive pamphlet Heredity Counseling, prepared by Helen Hammons, had large sales in bulk and single copies, continuing well into the 1960's.
To fill the need for qualified research workers in medical schools, the Society proposed to the Population Council the award of four medical genetics fellowships providing for postgraduate work in medicine by geneticists or postgraduate work in genetics by men with medical degrees. Of the four fellowship recipients, one became geneticist at the Yale School of Medicine and one at the medical school at the University of Virginia. Further funds were provided by the Population Council for two fellowships in 1960.
In 1956, under the Presidency of Dr. Harry Shapiro (1955-64), the Society joined in a conference in Philadelphia on marriage and the family, exposing a large marriage counseling group to the views of competent medical people on the need for genetic advice in marriage counseling. In 1957 the Society held its first major conference on genetics in medical practice and heredity counseling at the New York Academy of Medicine. It was attended by over a hundred professional people and aroused much interest. In 1959, the medical book division of Harper and Brothers published the proceedings of the Society's 1957 symposium at the New York Academy of Medicine^ under the title Heredity Counseling, with a foreword by Dr. John C. Bugher.
In 1959 the Society held an international conference on differentiation in current fertility trends, again at the New York

Vol. 21, No. 2

American Eugenics Society

123

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Academy of Medicine. The large attendance at the open meetings required the use of the large auditorium at the Academy. Finally, in 1961, the Society held a conference on the teaching of genetics to medical students at the Rockefeller Institution in New York City, jointly sponsored with the Population Council.
Publicity given the American Eugenics Society by these conferences and by the articles of medical columnists resulted from time to time in large numbers of individual inquiries on hereditary defects. On these, the Society acted as a referral agency, supplying lists of heredity clinics in the United States and abroad where specific advice and counseling could be sought. The American Eugenics Society was the first to publish lists of such counseling centers, their earliest listing showing 27 clinics in the United States. By 1969 the listing of counseling centers and genetic services had been taken over by the National Foundation, with an annual publication listing several hundred centers.
During this period, the Society had some part, through its medical genetics committee, in organizing a number of teaching and research meetings and symposiums ranging from evening lectures in connection with the New York Academy of Medicine to a symposium held at Colorado Springs under the administration of the Cornell Medical School. The most important of such meetings was that held in 1961 which helped inaugurate the Bar Harbor summer courses in medical genetics at the Jackson Laboratories in Bar Harbor, Maine. Grants for travel expenses to the first meeting were obtained from the Population Council in 1960 and again in 1961 and 1962. This conference thereafter became well established and supported by the National Institutes of Health and later by the National Foundation.
I t is hard to assess the part played by

the American Eugenics Society in the acceptance by the fields of medicine and public health of responsibility for developing the field of genetic defect. Prior to 1949 the Society had been a lone and ineffective voice. Through the 1950's it concentrated its grants and conferences in this field and made available several tens of thousands of dollars for this purpose. By the early 1960's, no important medical school was without teaching and research personnel in the field of human genetics, and variations in heredity were recognized as factors not only in gross defects and deficiencies but in many other aspects of mental and physical ill health. By 1961 it was evident that support of medical genetics need no longer be the major activity of the Society.
The field of work on which the American Eugenics Society placed major emphasis in the 1960's during the presidency of Dr. Harry Shapiro and that of Dr. Clyde C. Riser and the journal editorship of Dr. Richard H. Osborne, can best be described by the following quotation from the Society's Five-year Report for 1960-1964:
In December, 1961, the Eugenics Quarterly published a "Statement of the Eugenic Position," the report of a committee of the Society comprising five leading men from the fields of anthropology, demography, behavior genetics, medical genetics, and Mendelian genetics. The report noted that some 90 per cent of all fecund American couples use some form of family limitation at some time in their married lives and that with expected improvements in methods of birth control, we may be approaching a society in which all children are quite specifically "wanted" children. While this would not of itself make for eugenic trends in births, it would at least make possible policies for eugenic birth selection based on voluntary controls.
Preliminary to developing policies for "influencing the future course of evolution," it seemed desirable to find out what is the present direction of human evolution in the United States and, if possible, in other areas as well. This new field of scientific interest is as yet very little developed. In the past

124

Osborn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

several years there have been a number of conferences on the direction of human evolution, generally attended by geneticists and anthropologists. Lacking demographic data, the discussions have been highly theoretical. Mating habits and birth differentials among drosophilado not provide analogies applicable to man in an urban civilization nor in any other form of human society. On the demographic side, the data accumulated in population studies have never been adequately analyzed for their genetic significance.
Following on the publication of the "Statement of the Eugenic Position," the Society organized a workshop conference of geneticists and demographers to discuss their common interest in trends in human evolution. The meeting was held in Princeton in the fall of 1964 and was followed by Princeton Conferences held each fall through 1969, a total of five in all. At the first meeting in 1964, considerable time was spent in the search for a common meaning in the words used by geneticists and demographers respectively (for example, "fecundity" was used by geneticists to signify what demographers called "fertility"). There was agreement on the need for men trained in both disciplines, and the recommendation of the conference in this respect resulted in the granting of several graduate fellowships in population genetics.
The Second Princeton Conference was held in the fall of 1965 and included psychologists and behavioral geneticists. Its purpose was, in the words of the rapporteur Dr. Dudley Kirk, "To bring the experience and wisdom of several disciplines to bear on the problem of determining the selective forces which operate to change gene frequencies." Dr. Kirk said that "for the last twenty-five years or so we have seen an overwhelming tide of sociological and social determination which has almost monopolized thinking on these questions in the social sciences. We are engaged here in an attempt to break through our respec-

tive intellectual isolates, whether in genetics, psychology, or sociology."
The Second Princeton Conference was centered on the discussion of two research proposals: "A Proposed Study of 30,000 Menonites in Mexico," by Gordon Allen, and "The Wisconsin Study of Students and Families" by Richard H. Osborae. The several disciplines were brought to bear fruitfully on the plans for these studies. After the First Princeton Conference, there had been a feeling that the population geneticists and the demographers were talking past each other. At the end of the second conference, one of the demographers remarked, "I found the psychologists here lucid and germane and even felt that I understood what Lewontin and Allen (both geneticists) were saying."
The Third Princeton Conference in 1966 was attended by 10 demographers, 14 geneticists, 4 anthropologists, 3 psychologists, and a computer specialist. This conference also considered the planning of several studies on relatively isolated populations. Again, there was a marked improvement in the ability of the members of this interdisciplinary group to understand each other.
At the Fourth Princeton Conference in 1967, five papers were presented on assortative mating. The meeting was notable in that the discussions were carried out without reference to the particular disciplines represented.
The Fifth Princeton Conference was held in November, 1969, under the title "The Genetic Reconstruction of Human Populations." Nine papers were presented. An outside observer would have found it difficult to note that those taking part had been trained in different scientific disciplines. It was as though a new discipline were being developed in the field of current trends in human evolution.

Vol. 21, No. 2

American Eugenics Society

125

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

These conferences greatly enlarged the In the same year, the officers of the Society

basis of interdisciplinary eugenic thinking. helped to organize the international Be-

As a practical matter, they helped to de- havior Genetics Association.

velop a program of research grants for A major symposium was held in the fall

which funds were provided by other foun- of 1971 at the American Museum of Na-

dations. The excellent scientific papers tural History in New York under the joint

from these Conferences, published in the sponsorship of the Museum and the Society

Eugenics Quarterly, later Social Biology, on the subject "Human Evolution--Past,

gave the journal a broader base of contri- Present, and Future." The Committee in

butors and readership. But perhaps the charge included: Dr. Theodosius Dobzhan-

most important result of the Princeton sky, Chairman of the Board of Directors;

Conferences was that they gave those tak- Dr. Harry Shapiro, Curator of Anthropol-

ing part a new sense of their community ogy at the American Museum of Natural

of interest in the interdisciplinary field of History; Dr. David Sills, Chief, Demo-

genetic trends.

graphic Division of the Population Coun-

In the fall of 1970, the Society in its an- cil; and Dr. Carl Bajema, Secretary of the

nual fall conference went back, after an American Eugenics Society.

interval of nine years, to the field of de- The first day, five papers were presented

fect with a symposium on "Differential on man's evolutionary past beginning with

Reproduction in Individuals with Mental fossil evidence presented by Richard

and Physical Disorders." This symposium Leakey and going on through the evolution

marked the first attempt to bring together of races, of human behavior, and of natu-

demographers and medical geneticists for ral selection and differential population

discussion of the reproductive rates of growth. There were six papers on the con-

hereditary defectives. The meeting aroused tinuing evolution of man on the second

much interest, and its excellent papers and day, bringing together many of the men

discussions were compiled in a 133 page who had cooperated in the Princeton Con-

Supplement to Volume 18 of Social Biol- ferences. Man's evolutionary future was

ogy, published in September, 1971.

considered on the third day which covered

Between 1960 and 1970 the Society major trends in population growth and dis-

strengthened its position as a center for tribution and new developments in ge-

bringing together various scientific disci- netics. The papers from this symposium

plines in a common interest in present were published in 1972 in Social Biology,

trends in human evolution. Highly com- Vol. 19, Nos, 2, 3, and 4.

petent men from related fields were As it looked back on its fourth decade

brought on the board of directors, and the of active life, the American Eugenics So-

membership increasingly took on the char- ciety could take a moderate but substantial

acter of other organizations of scientists. satisfaction in the progress made during

By the end of the decade, the Society was that period. Problems of hereditary defects

in a position to obtain a larger participa- and deficiencies, mental and physical, had

tion from its members. All members were at last become the responsibility of medi-

invited to the symposium held in the fall cine and public health. The Society's hopes

of 1970 at Rockefeller University, and the and efforts had seen fruition in the estab-

general meeting of members for the elec- lishment of medical genetics research cen-

tion of directors was held at the same time. ters in all of the larger medical schools, and

126

Osborn

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

in the proliferation of heredity counseling clinics. It had held five interdisciplinary conferences, firmly establishing the cooperative nature of work on human evolution. I t was free to move into the next decade with its major interest the definition of generational trends and changes in gene frequencies and distributions, and the factors which might bring them about.
Through conferences and the publications of scientists from many different fields, stirred by an explosion of knowledge in the science of genetics, and by advances in demography, anthropology, and psychology, the Society was groping for wholly new definitions of its purpose. I t was no longer thinking in terms of "superior" individuals, "superior" family stocks, or even of the social conditions which would bring about a "better" distribution of births. It was thinking in terms of the importance of diversity; in terms of the genetic attributes appropriate to different kinds of physical and social environments; in terms of a society in which different breeding groups were making genetic adaptations appropri-

ate to the needs of different environments. I t was discarding the old criteria and beginning to sense a relationship between eugenics and the survival not only of Homo sapiens but also--because heredity and environment are not two parts but an inseparable whole--the survival of those forms of civilization which promise a more secure and a more abundant life. It was thinking in terms of bio-cultural evolution.
To reflect this thinking more explicitly,
the title of the Society journal was changed
in 1969 from Eugenics Quarterly to Social
Biology. Similarly, in 1972, the Society
changed its name to the Society for the
Study of Social Biology. As the announce-
ment in the journal of this change stated:
The change of name of the Society does not coincide with any change of its interests or policies. Such a change was marked rather by the founding of this journal twenty years ago. The common interests that have long united the membership, and to which their scientific disciplines are relevant, are the trends of human evolution and the biological, medical, and social forces that determine these trends.

