Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Family planning and population control
Alan Fine & Ivan B. Pless
To cite this article: Alan Fine & Ivan B. Pless (1973) Family planning and population control, Social Biology, 20:4, 416-420, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988071 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988071
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015
ill

Family Planning and Population Control
Alan Fine and Ivan B. Pless*
School of Medicine and Dentistry University of Rochester Rochester, New York

^
t _"
j
s·?""
K

Many persuasive arguments have been made regarding the potentially serious consequences of current rates of population growth in the United States (Ehrlich and Ehrlich, 1970; Hauser, 1970). There is general agreement that a reduction in growth is desirable, and considerable attention has been focused on how this might be accomplished. One strategy has revolved around the improved efficiency and expansion of traditional family planning facilities. However, others have argued that family planning in itself is, in the long run, neither a logical nor effective means of arresting growth (Blake, 1969; Davis, 1967; Hauser, 1969). Although Bumpass and Westoff (1970) have demonstrated the significant decrease in growth rate to be expected with the elimination of "unwanted pregnancies" (a potential consequence of the extension of voluntary family planning services to all American women), it is possible that the average family size intended by typical users of family planning services is such that population size will continue to expand in spite of such a program. While there is no consensus on what specific growth rate
*The first author was a fourth-year medical student; the second author is Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Preventive Medicine, and Community Health and a Milbank Memorial Fund Faculty Fellow.

is optimal, all must acknowledge that expansion must ultimately cease, the finiteness of our world having long ago been demonstrated.
Public Law 91-572, the Family Planning Services and Population Research Act (Dec. 24, 1970), makes it clear that the official population "policy" of this country is to be centered on strengthening and extending voluntary family planning services on a nationwide basis. This study is an attempt to provide some clues as to how effective such a policy might be. These data are inconclusive and are not assumed to be representative of the country as a whole. However, they do reflect the reproductive aspirations of the users of one city's family planning agency, provide a basis for comparison with a national random sample, and permit us to estimate how local family size aspirations differ from those which would result in eventual cessation of population growth in the United States. If extensive voluntary family planning is to be American's population policy, it is important to know what American family planners are planning!
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A questionnaire was designed to assess attitudes toward family size among women using Planned Parenthood services as their

416

Vol. 20, No. 4

Family Planning

417

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

principal source of family planning advice, physician services, and contraceptive devices. The women studied were those served by the Planned Parenthood League of Rochester and Monroe County, New York, during a six-week sample period. All new and returning patients to the League's central and outreach clinics were asked to complete, on their own, a one-page questionnaire designed to assess attitudes toward intended, desired, and ideal family size, as well as their views of what constitutes a "large" and "small" family.
Desired Family Size (DFS) was determined by asking "If you could have everything just the way you would like it to be, how many children would you have in all?"
Ideal Family Size (IdFS) was based on the question "In your opinion, what is the 'ideal' number of children for the average American family to have?" "
Intended Family Size (InFS) was obtained for women with children by asking "How many children do you have now?" and adding the result to "How many more children do you plan to have?" For nulliparas, InFS was assessed by asking "If you have no children now, how many do you intend to have in the future?"
The wording of these questions was chosen to correspond with those utilized in Ryder and Westoff's National Fertility Study (1969). However, the methods employed in obtaining the responses differ: self reporting on a written questionnaire vs. personal interview.
A total of 687 responses was obtained. For 316, additional demographic information (marital status, race, income, and education) was obtained and this random subsample is assumed to be representative of the study population as a whole. Of the 316 from whom social data were obtained, 62% were married, 71% were white and 58% had average annual family incomes below $5,000. Twenty-five per

cent had attended college and 6% were college graduates. The mean age of the total sample was 26.5 years (married, 28.6; single, 20.5). Comparisons of these figures with census data from Monroe County suggest that users of Planned Parenthood services in this county are disproportionately unmarried, black, and poor.
RESULTS
Table 1 presents the study data as mean values plus or minus standard errors for several demographic subgroups and the study group as a whole. In addition, the last column of Table 1 shows the arithmetic differences between mean intended family sizes and a nationwide mean family size which would (at the time of this study) insure replacement level reproduction (2.11) (Hauser, 1970). It should be remembered that DFS, IdFS and InFS are measures of attitude, not fact. The correlation between the family size which a childless, unmarried, twenty-year-old woman "intends" to have and the number of children she actually has twenty years hence, for example, is unknown.
When the study data are compared internally, the subgroups of unmarried and childless women are seen to harbor, on an average, attitudes concerning all three variables which are lower than their married or parous counterparts. These comparisons are all statistically significant, with p values less than or equal to 1%. White and black married women seem to disagree concerning IdFS (p = 4%), but no significant difference can be found between their attitudes towards DFS or InFS.
The explanation of the responses by unmarried and childless women is an important area for future research. Two demographic facts about these groups are worthy of attention: (1) Both groups have the lowest mean age of any in the

418

Fine and Pless

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015
01) 02) OS

oo
oo
VA

oo
V II
O <N 1-4 O

PP o oo o VV V
O 00
1-4 1-4

O. O p O oo p p V «-; « V *·; c~j f\ p o di<v o' o' ^. o' o' .ta. o rj THf Tchooo; cHoOoOtOo po
»H CO* N O CO* CO O CO*

P Q§

o oo

vQj\Oo>V» iQ~

oo.\ I|I|

coin Q-H

|M|

oT.J-

E Oo^, O O «, O O ^ O

o«oocoo>^or o"Oo if/icOo Ot^O-ir-f-ivcOo N M O IN NO csroO

O o'
QOfWOvND vop

p d
q o
O Qp p
d

· g 'g'g g "So U s e ·a a as a 5.2 .r -&

sample; and (2) they are also the best educated. This low age-high education profile suggests that many of these women were college students at the time ofthe survey.
As the last column of Table 1 shows, the best correspondence between InFS and a parity which would insure zero population growth is found among nulliparous women in this sample. For all other subgroups, a statistically significant difference between IdFS and replacement parity is demonstrated (p values less than or equal to 2%).
The family-size attitudes of most women in this sample are not those expected if this group of women were intending"replacement" reproduction only. Butare their attitudes more in keeping with replacement parity than the attitudes of American women in general? Is there a trend toward smaller family-size preferences among Planned Parenthood users? These questions arethe key to the assessment of family planning's impact on population growth. Although we lack the data necessary to answer them directly, some ideas may be gained by comparing the Rochester data with some of the results of the 196S National Fertility Study (Ryder and Westoff, 1969). Because of disparities in sampling andtime of data collection, this comparison is offered purely for its heuristic value; nevertheless, it yields some interesting observations.
Table 2 shows that the mean InFS of Rochester respondents is greater than national averages. In the national surveys, InFS was the lowest of the three variables in all but the subsample of black respondents, whereas in the Rochester data IdFS occupies the lowest mean value, with the same exception. I t is striking too, that the disparity between the two sets of data is largest for IdFS.
In spite of the inadequate basis for

Vol. 20, No. 4

Family Planning

TABLE 2
COMPARISON BETWEEN ROCHESTER PLANNED PARENTHOOD SAMPLE AND 196S NATIONAL FERTILITY STUDY: MEAN VALUES

Groups
Rochester sample White married Black married AH married
N.F.S. (196S)_ White married Black married

Current Parity

DFS

IdFS InFS

2.91 3 OS 2.78 3.31 3 21 3.OS 3.14 3.69 2.92 3.06 2.88 3.41
2 69 3.29 3.24 3.16 3 34 3.21 3.61 3.79 2 77 3.29 3.29 3.24

419

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

statistical comparisons, it is clear that the relationships among these variables differ markedly in the Rochester sample from those found in the 1965 study. The Rochester data indicate a trend toward attitudes favoring smaller family sizes. At the same time, Rochester Planned Parenthood users are, on the average, intending to have more children than they desire or consider ideal. This is not generally true in the national survey data. One possible explanation regarding these findings is that the Rochester responses, collected only a few months after "Earth Day 1970," may reflect a growing awareness and concern for environmental and population problems. However, the high InFS average suggests that these Planned Parenthood users may wish the burden of population limitation to rest with others, since it is only the question regarding InFS which deals directly with the respondents' personal intentions. Some of the results of a survey, close in sampling time to the present study, among students and staff at Cornell University were interpreted by the investigators as reflecting a similar "passthe-buck" attitude (van Tienhoven, Eisner, and Rosenblatt, 1971).
CONCLUSION
A study as limited in scope as this is not intended to provide definitive answers.

It does, however, raise some important questions about the role of family planning as a vehicle in achieving limitation in population growth. In assessing the effectiveness of family planning in this respect, it seems evident that, in this sample, the majority of recipients of Planned Parenthood services are not intending family sizes in keeping with what the future requires. Only the young, unmarried, or nulliparous women appear to be planning in accordance with population implications in mind. Clearly, we must know more about their motivation, since small familysize preferences must be fostered in all American women if voluntary family planning alone is to end population growth. The extension of voluntary family planning services to all American women would be a magnificent social achievement. Nonetheless, there is no current evidence that the attainment of such a goal would alter the desires and intentions of American couples to bear more children than our already uncertain future might allow.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Mr. James Foran, executive director, Mrs. Alice Lewis, supervising nurse, and their staff of the Planned Parenthood League of Rochester and Monroe County, for encouragement and aid in this project. We also acknowledge the support of the Milbank Memorial Fund.

420

Fine and Pless

Social Biology

REFERENCES

BLAKE, J. 1969. Population policy for Americans: States. Paper presented at the American Medical

Is the government being misled? Science 164: Academy's Seventh Congress on Environmental

S22-S29.

Health, May 4, 1970, Washington, D.C.

BUMPASS, L., and C. WESTOFF. 1970. The "per-
fect contraceptive" population. Science 169: 1177-1182.
DAVIS, K. 1967. Population policy: Will current programs succeed? Science 158:730-739.

RYDER, N., and C. WESTOFF. 1969. Relationship
among intended, expected, desired and ideal family size: United States, 196S. Population Research for the Center for Population Research within the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. U.S. Department of

EHRLICH, P., and A. EHRLICH. 1970. Population, Health, Education and Welfare, Bethesda,

resources, and environment. Freeman, San Fran- Maryland.

cisco.

VAN TIENHOVEN, A., T. EISNER, and F. ROSEN-

HAUSER, P. 1969. Population: More than family BLATT. 1971. Education and the population ex-

planning. J. Med. Educ. 44:20-29.

plosion. Bioscience 21:16-21.

. 1970. Population problems in the United

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

