Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The effects of variable ageofonset and diagnostic criteria on the estimates of linkage: An example using manicdepressive illness and color blindness
Lois A. Morton & Kenneth K. Kidd
To cite this article: Lois A. Morton & Kenneth K. Kidd (1980) The effects of variable ageofonset and diagnostic criteria on the estimates of linkage: An example using manicdepressive illness and color blindness, Social Biology, 27:1, 1-10, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988398 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988398
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 4
View related articles
Citing articles: 20 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

The Effects of Variable Age-of-onset and Diagnostic Criteria on the Estimates of Linkage: An Example Using Manic-depressive Illness and Color Blindness

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Lois A. Morton and Kenneth K. Kidd
Departmentof HumanGenetics School ofMedicine Yale University New Haven, Connecticut

ABSTRACT: Three pedigrees were selected from the literature for their compatibility with the hypothesis of linkage between the X-chromosome marker color blindness and bipolar affective disorder. We compared the results of linkage analyses of these pedigrees when both penetrance function and diagnostic classification were varied. The analyses show that the incorporation of age-of-onset information into a penetrance function significantly increased the evidence for linkage. In addition, assumptions about diagnostic classification affected the lod scores. These results demonstrate the need for careful consideration of diagnostic criteria and variable age-of-onset when pursuing linkage analysis of complex traits.

The use of linkage analysis in manicdepressive illness (MDI) and in other psychiatric disorders has become widespread in recent years. Because linkage analysis is a potential means of identifying a genetic vulnerability or predisposition and of defining subtypes of illness, it has been applied to many families in which manicdepressive illness has been diagnosed in several members.
However, the specific method generally used makes several assumptions which are not met by MDI. Most available algorithms assume etiologic homogeneity, complete and constant penetrance (the probability of observing the phenotype, given a specific genotype), a single affected phenotype, and unbiased ascertainment of pedigrees. The methods have not been tested for robustness, so that the effects of violating these assumptions are unknown. These problems make interpretation of many early studies of genetic linkage in MDI impossible.
More recently, studies using methods which permit one or more of these restrictive assumptions to be removed have been

published (Mendlewicz et al., 1979; Gershon et al., 1979). But the results of these two groups are contradictory, and neither group tested the effect of incorporating their more flexible assumptions into the methods.
It is our intent to assess the importance of incorporating age-dependent penetrance and variable diagnostic criteria into a linkage analysis using a subset of the published pedigrees which have been cited as evidence for X-linkage of MDI.
GENETIC LINKAGE ANALYSIS
Genetic linkage is the nonrandom assortment in meiosis of alleles at different loci because the loci involved are located on the same chromosome. During meiosis the two chromosomes of a pair--the one of paternal origin and the one of maternal origin--can exchange blocks of corresponding genetic material through a process called recombination. Except for this process, the gametes produced by an individual would contain for each chromo-

1

Morton and Kidd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

some pair either an intact chromosome of significant evidence against linkage at that

paternal origin or an intact chromosome value of 0.

of maternal origin. When the specific al- Of course, there are many other para-

leles at two loci differ in the maternal and meters in a given genetic hypothesis,

paternal chromosomes, gametes pro- specifically the gene frequencies and

duced can contain either a parental com- genotype penetrances for each of the loci.

bination of alleles (maternal or paternal) But this method was originally developed

or a recombinant arrangement. The (Morton, 1955) and implemented for loci

process of recombination occurs indepen- with known modes of inheritance; thus the dently in each separate cell undergoing only unknown parameter was 0. Obmeiosis and the crossover position is ran- viously the problem of parameter estimadomly distributed among different meiotic tion becomes much more complicated as events. The frequency with which recom- the number of unknown parameters inbination will occur between two loci is a creases. function of the physical distance along the

chromosome between those two loci.

X-LINKAGE IN DEPRESSION

Genetic linkage is measured as the recombination frequency, 0, which can be zero for loci immediately adjacent to each other or any value up to 0.5, the frequency of recombinant gametes when the two loci segregate completely independently.

Although patterns consistent with Xlinked transmission of depression were observed several decades ago (Rosanoff et al., 1935), reports of linkage to specific Xchromosome markers are much more recent. These studies have both benefited

Maximum likelihood estimation of 0 from and affirmed the validity of the uni-

requires the calculation of the probability polar-bipolar diagnostic distinction. Uni-

that the phenotypic patterns found in a polar affective disorder is characterized by

particular family would occur given a episodes of extremely depressed mood

specific hypothesis that incorporates the which result in a specific pattern of symp-

parameter 6. In a strict sense this probabil- tomatology and impaired functioning. Bi-

ity is proportional to, but can conveniently polar affective disorder is characterized by

be considered equal to, the likelihood of alternating episodes of depressed and

that specific hypothesis given the data. manic moods.

These likelihoods are computed for Most of the pedigrees studied for X-

several different values of 0, including linkage of MDI were ascertained through

0 = 0.5, i.e., independent segregation. a proband with bipolar affective disorder,

The statistic employed to assess the although both diagnoses were present in

significance of likelihood differences is the relatives. Reich et al. (1969) first reported lod score. This is the logarithm (to the linkage of bipolar MDI with color blind-

base 10) of the ratio of the likelihood at a ness (protan and deutan) in two large

specific estimate of 0 to the likelihood at families. Mendlewicz and Fleiss (1974),

0 = 0.5, i.e., the null hypothesis of inde- Winokur and Tanna (1969), and Mendle-

pendent assortment. The lod scores of all wicz et al. (19(72) reported other pedigrees informative families are summed for each informative for linkage analysis between

hypothesis (i.e., value of 6) in arriving at a bipolar affective disorder and several X

total lod score. A total lod score of +3.00 chromosome markers (protan, deutan,

is considered to be significant evidence in andXg).

favor of linkage at that value of 6, and a total lod score of -2.00 is considered

The findings of these studies can be summarized as follows: Alleles at each of

Vol. 27, No.1

Estimates of Linkage

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

the three marker loci cosegregated with those who do not possess an abnormal al-

the depressive phenotype in a fashion con- lele. In the case of depression, which has a

sistent with linkage. When summed over variable age of onset extending through-

all families, the lod scores reported by out much of adolescence and adulthood,

Mendlewicz and Fleiss (1974) were above unaffected individuals may be of yet

3.00 for protanopia (with the estimate another type: those who are genetically

9 = 0.10) and for deuteranopia (6 = 0.07). vulnerable and will express the phenotype

However, many investigators have later. Thus, penetrance increases with

published documented cases of father-to- age. For MDI, penetrance is probably

son transmission, a finding which is not both age-dependent and incomplete, i.e.,

consistent with X-linkage.

even susceptible individuals surviving

through the age of risk probably have a COMPLICATIONS IN LINKAGE ANALYSIS less than 100% chance of expressing the

The contradictory findings of male-to- phenotype. In linkage analysis, pene-

male transmission and linkage to X chro- trance is important in determining the

mosome markers have led to the postula- probability that an individual is a recombi-

tion of genetic heterogeneity in the nant. Correction for age-dependent pene-

etiology of MDI. Many investigators favor trance requires estimation of the age-of-

the hypothesis that two predominant onset distribution, a task which is

genetic forms exist, one X-linked and one frequently difficult with the available data

autosomal, although these forms have not (Heimbuchetal.,1980).

been separable on the basis of any criteria Another question which arises when

other than transmission patterns. The pos- conducting a linkage analysis of depres-

sibility of genetic heterogeneity substan- sion is that of diagnosis. Currently, it is

tially complicates the use of linkage analy- thought that unipolar illness is an alter-

sis. If one sums lod scores over all nate expression of the bipolar susceptibil-

available pedigrees, it is quite probable ity when it is encountered in the families of

that significant linkage in one of the genetic forms would be masked by the finding of independent segregation of marker and illness in pedigrees of the other form. Yet it is certainly invalid to sum lod scores over only those pedigrees which show cosegregation. Even the selection of pedigrees on the basis of transmission patterns alone may be introducing a bias, which is difficult to quantify, toward a finding of linkage with an appropriate marker.
Incomplete penetrance of the phenotype, i.e., a less than perfect correspon-

bipolar patients. However, unipolar illness is so prevalent (Silverman, 1968) that some unipolar relatives of bipolar probands may be manifesting an etiologically distinct disorder. In these cases, classification of the unipolar relative as affected may lead to incorrect assignment of recombinant status. In addition, opinions vary as to whether such diagnoses as questionable affective disorder, cyclothymic personality, and alcoholism should be considered expressions of the same genetic susceptibility in the families of bipolar probands.

dence between susceptible genotype and illness phenotype, presents several addi- REE VALUATIONS OF X-LINKAGE FOR M D I

tional problems for linkage analysis. In The failure of early linkage studies to

simple terms, unaffected individuals fall consider these questions and others led

into two classes: those who possess the ab- Gershon and Bunney (1976) to reanalyze

normal allele but fail to express it, and the pedigree data for X-linkage of MDI.

Morton and Kidd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Their analysis of the data took an ex- effects of the new variables introduced

tremely conservative approach, excluding into the analysis. Mendlewicz et al. (1979)

those families in which the parental source did not even specify the age-of-onset dis-

of a gene could not be determined unam- tribution actually used. It seems entirely

biguously or in which male-to-male trans- possible that use of "correct" age-of-onset

mission could not be excluded. They also distribution, degree of incomplete pene-

eliminated those individuals who were trance, and range of variable expressivity

well but less than 25 years of age. Using would allow detection of genetic linkage

these strict exclusion criteria, no evidence that was not detected using "incorrect"

was found for linkage between MDI and values.

the loci for protan-deutan color blindness To examine this question we have been

or the Xg locus. Gershon and Matthysse exploring the effects of age-dependent

(1977) also noted problems introduced by penetrance and variable diagnosis on the

nonrandom ascertainment of families seg- results of linkage analysis for an X-linked

regating for both the illness and a genetic trait. The results of our analyses illumi-

marker.

nate the problems of genetic linkage

The new studies by Mendlewicz et al. studies and provide some indication of the

(1979) and Gershon et al. (1979) have at- robustness of linkage analyses to varia-

tempted to resolve the uncertainty by col- tions both in the age-of-onset distribution

lecting additional families using more used and in the diagnostic criteria. These

defined ascertainment criteria and analyz- results do not address the question of X-

ing the data using more appropriate linkage for MDI, but rather demonstrate

methods. Both studies incorporated varia- the importance of using the proper ver-

ble age of onset into penetrance functions sions of the currently used methods of

and Gershon et al. (1979) addressed the linkage analysis when studying psychiatric

question of variable expressivity by com- disorders. Our conclusions also apply to

puting lod scores using two alternative studies of other complex disorders with

diagnostic schemes. The eight families variable age of onset and variable expres-

studied by Mendlewicz et al. (1979) were sivity.

consistent with linkage of MDI and color blindness, although the highest lod score

MATERIALS AND METHODS

of 1.55 (at 6=0.15) did not permit We selected three large published pedi-

definitive acceptance of the hypothesis. In grees, the Calvert and Alger families

addition, they reported significant hetero- (Reich et al., 1969) and the family of a

geneity of lod scores. Gershon et al. lithium-responsive schizoaffective pro-

(1979) reported six families for which total band, hereafter referred to as the Baron

lod scores did not support linkage, al- family (Baron, 1977). It should be noted

though a hypothesis of linkage could not that we did not attempt an unbiased ascer-

be rejected in the range for which Mendle- tainment; we specifically chose these pedi-

wicz et al. reported a maximum value. In grees for their compatibility with hy-

addition, Gershon et al. observed that in potheses of X-linkage for MDI.

two of the six families lod scores were We have modified LIPED Version 3

slightly in favor of linkage.

(Ott, 1976) to permit calculation of the

Though recognizing the need for more probability that an individual would ex-

sophisticated analyses, neither of these re- press his/her phenotype, given each possi-

cent papers systematically explored the ble genotype, as a function of age and/or

Vol. 27,No.1

Estimates of Linkage

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

sex (Hodge et al., 1979). The agedependent penetrance function to be used in a particular analysis is specified by a subroutine that is called from the main program. The subroutine calculates a set of penetrances for each individual using the individual's age and/or sex according to a function and parameters that must be specified. These individualized penetrances are then used in evaluating the likelihood.
We chose to compare three different penetrance functions. The first assumed that penetrance does not vary with age and is equal to 0.00,0.75, and 0.85 for normal homozygotes and hemizygotes, heterozygotes, and abnormal homozygotes and hemizygotes, respectively. The second function, in which penetrance for heterozygotes and for abnormal homozygotes and hemizygotes is 0.00 up to age 14 and increases exponentially to a value of 0.94 at age 100, was suggested by Crowe and Smouse (1977) after analyzing the age-of-onset data collected by Winokur et al. (1969). Finally, we tested a dominant linear function in which penetrance is 0.00 to age 14 and then increases linearly to 0.94 at age 65 and above. Both the linear and exponential functions were used in conjunction with an age-dependent linear function for phenocopies, in which penetrance is 0.00 to age 14 and then increases linearly to 0.03 for 65 and older. We did not consider sex-specific penetrances, but considered the hemizygote values equal to those of the respective homozygotes. In all cases, the gene frequencies for the "depressive" allele and for the colorblindness allele were both assumed to be 0.02.
We considered separately the question of whether a single genotype may develop more than one affected phenotype. In order to assess the effects of assuming that several diagnoses were variable expres-

sions of a single genotype, we classified the individuals in the families as affected vs. unaffected according to four different rules: (1) bipolar depression alone was considered affected; (2) bipolar and unipolar disorder were classified as affected; (3) bipolar, unipolar, and questionable affective disorder were considered affected; and (4) bipolar, unipolar, questionable affective disorder, and alcoholism were labeled affected. In the Alger family, individuals receiving all four diagnoses were present, resulting in four possible patterns of illness for that pedigree. The Calvert family had no one diagnosed as questionable; therefore, only three classifications were possible. All members of the Baron family were bipolar, unipolar, or well, resulting in only two possible classifications.
For each penetrance model and each possible diagnostic classification of the three families, we computed the likelihood of linkage at ten estimates of 6, the recombination fraction (0.00, 0.03, 0.06, 0.10,0.13,0.16,0.20,0.30,0.40 and0.50). This represents a total of 27 sets of likelihoods. In the case of the Alger and Calvert families, published pedigrees were modified to eliminate those sections which were not informative for linkage.
RESULTS
Since we have not addressed the issue of whether MDI is X-linked, but rather have looked at the effects of agedependent penetrance and diagnosis on linkage analyses, we will present here only illustrative results and not a full lod-score analysis. First, in most cases we found that incorporation of a penetrance function which increases with age yielded results very different from those obtained under the assumption of constant penetrance. Interestingly, we often found that, as in the case of the Baron pedigree with only

Morton and Kidd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

bipolars considered affected (Figure 1),

.200

ALGER / BP, UP, QO, ALC = AF

results obtained using a linear age-

dependent penetrance function differed

very little from those using an exponential

age-dependent penetrance function, although both were quite different from re-

- 2 1.0 -

EXPONENTIAL INCREASING

sults using a constant value. Second, even Log (L) when the linear and exponential models

yielded quite different numerical results,

-22 0

qualitative results were thesame. For ex-

ample, inthe case ofthe Alger family with

all four diagnoses considered affected

(Figure 2), the linear and exponential

-23.0

models gave different results, but our con-

clusions about the most likely recombina-

tion fraction and thegeneral shape of the likelihood surface arethesame. The con-

-24.0

.20 30

.50

stant penetrance function, however, yielded adifferent curve and adifferent estimate of 6. Finally, the Calvert family with both bipolar and unipolar considered

-8.0 r

BARON / BP  AF

e
Fig. 2.--Log10 likelihoods forthe Alger pedigree as a function of 6, therecombination fraction, using penetrance functions of three types: one which increases linearly with age,one which increases exponentially with age, andonewhich is constant for all ages. The diagnoses bipolar affective disorder (BP), unipolar affective disorder (UP), questionable affective disorder (QD), and alcoholism (ALC) were all considered affected.

-9.0 Log (L)
-10.0

LINEAR INCREASING

-11.0

-12.0

.10

.30 .40

e

Fig. 1.--Logio likelihoods forthe Baron pedigree as a function of 6, therecombination fraction, using penetrance functions of three types: one which increases linearly with age,one which increases exponentially with age, andonewhich is constant for all ages. Only the diagnosis bipolar affective disorder (BP) was considered affected.

affected (Figure 3), illustrates another important result. The lod score log10-- (likelihood at 9 = 9 - log10 (likelihood at 9 =0.5)--is greatest for a constant penetrance function, yet the absolute likelihoods of the age-dependent functions are greater than those of the constant function. This finding illustrates the point that, when parameters other than 6 arevaried, lod scores obscure the true likelihood differences forthe other parameters.
With respect to variation in diagnostic classifications, the results are fairly consistent regardless of the penetrance function employed. For each individual family as well as for.the total, the inclusion of unipolar affective disorder as affected increased the lod score (seeTable 1). For the Alger family, the addition of individuals with a diagnosis of questionable affective disorder further increased the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

Estimates of Linkage

CALVERT / BP, UP = AF -10.0

logio likelihoods for all three penetrance functions. The extension of the affected classification to alcoholism resulted in a decrease in lod scores for both the Calvert and Alger families. The magnitude of this decrease varied depending on the penetrance function.

-I 1.0 Log (L)
-12.0

-13.0

.10 .20

.30 .40

.50

6

Fig. 3.--Logio likelihoods for the Calvert pedigree as a function of 8, the recombination fraction, using penetrance functions of three types: one which increases linearly with age, one which increases exponentially with age, and one which is constant for all ages. The diagnoses bipolar affective disorder (BP) and unipolar affective disorder (UP) were both considered affected.

DISCUSSION
Perhaps the simplest conclusion is that the results of linkage analyses are dramatically affected by assumptions made in the handling of the data. Specifically, choice of a penetrance (or age-of-onset) function and choice of a diagnostic spectrum can affect conclusions concerning linkage. This finding argues strongly both for channeling research efforts into studies which will improve our knowledge in these areas and for careful consideration of the sensitivity of our methodologies to the approximations currently used.
Our results demonstrate the importance of incorporating an age-dependent

TABLE 1
LOG LIKELIHOODS OBSERVED WITH VARIABLE DIAGNOSTIC CLASSIFICATION ASSUMING AN EXPONENTIAL AGE-DEPENDENT PENETRANCE FUNCTION*

PEDIGREE AND DIAGNOSES

0.1 0.3 0.5

Alger BP BP, UP BP.UP.QD BP, UP, QD, ALCt
Calvert BP BP.UPt BP, UP, ALC
Baron BPf BP, UP

-10.60 -18.20 -18.28 -21.05
-8.22 -10.24 -12.29
-10.11 -9.39

10.60 18.75 19.06 21.65
-8.22 10.93 12.94
10.72 10.25

-10.60 -19.30 -19.74 -22.03
-8.22 -11.55 -13.46
-11.39 -11.28

0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
0.50 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00

텹ogio likelihoods computed using different classification schemes are not directly comparable because the data change as diagnostic criteria change. Note, however, that the observed evidence for linkage, based on likelihoods at various values of 6, changes depending on the diagnostic classification assumed. BP is bipolar affective disorder; UP is unipolar affective disorder; QD is questionable affective disorder; ALC is alcoholism; and 6 is the value of 6 which corresponds to the maximum logio likelihood.
tLogio likelihoods observed for these pedigrees employing different penetrance functions are presented in Figures 1-3.

Morton and Kidd

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

penetrance function into analyses of a trait unipolar depression as well as several

such as MDI for which risk is known to other depression-like diagnoses are as-

vary with age. However, in this small sumed to be variable expressions of the

number of families the choice of a specific "bipolar genotype" when present in the

age-dependent function, as long as it families of bipolar probands. However,

roughly approximated age-of-onset data, studies attempting to determine which

was less important than the decision to diagnostic entities are genetically related

employ some reasonable function. This to bipolar affective disorder are quite rare.

finding for an X-linked trait is in general The demonstration of increased incidence

agreement with the report on autosomal of a specific diagnosis among relatives of

linkage analyses of Huntington's disease bipolar probands would argue for the hy-

with three informative genetic markers pothesis that the two are genetically re-

(Hodge et al., ms.). These authors also lated, but only evidence of linkage to a

found that the precise shape of the age- single marker within families or of a single

correction curve had little effect on the lod inherited biochemical defect would con-

scores, while failure to employ any age stitute proof of genetic identity. It is abso-

correction at all yielded significantly lutely critical for the assignment of recom-

different lod scores.

binant/nonrecombinant status to

In general, our knowledge of age- individuals in a pedigree that we know

dependent penetrance is still quite lim- which of the diagnoses present are likely

ited. There are serious theoretical prob- to represent alternate manifestations of

lems encountered in the estimation of the "depressive genotype" and which are

penetrance and age-of-onset curves from likely to represent other genetic or non-

data on patients (Heimbuch et al., genetic entities. This question is especially

1980). For example, although age-of- important because of the high lifetime

onset distributions are available for pri- prevalence for some form of depression.

mary affective disorder, many age- Other diagnoses are quite likely to occur

dependent penetrance functions derived sporadically in large pedigrees by chance

from these data do not consider popula- alone.

tion demograhics or genotype- and pheno- Not surprisingly, this example has dem-

type-specific morbidities. Some data do onstrated that assumptions concerning the

not distinguish between bipolar and uni- extent of the bipolar spectrum do affect

polar disorder; yet we expect that the dis- lod scores and their interpretation. The in-

tributions for these two diagnoses may be clusion of both unipolar depression and

quite different. For the present, however, questionable affective disorder and the ex-

our results argue that while some function clusion of alcoholism from the diagnostic

must be used, an approximate function is spectrum consistently gave the highest lod

acceptable, although the best available scores. However, it is inappropriate to

function is preferable. Ignoring the age draw any conclusions about the true ex-

effect for disorders with variable age of tent of the spectrum from such a limited

onset may lead to errors both in the nu- number of families without confirmatory

merical results of linkage analyses and in evidence from independently collected

the conclusions drawn from those results. family prevalence data.

The question of which diagnostic cate- Our results also raise more general con-

gories are part of a single spectrum is also cerns about the use of linkage analysis in

pertinent in linkage analyses with complex complex disorders for which the mode of

traits. In many linkage analyses of MDI, inheritance is not known. The likelihoods

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 1

Estimates of Linkage

computed are functions of the parameters elucidating the genetics of hemochroma-

of the genetic hypothesis as well as the re- tosis. For psychiatric disorders, genetic

combination fraction and should thus be linkage provides the best proof of genetic

maximized over all those parameters. In involvement. Though only a small part of

the MDI example presented in this paper, the genome is currently close to a highly

uncertainty about age-dependent pene- polymorphic marker, recombinant DNA

trance and the extent of the diagnostic techniques should add a large number of

spectrum suggests additional parameters new markers in the next few years,

over which the likelihood must be max- thereby increasing the feasibility of

imized. The result graphed in Figure 2 linkage studies. However, a word of cau-

illustrates one possible consequence of tion is in order: We have shown that the

this complication: The hypothesis which situations in which linkage can be most

gives the greatest lod score for linkage is helpful--the complex disorders--are also

not the most likely one.

the ones in which the precise assumptions

It is important to remember that lod and methods used can have a great effect

scores represent only relative likelihoods on the results.

useful for comparing different estimates Finally, it should be reemphasized that

for a single parameter. They imply noth- these results in no way address the ques-

ing about the relative likelihoods of the es- tion ofX-linkage for MDI. However, they

timates of other parameters. Therefore, serve to demonstrate the necessity of con-

looking at lod scores alone can be mislead- sidering both variable age of onset and

ing. A linkage problem now has more than variable expressivity in subsequent

just one parameter because there is uncer- linkage analyses of bipolar affective disor-

tainty about the mode of inheritance, the der and many other traits. Our results sug-

diagnostic spectrum, and age-of-onset dis- gest that, in practice, any reasonable onset

tribution. In theory, the likelihood should distribution will suffice and that conserva-

be maximized over all variables, including tive diagnostic criteria will lead to conser-

not just 0, but also the onset function and vative results.

the parameters of the genetic model which

include the relationships between symptoms and genotypes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Genetic linkage promises to be one of the most important techniques in clarifying the genetics of complex disorders. For example, Kravitz et al. (1979) have dem-

We would like to thank Dr. Peter Smouse for lengthy and helpful discussions concerning this research and the writing of this manuscript.
This work was supported in part by USPHS

onstrated the value of genetic linkage in Grants NS 11786 and MH 28274.

REFERENCES

BARON, M. 1977. Linkage between an Xchromosome marker (deutan color-blindness) and bipolar affective illness. Arch. Gen. Psych. 24:721-727.
CROWE, R. R., and P. E. SMOUSE. 1977. The
genetic implications of age-dependent penetrance in manic-depressive illness. J. Psych. Res. 13:273-285.
GERSHON, E. S., and W. E. BUNNEY, JR. 1976.

The question of X-linkage in bipolar manicdepressive illness. J. Psych. Res. 13:99-117.
GERSHON, E. S., and S. MATTHYSSE. 1977. X-
linkage: Ascertainment through doubly ill probands. J. Psych. Res. 13:161-168.
GERSHON, E. S., S. D. TARGUM, S. MATTHYSSE,
and W. E. BUNNEY. 1979. Color blindness not closely linked to bipolar illness. Arch. Gen. Psych. 36:1423-1430.

10

Morton andKidd

Social Biology

HEIMBUCH, R. C., S. MATTHYSSE, and K. K. MENDLEWICZ, J., P. LINKOWSKI, J. J. GUROFF,

KIDD. 1980. Estimating age-of-onset distribu-

and H. M. VAN PRAAG. 1979. Color blindness

tions fordisorders with variable onset. Amer.

linkage to bipolar manic-depressive illness.

J. HUM.GENET. 32: 564-574.

New evidence. Arch. Gen. Psych.

HODGE, S. E., L. A. MORTON, S. TIDEMAN, K. K.

36:1442-1447.

KIDD, and M. A. SPENCE. 1979. Age-of-onset MORTON, N. E. 1955. Sequential tests forthe de-

correction available for linkage analysis

tection of linkage. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.

(LIPED). Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 31:761-762.

7:277-318.

Hodge, S. E.,M. A.Spence, B. F. Crandall, R. OTT, J. 1976. A computer program for linkage

S. Sparkes, M.C. Sparkes, M. Crist, andS.

analysis of general human pedigrees. Amer. J.

Tideman. Huntington's disease: Linkage

Hum. Genet. 28:528-529.

analysis with age-of-onset corrections. Amer. REICH, T., P. CLAYTON, and G. WINOKUR. 1969.

J. Med.Genet. 5:247-254.

Family history studies: V. The genetics of ma-

KRAVITZ, K., M. SKOLNICK, C. CANNINGS, D. CAR-

nia. Amer. J. Psych. 125:1358-1369.

MELLI, B. BATY, B. AMOS, A. JOHNSON, N. ROSANOFF, A. J., L. M. HANDY, I. R. PLESSET.

MENDELL, C. EDWARDS, and G. CARTWRIGHT.

1935. Theetiology of manic-depressivesyn-

1979. Genetic linkage between hereditary he-

dromes with special reference to their occur-

mochromatosis and HLA. Amer. J. Hum. rence in twins. Amer. J.Psychiat. 91:725-762.

Genet. 31:601-619.

SILVERMAN, C. 1968. The epidemiology of de-

MENDLEWICZ, J., and J. L. FLEISS. 1974. Linkage

pression. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,

studies with X-chromosome markers inbi-

Baltimore.

polar (manic-depressive) and unipolar (de- WINOKUR, G., P. J. CLAYTON, and T. REICH.

pressive) illness. Biol. Psych. 9:261-294.

1969. Manic depressive illness. C.V. Mosby,

MENDLEWICZ, J., J. L. FLEISS, and R. R. FIEVE.

St. Louis.

1972. Evidence forX-linkage in the transmis- WINOKUR, G., and V. L. TANNA. 1969. Possible

sion of manic-depressive illness. J. Amer.

role of an X-linked dominant factor inmanic-

Med. Assoc. 222:1624-1627.

depressive disease. Dis. Nerv. Syst. 30:80-94.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

