Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
A benefitcost analysis of amniocentesis
Ralph L. Andreano & Daniel W. McCollum
To cite this article: Ralph L. Andreano & Daniel W. McCollum (1983) A benefitcost analysis of amniocentesis, Social Biology, 30:4, 347-373, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988550 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988550
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

A Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Ralph L. Andreano and Daniel W. McCollum
Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin

ABSTRACT: This study applies benefit-cost analysis to one area of prenatal diagnosis-- amniocentesis. The ultimate purpose of such a study is to provide useful guidelines to policy makers. An attempt is made to exhaustively list benefits and costs, whether measurable or not. Those which can be quantified are estimated. On the basis of these benefit-cost estimates, the study concludes that a program of amniocentesis for all pregnant women beyond age 32 would be warranted. This economic analysis, however, is only one aspect of a policy decision. Moral, legal, and ethical questions must also be considered.

Amniocentesis is a process whereby diagnosis--in particular, amniocentesis. fluid is withdrawn from the amniotic sac A few analyses have been set forth in the

surrounding a developing fetus by in- medical literature, none of which, in the

serting a needle into the uterus. The am- opinion of the authors, presents a com-

niotic fluid is composed of water and a plete enough picture (Glass, 1975; Ha-

large array of solutes. Suspended in the gard and Carter, 1976; Hook, 1979;

fluid are a number of intact cells to- Stein et al., 1973). Our intention is to set

gether with cell debris and metabolic by- out an exhaustive list of benefits and products of the developing fetus. For costs. Some of them it will be possible to

prenatal diagnosis, both the cells and measure accurately; others can be esti-

the soluble constituents are of interest. mated utilizing some plausible assump-

The amniotic fluid and cell cultures de- tions. Some of the benefits and costs,

rived from it are used to look at the chro- while not estimable in terms of numeri-

mosomal karyotype as well as to look cal value, can reasonably be signed so as

for various compounds indicating the to provide useful, though nonquantifiapresence or absence of certain charac- ble, information. Lastly, some benefits teristics (such as monitoring levels of al- and costs can only be listed with no a

phafetoprotein in looking for neural priori indication of whether they will

tube defects) or defects in certain meta- add to or subtract from net benefits. The

bolic processes (such as the breakdown ultimate purpose of such a study is to

of a particular amino acid). The amni- provide useful input to policy makers in

otic fluid can also be used to assess, deciding on future directions.

more accurately, the degree of develop- This study takes as counterfactuals:

ment of the fetus, or fetal maturity.

(1) a state of the world with no amnio-

This study is an attempt to advance centesis or prenatal diagnosis, so all the state of the art in benefit-cost analy- genetically-abnormal fetuses are alsis as applied to the area of prenatal lowed to be born, and (2) a state of the

347

348

Andreano and McColIum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

world in which there is a program of amniocentesis, offered to all pregnant women beyond some cut-off age, following which abortions would be available to women whose test results indicate they are carrying a genetically-defective child.
In performing an amniocentesis and its associated analyses, the tests usually performed are: an examination of the chromosomes to look for any chromosomal aberration (such as the absence of a chromosome or the presence of an extra one, as is the case for Down's syndrome) and a measurement of the level of alphafetoprotein (AFP), which is used as an indication of the presence or absence of neural tube defects. If there is reason to suspect some other problem, such as an inborn error of metabolism (for example, Tay Sachs disease or PKU) because of family history or ethnic background, an additional search for diagnostic clues in the amniotic fluid is made. Because of the rarity of such inborn errors and the large number of possibilities, it is virtually impossible to test everyone for all of them. The "big" anomalies are Down's syndrome and the neural tube defects: anencephaly and spina bifida. While anencephaly is one of the more frequently occurring congenital anomalies, the data show that the overwhelming majority of infants born with anencephaly die perinatally (within about the first two weeks of life). The rest die by about the end of the fourth week of life (Chamberlain, 1978; Taffel, 1978). For this reason, in our calculation of benefits, we will look only at Down's syndrome and spina bifida.
We should stress, however, that many other anomalies will be detected through a program of amniocentesis. The chromosomal analysis will pick up virtually any recognizable chromosomal

aberration. Data compiled by Nevin (1982) show incidences of 2.1 per 1,000 live births for sex chromosomal anomalies; 2.3 per 1,000 live births for structural chromosomal anomalies and 0.2 per 1,000 live births for autosomal trisomies besides Down's syndrome. Many of these cases would be detectable through a program of amniocentesis offered to women beyond some given age, as would inborn errors of metabolism sought out in specific cases. Hence our final benefit estimate will be a conservative one since we are counting benefits only for prevented Down's syndrome and spina bifida births. This will be mentioned again later in the paper.
INCIDENCE OF CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
The incidence of congenital anomalies, in general, shows some interesting trends. Studies have looked at racial differences in incidence of congenital anomalies, where it seems no real consensus emerges as to the significance of the difference (Taffel, 1978). Some have looked at ethnic differences and sex differences as well as differences due to plurality (i.e., more than one infant born in the same delivery), birth order (first, second, or third child born to a mother) and socioeconomic status. The major differences, however, seem to be related to age of the mother and birth weight of the child (Taffel, 1978). The relevant incidence rates for this study (and, we would assert, the most relevant from a policymaking viewpoint) are those broken down by age of the mother.
For congenital anomalies in general, the incidence rates initially decrease as the age of the mother increases, reaching a minimum in the 25-29 year age

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

349

bracket, then rapidly increase asmater- society as a result of the program. We

nal ageincreases beyond 30.Themost therefore define as a benefit (or dis-

striking illustration ofthe relationshipis benefit) anything that comes under the

Down's syndrome, which shows astead- heading ofresources notconsumed as a

ily increasing incidence with maternal result ofcertain births being prevented.

age. Table 1illustrates the relationship The benefits, defined in this manner,

between maternal age and theincidence deal with the saved cost of raising a

of Down's syndrome. Theincidence of genetically-abnormal or developmen-

this anomaly is33 times as great forchil- tally disabled child (i.e., emanating

dren born tomothers over age40than from theaffected child notbeing born),

for those born to mothers aged 20-24 whereas costs will deal with theamnio-

years. Perhaps abetter way to look at it centesis program itself (i.e., costs ema-

is to notice that women aged 35 orover nating more or less directly from the

accounted forabout 5 percent of total program). Since weareheading toward

live births but about 30 per cent of a net benefit calculation, the definition

Down's syndrome births. This relation- of costs and benefits isnotcritical, i.e.,a

ship, aswell astheease ofobservation, cost is not distinguished. Ifwe wantedto

provides themotivation for looking at arrive ata benefit-cost ratio, this defini-

an amniocentesis program with eligibil- tion would be critical. Whether some-

ity based onmaternalage.

thing was defined as a cost or a dis-

benefit would lead to adifferent result.

BENEFITS OF APROGRAM OF AMNIOCENTESIS

The purpose of this section is to set out the benefits accruing from a program of amniocentesis andbriefly ex-

Our objective inthis study istolook plain or comment onthem. Thereare

at the amniocentesis program in terms three categories to consider: (1)direct

of the resources which will be saved by benefits (orcosts) are those whichare

TABLE 1
INCIDENCE OF DOWN'S SYNDROME BYMATERNAL AGE (BASED ONU.S. DATA FOR 1978 AND 1973-1974)

Maternal Age
All Ages . . . Under 20 . . 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40 and over 35 and over 30 and over

Number of Live Births
3,335,000 556,000
1,140,000 1,015,000
474,000 126,000 24,000 150,000 624,000

Per Cent of Total Live Births
100 16.7 34.2 30.4 14.2 3.8 0.7 4.5 18.7

Estimated Number of Affected
Infants
1209.8 97.3
230.3 299.4 220.9 201.0 160.9 361.9 582.8

Per Cent Of Total Affected Infants
100 8.0 19.0 24.7 18.3 16.6 13.3 29.9 48.2

SOURCE: Live Births: Statistical Abstractofthe United States.Incidence ofDown's Syndrome: Taffel, Congenital Anomalies and BirthInjuries Among Live Births: United States, 1973-74

350

Andreano andMcCollum

Social Biology

TABLE2
BENEFITS FROM AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM (SUMMARY)
A. Direct and Indirect Benefits 1. Saved cost of institutional care for mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons. 2. Saved cost of home care for mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons not institutionalized 3. Saved cost of hospital and medical care for persons born with neural tube defects and other conditions requiring special medical care 4. Saved cost of educating and training mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons 5.*Saved cost to society of lost productivity of retarded or developmentally disabled persons 6. No loss of parental income due to retarded or disabled child
B. Intangible Benefits 7. Relief of anxiety and reduction in uncertainty for parents 8. Benefit to a family of not having a retarded or disabled child 9. Better ability to prepare for the birth of a child under fetal distress because of better measure of fetal maturity 10. Benefit from basic research and expanded knowledge due to further development of amniocentesis 11. Benefit to society of a decrease in the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities, neural tube defects, and other congenital anomalies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

current expenditures or savings, i.e., tangible savings in the use of health resources or tangible costs; (2) indirect benefits (or costs) are those earnings

tutional care is desirable or necessary, there would be a savings in expensiveinstitutional care if Down's syndrome and other congenital anomalies were reduced. The amount of savings depends

lost, for whatever reason, such as due to on the proportion of retarded anddis-

a disability; and (3) intangible benefits abled persons who used to be institution-

(or costs) are those rather nebulous ones that really cannot be measured but

alized, thelevel of care required, and the age at which they are institutionalized.

should enter into consideration, such as 2. Saved cost of home care for mentally

reducing pain, discomfort, or grief. Table 2 summarizes the benefits described below.

retarded ordevelopmentally disabled persons notinstitutionalized. Many retarded persons are kept at home and cared for, at least part of their lives. There are likely

1. Savedcost of institutional carefor mentally retarded ordevelopmentally disabled persons. A substantial proportion of mental retardation istheresult of Down's syndrome, which would be greatly reduced under a program of amniocentesis and abortion of affected fetuses. Notall mental retardation is the same. It ranges from mild to profound with different degrees of developmental capability associated with each. Table 3 gives some devel-

to be costs of home care above and beyond those required for a nonretarded person. Developmentally disabled persons are also likely to require additional care at home. Special facilities might need to be installed. Therapists or other health care professionals might have to visit at some interval of time. To the extent that the incidence of retardation or developmental defects is reduced, these costs would be saved.

opmental characteristics for each degree 3. Savedcostof hospital andmedical care

of retardation. While not all mentally re- in casesof neural tube defectsand other

tarded persons require institutional care, conditions requiring special medical care.

many do, as maysome physically handi- The twomain defects in this category are

capped persons. To the extent that insti- anencephaly (which consists of a mark-

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysisof Amniocentesis

351

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
DEVELOPMENT CHARACTERISTICS OFMENTALLY RETARDED PERSONS

Degreesof
Mental Retardation

Pre-School Age0-5 Maturation & Development

Mild

Can develop social and communication skill; minimal retardation in sensorimotor areas; often not distinguished from normal until later age.

Moderate Severe

Can talk or learn to communicate; poor social awareness; fair motor development; profits from training in self-help; can be managed with moderate supervision
Poor motor development; speech is minimal; generally unable to profit from training in self-help; little or no communication skills

Profound

Gross retardation; minimal capacity for functioning in sensorimotor areas; needs nursing care.

School Age 5-20 Training & Education
Can learn academic skills up to approximately sixth grade level by late teens. Can be guided toward social conformity. "Educable"
Can profit from training in social & occupational skills; unlikely to progress beyond second grade level in academic subjects; may learn to travel alone in familiar places.
Can talk or learn to communicate; can be trained in elemental health habits; profits from systematic habit training.
Some motor development present; may respond to minimal or limited training in self-help.

Adult 21 and Over Social and
Vocational Adequacy
Can usually achieve social and vocational skills adequate to minimum selfsupport but may need guidance & assistance when under unusual social or economic stress.
May achieve selfmaintenance in unskilled or semi-skilled work under sheltered conditions; needs supervision & guidance when under mild social or economic stress.
May contribute partially to self-maintenance under complete supervision; can develop self-protection skills to a minimal useful level in controlled environment.
Some motor and speech development; may achieve very limited self-care; needs nursing care.

SOURCE: Yearbook of SpecialEducation, 1977-78.Third Edition, p. 227. Marquis Academic Media, Marquis Who's Who, Inc., Chicago, 1977.

edly defective development of the brain together with the absence of some of the bones in the cranialvault) and open spina bifida (a defect consistingof theabsence of vertebral archesthroughwhichthespinal membrane, with or without spinal cord tissue, may protrude). Conditions such as these require extensive medical care. While the number of cases prevented through a program of amniocentesis would be relatively small, the cost saving in each case prevented would be relatively large.
4. Saved cost of educatingand training mentally retarded or developmental^ disabled persons. These benefits are selfexplanatory. They would includecosts of special schools, vocational programs, sheltered workshops and so forth. It

should be noted that this represents the total cost of educating and training theretarded or developmentallydisabled person and not merely the costs above and beyond educating and training a "normal" person.
5. Saved cost to society of lost productivity of retarded or developmentally disabled persons. Personswho are retarded or developmentally disabled may work at a lower level of productivitythan a nondisabled person, if they can doso at all. They still, however, consume. They must eat, be clothed, and consume other necessities. Societyexperiences a net drain when resources are consumedand notreplaced with productive effort.
6. Saved cost of loss of parental income due to a retarded or disabled child. When

352

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

a retarded or disabled child is cared for at home, one of the parents is likely to feel that he or she cannot work or can only do so at a lesser level of time than he or she otherwise would, in order to stay at home and care for the child. The family loses income, and society loses some productive effort.
7. Relief of anxiety and reduction in uncertainty.Expectant parents (and other people close to them) can be very aaxious when they know there is an increased risk of having a retarded or disabled child, as would be the case when there is some history of abnormality in the family or when the mother is older. By being able to undergo amniocentesis and be relatively certain their child is "normal," if the test results are negative, the parents avoid psychological stress.
8. Benefit to afamily of not having aretarded or disabledchild. One would expect that, given the choice, parents would not choose to have a genetically abnormal or developmentally disabled child. From this, one can infer a higher level of utility for having a "normal" child than a disabled one. It is less clear, however, whether having a disabled child yields more or less utility than having no child. This would likely affect different families differently. One must be somewhat careful because of the stories told by some parents of retarded or disabled children of the progress that can be made with proper training, how satisfying they found it to raise such a child, and the benefits they have received from the experience. These cases notwithstanding, the fact remains that many, if not most, Down's syndrome children are severely retarded. They are not "simple beautiful people," are not maintainable at home and, in many cases, are true human tragedies. On balance, we cannot be sure which way this part of the benefit will go.
There could also be an effect on siblings of the disabled child. To the extent that more care or attention must be given to the disabled child, less may be given to other children in the family. This could lead to extra costs to the family (though we will define them as disbenefits), both direct and intangible. Par-

ents may put other children in a preschool, for example, to be able to give more attention to the disabled child. On an intangible level, the "normal" child may experience stress or some psychological disbenefit as a result of receiving less of the parents' attention.
9. Betterability to preparefor the birth of a child underfetal distress because of a better measure of fetal maturity. Fetal distress has a great deal to do with the timing and method of delivery. There is a sizeable group of infants whose chances for survival are enhanced by early intervention, frequently by Caesarean section, and for whom retention in the uterus and delivery through the birth canal can be hazardous. Selecting the optimal time for intervention is a problem and is dependent on the degree of fetal maturity. The major cause of fetal distress (affecting some 50,000 infants annually, about half of which die) is immaturity of the pulmonary function manifested as Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS). Maturity of the lung does not always coincide with other indices of maturation. However, measurement of phospholipids in amnioticfluiddiffers from other approaches to the estimation of fetal maturation in that it provides specific information about the lungs. The decision to intervene in the pregnancy often is not made until later in the pregnancy than the 16th to 18th week, when amniocentesis for prenatal diagnosis would be done. The existence of a widespread program of amniocentesis, however, and the necessary personnel and facilities to perform it, as well as a more universal acceptance and awareness of the procedure, could lead to better preparation and therefore reduced cost or reduced level of mortality or morbidity for those infants born under fetal distress.
10. Benefits from basic research and expanded knowledge due tofurther development of amniocentesis. Amniocentesis and its associated chromosomal analyses could lead to advances in the field of genetics. Gene mapping is one possible application of chromosomal research that could be advanced via the expanded use of amniocentesis. At some point in the fu-

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

353

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

ture, intrauterine treatment of disease or

COSTS OF A PROGRAM OF

errors in metabolism may be an option rather than termination of a pregnancy.

AMNIOCENTESIS

There have already been instances where This section will detail the costs of a

intrauterine treatment has taken place to remove blockages in the urinary tract and drain fluid from lungs or brain cavities of

program of amniocentesis. As with benefits, there are three categories to

fetuses. In at least one case, a fetus was consider: direct, indirect, and intangi-

removed from the womb, operated on ble. Table 4 summarizes the costs de-

and returned to the womb (Wisconsin scribed below.

State Journal,Nov. 16,1981).

1. Publicity to make theprogramknown.

11. Benefits to society of a decrease inthe Starting up a new program would entail

incidence of chromosomal abnormalities, costs in making people aware of the pro-

neural tube defects, and other congenital gram, what the program is supposed to

anomalies. This is a difficult thing to think accomplish, who is eligible, and so forth.

about. Certainly, society would be better off if these anomalies were decreased; but would society be better off if certain people, namely the retarded or developmentally disabled, were not born? Something seems inherently wrong about making such a claim on an individual level;

2. Administration of the program. Another necessary part of any public program is the administration. The machinery has to be set up to run the program and to make sure things proceed as they are supposed to.

but it seems reasonable to assume that, 3. Genetic counseling. Along with am-

given the choice, society would not niocentesis, there is some counseling

choose to have disabled children. There- done with expectant parents. They must

fore, we would infer a benefit. The spe- be told about amniocentesis procedures

cific benefit here is more of a psychologi- and what to expect. They must be in-

cal nature. Society in general would be formed about the risks of the procedure,

expected to gain utility just by knowing however slight they may be. The options

that the incidence rate of congenital must be explained to them in case of a

anomaly is now lower than it had been positive test. The meaning of test results

previously.

must also be explained--what they tell

TABLE4
COSTS OF AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM (SUMMARY)

A. Direct and Indirect Costs 1. Publicity to make the program known 2. Administration of the program 3. Genetic counseling 4. Hospital, physician, and laboratory costs associated with drawing and analyzing the amniotic fluid sample 5. Associated care costs for abortion, etc.,in case of a positive test 6. Any additional facilities required for widespread program including hospital and laboratory facilities and personnel 7. Time costs involved in women actually going through the amniocentesis procedure
B. Intangible Costs Increased social cost of more older women having children because of decreased risk of bearing (by terminating the pregnancy) a genetically abnormal or developmentally disabled child
9. "Mental anguish" of an abortion from a false positive test 10. Possibility of parents "rejecting" an abnormal child allowed to be born as the result of a false
negative test 11. "Psychological" cost to those opposed to abortion from legitimized use of abortion with counsel-
ing and family planning, probably resulting in an increased use of abortion

354

Andreano and McCoIIum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

us, what they don't tell us, and so forth. The cost here will be primarily labor, namely, the cost of the counselors.
4. Hospital, physician, and laboratory costs associated with drawing and analyzing the amnioticfluidsample.These costs involve capital cost for the equipment necessary to draw and analyze the sample as well as for the ultrasound analysis to locate the fetus; but the main costs, again, are labor. Chromosomal analysis is a labor-intensive procedure. It involves someone actually looking at the chromosomes to see if there is some aberration present. Some of the biochemical analyses can be done by machine, but some of them also are done manually. Thus, labor is a large share of the laboratory cost as well as that of actually drawing the sample. Also included in this category would be any additional medical care required because of complications due to the amniocentesis procedure.
5. Abortion and associated care costs in case of apositivetest.One of the assumptions in amniocentesis is that should the test results be positive, indicating an abnormal child, the parents will elect to terminate the pregnancy through abortion. The costs included here would be for the abortion procedure and any associated care required, such as for any complications that might develop.
6. Any additional facilities required for a widespread program, including: hospital andlaboratoryfacilities andpersonnel. At present, the number of amniocenteses performed is relatively small. It is conceivable that additional facilities would have to be added or existing facilities expanded to handle the increased demand resulting from the implementation of a widespread program of amniocentesis.
7. Time costs of women going through the amniocentesis program. There is a value attached to the time a woman would spend going through the amniocentesis that could be spent doing something else. Associated with this would be time spent in traveling to and from the place where the amniocentesis is performed as well as time actually spent at the site to draw the sample, receive counseling, etc.

8. Special cost of more older women having children because of a decreased risk of bearing (by termination of the pregnancy) agenetically abnormal or developmentally disabled child. This is a rather vague category but would include the cost to society of an increased population. These costs, of course, would have to be net of any contributions made to societal welfare by the increased population. One would have to consider living costs and resources consumed by these extra people net of the benefits of having the extra workers (or cost of too many workers) and the presumably increased output of society, as well as extra congestion from those additional people. This could turn out to be a negative cost or in effect, a benefit.
9. "Mentalanguish" of an abortion from a false positive test.Though studies have found amniocentesis to be a highly accurate procedure--one study reports an accuracy rate of 99.4% (Lowe et al., 1978)--it seems inevitable that some mistakes will occur. Assuming this to be the case, there will be some cost incurred (largely psychological) by the people involved: family, physician, etc.
10. Possibility of parents "rejecting" an abnormal child allowed to be born as a resultof a false negative test. This cost is the mirror image of the previous one. If parents are "surprised" by the birth of an abnormal child when the amniocentesis test results had falsely assured them of a "normal" child, there could be problems. The parents might feel they are unfairly burdened by this child and harbor resentment toward the child. They might not care about the child and therefore not give it the proper care or attention. Whether or not the child was rejected, some cost would be incurred by the parents or others. Here again, there would be psychological costs to the parents, to the child--and, quite possibly, to others involved, such as the physician--in addition to real or direct costs of inadequate care to the child.
11. Psychological costs to those opposed to abortion from legitimized use ofabor-

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

355

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

tion with counseling and family planning, survival rate, and r is the discount rate.

probably resulting in an increased use of abortion.Obviously, from the amount of debate in recent years, there are many people who are opposed to abortion. With a program of amniocentesis and the likely increased use of abortion that

The lower case letters (a, b,d, e,g)are the proportions of people who fall into each benefit category for each year, i.e., a, is the percentage of the cohort under institutional care in year i, etc. The survival

would accompany it, there would be a rate is zero at age 70, hence the summa-

cost imposed on these people.

tion for 70 years. /, E, C, and P are all

paid out of society's total bundle of re-

THE MODEL
The figure we want to arrive at in this study is an estimate of the net benefit to society of preventing children with Down's syndrome and neural tube defects from being born. In order to arrive at this estimate, we look at the expected number of people born in a single year with the relevant birth defects and follow these people through their expected lives. We set out to estimate the net cost to society imposed by these people for each year of their life. These net costs are adjusted by the relevant survival

sources to support the person in question over his or her lifetime. Y represents the person's own contribution to that support, so it must be netted out of the benefit calculation. Looked at in these terms, we believe the logic is consistent. In the case of a "normal" person, one would expect the personal contribution to outweigh the resources used up in providing a lifetime of support. On balance, society gains resources as a result of that person being alive. In other cases, this is not necessarily so.
The estimate of costs is calculated as:

rates at each year, then discounted back

C=A +Tn+ Kq

to some year zero--the beginning of the project. This net cost to society, which would be saved if these people were not born, is what we call the benefits of a program of amniocentesis. These benefits are then compared to the cost of running the program (the fixed costs) and the cost per participant (the variable cost). The result is the net benefit of the amniocentesis program.

where C is the total cost of the amniocentesis program for one year, assumed to be paid at year zero, the beginning of the program; A is the administrative cost of the program (which includes both the administration and publicity costs talked about earlier); Tis the cost of the amniocentesis (which includes the genetic counseling, hospital, physician and laboratory costs associated with

The estimate of benefits is calculated drawing and analyzing thefluidsample);

as:
B =JJ°=o

i+ d,i-e,Y, +

n is the number of procedures performed in a given year, K is the cost of an abortion, and q is the number of posi-

tive tests expected (equal to the ex-

where B is benefits, / is institutionaliza- pected number of abnormal births tion costs, E is education and training averted in the benefit calculation).

costs, C is personal consumption, Y is The estimate of net benefits of the

personal income, P is lost parental in- amniocentesis program then isB--C.

come, q is the expected number of ab- A couple of studies from the medical

normal births averted in a year, S is the literature talk about what they term

356

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

"the replacement case" (Hagard and Carter, 1976; Hock, 1979). This is the case where, upon receiving a positive test result and terminating the pregnancy, some proportion of women try again. Statistically, the chance of having two consecutive positive test results is even smaller. This will be the case whether or not the events are independent. The replacement case assumes a "normal" child is born the second time. The claim is that in calculating benefits, the final figure must be net of the cost of raising a "normal" child for those women who go on to have a "normal" child under the replacement case. We came to the conclusion that the replacement case is not a relevant consideration. Whether the child is replaced or not, the same resources are saved by society. In the case of a "normal" child, society does not give up resources; rather, it would be expected to gain resources on balance. In a study such as this where gross benefits are the relevant consideration, i.e., resources saved by society by preventing the birth of disabled children rather than resources lost by those children being born disabled rather than "normal," we feel the replacement case is not a relevant consideration. Hence, we will not include replacement versus nonreplacement in our calculations.
Several assumptions are made in this analysis. First, with regard to institutional care, two levels of care are assumed: a high level of care, taken to be a complete-care institution, and a low level of care, taken to be a skilled-care nursing home. We assign people to a care facility based on the degree of their disability. Hagard and Carter (1976) cite estimates based on data collected in Scotland, that 20 per cent of children with Down's syndrome have an IQ in

the range of 50-69; 75 per cent, in the range 20-49; and the rest (5 per cent), below 20. Using these data, we assume that the 5 per cent with an IQ below 20 and 5 per cent from the low end of the 20-49 range go into the high level of institutional care. The rest go to the low level of care. Consistent with Hagard and Carter (and roughly consistent with assumptions made by Glass [1975]), we assume that 5 per cent of the Down's syndrome cohort is institutionalized immediately. These would be those with the most severe level of retardation. At age 15, a total of 25 per cent of the cohort would be under institutional care (10 per cent at the high level and 15 per cent at the low level). Half of the Down's syndrome cohort would be institutionalized by age 25, three-quarters by age 35, and all by age 45. These assumptions are based on medical information, and we see no reason to assume otherwise (Glass, 1975; Hagard and Carter, 1976). The increments to the institutionalized population are added at the ages specified rather than evenly over the period.
In the area of education and training, we assume that the entire surviving cohort would be involved in education and training from the age of six through twenty. This assumption is consistent with classifications made in the Yearbook of Special Education when discussing developmental characteristics of mentally retarded persons. We assume 20 per cent of the cohort (those in the 50-69 IQ range) to be in the "educable" category for education and training. Those persons institutionalized at the high level of care, over the relevant time period, are educated/trained at the institution. The remainder of the cohort is assumed to be in the "trainable" category.

Vol. 30, No.4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

357

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Following the period of education pregnancy may later be terminated by

and training, it is assumed that all nonin- miscarriage by stillbirth, there is no way

stitutionalized survivors are employed. to know this and the induced abortion

We assume no overlap of the period of would be offered.

education and training and the period of The incidence rate of abnormality for

employment, i.e., the people are in those pregnancies ending in miscarriage

training through age 20, then become is substantially higher than for those

employed at age 21.

ending in live birth. As a result, we ex-

In terms of lost parental income, we pect relatively more positive test results

assume that the income lost is maternal and relatively more abortions for the

income. Further, we assume that as a former group. Keep in mind, however,

result of having mentally retarded or de- two points:

velopmentally disabled children, mothers will enter the work force at half the participation rate observed for mothers of "normal" children.
An assumption made in deriving the cost estimate for the amniocentesis program involves the number of women

1. We want to look at the resources saved by society, i.e., not expended, as a result of the amneocentesis program compared to the counterfactual. 2. Those pregnancies ending in miscarriage require resources to care for the resulting abortion.

who are offered the procedure. The live The procedures and care required for a

birth statistics do not reflect the number miscarriage are similar to those required

of women who are pregnant at the time for an induced abortion. The costs, or

an amniocentesis would be offered, usu- resources expended, would be similar as

ally at the 16th to 18th week of gesta- well (Olson). For this reason, we can

tion. There is some number of women view the abortion performed on the

who are pregnant at this time but for group whose pregnancy would have oth-

some reason do not give live birth; they erwise ended in miscarriage as a substi-

may miscarry or have a stillbirth, for ex- tute for the miscarriage. Therefore, the

ample. For this reason, we add the num- costs for these abortions are merely a

ber of fetal deaths to the number of live transfer of resources expended, trans-

births to derive an estimate of the num- ferred from caring for a miscarriage to

ber of women to whom an amniocente- inducing an abortion, and do not repre-

sis would be offered. Accurate statistics sent a real cost of the amniocentesis pro-

on fetal mortality are only available for gram.

20 weeks or more of gestation. The number of fetal deaths between weeks 18 and 20, which we would ideally include in our estimate, would be a smaller number, so the available statistics can provide a good proxy for fetal deaths over the relevant period.

In sum, we are assuming that an amniocentesis is offered to all women pregnant at the 16th to 18th week of gestation, both those ending in live birth and those ending in miscarriage or stillbirth. We include in the cost of the program, however, only those abortions offered

Under the terms of the program we to women who would have given live are looking at, all women who show pos- birth.

itive results in the amniocentesis are of- We assume no adverse effects, lead-

fered an abortion to terminate the ab- ing to increased costs, due to risks asso-

normal pregnancy. Even though the ciated with the amniocentesis procedure

358

Andreano andMcColIum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

itself. In our literature survey, we found an affected child. The logic is as follows:

three large-scale studies in the U. S. and If there is a family history of birth de-

Canada which indicated there is no ex- fects or some other factor which would

cess risk to women undergoing amnio- indicate a woman is at an increased level

centeses (Lowe et al., 1978; Simpson et of risk, she v/ould be more likely to be-

al., 1976; Goldbus et al., 1979). They come involved in an amniocentesis pro-

find amniocentesis to be a safe proce- gram than would a woman who wasnot

dure. Based on these studies, we feel at an increased level of risk. In this case,

confident in not considering costs due to one would again expect both benefits

complications of the procedure itself. and costs to decrease but with the costs

We also assume, though with a lesser decreasing proportionately more than

degree of confidence, that there will be the benefits since women who were at a

no extra costs associated with complica- lower risk level and did not participate

tions encountered in performing abor- would lower costs but have a smaller ef-

tions on those women showing positive fect on benefits. This situation would

test results. Complications and their as- show greater net benefits and make the

sociated costs could have such a wide program more attractive.

range, both in magnitude and incidence, that gathering such information would be a task of monumental proportions, and their expected effect in this study would seem to be relatively small.

We must also consider the discount rate. If one can assume that the costs of the program, the market value of theresources which must be devoted to the project, are an accurate reflection of the

In addition, we assume 100 per cent opportunity costs of those resources,

accuracy of the procedure and that the i.e., they are an accurate representation

procedure is performed once for each of the discounted value of these re-

participant, i.e., that only one visit is sources invested elsewhere, then no ad-

necessary to obtain thefluidsample. It is justment to these costs is necessary. No

assumed that there is a 100per cent par- matter who would undertake a project

ticipation rate for the program, and all of offering amniocentesis to all pregnant

those women showing positive test women--the government, the insur-

results actually go through with an abor- ance industry, or some private charita-

tion. In the case where there was less ble organization--they all have to com-

than 100per cent participation, both the pete for funds in capital markets. In light

benefits and costs would be reduced. of this fact, one can assume that the

There are a couple of possible cases. price paid for the resources devoted to

One is that those who choose not to par- amniocentesis accurately reflects the

ticipate in the program would be similar true discounted value or opportunity

in characteristics to those who do partic- cost of those resources. Further, the

ipate, specifically in their chances of costs are defined in this study are for one

having a child with Down's syndrome or year's operation of the program and are

some neural tube defect. If this were the all assumed to be paid out at the begin-

case, benefits and costs would each be ning of the year, so no time adjustment

reduced bytheproportion of nonpartici- is necessary. Thereal concern then is the

pation. One could also make an argu- social rate of time preference applicable

ment that the nonparticipants would to the benefits of theproject which occur

have, overall, a smaller chance of having over a relatively long period of time.

Vol. 30, No.4

Benefit-Cost Analysis ofAmniocentesis

359

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

One prominent view about the social rate of time preference, as expressed by Gramlich (1981), is that it should be the same as the economy's real growth rate. The long-run U. S. growth rate is in the neighborhood of 3V2per cent, so we will use 3V2per cent as our discount rate. All costs and benefits are expressed in 1980 dollars. We will assume that real values remain constant throughout the period of analysis.
Another assumption regarding costs is that no additional facilities will be necessary to implement the amniocentesis program. We assume that no additional hospital or laboratory facilities will be required to accommodate the program. This assumption is based primarily on the feeling that there is a significant amount of excess capacity in the hospital and laboratory industry. In addition, it is based on the fact that amniotic fluid samples can be preserved and transported to other locations for analysis. A large share of hospital laboratory work is done at central laboratory facilities rather than being done "in-house." Such facilities typically exhibit economies of scale. Hence, we feel that existing facilities can accommodate the increased demand for their services.
In attempting to estimate the benefits from averted neural tube defect births, we employ a similar set-up to that used in the case of Down's syndrome. The differences come in the assumptions used to arrive at the components of the estimate. A major difference is in the survival rates for those born with neural tube defects. In the data we looked at, all those born with anencephaly died in the first year of life. In the case of spina bifida, 56 per cent died perinatally and 17 per cent died in the first year of life (Chamberlain, 1978). The estimated survival rate at 5 years of age is 24 per

cent. Beyond the age of 5, we were unable to find any data on survival rates, so we will assume that the survival rates beyond age 5 are similar to those in the Down's syndrome case. For severity we assume the breakdown given by Chamberlain (1978). Of the 24 per cent surviving at age 5:13.2 per cent have minimal handicap, 21.7 per cent have moderate handicap with normal intellect, 47.6 per cent have severe handicap with normal intellect, and 17.5 per cent have severe handicap with some degree of mental retardation. Specifically, we assume that all those with the combination of severe physical handicap and mental retardation are institutionalized immediately at the aforementioned high level of care. We assume, in addition, for the purpose of analysis, that none of the physically handicapped people with normal intellect are institutionalized.
The education and training cost assumptions are the same as for the Down's syndrome case, i.e., that this period of life runs from age 6 through 20.
The assumptions for lost parental income are the same as those used in the case of Down's syndrome. The final assumption needed in the derivation of benefits from averted neural tube defect births is one concerning income. Since the noninstitutionalized population in this case consists solely of people with normal intellect, we assume that upon completion of the education and training period all of the people will be employed at the same level of wages as a nonhandicapped person.
There is another source of benefits in the case of neural tube defects: averted medical costs. These medical costs involve a tremendous amount of variability. Procedures could involve plastic surgery to repair and cover the defect,

360

Andreano and McCoIIum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

repair to nerve damage or impairments, sources. The cost figures on institutional

possible tendon repair and transplant, care are from the Wisconsin Depart-

among other things. The surgical proce- ment of Health and Social Services

dures involved can easily run into the (DHSS), Division of Health. One set of

tens of thousands of dollars. In addition, cost estimates is for a high level of care.

all of these would likely be inpatient These cost figures include everything

rather than outpatient procedures, in- but education and training (i.e., room

volving high hospital costs. A study of and board, medical care, etc.). The an-

the Myelodysplasia and Hydrocephalus nual cost of this care is $30,588. The sec-

Program in Nebraska by Angle et al. ond set of cost figures is for the care of a

{1911a, 1911b) estimates the extra medi- mentally retarded person in a skilled

cal costs associated with these defects. care nursing home. This type of facility

The defects considered by this program would be expected to provide a lower

are myelodysplasia (which is a defective level of care than that covered by the

development of any part, especially the first set of cost estimates. This lower

lower segments, of the spinal cord), hy- level of care is estimated at $12,775 an-

drocephalus (which is a condition char- nually. The level of care required is de-

acterized by the abnormal accumulation pendent on the severity of mental retar-

of fluid in the cranial vault, accompa- dation or disability.

nied by enlargement of the head, prominence of the forehead, atrophy of the brain, mental weakness and convulsions), and encephalocele (which is a hernia of the brain, manifested by protrusion of brain substance through a congenital or traumatic opening of the skull). The nature of these defects is relatively close to that of neural tube defects. In fact myelodysplasia, which is a neural tube defect, makes up 65%of the sample, so we feel relatively comfortable in using these cost estimates as a proxy for the additional medical costs associated with neural tube defects. We will assume that these expenses are incurred only in those surviving past the age of 5.

The costs of education and training come basically from two sources. One is a Colorado study cited in a discussion report to the U.S. Congress in 1979 on the implementation of the Education For All Handicapped Children Act (U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, 1979). The other source of information is the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services (Division of Vocational Rehabilitation; Division of Policy and Budget). Using information from these sources on the excess direct special education cost per student and information on the cost of educating a "normal" student, we arrive at the following estimates of annual cost:

Limited Intellectual Capacity

"Educable"

$4,128

THE DATA

"Trainable" Physically Handicapped

$4,777 $4,243

The expected numbers of live births, fetal deaths and congenital anomalies for the United States and Wisconsin are

Mentally Retarded and/or Physically Handicapped in an Institutional Care Facility $2,636

shown in Table 5.

In addition we added $246 as an esti-

The benefit and cost data used in this mate of administrative and case worker

study came from a wide variety of cost for the Division of Vocational Re-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

361

TABLE5
BIRTHS, FETAL DEATHS (20 WEEKS OR MORE GESTATION), AND EXPECTED NUMBER OF CASES OF D O W N ' S SYNDROME, ANENCEPHALY, AND SPINA BIFIDA FOR WISCONSIN AND THE UNITED STATES (BASED ON 1978 LIVE BIRTHS)

Age of Mother
Wisconsin Under 15 . . 15-19 0-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40 & over . Total
United States.: Under 2 0 . . 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40 & over . Total . . . .

1978 Live Births
72 8,805 23,197 23,447 10,033 2,503
516 68,573
556,000 1,140,000 1,015,000
474,000 126,000 24,000 3,335,000

Fetal Deaths
3 107 198 193 116 48 14 679
5,316 9,641 9,377 5,646 2,311
660 32,951

Expected Down's Syndrome
0 1.5 4.7 7.0 4.7 4.0 3.5 25.4
97.3 230.3 299.4 220.9 201.0 160.9 1,209.8

Expected Anenceph
0 1.3 5.0 5.4 2.6 0.5
0 14.8
79.0 247.4 235.5 123.2
23.6 2.5 711.2

Expected Spina Bifida
0 4.0 10.6 9.5 3.9 1.2 0.3 29.5
252.4 522.1 412.1 183.0
60.5
14.4 1,444.5

SOURCES: Wisconsin births: Public Health Statistics--1978, Supplement. U. S. births: Statistical Abstract of the UnitedStates. Incidence of Down's syndrome, anencephaly, spina bifida: Taffe!. Congenital Anomalies and Birth Injuries Among Live Births: United States, 1973-74. Fetal death rates: Vital Statistics of the UnitedStates--1977, Volume II, Mortality, Part A.

habilitation or similar organizations Survey to derive an estimate for the per-

working with thedisabled students.

sonal consumption part of child-raising

Estimates of personal consumption costs. Theestimate weused wasthe dif-

expenditures were arrived at using a ference in personal consumption ex-

Consumer Expenditure Interview Sur- penditures between a two-person and a

vey (U. S. Department of Labor, 1978). three-person family. The amount came

Ideally, we wanted to use age-specific out to be $3,461 annually. This was the

personal consumption needs for re- personal consumption figure used from

tarded and physically disabled persons birth through the ageof 20, correspond-

not under institutional care. To our ing to the pre-school and school-age

knowledge, however, such data do not years. From age 21 through the endof

exist, nor do age-specific consumption life, or until institutionalization, we ap-

patterns or needs for a "normal" per- plied per capita personal consumption

son. We settled on an assumption that expenditures from the National Income

the consumption patterns of a noninsti- accounts on theassumption that this was

tutionalized retarded or disabled person the best estimate wecould usein viewof

would not be substantially different the diversity of situations our cohort of

from those of a "normal" person. We retarded anddisabled persons wouldac-

then used the Consumer Expenditure tually be in (U. S. Bureau of the Census,

362

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

1980). This amount was $7,735 annu- sive surveys cited in the Hagard and

ally. Carter Study (1976). Those for spina

Estimates for income of retarded bifida prevention are calculated based

workers used in the study came from the on survival rates given by Chamberlain

Wisconsin DHSS, Division of Voca- (1978).

tional Rehabilitation (DVR), and are To estimate the averted medical costs

the average earnings at closure, i.e., associated with spina bifida we used the

when DVR feels the person has been aforementioned studies by Angle et al.,

adequately trained and is now employ- (1977a, 19776) which found an average

able to some extent, helped to find a job duration of hospitalization of 129 days

and sent out into the world. The esti- with an average of 6.3 operative proce-

mates used for annual income for mild dures. The cost of these, plus the cost for

and moderate mental retardation are as an average of four annual clinic visits,

follows:

including laboratory and x-ray studies,

Mild retardation Moderate retardation

$5,891 spread over an eight-year period, is esti$5,233 mated at $21,140, exclusive of the cost

For the benefit calculation in the neural tube defect case, the income used was the median income for workers aged 25 or below and that for workers over age 25 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1980).
The figures for lost parental income are derived from median weekly wages of "women who maintain families." The derived estimate of these annual earnings is $10,572 (U. S. Bureau of the Cen-

of braces and outpatient medicines. This cost estimate is in 1977 dollars, and no discounting is applied for the eight-year period. We adjust their figure for inflation to bring the units up to 1980 dollars, comparable with the other cost and benefit estimates. To adjust for the time value, we will assume the cost to be spread evenly over the eight-year period.

sus, 1980). The data on labor force par- Let us now turn to the cost side of the

ticipation rates are from the Statistical study. To arrive at an estimate for the

Abstract of the UnitedStates (U.S. Bu- cost of making the program known to

reau of the Census, 1979,1980) and are the population it seeks to serve and the

averages (weighted by proportions of administration of the program, we used

married women with husband present, the analogy of another social program as

separated women and divorced women) similar as possible both in size and pur-

for the following three categories: No pose, and assumed that administration

children under age 18; children aged 6- and publicity costs of this program

17 only; and children under 6 years of would be a reasonable approximation to

age. The participation rates for these those for a program of amniocentesis.

three categories are 47 per cent, 60 per The main programs looked at were the

cent and 44 per cent, respectively. In Genetic Awareness Program (GAP)

calculating benefits we assumed a partic- and the Rubella Screening and Vaccina-

ipation rate of one-half these rates for tion Program (RSVP), both offered by

mothers of disabled children.

the Planned Parenthood Association of

The benefits for Down's syndrome prevention were calculated based on survival rates of people with Down's syndrome taken from two comprehen-

Wisconsin. The unit costs of these programs (per expected person served), as well as some other programs considered, were remarkably similar. We set-

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

363

tied on an estimate for administrative formed and on the battery of tests per-

and publicity costs of $4.77 per person formed on the fluid sample. After care-

served (Planned Parenthood Associa- ful consideration and much discussion

tion of Wisconsin, 1979).

we settled on an estimate of $200 to use

The cost for the amniocentesis proce- in our cost calculation.

dure itself, which includes ultrasound, The final piece of datum included in

drawing the sample, analyzing the fluid, the cost calculation is the cost of an

reporting and interpreting the results, abortion and its associated care to those

and some genetic counseling, came women who show positive test results.

from insurance data for the State of Wis- Our estimate for an abortion, done as an

consin (Wisconsin Blue Cross and Blue outpatient procedure, is $275 (Eng-

Shield) and from personal communica- strom, Burke).

tions with two physicians on staff at a Lastly, note that all data are ex-

hospital in the Greater Chicago area-- pressed in 1980 dollars. Adjustments

one a family practitioner, the other an were made to data from older sources to

obstetrician and gynecologist (Eng- assure uniformity of units.

strom, Burke). The cost of the amnio-

centesis procedure had a wide variation over the areas covered, from a low of

RESULTS

$121 up to $500, depending both on the Tables 6 and 7 present the results of

place where the procedure was per- the benefit-cost calculations for the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

TABLE6
N E T BENEFIT OF AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM--UNITED STATES

(1) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 40 and over

Expected Live Births

24,000

Expected Down's Syndrome

161

Expected Spina Bifida

14.4

Costs Benefits Net Benefits

$ 5,097,836 $25,743,004 $20,645,168

(2) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 35 and over

Expected Live Births

150,000

Expected Down's Syndrome

362

Expected Spina Bifida

75

Costs Benefits Net Benefits

$31,443,992 $60,145,381 $28,701,389

(3)

Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 30 and over

Expected Live Births

624,000

Expected Down's Syndrome

583

Expected Spina Bifida

258

Costs Benefits Net Benefits

$129,772,180 $104,102,850 -$25,669,330

364

Andreano and McColIum

Social Biology

TABLE7
N E T BENEFIT OF AMNIOCENTESIS PROGRAM--WISCONSIN

(1) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 40 and over

ExpectedLiveBirths

516

Expected Down's Syndrome

3.5

Expected Spina Bifida

.3

Costs Benefits NetBenefits

$109,573 $559,280 $449,707

(2) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 35 and over

Expected Live Births

3,019

Expected Down's Syndrome

7.5

Expected Spina Bifida

1.5

Costs Benefits NetBenefits

$633,371 $1,243,694
$610,323

(3) Amniocentesis offered to all pregnant women aged 30 and over

Expected Live Births

13,052

Expected Down's Syndrome

12.2

Expected Spina Bifida

5.4

Costs Benefits Net Benefits

$2,713,947 $2,179,296 -$534,651

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

United States as a whole and for the State of Wisconsin. We see that the break-even point of an amniocentesis program, in terms of total benefits and costs, would occur in the early 30's age group. Given the magnitude of the net benefits for extending the program to women aged 35 and over, and those for extending the program to women aged 30 and over, as well as the relevant birth and abnormality incidence rates, we speculate that the break-even point would occur about age 32. Note that the net benefit figure derived is for one year's operation of the program; hence it can be interpreted as annual benefit. These results presume that all of the women with positive test results will go through with termination of the pregnancy. If some proportion of women decide not to go through with the abortion,

of course, the net benefit calculation will be affected. The benefits will decrease by the proportion of women who decide against abortion. The costs will be reduced by $275 (our estimated cost of an abortion) for each woman declining the abortion. This will raise the break-even age of the program. At the level of offering amniocentesis to all pregnant women 35 and older, a 5 per cent rate of decline to go through with the abortion would reduce net benefits to $25,700,126. A 10 per cent rate of decline would reduce net benefits to $22,698,863. From these comparisons one can see that, unless the proportion of women declining abortions was large, say 40 per cent or more, the viability of the program would not be substantially affected.
These results compare favorably to

Vol. 30, No.4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

365

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

the few previous studies done. The break-even age is a bit lower in this study than some of the others, which is to be expected since we looked at benefits from averted Down's syndrome cases and averted neural tube defects, whereas others have focused primarily on Down's syndrome. Glass (1975) found that under no set of assumptions was cost less than benefit in the 35-59 year old group of mothers in the United Kingdom. Hagard and Carter (1976), also working in Great Britain, found a break-even point at about age 35. Hook (1979), using older data and some different assumptions, arrived at a breakeven age in the early 30's.
Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of our results. The figure shows the total benefit and total cost of extending an amniocentesis program to all pregnant women beyond certain ages. The horizontal axis gives the cutoff ages. For example, the total benefit of extending the program to all women at or beyond age 35 is about $60 million and the total cost is about $31 million. The curves cross at about age 32. This represents the program break-even age, or the point where total benefit equals total cost. The marginal break-even age, where total net benefit to society is at a maximum, occurs somewhere around age 36. The aforementioned study by Hook found a similar marginal breakeven age.
The significance of the marginal break-even point is that, up to this point, each additional woman entering the program adds to the total net benefit. Beyond the marginal breakeven point, i.e. as successively younger women are added to the program, each additional participant subtracts from the total net benefit. While the total net benefit is still positive, i.e. total benefits

outweigh total costs, it is decreasing. For each new participant the additional (or marginal) cost outweighs the additional (or marginal) benefit.
The excess benefit from older participants is, in effect, subsidizing the entry of younger women into the program. This is illustrated in Table 8. The "average" figures refer to the entire group included in the program; the "marginal" figures refer to the last group added to the program. For example, if the program is extended to all women aged 35 or over, the average annual benefit is $401. The average annual cost is $210. The marginal benefit, the benefits added when the 35-39 year old age group is included, is $273 per participant. The marginal cost is $209. In this case the marginal benefits and costs of the entire program are equal to the average benefits and costs for the last included age group, i.e. the average benefit and cost for the 35-39 year age group equals the marginal benefit and cost of the program offered to all women aged 35 or over. A finer age breakdown would show marginal benefit and marginal cost equal at the marginal break-even age.
A graph of total net benefit would start at zero, with no participants. It would increase and reach a maximum at the marginal break-even age (around age 36). It would then decrease and reach zero again at the program breakeven age (around 32), as younger women are successively added to the program. If the priority of policy makers is to maximize the benefit to society, the amniocentesis program should be offered to all women age 36 or over. If the priority is to extend the program to as many people as possible, the amniocentesis program should be offered to all women age 32 or over.

366
Millions of Dollars
200

Andreano and McColIum Total Costs

Social Biology

Total Benefits

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

30 25 20 15 Maternal age in years
FIGURE 1

10

Further, we claim that our estimates of net benefit will be conservative estimates. The reasons for this claim are threefold. First, as alluded to earlier, there are many congenital anomalies besides Down's syndrome and spina bifida

which, in specific cases, could be averted. In many cases, as a result of evidence from family history or previous pregnancies, other anomalies may be detected and the pregnancy terminated. To the extent that this occurs, net

Vol. 30, No.4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

367

Age Group
40 and over . . . 35 and over . . . 30 and over . . .

TABLE8
AVERAGE AND MARGINAL BENEFITS AND COSTS

Average Benefit
$1,073 401 167

Average Cost
$212 210 208

Average Net Benefit
$861 191 -14

Marginal Benefit
$1,073 273 93

Marginal Cost
$212 209 207

Marginal Net Benefit
$861 64
-114

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

benefit will be increased. The absolute number of cases would be relatively small but the amount of benefit would be relatively large for each abnormal birth averted.
Secondly, the benefits and costs measured in the study did not include intangible benefits and costs. These benefits and costs cannot be quantified but many can be signed as to the direction of their effect on net benefit. Table 9 presents the intangible benefits and costs along with what we believe is the probable direction of their effect. The major intangible effect, we believe, is the "relief from anxiety and reduction in uncertainty." Left out of Table 9 but also not

explicitly measured are the saved costs of home care for mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons. We were unable to find reliable data in this area, although some outpatient medical costs are included in the Nebraska study on developmentally disabled persons (Angle et al., 1977a, 19776). We expect this effect on net benefits to be positive but small relative to some others, such as institutional care. This, coupled with the information in Table 9, again leads us to conclude our net benefits are conservatively estimated.
Thirdly, some of our assumptions lead to conservative benefit estimates. In particular, our assumption on institu-

TABLE9
INTANGIBLE BENEFITS AND COSTS AND THE PROBABLE SIGN OF THEIR EFFECT ON NET BENEFIT

Intangible Benefits 1. Relief of anxiety and reduction in uncertainty 2. Benefit to a family of not having a retarded or disabled child 3. Better ability to prepare for the birth of child under fetal distress because of better mea-
sure of fetal maturity 4. Benefit from basic research and expanded knowledge due to further development of
amniocentesis 5. Benefit to society of a decrease in the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities, neural
tube defects and other congenital anomalies
Intangible Costs 1. Social cost of more women having children because of decreased risk of bearing (by
terminating the pregnancy) a genetically abnormal or developmentally disabled child 2. "Mental anguish" of an abortion from a false positive test 3. Possibility of parents "rejecting" an abnormal child allowed to be born as a result of a
false negative test 4. "Psychological"cost to those opposed to abortion from legitimized use of abortion with
counseling and family planning, probably resulting in an increased use of abortion

(+) (?) (+) (+)
(+)
(?)
(-) (-) (-)

368

Andreano and McCoIIum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

tionalization, that 10 per cent go to the ing the claim that we conservatively esti-

high level of care and the rest to the low mated net benefit. The omniscient ana-

level of care, we feel is a conservative as- lyst would arrive, we believe, at a lower

sumption. Our assumption of equal break-even age for the amniocentesis

earnings for a physically handicapped program.

person with normal intellect and a nonhandicapped person is likely to be an over-estimate which would lead to conservatively estimated benefits. Recall that almost half the survivors at age 5 in the physically handicapped cases were severely handicapped. We would expect the earnings of these people to be lower

In order to test the robustness of the net benefit statements, benefits and costs were calculated using several different assumptions. The major factor in the benefits calculation is institutional care for the Down's syndrome cohort. We calculated the benefits using extremes in institutional care assumptions

than the median, all other things equal. Other assumptions as well could lead to an understatement of benefits. In our literature survey, some author mentioned, in passing, a feeling that retarded and

to derive an upper bound and lower bound on the benefits calculation. We also had to vary the education and training assumptions to fit the institutional care. In the upper bound case, all insti-

especially physically handicapped persons might have higher morbidity rates than nonhandicapped persons. If this were the case, though we could not find definite data on this question, medical costs averted would be larger, thus further understating benefits of the amniocentesis program.

tutionalized persons are at the high level of care mentioned previously. All persons institutionalized during the education and training period, therefore, receive training at the institutional care facility while they are institutionalized. All other assumptions are the same as previously mentioned. In the lower

On the cost side, however, there is one area left out of our calculation that would lead to an understatement of costs. This istheareaoftimecostsofthe participants in the program, which would definitely add to the costs but, we feel, not enough to detract much from the net benefit. Time costs are a very difficultthing to estimate and would likely be very diverse for a large group of women.
A factor leading to a slight overestimate of costs is multiple births. Our estimate of the number of women offered an amniocentesis implicitly assumed single births. To the extent that pregnancies involve more than one fetus, fewer women will be offered an amniocentesis, thus lowering costs.
On balance, we feel justified in mak-

bound case, all institutionalized persons are assumed to be in skilled care nursing homes--the low level of care. Accordingly, for education and training, they are in the "trainable" category. Again, all other assumptions remain the same. The "mixed case" is the case originally presented in Tables 6 and 7. The total benefit calculations for these three sets of assumptions are displayed in Table 10. The end result--the total benefits calculation--does not change much, regardless of the institutional care assumption chosen. Comparing these benefit calculations to the cost figures shown in Table 6, the program still breaks even between age 30 and 35. The exact break-even point will vary depending on the assumption chosen. It will be lower for the high level of care

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

369

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

TABLE 10
TOTAL BENEFITS USING DIFFERENT ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT INSTITUTIONAL CARE, EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT--UNITED STATES

Age Group All ages 40+over 35+over 30 + over 25 + over

Assumption
All institutional care at low level ·Mixed levels of institutional care All institutional care at high level 50% employment of non-institutionalized persons
All institutional care at low level 'Mixed levels of institutional care All institutional care at high level 50% employment of non-institutionalized persons
All institutional care at low level ·Mixed levels of institutional care All institutional care at high level 50% employment of non-institutionalized persons
All institutional care at low level ·Mixed levels of institutional care All institutional care at high level 50% employment of non-institutionalized persons
All institutional care at low level ·Mixed levels of institutional care All institutional care at high level 50% employment of non-institutionalized persons

"Denotes theassumption used andpresented in theprimary analysis (see Table 6).

Total Benefits
$243,533,620 $264,140,273 $311,036,220 $279,925,272
$23,002,830 $25,743,004 $31,979,002 $26,115,307
$53,982,119 $60,145,381 $74,171,532 $61,395,740
$94,177,593 $104,102,850 $126,690,410 $107,450,010
$157,316,170 $172,340,300 $206,531,700 $180,123,210

(higher cost of institutionalization, halved. Employment is a much larger

therefore more benefit per affected factor in the case of spina bifida than in

birth averted) and higher for the low the Down's syndrome case, so benefits

level of care.

from averting spina bifida births would

Also displayed in Table 10 are the be expected to be more sensitive to

results of changing the assumption on changes in employment,

employment. We assumed that 50 per On the cost side of the analysis, the

cent of the noninstitutionalized cohort major expense is the cost of the amnio-

would be employed rather than 100 per centesis procedure. Aside from being a

cent. The results for total benefits do not major expense, under the program we

change substantially. The expected are examining, it is offered to all preg-

value or average benefit per Down's nant women. We examined extreme as-

syndrome birth averted changed less sumptions on the average cost of an am-

than 1 per cent when the employment niocentesis procedure to set upper and

assumption was changed to 50 per cent, lower bounds to the costs of the amnio-

The average benefit per spina bifida centesis program. The "low amniocen-

birth averted, however, increased by 18 tesis" assumption is that the average

per cent when this assumption was cost of the procedure is $121. In the

changed. Similar changes would be ex- "high amniocentesis" case, the average

pected if the level of income earned by cost of the procedure is assumed to be

the noninstitutionalized group were $400. The "medium amniocentesis"

370

Andreano and McColIum

Social Biology

case is the one assumed in derivingTables 6 and 7, namely an average cost of $200 per procedure. In each case, all other assumptions remain the same. The total cost calculations for these alternate assumptions are displayedinTable 11. There is a wide range of costs between the upper and lower bounds,the upper exceeding the lower by about a

factor of three. Comparing the total benefits derived from the "mixedlevels of care" assumption of Table 10 to the total costfiguresin Table 11, it is evident that the results are quite different depending on the cost assumption applied. Assuming a high cost of amniocentesis, the program breaks even slightly beyond age 35. With a low cost of amnio-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

TABLE11
TOTAL COSTS USING DIFFERENT ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT COST OFAMNIOCENTESIS PROCEDURE, ABORTION, AND ADMINISTRATION

AGE GROUP
All ages
40 + over
35 + over
30+over 25 +over

ASSUMPTIONS
Low amniocentesis 'Medium amniocentesis High amniocentesis Low abortion High abortion High administration Medium administration
Low amniocentesis *Medium amniocentesis High amniocentesis Low abortion High abortion High administration Medium administration
Low amniocentesis *Medium amniocentesis High amniocentesis Low abortion High abortion High administration Medium administration
Low amniocentesis 'Medium amniocentesis High amniocentesis Low abortion High abortion High administration Medium administration
Low amniocentesis 'Medium amniocentesis High amniocentesis Low abortion High abortion High administration Medium administration

·Denotes the assumptionsused and presented in the primary analysis (see Table 6).

TOTAL COST
$424,317,130 $690,385,260 $1,363,975,500 $690,318,900 $690,451,620 $741,679,150 $707,999,640
$3,149,696 $5,097,836 $10,029,836 $5,093,453 $5,102,218 $5,473,408 $5,226,808
$19,359,283 $31,443,992 $62,038,192 $31,433,072 $31,454,912 $33,773,740 $32,244,030
$79,795,433 $129,772,180 $256,295,580 $129,751,160 $129,793,190 $139,406,930 $133,080,760
$208,826,990 $339,729,520 $671,128,320 $339,690,710 $339,768,320 $364,965,540 $348,395,600

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

371

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

centesis, the program would break even below the age of 30--maybe around age 28.
In addition to varying the assumption on the cost of the amniocentesis procedure, Table 11 shows the total cost derived using alternative assumptions on abortion cost and program administration costs, other things being equal. The low abortion cost case assumes a cost of $250 per abortion; the high abortion case assumes a cost of $300per abortion. This reflects the range of abortion costs found in our collection of data. The assumption used in the earlier results was $275 per abortion. Table 11 indicates that varying this assumption did little to change the total cost calculation. It is a small range and it affects a relatively small number of women--only those found to be carrying an affected fetus.
The "high administration" cost case used an average cost of $20 per person served. The "medium administration" case assumed an average cost of $10 per person served. Again, all other assumptions remain in the same as the medium amniocentesis case used to derive earlier results. This change in our assumptions did little to change the total cost figures.
The upshot of this discussion of different assumptions is that the end results do not change very much. Even under the most unfavorable assumptions for benefits and cost (from the proamniocentesis program point of view), those of "low level institutional care" and "high amniocentesis procedure cost" the program will still break even around age 37.
IMPLICATIONS
Based on the results of this study, it would seemingly be in the interest of society to offer a program of amniocente-

sis to all pregnant women beyond the early 30's in age. The program could economically be extended to younger women who were at a high level of risk of bearing a genetically abnormal child due to a family history of genetic defects or some other circumstance. Such a program, we would imagine, would most likely be administered by a governmental agency. It could also feasibly be offered by the insurance industry.
A caveat to be issued here is that a benefit-cost study such as this one is only one aspect of a decision to go ahead with a program of amniocentesis such as the one examined here. There are several moral, ethical and legal issues that must be considered as well, not the least of which is the question of abortion. Other questions raised include: using amniocentesis and then abortion to terminate pregnancies for "trivial" reasons, such as a child of the "wrong sex," a broader issue of genetic management, the responsibility of the physician to provide and/or advise patients of the availability of such procedures as amniocentesis. These issues are discussed in the medical literature, and we feel their importance must temper any policy conclusions drawn from an analytical example such as this one.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the Biomedical Research Fund, Graduate School, University of Wisconsin-Madison, for research support. They are also indebted to Timothy Tyson, Susan Kidder, and Florence O'Donnell of the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services for assistance in locating data. The authors additionally benefitted from discussions with Barbara Wolfe, Michael Welsh, Michael Rothschild and Robert Haveman, as well as comments by Richard Osborne. The views expressed are solely those of the authors, as are any remaining errors.

372

Andreano and McCollum

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ANGLE, CAROL R., E.J. TREMBATH, and WIL-

aspects of health planning. North Hollard

LIAM L. STROND. 1977a. The Myelodysplasia and Hydrocephalus Program in Nebraska: A 15-year review ofcosts and benefits, Part I. Nebraska Med. J. (October), pp. 359361.

Publishing Co.
GOLDBUS, MITCHELL S., WILLIAM D. LOUGHMAN, CHARLES J. EPSTEIN, GIESELA HALBASCH, JOHN D. STEPHENS, and BRYAN
D. HALL. 1979.Prenatal genetic diagnosis

. 19776. TheMyelodysplasia and Hy- in 3000 amniocenteses. New England J.

drocephalus Program in Nebraska: A 15- Med. 300(4):157-163. January 25.

year review of costs and benefits, Part II. GRAMLICH, EDWARD M. 1981. Benefit-cost
Nebraska Med. J. (November), pp. 391- analysis of government programs. Prentice393. Hall.

BANTA, HENRY DAVID, and STEPHEN B. HAGARD, SPENCER, and FELICITY A. CARTER.
THACKER. 1979. Costs and benefits ofelec- 1976. Preventing the birth of infants with

tronic fetal monitoring: Areview of the literature, U.S. Dept. of Health, Education

Down's syndrome: A cost-benefit analysis. British Med. J. (March) 27:753-756.

and Welfare, Public Health Service, Office HOBBINS, JOHN C., ROGER FREEMAN, and JOHN

of Health Research, Statistics and Technol-

T. QUEENAN. 1979. Thefetal monitoringde-

ogy. DHEW Publication No. (PHS) 79- bate. Obstet. Gynedol. 54(1):103-109.

3245.

July.

BENNET, M.J., K. BLAU, R.D. JOHNSON, and HOOK, ERNEST B. 1979. Genetic counseling and

G.V.P. CHAMBERLAIN. 1978. Some prob-

prenatal cytogenetic services: Policy impli-

lems of alphafetoprotein screening. The

cations anddetailed cost-benefit analysesof

Lancet 2(8013):1296-1297. December 16.

programs for theprevention of Down's syn-

BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL. 1978. Hazards of

drome. In Ian H. Porter and Ernest B.

amniocentesis. Vol.2,No. 6153, pp. 1661- Hook (eds.), Service and education inmedi-

1662. December 16.

cal genetics. Academic Press, New York.

BURKE, JOSEPH, M.D. Personal communica- LANCET, THE. 1979. The risk ofamniocentesis. tion. Vol. 2,No. 8103,pp. 1287-1288. December

CHAMBERLAIN, JOCELYN. 1978. Human benefits

16.

and costs of a national screening pro- LIEBER, ERNEST, PALOMA SHAH, and MARILYN gramme forneural-tube defects. The Lan- HACK. 1978. Hazards of amniocentesis: An

cet 2(8013):1293-1296. December 16.

unidentifiable fragment. Clin. genet.

CONLEY, R., and A. MILUNSKY. 1975. The eco-

14(3):130-132. September.

nomics ofprenatal genetic diagnosis. In A. LOWE, CHARLES V., DUANE ALEXANDER,DO-

Milunsky (ed.), The prevention of genetic disease and mental retardation.W.B.

LORES BRYLA, and DANIEL SEIGEL. 1978.
The safety and accuracy of mid-trimester

Saunders Co.

amniocentesis. U.S.Dept. Health, Educa-

ELLIOT, JOHN. 1979. Abortion for "wrong" fetal sex: An ethical-legal dilemma. J. Amer.

tion and Welfare, Public Health Service, National Institute ofHealth, National Insti-

Med. Assoc. 242(14):1455-1456. October

tute of Child Health and Development.

5. DHRE Publication No. (NIH) 78-190.

ENGSTROM, C. DAVID, M.D. Personal com- MAGUIRE, PHILIP J. 1976. Amniocentesis: a

munication.

brief discussion. J. Oklahoma State Med.

ETZIONI, AMITAI. 1976. Issues of public policy

Assoc. 69(10):425-428. October.

in theU.S.A. raised byamniocentesis. J. MILUNSKY, AUBREY (ed.). 1975. The preven-

Med. Ethics. 2(1):8-11. March.

tion of genetic disease and mental retarda-

FLETCHER, JOHN C. 1979. Sounding board--

tion. W. B. SaundersCo.

ethics andamniocentesis for fetal sex identi- NEVIN, NORMAN C. 1982. Genetic disorders.

fication. New England J. Med.

Clinics Obstet. Gynecol. 9(1):3-27. April.

301(10):550-553. September 6.

OLSON, RONALD, M.D. Personal communica-

FUCHS, FRITZ, and LARS L. CEDERQUIST. 1978.
Use of amniotic fluid cells inprenatal diagnosis. In D . V . I . Fairweather and T.K.A.B. Eskes (eds). Amniotic fluid, research and clinical application. Elsevier/

tion
PERNOLL, MARTIN L., GERALD PRESCOTT,
FREDERICK HECHT, and CATHERING L.
OLSON. 1974.Prenatal diagnosis: practice, pitfalls and progress. Obstet. Gynecol.

North Hollard Biometical Press.

44(5):773-783. November.

GLASS, N. 1975. Economic aspects of the pre- PLANNED PARENTHOOD ASSOCIATION OF WISCON-

vention of Down's syndrome. In N.T.J.

SIN, INC. 1980.1980-81 application for Title

Bailey and M. Thompson (eds.), Systems

V Social Security Act maternal andchild

Vol. 30, No. 4

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Amniocentesis

373

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

health funds and general program revenue STITUTE OF HEALTH. 1979. Antenatal diag-

family planning funds, volumes I-IV. Mil- nosis. NIHpublication no. 79-1973.

waukee, Wisconsin.

U.S. DEPT. OF HEALTH, EDUCATION AND WEL-

SIMPSON, NANCY E., L. DALLAIRE, J.R.

FARE, OFFICE OF EDUCATION. 1979. Progress

MILLER, L. SIMINOVICH, J.L. HAMERTON,
JANET MILLER and CAROL MCKEEN. 1976.
Prenatal diagnosis of genetic disease in Can-

toward a free appropriate public education, A report to the Congress on the implementation ofPublic Law94-142: the Education

ada: Report of a collaborative study. of all Handicapped Children Act. Washing-

Canad. Med. Assoc. J. 115:739-746. Octo- ton, D.C.

ber 23.

U.S. DEPT. OFLABOR, BUREAU OF LABOR STATIS-

SOUTHERN MEDICAL JOURNAL. 1978. The case

TICS. 1978. Consumer expenditure interview

against fetal monitoring. Vol. 71,No. 9, pp. survey, 1972-1973: Annual expenditures

1058-1061. September.

and sources of income cross-classified by

STEIN, ZENA, MERVYN SUSSER, and ANDREA V.

family characteristics. Bulletin 1985(NTIS

AUTTERMAN. 1973. Screening programme Publication No. PB275-418).

for prevention of Down's syndrome. The WISCONSIN BLUE CROSS ANDBLUE SHIELD. Per-

Lancet, pp.305-310. February 10.

sonal communications.

TAFFEL, SELMA. 1978. Congenital anomalies WISCONSIN DEPT. OF HEALTH ANDSOCIAL SERV-

and birth injuries among live births: United ICES. Division ofHealth, Bureau of Health

States, 1973-1974. Vital and health statis- Care Financing. Madison, Wisconsin. Un-

tics: Series 21 no. 31. U.S. Dept. Health, published data.

Education and Welfare, Public Health Serv-

. Division ofHealth, Bureau of Health

ice, DHEW Publication No. (PHS) 79- Statistics. 1978. Public health statistics--

1909. 1978, Supplement. Madison, Wisconsin.

TURNBULL, A. C., D. V. I. FAIRWEATHER, B.M.

. Division of Policy andBudget, Bureau

Hibbard, P . E .Polani, H. Reiss,L . B .

of the Budget, Madison, Madison, Wiscon-

STRANG, I. SUTHERLAND, D . ROTHMAN, and

sin. Unpublished data.

H. BANTOCK. 1978. An assessment of the

. Division of Vocational Rehabilitation,

hazards of amniocentesis: Report of the Bureau of Planning, Evaluation and Pro-

M. R.C. working party on amniocentesis. gram Development. Madison, Wisconsin.

Brit. J. Obstetrics Gynecol., Vol. 85, Suppl. Unpublished date.

No. 2.

WISCONSIN STATE JOURNAL. 1981. Baby put

U. S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS. 1979. Statistical

back in womb after surgery. November 16:

abstract of the United States 1979. Govern- Section 4, page 4, Madison, Wisconsin.

ment Printing Office, Washington, D. C. YEARBOOK OF SPECIAL EDUCATION, 1977-1978.

U.S. DEPT. OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WEL-

1977. Marquis Academic Media, Marquis

FARE, PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE, NATIONAL IN-

Who's Who, Inc. Chicago.

