Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Attitudes toward control and elimination of genetic defects
C. R. Margolin
To cite this article: C. R. Margolin (1978) Attitudes toward control and elimination of genetic defects, Social Biology, 25:1, 33-37, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988316 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988316
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Attitudes Toward Control and Elimination of Genetic Defects

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

C. R. Margolin
New College San Jose State University San Jose, California
ABSTRACT: In a series of realistic examples, university students displayed support for interference with natural processes to prevent the births of defective children. The majority felt that an organism became a person before birth, yet that it was not murder to end such a life under specific circumstances. Women, older respondents, and students not currently enrolled in genetics classes showed more willingness to interfere more drastically in selected situations than men, younger respondents, and genetics students. However, the majority of the sample consistently opposed taking chances on producing children with genetic or birth defects.

Concern is mounting over the role of public opinion and governmental control in the manipulation of genetic characteristics. Sophisticated laboratory techniques like amniocentesis and biochemical tests now permit the detection of abnormalities in unborn fetuses. Coupled with these new diagnostic tools, methods for avoiding the births of children with possible genetic defects are becoming more reliable and accessible: birth control, sterilization, abortion, artificial insemination, implantation of eggs fertilized outside the womb.
While some researchers stress the value of genetic and environmental diversity (White, 1972; Davis, 1970), the scientific community continues to study the elimination of defects through genetic manipulation with the "humane goal of . . . relieving human misery" (Kass, 1971, p. 784).
Weekly news magazines publish reports of current scientific discoveries, Congressional committees hold hearings to ascertain professional opinions, and scientific groups meet to set guidelines. But the

opinions of the lay public are largely unknown, even while Congressional leaders like Senator Kennedy and radical groups, such as Science for the People, are calling for increased public involvement in the determination of needs and policies of future research (Maugh, 1976; Walsh, 1976; Culliton, 1976; Newsweek, Jan. 12, 1976).
How do people feel about the uses of the new technology in manipulating the genetic make-up of the population? A Harris poll in 1969 found that a majority of the public (58 per cent) favored using genetic engineering to correct defects in a particular fetus, but only 21 per cent wanted to use it to improve the race. Women favored the use of the new technology more than did men (Fletcher, 1974). In 1971, a Gallup poll showed that 69 per cent of the public felt that a young couple should obtain "professional information and guidance" before having children (Gallup, 1972).
If faced with crucial situations in which the techniques of genetic control presented realistic alternatives, how would a wellinformed person respond? How do people

33

34

Margolin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

feel about making decisions about their own reproductive lives and those of others? What about the possibilities of government involvement in these decisions? The answers to these questions are important to scientific researchers and legislators who will determine the applications of current and future discoveries.
The current study utilized a role-playing model for a questionnaire to ascertain attitudes about difficult decisions concerning the control and elimination of genetic defects. Upper-division liberal arts university students, who represent a generally well-informed segment of the lay population likely to become future policy makers, were given the questionnaire and asked to place themselves in situations which called for decisions about reproduction. In addition, students enrolled in genetics classes were surveyed to determine if current involvement in the area was associated with different opinions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLE
Approximately 550 questionnaires were distributed in upper-division science (nongenetics), social science, humanities, and genetics classes at San Jose State University. The final sample consisted of 291 respondents who voluntarily returned the questionnaire: 74 in science, 70 in social science, 64 in humanities, and 83 in genetics. There were 141 males and ISO females, ranging in age from 18 to 66 (median, 23). Responses were analyzed in terms of the entire sample and the following subgroups: male/female, older (over 23)/younger (18 to 23), and genetics/ general (science, social science, humanities).1 The median age of each subgroup was the same.
1 The various school groups were included to assure a good sampling of a well-informed lay popula-

QUESTIONNAIRE
Fourteen situations involving the definition of life and the control and elimination of genetic defects were proposed.2 The respondent was asked to choose one of the various alternative actions as if he/she were a specific person involved in the situation. The problems revolved around feelings about ending life under various circumstances, interfering with "natural" processes, limiting births by applying current technologies, and making decisions on the individual,and governmental level. The rights of parents and their offspring and those of the government, researchers, and medical authorities were questioned. For example, Question 4 read as follows:
Through blood tests, you have discovered that you and your mate both carry the recessive gene for Tay-Sachs disease. This disease results in complete deterioration of the nervous system, and the victims (who have a double recessive) do not survive infancy. If you have a child, there is a 25% chance that it will have Tay-Sachs, 50% that it will be a carrier of one recessive gene (like you and your mate) and 25% that it will be normal. You should:
a. not have any children and have yourself sterilized.
b. not have any children, use birth control, and abort all conceptuses.
c. choose artificial insemination by sperm from a noncarrier (the probability is 50% that an offspring will carry the deleterious recessive gene).
d. have amniocentesis done after 4 months of pregnancy and abort any with the disease.
e. take chances, have children, and hope for the best.
In every question, there was at least one alternative solution which interfered with
tion rather than to assess differences. Many of the respondents in each group were majors in another group, so that the entire sample could be characterized as liberal arts. The genetics/general dichotomy refers only to the specialized emphasis of one of the classes in which one of the groups was currently enrolled.
2 A complete questionnaire is available on request.

Vol. 25, No. 1

Genetic Defects

35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

natural processes by eliminating the possibility of ever bearing biological children or by allowing some flexibility (amniocentesis, abortion, artificial insemination, birth control, infanticide). There was also one alternative which rejected controls completely. Respondents were asked to choose only one alternative in each case. Technical terms were denned in a glossary at the end of the questionnaire.
ANALYSIS
To analyze differences between groups on the questionnaire as a whole, the alternative actions in each situation were ranked and assigned a score. The lowest score represented having one's own biological children with a minimum of control ("e" in the above example). The highest score called for irreversible action determined by an outsider (e.g., "your mate should be sterilized" or "let it [a seriously deformed newborn] die"). In this framework, amniocentesis ranks lower than birth control with abortion of all conceptuses because the former still allows affected individuals to have their own biological children, even though the technique seems to involve more interference with natural processes. This rank score was used in order to compute a total score for each respondent and the questionnaire as a whole and for certain groups of items. T-tests on mean scores were used to analyze group differences on rankings. The bulk of the data (individual questions), however, were analyzed by chi-squares for frequency distributions.
The study has been summarized by grouping questions and reporting the significant results of these groupings in the following section. All reported differences based on sex, age, or current class enrollment (genetics/general) are statistically significant, with a probability of less than 0.0S of occurring by chance.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The overriding result of this study was that a majority of a generally welleducated informed sample of the lay population favors using the techniques of genetic and population control to prevent the births of defective persons, but feels that specific decisions should be made by individual prospective parents rather than government officials. Four groups of questions dealt with different aspects of these perceptions and attitudes: definitions of life and murder, role of prospective parents, role of professionals, and role of the government.
In response to three questions about the beginning of personhood and the definition of murder, the most frequent choice (37 per cent) was that the respondent began to exist as a person at birth. The majority (56 per cent) felt that ending the life of this "person" would be murder at birth (but not earlier), even though many of them had chosen earlier times for the beginning of personhood (23 per cent choosing time of fertilization). For a severely deformed organism, however, the majority (51 per cent) felt that at no point up through birth was one guilty of murder. Overall, women and older students chose significantly later times than men and younger students. Genetics students chose later times for the deformed organism.
Six questions asked people to make decisions about reproduction if they were victims or carriers of serious genetic or birth defects (Tay-Sachs disease, thalassemia major, hemophilia, Down's syndrome, and multiple birth defects). Table 1 summarizes the main responses to these questions. A majority of the respondents chose alternatives to simply taking a chance on having a defective child (62 per cent for hemophilia to 93 per cent for

36

Margolin

Social Biology

TABLE 1
PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS FAVORING VARIOUS ALTERNATIVES IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION OF SPECIFIC GENETIC OR CONGENITAL DEFECTS

DEFECTS AND PERSON INVOLVED

Sterilize

Abort All Conceptuses

Tay-Sachs carriers*! Thalassemia major
carriers*^ Hemophilia female carriert Hemophilia male victim*t Birth defects victim* Down's syndrome fetus*

31
25 37 27 54 N.A.

6
7 12
7 15 N.A.

* Older students favored the stronger interventions. t General (nongenetics) students favored thestronger interventions. $ Women favored thestronger interventions.

ALTERNATIVES
Abort Affected Conceptuses
54
52 24 14
N.A.
81

Artificially Inseminate
2 4 12 13
N.A.

DoNot Interfere
9 20 36 14 18

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Tay-Sachs), but they favored different social workers should recommend (43 per

specific actions depending onthe possible cent) orrequire (25 per cent) genetic coun-

amelioration of the condition by modern seling but not specific actions for their

medicine andwhether thepotential child clients. Preference was shown for having

would be a victim or carrier. Unknown professionals donate time to a free clinic

causes ofbirth defects seemed tomotivate for abortions and genetic counseling (76

the most drastic intervention showing the per cent) rather than to one treating vic-

only majority response for sterilization. tims of defects, with the genetics students

The "take chances" alternative received a expressing an even stronger preference (83

minority response inevery case. However, per cent).

36 per cent did choose it when only The situation posed by the last question

hemophilia carriers could be produced. placed the respondent on a Presidential

When differences did occur between advisory panel "making recommendations

groups, women, older respondents, and for alleviating a disastrous overpopulation

nongenetics students chose more drastic problem." Table 2 summarizes theseven

interventions significantly more often. areas in which the sample had tofavor or

Four questions asked respondents to oppose legislation. Amajority ofthe sam-

identify with professionals, i.e., doctors

and social workers, who might bein-

TABLE 2

volved in making decisions about people PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS FAVORING AND

with genetic defects. The majority (52 per cent) felt that doctors should directly

OPPOSING LEGISLATION ON VARIOUS AREAS OF POPULATION CONTROL

counsel potential victims of Huntington's chorea, rather than leaving it to the af-

Areas

No Favor Oppose Response

fected parent. However, an even larger percentage (63 percent) felt that a doctor should consult the parents of a severely deformed newborn rather than acting unilaterally to let it live or die. Younger students favored this consultation process even more strongly. Respondents felt that

Requirements for conceptions
Limitson
conceptions Amniocentesis Abortion
Birth control Sterilization Information
dissemination

44 0 54.6 1.4

53.6 44.7 79.0 19.9 77.0 22.3 61.9 375 52.2 47,1

1.7 10 07 07 07

88.3 8.9 2.7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 1

Genetic Defects

37

pie did favor legislation in all areas except (2.8 men to 2.2 women). There were no

that of setting requirements for concep- significant differences among the three

tion. Specific proposals, however, were schools where students were not enrolled

only favored if they increased rather than in genetics classes. Where significant dif-

decreased options for individuals, for ex- ferences did occur between groups,

ample, if they provided free services women andolder respondents were consis-

rather than required controls. Genetics tently more in favor of drastic irreversible

students were more hesitant than the rest actions (like sterilization). Genetics stu-

of the sample about favoring the dissemi- dents, on the other hand, with their cur-

nation of information by holding public rent involvement in the field were more

meetings or requiring counseling for pros- hesitant than the rest of the sample touse

pective parents.

these irreversible techniques.

Comparing the various groups on their

total scores for the whole questionnaire,

women, older respondents, and students

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

not currently enrolled in genetics classes scored significantly higher, favoring

The author wishes to thank the following San Jose State University faculty for their help

stronger interventions overall. Men made on the questionnaire, the participation of their

significantly more choices which rejected interference or "took chances" thanwom-

students, and the critical reading of the manuscript: Jean Beard, Eugene Bernardini, Catharine Blecki, Terry Christiansen, Peter

en, although the mean number of times Collins, Harold DeBey, Nancy Geilhufe,

such a choice was made (2.5 out of a pos-

Robert Gliner, Richard Ingraham, Kenneth MacKay, Marshall Maddock, Paul Oler,

sible 21 times for the entire sample) was Beata Panagopoulos, Richard Smith, Robert

extremely low and the difference small Thamm, and Robert Wilson.

REFERENCES

CULLITON, BARBARA J. 1976. Genetic screening: States may be writing the wrong kind of laws. Science 191:926-929.
DAVIS, BERNARD D. 1970. Prospects for genetic intervention in man. Science 170:1279-1283.
FLETCHER, JOSEPH. 1974. The ethics of genetic control. Anchor Press, Garden City, New York.
GALLUP, GEORGE H. 1972. The Gallup Poll. Vol. 3. 1959-1971. Random House, New York.
KASS, LEON R. 1971. The new biology: What price for relieving man's estate? Science 174:779-788.

MAUGH, THOMAS H., II. 1976. NSF: Trying to cope with Congressional pressure for public participation. Science 191:274.
NEWSWEEK. Politics and genes. Jan. 12, 1976. Newsweek 88(2):50-52.
WALSH, JOHN. 1976.Science for the people: Comes the evolution. Science 191:1033-1035.
WHITE, ELLIOTT S. 1972. Genetic diversity and political life: Towards a population-interaction paradigm. J. Polit. 34(4):1203-1242.

