Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
New mating boundaries in education
Bruce K. Eckland
To cite this article: Bruce K. Eckland (1970) New mating boundaries in education, Social Biology, 17:4, 269-277, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987884 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987884
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 8 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

New Mating Boundaries in Education

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Bruce K. Eckland
Department of Sociology University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Mate selection has been governed at var- In the first model, man is viewed as a

ious times by geography, culture, and the reasoning animal who regularly weighs the

predispositions of different peoples. Intra- consequences of his actions and the actions

dition isolates, the intrabreeding modality of others in a calculated manner. He is es-

of thegroup was largely influenced by con- sentially motivated by a system of rewards

sanguinity, or themanner in which one in- (incentives) and punishment (sanctions).

dividual was related to another. If marriage Whom he chooses to marry is largely deter-

partners tended to resemble each other in mined by utility and reason.

some physical sense, it probably had more to The rational-utilitarian model is quite

do with inbreeding and the unilineal kinship compelling when applied to certain formsof

systems of such societies than to any form mate selection. It may be used, forexample,

of selection for phenotypic traits.

to explain specific instances of social hyper-

In the absence of consanguineous mar- gamy in inter-caste marriages in India and

riages in most Western societies, sociolo- inter-racial marriages in America. Rational

gists, demographers, population geneticists, principles of supply and demand, or exanthropologists, and others have turned a change and reciprocity, sometimes are the good part of their attention to assortative dominant factors in who mates with whom.

mating for character-specific traits. I t is In the normative model, onthe other hand,

conceivable that assortative mating may be the primary emphasis is upon the commit-

a more important factor in affecting the ge- ment to moral values--what people are ex-

netic structure of future populations than pected to do. Caste, racial, and, to some

inbreeding was in the past, depending upon extent, religious endogamy undoubtedly are

just how high the rates of assortative mating eventually become forsome highly heritable phenotypes, like intelligence.
Most sociocultural theories ofmate selec-

due largely to moral prescriptions or proscriptions. Like incest, the "taboos" are so deeply internalized that the very thought of violating them seldom comes to mind.

tion tend to explain assortative mating from To a lesser degree, a similar commitment

the perspective of one of three models of to cultural values operates to explain class

human behavior:

endogamy, as well as the tentative commit-

1. Rational-utilitarian model. 2. Normative model. 3. Opportunity model.

ment of some individuals to the simple folkways of each culture regarding such norms as gentlemen prefer blondes, and women

269

270

Eckland

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

should marry someone taller and older than females as males in the entering classes of

themselves (but not too tall and not too most state universities. Yet, and probably

old). some feminists would agree, it is not entirely

The opportunity model says nothing di- clear what value a college diploma is to most

rectly about human motivation; rather it women, other than attracting an eligible

suggests that some of the central determi- male and unrestricted passage thru marriage

nants of human behavior are well outside to middle-class respectability.

the control of specific individuals. They lie There are two important aspects to be

instead in the opportunity structure, or noted about the growth of mass education

one's access to the means for achieving cer- over the past sixty years in America: (1) the

tain ends.

tendency to hold everyone in the academic

This implies, in the case of mate selection, contest well into early adulthood, a time

an array of ecological and social factors that when people are normally considering mar-

place individuals into different positions in riage; and (2) the tendency to sort and

relation to their opportunity to be consid- screen students as they progress through the

ered as potential mates. For example, pat- educational system on the basis of ability,

terns of residential and school segregation providing numerous "check points" and as

apparently contribute substantially to ra- many options or second chances as practical.

cial, class, and religious endogamy in the In 1910, only about 12% of all persons

United States, quite independent of the age 14 to 17 were enrolled in high school

motives of the people involved.

(Folger and Nam, 1967). Considering the

The remainder of this paper is devoted fact that the median age at first marriage

to an application of the structural opportu- in 1910 was 25 for males and 22 for females

nity model to educational endogamy and as- (Winch, 1963), it is highly improbable that

sortative mating for intelligence. We contend education was involved in any significant

that positive assortative mating for intelli- way in mate selection then. However, by

gence may be almost totally unrelated to per- 1940 the proportion of persons age 14 to 17

sonal preferenceor choice.Rather, it appears enrolled in high school had risen to about

that marriage partners tend to resemble 67% and presently is over 80%.

each other in intelligencemainly because they The more recent rise in enrollments in ham both been processed through the same higher education is almost as phenomenal

educational system--a system which places and seems to be following a similar growth

individuals into different educational niches rate. Less than 15% of the 18 to 21 age

basedon intelligence and these niches, in turn, group were attending college in 1940. By

lend tofunction as marriage markets.

1970, this proportion is expected to have

In an open society that values individual risen to about 50%. At the same time, the

freedom of choice in marriage, education median age at first marriage has declined

probably is a better predictor of who mates to about 23 for males and 20 for females.

with whom than even social class or resi- As a result, marriage today tends to closely

dential propinquity. I suspect that if our coincide with the cessation of schooling.

schools and colleges did not function as mar- We are implying here that schools and

riage markets, we would be hard pressed to colleges function as marriage markets in

explain the college-going rates of most wom- the direct sense that marriages frequently

en in this country. The number of women at- are contracted among schoolmates. Educa-

tending colleges for the first time has been tion, however, is involved in mate selection

steadily rising over the past generation. In in other ways, too. For one thing, the

fact, there now appear to be nearly as many amount and kind of education people receive

Vol. 17, No. 4

Mating and Education

271

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

tend to place them into relatively homogeneous social settings (at work, at home, at play) which severely reduce the chances of persons with very dissimilar educational backgrounds coming into close contact. For another, educational attainment seems to presume, especially among college graduates, the acquisition of knowledge and an appreciation of culture (call it "sophistication") which probably tend to be desired characteristics for some people in choosing a wife or husband. Thus, even given the opportunity to marry a college graduate, a high-school dropout might find such a situation faintly uncomfortable.
Let us turn now to our second point regarding the increase in mass education. Over the past twenty to thirty years, there has been a silent revolution in our schools and colleges in the development of testing programs and other mechanisms designed to choose those individuals who will be permitted to enter a particular educational institution or a particular program within an institution. While its functions are many, including the self-aggrandizement of some of our most highly selective colleges and private schools, educational selection has developed partly in response to the growth of higher education which, in turn, has required a fundamental change in the character of public secondary education. Instead of preparing the vast majority of their students for terminal diplomas, as they once did, our high schools now are primarily, it seems, in business to prepare students for college and secondarily in business to find satisfactory alternatives for those who are not college-bound.
Educational selection, however, occurs at numerous points throughout the entire system, beginning in the primary grades and continuing through college and into graduate school. To a large extent, the process involves the routine administration of standardized tests. In the early years, IQ tests are most common. Later, as it becomes

more important to measure what a student has learned rather than his potential for learning, aptitude and achievement tests are most widely used. The result is that, except for the lowest socioeconomic quarter of the population, the far majority of the students today of both sexes in the top quarter of ability enter college after high school (Flanagan and Cooley, 1966). Even in the lowest socioeconomic quarter, over half of the men and a third of the women in the top ability quarter go on to college.
In the remainder of the paper we will trace the most critical points in the educational process when such decisions are made, sometimes irrevocably. In doing so, we will note any major sex differences involved in the process, since the proposition that assortative mating for intelligence is primarily a reflection of educational endogamy and selection depends upon the degree to which the system operates in basically the same manner for both males and females.
PRESCHOOLS AND ELEMENTARY EDUCATION
Over the past decade, preschool (compensatory education) programs have been developed in many American communities to prepare culturally deprived children for the rigors of formal education. IQ tests are routinely administered, sometimes ostensibly for program evaluation, but perhaps more frequently to assess each child's learning potential in order to provide individualized instruction or to decide his readiness to enter a particular educational program.
Actual "grouping," the assigning of students to different groups within the same classroom or to different sections of the same course according to ability, usually begins early in the primary grades. Initial assignments, such as to reading groups, generally are based on the results of the school's testing program. Children later may be moved to "faster" or "slower" sections depending on their performance in the group

272

Eckland

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

or depending on changes in test scores. Although large jumps in scores in either direction between testing periods are rare, IQ tests nevertheless tend to be somewhat unreliable or unstable before a child reaches about age 8 or 9.
Thus, educational selection proceeds very slowly in the primary grades. An attempt is made to bring all students up to a minimal level of performance. Of course, some students will reach this level sooner than others. Yet, rather than allowing these students, that is the "fast" ones, to move more rapidly through the program and promoting them into the next grade ahead of their peers, in most cases they either are simply given some extra homework or are just ignored.
The new educational technology, however, may change all of this in the next couple of generations. Teaching machines mean individualized instruction and, at least in theory, there is no upper limit on individual performance that machines cannot be programmed to tolerate.
SECONDARY EDUCATION
The transition from the primary or elementary grades to secondary education is not firmly fixed in the United States, although the dominant patterns involve either an 8-4 or 6-3-3 system. Homogeneous ability grouping almost invariably expands as students move into junior and senior high, perhaps only because a larger number of students are enrolled together in the same grade.
During this period, school-wide testbg programs also are used to enable teachers to guide students in their decisions about the school curriculum. Course options ("electives") usually are available by the time a student reaches junior or senior high. The choice of electives sometimes will decide whether or not he eventually will enter a college-preparatory program.
Going to high school, however, does not

generally involve a decision on the part of parents and students because compulsory education laws require children to stay in school in most states until their fifteenth birthday. If a student has progressed normally, he would already have reached the 10th grade at this age.
Similarly, a decision is seldom made regarding where to send a child to high school. In most small towns and cities in the United States, one senior high school serves the entire community. These generally are "comprehensive" high schools, meaning that they try to accommodate the diverse interests of a heterogeneous student body.
Although "busing" tends to break the pattern, the "neighborhood" school is most commonly found in our large urban centers and suburbs. Here, intraschool differences give way to interschool differences, which are important to consider from the standpoint of social class and racial differentials but which usually do not directly involve educational decisions either by the school or by the student and his parents.
There are two general exceptions where standardized measures of ability are routinely used for permitting students to attend a particular high school. One of these involves the special preparatory schools for "gifted" students found in some of our large urban public school systems, like Bronx High and Hunter High in New York City. Students who rank in the 99th percentile on standardized tests are admitted from a population base which cuts across neighborhood school boundaries.
The second exception is the standardized tests that have become an important part of the admissions process of many private secondary schools. Some of the most prestigious independent schools, like Exeter and Andover in New England, apparently depend as much (perhaps more) on the past performance and test scores of applicants than on who their parents happen to be. Some of these schools, in fact, actively

Vol. 17, No. 4

Mating and Education

273

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

recruit and sponsor bright students from homes of low socioeconomic status. Thus, where some students go to high school may very well rest almost entirely upon their academic credentials.
During the high-school years, a fairly large majority of America's youth are placed into separate "tracks" or curricula. Among the programs offered, the central distinction tends to be between the college preparatory program andall others--whether vocational, general, commercial, or agricultural. Although it is possible for students in nonpreparatory programs to go to college, most do not. Consequently, being in the "right" track is an important matter. I t also is related to ability.
In one recent study of high-school graduates, path coefficients of 0.36 for males and 0.38 for females were found between academic aptitude and curriculum, controlling for social class (Warren, unpublished). In the same study, the path coefficients between social class and curriculum, with ability controlled, were 0.13 and 0.27 for males and females, respectively.
One reason for the somewhat closer association between ability and curriculum decisions than between social class and curriculum is that it is one of the primary duties of the school's guidance counselor to help students to choose courses in light of their own academic record and test performance. A relatively newmember of the professional staff at most schools, the counselor's influence is very great and frequently outweighs that of the students' parents (Circourel and Kitsuse, 1963).
At least in terms of its irrevocability, probably the most critical decision during the high school years involves leaving school after it is permissible to do so and before graduating. Students who drop out seldom come back. Although the rates vary considerably from onestate to another, about 10% of all tenth grade students never receive a high-school diploma. Moreover, the dropout

rate is about three times higher among students in the lower than in the upper third of ability (Stice and Ekstrom, 1964).
A most striking piece of evidence to demonstrate the strong correlation between school attrition and intelligence was recently reported by Folger and Nam in their analysis of some of the 1960 census data. They estimated that about 98% of the children with above-average IQscompared with 6 1 % of those with below-average IQs continue in school to the senior year (Folger and Nam, 1967).
COLLEGE
Up to this point only minor differences appear between the sexes in the educational selection process. However, after high school the situation changes--both in the proportion of males and females who continue on and thepart that ability plays in theprocess.
The general association between ability and college enrollment is shown in Table 1. It is interesting here to note that intelligence apparently is as good if not a better predictor of who goes to college than is class standing, which is based on high-school grades.
Moreover, who goes to college depends about as much upon intelligence as it does upon socioeconomic status, although there are some sex differences. For males, intelligence clearly outweighs family background; whereas for females, the reports are conflicting (Sewell and Shah, 1967;Schoenfeldt, 1968).
TABLE 1
PERCENTAGE OFHIGH-SCHOOL GRADUATES ENROLLED IN COLLEGE, BY INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT AND SCHOLASTIC STANDING IN HIGH SCHOOL

Quartile
Top Second Third

,

Intelligence Quotient
67.2 38.2 24.8 IS.5

Scholastic Standing
66.6 43.6 33.6 19.2

SOUECE: Folger and Nam, 1967, p . 6 1 .

274

Eckland

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

For many students, the most important decision of their educational career is not whether to go to college, but where to go to college. There are numerous qualitative differences between institutions, and most pronounced are the differences in selectivity of the student bodies. In fact, Table 2 suggests that in some colleges the most inept student may be a better academic risk than the majority of students at another college.
Along with the introduction of educational testing in the college admissions process, the hierarchical structure of American higher education has been significantly transformed. Instead of being class-based, it is based today primarily on meritocratic principles. Although there are some exceptions, most college admissions officers presently are more concerned with "what you are" than "who you are." Unlike a generation ago, if you are an alumni son of Harvard, Princeton or Yale, you will largely have to take your chances along with several thousand other applicants from across the nation. The majority of undergraduates at these three colleges no longer are prep school boys, but public school boys.
Similar enrollment pressures have forced virtually all major state universities to be-
TABLE 2
PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION BY SEX OF SATVERBAL SCORES OF FIRST-TIME ENROLLMENTS FOR THREE SELECTED VIRGINIA COLLEGES

SAT-VEXBAL SCOMS

COUEGES

Above

Below

499 350-499 350

William and Mary-

Males (N= 3 89)

84 16

0

Females (N=317)... 92 8 0

Old Dominion

Males (N= 1,034)... 27 64

9

Females (N=588)... 32

60

8

Virginia State (Norfolk)

Males (N=303)

2 23 75

Females (N=366)... 1 21 78

EOCKCE: State Council of Higher Education for Virginia, 1966.

come selective. Typically, about a decade ago, roughly one-fourth of the entering freshmen in these institutions ranked in the bottom half of their high school classes. Today, almost no one is admitted unless he ranks in the upper half of his class, and most rank in the top quarter. (Many of these universities are land grant colleges and, in theory, are required to admit any person with a high-school diploma who applies, although obviously they do not.) Where do the others go? To the burgeoning teachers and agricultural colleges which have recently gained university status, to the numerous small private colleges across the country, to the city colleges, and to the new junior and community colleges. The diversity and selectivity in higher education in the United States have reached the point where the interinstitutional differences in intelligence (or scholastic aptitude) are about as great as, and often greater than, the intrainstitutional differences.
In the search for talent, the selective colleges rely very heavily upon a student's high-school performance and standardized tests. The major testing programs are administered while the students are still in high school. The first two hurdles--Educational Testing Service's Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test (PSAT) and National Merit Scholarship Corporation's Qualifying Test--usually come in the eleventh grade and are being administered today in over three-fourths of the nation's high schools.
Results on the PSAT are not used by the colleges but by the college aspirant, his counselor, and parents. They are designed to help the student decide where to apply to college by giving him an early estimate of the probabilities of being admitted. The National Merit examination is designed to select among the uppermost two per cent of the country's college-bound students those who will receive special recognition and awards. The scholarships provided through this program enable the most talented stu-

Vol. 17, No. 4

Mating and Education

275

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

dents to go to the college of their choice. While relatively few winners come from homes so impoverished that the student cannot afford to go to college, many could not otherwise afford to pay the high costs at the better schools. Lists of high scorers on the National Merit examination also are sent to colleges across the country that may wish to actively recruit some of these students on their own.
The most important hurdle in the admissions process comes a year later--the college entrance tests themselves, which are administered chiefly by Educational Testing Service (for the College Entrance Examination Board) and by the American College Testing Program. The results of these tests go directly to the colleges and are used in their admissions formula.
At colleges like Harvard, Princeton, and Yale, once the student is there it is hard for him to drop out. An elaborate set of devices is used, including psychiatric counseling and temporary "leaves of absence," to keep the student in school until graduation. Consequently, these schools have very low attrition rates. In the long run, the far majority graduate.
However, the picture is quite different at most other institutions. In the open-door junior colleges, attrition is extremely high. In fact, the chief role of the counselors in some of these schools is "cooling out" the inept students who can't make it through the academic program (Clark, 1960). The students are encouraged either to transfer over to a business or vocational program or to drop out. Relatively few students complete the two years with grades that would qualify them for transfer to a four-year institution.
Between the extremely selective and nonselective colleges are the state universities and numerous private liberal arts colleges. Dropout rates vary considerably among these schools, ranging in most instances from 40 to 60%.However, many dropouts return to college after a few years, sometimes back to

the same school they left and sometimes to a different institution (Eckland, 1964a). Consequently, the true extent of the attrition problem is difficult to assess.
Nevertheless, academic aptitude or intelligence has consistently been found to be a major factor in dropout studies. The brightest students are apt to get through college, regardless of their starting position in the system. Inept students are not likely to get to college in the first place, and relatively few of those who do are likely to graduate with a four-year degree.
The association between intelligence and college attrition is closer for males than for females. If they have a good chance of making it academically, men are more apt to persist to graduation. Women, on the other hand, are more likely to drop out, and they are more likely to do so for nonacademic reasons, particularly marriage.
But whether women persist or not to graduation may not be particularly important in so far as our model is concerned. In 1965, the National Merit Scholarship Corporation conducted a follow-up study to determine the accomplishments of all female Merit Scholars whohad received their awards between 1956 and 1960. These women were among the brightest in the nation, and many had not completed their degrees. However, they were not destined to be spinsters or to resort to hypogamy. By 1965, the far majority had married, and most of their husbands had either completed or entered graduate school (Watley, 1969).
GRADUATE AND PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION
For an increasingly significant segment of the American population (at least in numbers) formal education does not end with a baccalaureate degree. Today, about half of all male college graduates and a third of all female graduates enroll in graduate or professional schools. Some observers believe, in fact, that graduate education now differen-

276

Eckland

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

tiates between the "haves" and the "have nots" in much the same way that undergraduate education did a generation ago. We therefore will attempt to answer briefly the same questions here that were raised in the previous section: Who goes, who goes where, and who finishes?
Standardized tests are an important part of the admissions process at most graduate schools. Nationally administered tests include the Graduate Record Examination, the Admission Test for Graduate Study in Business, and the Law School Admissions Tests. Scores on these examinations are particularly helpful in identifying the very able graduates from mediocre colleges and from colleges about which the university has little knowledge (much in the same way that undergraduate college admissions officers use entrance examinations for students coming from hundreds of high schools of unknown quality).
As should be expected, admission to graduate school depends in large measure on undergraduate performance. However, even though many universities will not even consider students without a "B average" or better, nearly a third of the males in the lower half of their graduating class are admitted directly from college. On the other hand, over two-thirds of those in the upper fifth of their class enroll (Davis, 1963). Social class, incidentally, plays only a minor role in both college attrition (Eckland, 1964J) and in graduate school admissions (Davis, 1963). Almost all of the independent effects of class background are played out in high-school and in college admissions.
Where the seniors go to graduate school also depends upon ability, although the direct effects of where they went to college as undergraduates and college performance are stronger. The path coefficients to graduate school quality, as measured by national prestige rankings and controlling simultaneously for socioeconomic status and for each other, are 0.34 for undergraduate college quality,

0.26 for college grade-point average, and0.07 for intellectual ability (Spaeth, 1968). This does not mean that ability is really any less important than either college grades or the caliber of the undergraduate institution, since both grades and where one goes to college are themselves largely dependent on ability. By the time a cohort of students completes college and is selected for graduate school, the variance in intelligence among those who are left is severely restricted.
Attrition in graduate and professional school is similarly affected. Only a small proportion of the variance in graduate school performance and attrition can be accounted for by either entrance examinations or undergraduate records. No doubt, this is largely because the small variability in intelligence among college graduates who remain in direct competition with one another has been further reduced by their selection into small and relatively homogeneous graduate departments. Most of the explanatory power of ability is lost.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Having followed the full cycle of educational selection from preschool to graduate school, the reader may be left with the impression that all that counts in American education is how well students perform on standardized tests. This is far from the truth. Motivation and other affective attributes of individuals probably contribute as much, if not more, to academic achievement in school and college than test performance or ability. No doubt this is why past performance (as measured by grades) is usually a better predictor of future performance than are entrance examinations, and consequently why grades are given more weight in both graduate and undergraduate admissions. Most students earn the grades they receive, and in the meritocracy effort plays as great a part as ability.
We may also have left the erroneous impression that standardized tests are simply

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Vol. 17, No. 4

Mating and Education

277

a convenient device to position people in an diversity new patterns of mate selection

educational rat race. On the contrary, tests have emerged or, to put it another way, the

are used just as often to identify the under- criteria for selection have changed. Socially

achieving student and give him a second ascribed characteristics are replaced by

chance as they are to weed out the inept. achieved characteristics. Ascription is based

Moreover, the so-called "rat race" is not so deplete of human values as is often supposed. To be sure, the search for ability is part of the rationality of a technological society; but it also is part of the ethos of any egalitarian society which insists that allmen should be given the opportunity to fulfill their potential.
In conclusion, the decline of traditional kinship networks and the resulting freedom which young people enjoy in marital choice no doubt have tended to break up previous social isolates and reduce both the level of inbreeding and assortative mating for deleterious genes in Western societies. However, owing to the rise of mass education and intense educational selection, social endogamy does not disappear; the boundaries simply are restructured.

largely on class, race, and ethnicity; achievement is based largely on educational attainment.
Since how much of what kind of education people get depends upon intelligence and since marital choices generally occur between individuals with similar educational backgrounds, all of the conditions necessary are present for high assortative mating for intelligence.
The question really is not whether likes attract likes, as if people were really such excellent judges of one another's intelligence. Rather, assortative mating for intelligence is a built-in feature of the educational selection system. Males and females of like ability tend to end up in similar educational niches--as school dropouts, as college class-

As we have seen, educational institutions mates, or as graduate students. It is primari-

openly recruit and sponsor students from ex- ' Iy within these social boundaries that mate

ceedingly diverse backgrounds. Out of this selection occurs.

REFERENCES

CICOUREL, AARON V., and JOHN I. KITSUSE. 1963.

Socioeconomic status, intelligence, and the at-

The educational decision-makers.Bobbs-Merill, tainment of higher education. Sociol. Educ.

New York.

40:1-23.

CLARK, BORTON R. 1960.The open door college. SPAETH, JOE L. 1968. The allocation of college

McGraw-Hill, NewYork.

graduates to graduate and professional schools.

DAVIS, JAMES A. 1963. Great aspirations. National Sociol. Educ. 41:342-349.

Opinion Research Center, Chicago. ECKLAND, BRUCE K. 1964a. College dropouts who
came back. Harvard Educ. Rev. 34:402-420. . 1964b. Social class and college graduation:
Some misconceptions corrected. Amer. J. Sociol. 70: 36-50.
FLANAGAN, JOHN, and WILLIAM COOLEY. 1966.
Project Talent one-year follow-up studies. University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh.
FOLGER, JOHN K., and CHARLES B. NAM. 1967.
Education of the American population. U.S.

STATE COUNCIL OFHIGHER EDUCATIONFOR VIRGIN-
IA. 1966. Student admissions: Virginia statecontrolled institutionsof higher education.
STICE, GLEN, and RUTH B. EKSTROM. 1964. High
school attrition. Educational Testing Service, Princeton. WATLEY, D. J. 1969. Career or marriage?: A longitudinal study of able young women.Research Reports, No. 5. National Merit Scholarship Corporation.

Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. WARREN, JONATHAN. Determinants of college at-

SCHOENFELDT, LYLE F. 1968. Education after high tendance. Ms.

school. Sociol. Educ. 41:350-369.

WINCH, ROBERT F. 1963. Themodern family.Holt,

SEWELL, WILLIAM H., and VIMAL P. SHAH. 1967.

Rinehart and Winston,New York.

