Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Prevention and treatment of alcohol abuse: Uses and limitations of the high risk paradigm
Soren Sigvardsson , C. Robert Cloninger & Michael Bohman
To cite this article: Soren Sigvardsson , C. Robert Cloninger & Michael Bohman (1985) Prevention and treatment of alcohol abuse: Uses and limitations of the high risk paradigm, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 185-194, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988607 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988607
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

Prevention and Treatment of Alcohol Abuse: Uses and Limitations of the High Risk Paradigm

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

aSoren Sigvardsson, bC. Robert Cloninger, andcMichael Bohman
aDepartment of Child and Youth Psychiatry, University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden; and the bDepartment of Psychiatry and cDepartment of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri

ABSTRACT: The practical utility and limitations of research on individuals at high personal risk for alcoholism are critically examined using results from the Stockholm Adoption Study. Risk factors relevant at the level of individual cases and at the population level are reviewed. Important differences are noted between factors that influence the treatment of individual alcoholic patients and factors that influence the prevalence of alcoholism in a total population. Although knowledge about factors effective on the individual level is necessary for providing treatment, the authors emphasize that research aimed at prevention must also focus on other variables that are critical at the population level, such as education and commercial advertising which influence exposure to alcohol by changing social attitudes and expectations about alcohol use.

Several family, twin, and adoption studies have shown that the prevalence of alcoholism in relatives of an alcoholic proband is higher than that in the general population. This risk research has been reviewed elsewhere (Cloninger et al., 1981, 1985; Bohman et al., 1981; Cloninger, 1983), and it shows the importance of both genetic and environmental factors in increasing susceptibility to alcoholism. The importance of genetic factors was suggested by earlier studies of multiple classes of relatives that have been carried out in Sweden. There is a consistent relationship between degree of consanguinity and concordance rates for alcohol abuse, ranging from 12 per cent in pairs of grandfathers/grandsons to 70 per cent between MZ twins (Table 1). This can be compared to a prevalence of 7 per cent in the general population.
However, as is well known to every-

one who is familiar with these kinds of studies, it can be difficult to evaluate the extent to which concordance for alcohol abuse depends on genetic effects rather than similarity of shared environments. Twins and other sibs usually share both genetic and environmental antecedents, so adoption studies are crucial in evaluating the interaction of genetic and environmental effects. However, there are other important difficulties in interpreting the results of risk research on alcohol abuse. In order to calculate concordance rates we have to differentiate alcoholism from normal consumption. Also, the concordance rate for severe abuse may not be the same as in cases of mild abuse.
There exists a fundamental doubt about alcohol abuse being a homogeneous trait that varies only in degree of severity. There may be, quite apart from variation in severity, different types of

185

186

Sigvardsson et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 1
FAMILY STUDIES OF RECURRENT ALCOHOL ABUSE IN SWEDISH M E N

SOURCE
Kaij (1960 Kaij(1960 Âmark (1951)
Bohman (1978) Kaij and Dock (1975) Census (1968)

RELATIONSHIP
MZ twins DZtwins Singleton sib
No alcoholic parent One alcoholic parent Adopted-away sons Grandsons General population

PKOBAND
CONCORDANCE
N%
27 70 60 33 349 31 252 17 97 33 50 20 270 12
7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

alcohol abuse with different concordance rates. We considered the possibility of genetic heterogeneity in a series of analyses which were the direct continuation of the adoption study referred to in Table 1(Bohman, 1978).The results are described in detail elsewhere (Cloninger et al., 1981; Bohman et al., 1981), and will be briefly summarized here.

0 = no registered alcohol abuse; 1 = one single registration by the Tem-
perance Board and no treatment; 2 = two or three registrations by the
Temperance Board and no treatment; or
3 = four or more registrations by the Temperance Board, or treatment in a psychiatric department or institution, or supervision because of alcohol abuse.

THE STOCKHOLM ADOPTION STUDY
The material consisted of 862 men and 913 women in Stockholm, Sweden, aged 23-43 years, who were separated from their biological parents and adopted prior to 3 years of age (average separation was at age 4 months). Criteria for alcohol abuse were registration by the National Temperance Board, treatment in a psychiatric institution with the diagnosis of chronic alcoholism, treatment in an institution for alcoholics, or supervision because of alcohol abuse.
The first part of the analyses concerned adopted men. They were classified in four groups according to severity of alcohol abuse:

It could be assumed that there existed a considerable amount of "hidden" abuse, i.e., individuals who were classified in Group 0 but in fact had alcohol problems, perhaps even of severe character. On the other hand, one single registration (Group 1) might often be questionable as a criterion of substantial alcohol abuse.
The analyses were carried out in four different steps. First, a discriminant function analysis was run with alcohol abuse (classified 0-3 according to the preceding categories) in the adoptees as the dependent variable and information about the biological background as independent (predictor) variables. The latter consisted of data about registered alcohol abuse, registered criminality,

Vol. 32,No. 3-4

Prevention and Treatment ofAlcohol Abuse

187

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

and occupational status of the biological parents.
A second analysis was also carried out with data about postnatal environment as independent variables. These data included alcohol abuse, criminality, and occupational status of the adoptive parents, plus information about early institutional care, age at time of placement in adoptive home, number of temporary placements before adoption, and size of hometown. Later social variables were not used because such variables may be affected by genetically influenced differences in temperament.
Third, a test of the extent of geneenvironment correlation due to nonrandom placement was carried out by an analysis which included all significant predictors from the previous steps at the same time. Finally significant variables about biological background and significant postnatal variables were used in a cross-fostering analysis to evaluate the pattern of interaction between genetic and environmental indices.
The results from the combined analyses showed that alcohol abusers as a group, even those with only one single registration, were characterized by a specific biological background as well as postnatal variables that distinguished them from the group of non-atnisers. Further, the results indicated that alcohol abusers do not constitute a homogeneous group which can be classified simply in accordance with severity, e.g., mild, moderate, or severe as in our initial classification. Rather we identified two distinct subgroups that we labeled Type I and Type II, each of which ranged from mild to severe abuse.
Type I accounted for about 75 per cent of all male adoptees ever registered for alcohol abuse. Their biological par-

ents, both fathers and mothers, were characterized by mild alcohol abuse and minimal criminality. Given this biological background for the adoptees (which was regarded as an indication of genetic predisposition), both risk of being registered and severity in expression were determined by the degree of postnatal stress. Accordingly, we suggested that this form be identified as "milieulimited" alcoholism.
In contrast, the biological background of Type II abusers was characterized by severe alcohol abuse and severe criminality in the biological fathers. The biological mothers, on the other hand, did not have any greater risk of alcohol abuse or criminality than the mothers of non-abusers. Accordingly, we suggested that this form be identified as "male-limited" alcoholism. Given the biological background that predisposed to Type II abuse, the actual riskof abuse was increased ninefold in the adopted sons regardless of postnatal milieu. Severity in expression was much less influenced by environmental factors than in the case of Type I abuse.
We also studied alcohol abuse in the 913 female adoptees. Only 31were ever registered for abuse, so any subclassification according to severity was not possible.
Female abusers had a biological background similar to that of Type I abuse in male adoptees. No excess of abuse was found in female adoptees with a biological background similar to that of Type II abuse in men. The main results are summarized in Table 2.
As can be seen from the table, Type II abuse was highly heritable from fathers to sons and fairly independent of postnatal stress. This does not imply that the prevalence of Type II is entirely

188

Sigvardsson et al.

Social Biology

TABLE2
A PROFILE OFPROMINENT FEATURES DISTINGUISHING TWO TYPES OF ALCOHOLISM

Distinguishing Feature

Type I (Milieu-Limited Form)

Typell (Male-Limited Form)

PREVALENCE in adopted men
BIOLOGICAL FATHER'S characteristics

13 per cent
Mild alcohol abuse, minimal criminality, no treatment

4 per cent
Severe alcohol abuse, severe criminality, extensive treatment

BIOLOGICAL MOTHER'S characteristics

Mild alcohol abuse, minimal criminality

Normal

POSTNATAL ENVIRONMENT

Determines both frequency and severity of alcoholism in susceptible sons

No effect on frequency (may influence severity)

SEVERITY of alcoholism

Usually isolated or mild problems, but maybe severe

Usually recurrent or moderate problems, but may be severe

RELATIVE RISK in congenitally predisposed sons"

2 with postnatal provocation, 1 without postnatal provocation

9 regardless of postnatal milieu

aThis relative risk isthe ratio ofthe risk ofalcoholism incongenitally predisposed sons to that inothers. Thus, a relative risk of 1 indicates no difference.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

due to the effect of genetic factors and population may have an inborn, geneti-

not at all the result of environmentalin- cally determined vulnerability to alco-

fluences. What it means is simply that hol. Further, inmany cases, this vulner-

this genotype isextremely vulnerable to ability may besignificantly increased by

a commonly available environmental psychological orsocioeconomic factors.

factor--alcohol. Furthermore, this vul- Social factors influenced theexpression

nerability is so strong that it outweighs of risk foralcohol abuse and, inparticu-

other external factors. Finally, it is not lar, the frequency of registrations with

the effect of early negative experiences the Temperance Board. Biological fa-

such asseparation from themother, in- thers with single registrations for alco-

stitutional care during infancy, etc.Al- hol abuse did not increase the risk of

coholic adoptive parents did not in- their sons for either single or recurrent

crease the risk of alcohol abuse inthe registrations (Table 3). However, fa-

adoptees, so imitation of parental be- thers with recurrent registrations hadan

havior is not the cause of such abuse. excess ofsons with either single registra-

Rather Type II alcoholism is due to a tions (11.6 percent versus 6.6percent)

vulnerability that is genetically transmit- or recurrent registrations (15.7 percent

ted from fathers tosons.

versus 8.6per cent). Thus, asingle regis-

Adoptees may not be quite representative of the general population. Nevertheless, ourfindingsare a strong indication that a high percentage of our

tration for abuse appears to be an expression ofthe heritable risk foralcohol abuse inthe sons, butnot inthe fathers. This inconsistency is largely explained

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Prevention and Treatment of Alcohol Abuse

189

TABLE 3
REGISTRATIONS FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE IN BIOLOGICAL FATHERS AND THEIR ADOPTED-AWAY SONS

None Only one ,,
Recurrent..

FATHER'S REGISTRATIONS

No.
OF SONS
594 6
172

REGISTRATIONS IN ADOPTED-AWAY SONS

% Only One
6.6 5.2 11.6

% Recurrent
8.6 9.4 15.7

by differences in the social circum- the adoptive father had a skilled occupa-

stances of the biological fathers and tion, there was an increased risk of alco-

their adopted-away sons.

hol abuse (single or recurrent) in sonsof

The occupational status of the biolog- biological fathers with recurrent, but

ical fathers tended to be lower than that not single, registrations. In contrast, if

of the adoptive fathers, and the occupa- the adoptive father had an unskilled oc-

tional status of the adoptive father in- cupation, there was an excess of recur-

fluenced the expression of risk for devel- rent alcohol abuse in sons of biological

oping alcoholism. Table 4 shows the fathers with either single registrations

frequency of alcohol abuse registrations (17.2 per cent versus 7.6 per cent, in the sons in relation to the number of X2 = 3.29, P < 0.06) or recurrent regis-

registrations of the biological father and trations (19.0 per cent versus 7.6 per the occupational status of the adoptive cent, x2 = 8.52, P < 0.01). Thus, sever-

father. Adoptive fathers with unskilled ity of alcohol abuse is a complex product

occupations had more sons with alcohol of biological and social determinants, abuse than did other adoptive fathers. If and this has important implications for

TABLE4
OCCUPATIONAL STATUS OF THE ADOPTIVE FATHER AND FREQUENCY OF REGISTRATIONS FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE IN BIOLOGICAL FATHERS AND THEIR ADOPTED-AWAY SONS

ADOPTIVE FATHER'S
JOB

BIOLOGICAL FATHER'S
REGISTRATIONS

Skilled Skilled Skilled Unskilled Unskilled . Unskilled

None One Recurrent None
One Recurrent

"P < 0.05 compared to 406 low risk sons. bP < 0.10 compared to 406 low risk sons. 'P < 0.01compared to 406 low risk sons.

No. OF
SONS
406 67 109 188 29 63

REGISTRATIONS OF SONS

%Once

% Recurrent

6.2 7.6 4.5 6.0 12.8" 13.8° 7.4 10.6 6.9 17.26 9.5 19.CK

190

Sigvardsson et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

the use and interpretation of such results for the treatment and prevention of alcohol abuse.
WHY IS RESEARCH NECESSARY?
From a number of studies we know that today in most Western countries at least 5 per cent of all boys and about 1 per cent of all girls will end up with severe alcohol problems during their lifetime. Sometimes statistical figures are hard to grasp and difficult to conceptualize, but in this case we are lucky. Five per cent simply means one boy in 20, and we can fairly well imagine 20 boys. This is a hockey team with coaches and reserves. One in every team will end up with severe medical and social problems because of alcohol.
Five per cent--that means either one of my boys or one of your boys, or at least one of their very best friends. Goodwin and Guze (1979) report that one boy in 12-15 who ever start to drink will end up with severe alcohol problems. Recent epidemiological studies indicate that one man in every four has multiple alcohol problems (Robins et al., 1984). Such high risk of disability from alcohol abuse is the best answer to the question why research is necessary.
WHAT IS THE AIM OF RESEARCH ON ALCOHOL
ABUSE?
For a moment, just consider what would happen if we knew that one in every 12-15 boys who ever sit down behind the steering wheel of a Volvo or a Cadillac would end up in a serious traffic accident because of certain characteristics of that type of car. How would you

react if car dealers, by using the most sophisticated commercial tricks available, tried to sell such a car to your son, or to my son, or to some of their best friends?
In fact, medical research on alcohol abuse, in the sense of modern science, started from two similar observations: (1) the devastating effects of alcohol on a high number of consumers, and (2) the powerful economic interest, private as well as public, behind production and sale of alcoholic liquors.
The very first scientific study of alcohol abuse was a doctoral dissertation at the University of Edinburgh in 1788 with the title De Ebrietate,ejusque Effectibus in Corpus humanum. The author was Thomas Trotter. The thesis was written in Latin and is thus difficult for most of us to read. However, in 1804 he published a new book, in English, called An Essay, Medical, Philosophical, and Chemical, on Drunkenness, and itsEffectson theHuman Body.
At this time drunkenness was generally regarded as an expression of immorality and a sinful life. Trotter's main interest was therefore first to bring the alcohol problem out from the domain of the moralists and make it an issue for research within medical science. For that reason he redefined the problem and declared drunkenness as being not a moral flaw,but rather a disease. Such a statement was a real shock for his time.
However, even more important was that Trotter in this, the very first scientific treatment of alcohol abuse, made a clear distinction between treatment and prevention. There is no direct relation, either logical or empirical, between these two concepts.
In the case of prevention, there is,according to Trotter, little to be gained from knowledge about "temperament

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Prevention and Treatment of Alcohol Abuse

191

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

of the body"--or, as we would call it, personality traits. In fact, he says, alcohol consumption and its sequel "drunkenness" is common among every type of personality. Further, any state of mind--good mood as well as low spirits--may be a good reason to drink. Also, any life event, negative as well as positive, can justify alcohol consumption.
It is not that these factors, personality traits or life events, are of no or even subordinate importance. What Trotter says is that "knowledge of those remote causes... is . . . necessary for conducting the cure," i.e., for treatment of individual cases. Prevention, on the other hand, is a question of changing customs and drinking habits and achieving a general reduction of alcohol consumption. Trotter's suggestion for prevention led to a long and bitter fight against both some of the most influential members of the government and some of the largest beer and whiskey companies. But this was for him as much a part of medical science as was the treatment of the individual abusers.
We have good reasons to assume that any serious attempt to reduce production and sale of alcoholic liquors today would still stir up a similar battle on the political arena. Suggestions for treatment seem to be much less provocative for the very powerful economic interests behind production and sale of alcoholic liquors. Nevertheless, prevention must be the primary goal for medical research.
THE INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIETY
The important distinction between the individual and society was further emphasized in another early disserta-

tion published in Tübingen in 1839 with the title Der Missbrauch geistiger Getränke: in Pathologischer, therapeutischer, medizinischer und gerichtlischer Hinsicht (or The Abuse of Spirit Beverages in Pathological, Medical, and Legal Respects). The author was Carl Roesch.
First, like Trotter earlier, Roesch pointed out that there are always, on the individual level, ready explanations for why people drink. It can be an anniversary, a party, or just having a good time with old friends; but people can also drink when they feel lonesome. Some drink on their jobs; others, because of unemployment. As mentioned, the reasons for using alcohol can be of almost any kind.
Secondly, even more than his forerunner, Roesch stressed the importance of distinguishing factors that operate on the individual level apart from mechanisms operative on the population (society) level. His explanation why the use of alcohol had become such an enormous social problem remains relevant today:
Although the use of alcohol is almost as old as the human race, it is quite obvious that it has never been used so much and by so many as nowadays. Significantly contributing to the vice of drunkenness is the invention of the manufacturing of distilled alcohol. . . . Speculative profits very soon took possession of the new branch of industry. In particular, manufacturing alcohol from potatoes in combination with the daily increasing open competition between the producers has cut down the prices to the degree that nowadays even the most impoverished beggar is able to obtain money enough for his alcohol, (p. 36)
Roesch gave a thorough account of
the increase in alcohol production.
Sixty years ago in the district where I live people hardly knew about distilled

192

Sigvardsson et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

liquors and even thirty years ago people here drank very little in comparison to the situation today. Since then the consumption of distilled liquors has increased. Now husband and wife drink, as well as farmhand and maid. No daylaborer works any longer without schnapps. Children are given this poison as if it were pastry. In my district, in a village with 1,800 inhabitants, there were thirty years ago two distilleries, together producing about four hundred barrels of schnapps. Today there are in the village nine distilleries, each of them producing considerably more than the two previous together, (p. 45)
The enormous increase in drunkenness could not be explained simply by referring to variables on the individual level. Consequently, measures aimed at prevention had to be based on knowledge about factors effective on the group level. Accordingly, Roesch argued for state-controlled production and sale, higher taxes and prices, and no free competition between producers-- all of this aiming at a substantial reduction of alcohol consumption in general.
WHAT CONCLUSIONS CAN BE DRAWN?
Roesch published his book almost 150 years ago. Since then several other studies have been carried out in an attempt to solve the alcohol problem. Also many different strategies have been suggested concerning primary prevention, some of them focusing on the individual, others concentrating on cultural and socioeconomic factors. From a number of recent studies we know that alcohol abuse is related to certain biological and environmental risk factors. It has been suggested that we could use this knowledge to define a risk group

consisting of people with high susceptibility to alcoholism. Education of those high risk individuals, warning them not to drink, is suggested as an effective means of primary prevention.
At first sight this strategy may appear rather attractive. It does not challenge strong economic interests in the same way as a demand for a general reduction of alcohol consumption, and it does not impose any restrictions on the great majority of the population who are able to "handle" alcohol.
If there were no variation between individuals or groups over time concerning exposure to alcohol, the risk group strategy would identify individuals at risk, although its predictive value might be low. However, we cannot rely on this strategy since there is actually great variation in exposure to alcohol over time, and the group at risk may vary to the same degree as exposure because of gene-environment interaction.
The change in exposure is illustrated by the Swedish situation. In Sweden, alcoholic beverages were rationed from the early 1920's until 1955. Also, alcoholic beverages were available only in state-controlled retail shops, except for the low alcoholic beer Class II (2.8 per cent). After the abolition of rationing in 1955, there was a trend toward a more liberal attitude with respect to the use of alcohol in the whole society. In accord with this liberalized attitude, a new type of beer (3.6 per cent alcohol content) was approved for sale in ordinary food stores.
This type of "intermediate beer" was also marketed and advertised by eyecatching commercials: young people sitting amongst flowers and green grass and enjoying a cool beer, or a weather-

Vol. 32,No.

Prevention and Treatment of AlcoholAbuse

193

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

beaten sailor with pipe in mouth and beer can in hand, or sportsmen and athletes, or anything that alluded to the joy of living. The result, fully documented in official registers, was an unprecedented increase in alcohol abuse among young people.
In each single case there was certainly a reason on the individual level, either found in negative external factors, in specific deviant personality traits, or in a genetically determined vulnerability. However, the change in alcohol consumption on the national level was not due to a change in the gene pool or to life in Sweden suddenly having become so unbearably boring, or to an enormous increase of psychiatric disorders in Swedish teenagers, or to an unusually severe wave of unemployment. On the contrary, the unemployment rate in general, and among young people specifically, has never been so low.
The explanation for the remarkable increase in alcohol abuse is almost entirely to be found in changes in availability of alcoholic liquors and attitudes toward its use for recreation, relaxation, and enjoyment. Medical science could not have prevented this development in society by using its knowledge about risk factors on the individual level.
FUTURE RESEARCH
The fact that the risk group strategy may be insufficient as a tool for prevention does not contradict findings that individuals may differ to a very great extent concerning risk of developing alcohol abuse in a given environmental context. Maybe the most important result of our own adoption study was the demonstration of the importance of

gene-environment interaction. The same environmental conditions appeared to have quite different implications for individuals depending on their biological background, e.g., for those classified as a low risk group compared to those with a biological background predisposing to Type I or Type II abuse. Similarly, the same genetic predisposition appeared to be manifested quite differently depending on the environmental situation. For instance, the fathers of Type II abusers were characterized by severe alcohol abuse, whereas their adopted-away sons, who had grown up in another social setting, usually were abusers only of moderate degree if they abused alcohol at all.
These findings suggest several new questions for future research. For example, how are individuals with different genetic predispositions (such as Type I or Type II) affected by changes in total consumption in society or by changes in drinking patterns? Or, how are the different types of predisposition for alcohol abuse related to psychiatric disorders, somatic disorders, and criminality? How do those predisposed to different genetic subtypes differ in underlying neurophysiological mechanisms or biochemical variables, such as cortical evoked potentials in response to alcohol or platelet monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity?
We cannot rely solely on the identification of special risk groups for the prevention of alcohol abuse because of changing patterns of exposure. Attention to factors that influence social attitudes toward drinking and patterns of exposure is also needed. Thus, research on the interaction of genetic and environmental factors touches questions

Í94

Sigvardsson et al.

Social Biology

that have direct relevance for practical application. Alcohol abuse is still the most severe social and medical problem in our society. Genetic epidemiology can contribute to the prevention of alcohol abuse by clarifying how influences at the societal level interact with familial risk factors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part bythe United States Public Health Service Grant AA-03539 from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Research Scientist Development Award MH-00048 from the National Institute of Mental Health, and Swedish Medical Research Council Grant B82-21X-O3789-11.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ÅMARK, C. 1951. A study in alcoholism. Acta Psychiat. Neurol. Scand. 70 (Suppl.):253271.
BOHMAN, M. 1978. Some genetic aspects of alcoholism andcriminality: A population of adoptees. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 35:269-276.
BOHMAN, M., S. SIGVARDSSON, and C. R.
CLONINGER. 1981. Maternal inheritance of alcohol abuse. Cross-fostering analysis of adopted women. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 38:965-969. CLONINGER, C. 1983. Genetic and environmental factors in the development of alcoholism. J. Psychiat. Treat. Eval. 5:487-496.
CLONINGER, C., M. BOHMAN, and S. SIGVARDS-
SON. 1981. Inheritance of alcohol abuse. Cross-fostering analysis of adopted men. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 38:861-868.
CLONINGER, C. R., S. SIGVARDSSON, T. REICH,
and M. BOHMAN. 1985. Inheritance of risk to develop alcoholism. In Genetic and biological markers for drug abuse and alcoholism. NIDA/NIAAA Research Monograph.

U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
GOODWIN, D. W., and S. B. GUZE. 1979. Psy-
chiatric diagnosis. Oxford University Press, New York/Oxford. KAU, L. 1960. Alcoholism in twins: Studies on the etiology and sequels of abuse of alcohol. Almqvist andWiksell, Stockholm. KAU, L.,and J. DOCK. 1975. Grandsons ofalcoholics. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 32:1379-1381.
ROBINS, L. W., J. E. HELZER, M. M. WEISS-
MAN, H. ORVASCHEL, E. GRUENBERG, J. D.
BURKE, JR.,and D. A. REGIER. 1984. Life-
time prevalence of specific psychiatric disorders in three sites. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 41:949-958. ROESCH, C. 1839. DesMissbrauch geistiger Getränke. Verlag der H. Lauppschen Buchhandlung. Tübingen. TROTTER, T. 1804. An essay, medical, philosophical, and chemical, on drunkenness, and its effects onthe human body. Strahan and Preston, London.

