Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Schizophrenia: A bag of dilemmas
L. ErlenmeyerKimling
To cite this article: L. ErlenmeyerKimling (1976) Schizophrenia: A bag of dilemmas, Social Biology, 23:2, 123-134, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988218 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988218
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling
Department of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York, and Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York

ABSTRACT; This paper is concerned with the efficacy of genetic counseling with respect to schizophrenia. Evidence for the genetic basis of schizophrenia is reviewed, as are data demonstrating increases in the marital and reproductive rates of schizophrenic patients. The dilemmas of genetic counseling are discussed, and a strategy for early identification of individuals with a predisposition to schizophrenia is described.

Of the psychiatric disorders, schizophrenia is the one for which the greatest number of people are at risk at any given time. Occurring in 1 to 2 per cent of the population, it is a relatively common condition and certainly among the commonest of psychiatric illnesses. Moreover, rather than declining in frequency, schizophrenia may increase by small but significant degrees in the future if recent trends, which I shall review briefly, continue.
Schizophrenia is therefore the psychiatric disorder that probably does the greatest harm to the greatest number of people. It is marked by high costs in personal tragedy and by high costs to society, only some of which can be reckoned in dollars and cents. Systematic approaches to prevention are still unknown; and although treatments introduced in the past two decades have accelerated release following admission to hospital and have benefited many patients for appreciable periods of time, the lifetime prognosis continues to be poor for the majority of persons afflicted with schizophrenia.
From these perspectives, efforts to reduce schizophrenia risks in the next generation can be seen as desirable, even as urgently needed. Genetic counseling appears to be the obvious focus of such ef-

forts, and, in fact, it is the only measure available at this time that could be supposed to have any effect whatsoever upon future risk rates. Nevertheless, in our present state of knowledge, the implications of genetic counseling with respect to schizophrenia are trivial, at the individual level as well as at the population genetics level. Schizophrenia poses a bag of dilemmas.
I will attempt to review in this paper some things that we know about schizophrenia as they relate to genetic counseling and to consider a current approach in research that may help to resolve some dilemmas, though it will almost surely create new ones.
GENETIC BASIS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA: EVIDENCE AND UNCERTAINTIES
That genetic counseling can be considered useful at all implies the involvement of genetic factors in schizophrenia. Until quite recently, the majority of workers on schizophrenia might have disagreed with such a premise; genetic hypotheses were regarded as a myth, and a malicious myth at that. However, most investigators nowadays are convinced that heredity, interacting with environmental factors, does

123

124

Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

play a role in the development of the disorder. Starting with the first family study reported by Riidin in 1916 and continuing to the current methodologically sophisticated work on adoptive samples, research on well over fifty thousand individuals (schizophrenic probands and their relatives) has demonstrated that the "myth" is rooted in reality.
The cumulative genetic evidence can be distilled into the following main points.1
1. Family studies have shown significantly higher schizophrenia risk rates among first-degree relatives of schizophrenic probands than among seconddegree relatives and moderately higher risks among the latter than expected for members of the relevant general population.
2. With sufficient follow-up of cotwins, all of the twin studies have found very substantially greater concordance rates in monozygotic pairs than in dizygotic pairs.
3. Communality of environment is not sufficient to explain the latter findings. For example, schizophrenia occurs more frequently in full siblings of affected probands---whether reared apart from or with the probands (Karlsson, 1966)--than in half-siblings who share the same environment as the probands, and more frequently in the half-siblings than in stepsiblings who also share the probands' environments but none of their genes (Kallmann, 1938; Rudin, 1916). The concordance rate for schizophrenia in the 17 pairs of monozygotic twins reared apart that have been reported in the world literature is approximately the same (actually slightly higher) as the average, across studies, for monozygotic twins reared together and much higher than the concordance rate reported by any investigator for dizygotic twins reared together.
1 Detailed reviews appear in Rosenthal, 1970; Shields, 1968; Slater and Cowie, 1971; and ZerbinRüdin (1967), among others.

4. Specific environmental conditions are apparently not capable of explaining data on schizophrenia risks. For instance, children with one schizophrenic parent have a relatively high (7 to 19 per cent) expectancy of manifesting the disorder whether they are exposed to the undoubtedly pernicious influences of a home that includes a mentally ill parent or are separated from such a home from birth (see No. 6 below). Both genetic and environmental loads are doubled in children with two schizophrenic parents and, as might be expected, empiric risk figures for such children jump to 39 per cent. Yet, children who presumably have an equally malignant environmental exposure but a lower genetic load--by virtue of having one schizophrenic and one psychopathic parent--show a schizophrenia risk similar to that for children of schizophrenic X normal matings (Kallmann, 1938).
A study of persons with early total deafness further illustrates the nonspecificity of environmental explanations. Early total deafness imposes unusually stressful and disruptive conditions on childhood development and later life, including disturbed communication patterns, developmental imbalances, and marked disruption of parent-child relationships (Altshuler and Sarlin, 1962). Just such types of stress are frequently claimed tobe implicated in the etiology of schizophrenia, and it might therefore be expected that highly increased rates of schizophrenia would be found among the deaf. Yet Altshuler and Sarlin (1962) found only a slightly increased schizophrenia rate of 2.S per cent in the deaf population of New York State compared to the usual estimate of 1 to 2 per cent for the general population.
5. A review of the world literature on folie a deux has demonstrated that persons who were presumably "induced" into irrationality by another person actually had

Vol. 23, No. 2

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

125

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

positive family histories for mental illness and controls, Rosenthal and colleagues

themselves (Scharfetter, 1972). Risk rates (Rosenthal, 1972) have obtained results

for schizophrenia in relatives of the "in- similar to Heston's: 11 per cent of the

ducees" were found to be similar to those adopted-away offspring of chronic

for relatives of schizophrenic patients gen- schizophrenics had a definite diagnosis of

erally. Thus, the "inducees" are evidently schizophrenia and 22 per cent had less

genetically predisposed individuals whose severe diagnoses within the "schizophre-

breakdown is precipitated by a close psy- nia spectrum"; none of the offspring of

chological relationship with another dis- parents with "spectrum" diagnoses had

turbed individual.

definite diagnoses of schizophrenia, but 33

6. Finally, powerful evidence in sup- per cent received spectrum diagnoses as

port of the genetic theories has come in did IS per cent of the adopted-away off-

recent years from studies of adopted indi- spring of parents without psychiatric

viduals. These investigations allow the illnesses. The Heston (1966) and the Ro-

transmission of biological and of cultural senthal (1972) studies both point to the

factors to be separated and examined in- specificity of genetic factors in relation to

dependently. In the first adoption study, definite hard-core schizophrenia and,

carried out in Oregon by Heston (1966), 47 likewise, indicate the genetic relationship

subjects born to schizophrenic women, of a considerable range of less clear-cut

but reared away from their mothers and pathology.

all maternal relatives from birth, were evaluated for psychiatric status in adulthood and compared with matched subjects reared in equivalent foster placements but born to parents with no recorded psychiatric illness.

Two other investigations--by Kety et al. (1973) in Denmark and by Wender et al. (1968) in the United States--are examining the reverse side of the coin. Rather than tracing forward the psychiatric histories of offspring of parents known to be

Among the offspring of the schizo- schizophrenic, these studies start with

phrenic mothers, 5 (10.6 per cent; age- adoptees who are known to be schizo-

corrected risk of 16.6 per cent) had been phrenic and with control adoptees who are

hospitalized with a diagnosis of schizo- not schizophrenic. The psychiatric status

phrenia, and close to one-half of the re-, of the adoptive relatives--and, in the Kety

mainder exhibited "major psychosocial study, of the biological relatives as well--

disabilities" of other types. The figures for is examined for both groups of adoptees.

these subjects are in line with those found Analyses reported thus far reveal no difin earlier studies2 of children who were ferences in the schizophrenia rates of

usually reared in their own parental adoptive relatives of schizophrenic and

homes. By contrast, none of Heston's con- control adoptees. In the Kety study,

trol subjects had had psychiatric hospitali- moreover, biological and adoptive rela-

zations or received diagnoses of schizo- tives of the controls do not differ from

phrenia, although 18 per cent were clas- each other, but biological relatives of the

sified as showing a serious psychosocial schizophrenic adoptees have significantly

impairment.

higher schizophrenia rates than do the

In a Danish investigation of adopted- other three groups.

away offspring of schizophrenic parents The results of the several adoption

studies agree well with each other and cor-

2 Age-corrected figures for schizophrenia are cited above; rates for other disabilities range between 15,

roborate the large body of data obtained in

and 42 per cent.

earlier investigations with less powerfully

126

Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

compelling research methods. The new evidence should effectively remove the last lingering doubts about the fact of genetic involvement in the predisposition to schizophrenia.
Genetic counseling may therefore be regarded as a legitimate approach to be taken in relation to schizophrenia. However, one reason that it is not likely to prove a very effective approach to the problem of risk reduction in the immediate future is that the exact nature of the genetic predisposition remains as uncertain as it was when the first family study was conducted, although theories have grown more sophisticated as other human genetic diseases have come to be better understood. Seeming equally viable at present are theories postulating: monogenic inheritance, probably acting as a partial dominant with reduced penetrance and variable expression; polygenic threshold inheritance; or genetic heterogeneity involving a number of genetic mimics which might differ among themselves with respect to the kinds of environmental variables that act as primary stressors, with respect to the degree of responsivity to such variables, and with respect to transmission pattern (primarily dominant versus primarily recessive). The various models have different implications both for the type of approach to be taken in genetic counseling and for the benefits to be expected from intensified efforts to provide counseling services.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FOR WHOM?
Whatever model may eventually be shown to best describe the genetic situation, it is evident that many "carriers" do not manifest overt schizophrenia and do not come to attention for psychopathological deviances at all. Who makes up the target population for genetic counseling?
Despite the strong evidence for genetic

involvement in schizophrenia, 80 per cent of persons who will eventually manifest the disorder do not have either an affected parent or an affected sibling. Most of the parents whose children will eventually become schizophrenic cannot be recognized beforehand. Of course, the same is often true of parents of children afflicted with recessive diseases, although family histories and knowledge about the pattern of inheritance underlying such conditions-- and the availability of screening programs for some types of carriers--may help to direct many of these potential parents to genetic counseling services prior to the birth of a damaged child. Moreover, even when there are no recognized signals to warn parents prior to the birth of an affected child, genetic counseling can at least be effective in preventing births of additional children with the same condition. Parents of a schizophrenic-to-be, however, have few chances of receiving counseling to guide their decisions about subsequent births. Usually, all of their children will have been born long before any one of them shows signs of becoming ill.
Often, the siblings of schizophrenics have also completed their families before the patient's condition becomes apparent. Some siblings, though, will have an opportunity to seek counseling before entering parenthood, as will the children of schizophrenic parents. The estimation of risks in the next generation should then depend upon the counseling team's evaluation of the individual sibling's or child's own chance of experiencing a schizophrenic breakdown. The situation is similar to that encountered in counseling, for example, young relatives of Huntington's patients, except that the risks to siblings and children of schizophrenic patients are considerably lower than the SO per cent risk for first-degree relatives in Huntington's disease. Frequently, however,

Vol. 23, No. 2

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

127

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

counselors are satisfied with citing the low known schizophrenics. To explore that

risks (approximately 2.5 per cent) to question, I want to review what is known

nephews and nieces or to grandchildren of about reproductive patterns in schizo-

schizophrenic patients; such figures apply phrenic patients.

only if the would-be parent remains free of

the disorder.
In general, neither a relationship to a known schizophrenic nor specifiable individual characteristics serve to identify pre-

MARITAL AND REPRODUCTIVE PATTERNS OF SCHIZOPHRENIC
PATIENTS

schizophrenic individuals as being at risk. Studies in Germany (Essen-Moller,

Thus, genetic counseling is not indicated 1935; Kallmann, 1938), Switzerland (Gar-

for most persons until after a breakdown ronne, 1962), Norway (0degaard, 1960),

has occurred, and the target group for and England (Norris, 1956) established

counseling is pretty much narrowed down that schizophrenic patients admitted to

to those who have already become ill. mental hospitals earlier in this century

I do not think there is usually much had, on the average, substantially reduced

question about the direction that genetic rates of marriage and reproduction com-

counseling should take in advising persons pared to the prevailing rates for the gen-

who have already experienced a schizo- eral populations of their own times and

phrenic breakdown or their spouses or places. Marriage and fertility differentials

prospective spouses. Parenthood and schi- may shift very rapidly as indirect conse-

zophrenia tend to mix poorly. In addition quences of social changes or of medical

to the genetic risks to the children of advances that improve life expectancies

schizophrenic parents, there is consider- and fully or partially normalize the living

able likelihood that any children of such style of the victims of a particular disor-

parents will be exposed to a disrupted der. Diabetes and hemophilia are cases in

home environment, and frequently to a point. Schizophrenia may be another.

grossly unsuitable one. The birth of a child often exacerbates the patient's illness, and the responsibilities of bringing up the children tend to trigger further difficulties.

Important changes in the hospitalization patterns of schizophrenic patients began to take place about twenty years ago, following the introduction of modern

Prospects for the nonschizophrenic · drug therapies and of the movement to-

spouse's happiness are not good either; it is ward out-of-hospital management. The

difficult to be mother and father, wage average length of separate stays in hospital

earner and homemaker, sometime mate has declined steadily ever since.

and companion, and, increasingly, part- To investigate the impact of this trend

time nurse and attendant to a departed upon schizophrenic patients' opportunities

mind. Most counselors would probably to marry and become parents, the late

agree that schizophrenic patients should Franz J. Kallmann initiated a study in

be advised against parenthood, or having 1960 in which marital and reproductive

further children, and probably even rates could be compared for patients ad-

against marriage if they are not already mitted at the beginning of the era of tran-

married.

quilizing drugs and outpatient care and

There is a question, however, regarding patients admitted at an earlier period of

the value of genetic counseling, at the time. Detailed description of the sampling,

population genetics level if not at the indi- diagnostic evaluations, follow-up proce-

vidual level, if counseling is confined to dures, and methods of analysis have been

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

128

Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

presented elsewhere (Erlenmeyer-Kimling not designated for follow-up. I will there-

et al., 1966, 1969; Goldfarb and Erlen- fore discuss the findings on the followed

meyer-Kimling, 1962).

cases only.

The admission periods selected were The main results that bear upon the

1934-36 and 1954-56. Sampling of con- question of genetic counseling and that in-

secutive admissions was carried out in 11 dicate important trends in the reproduc-

state hospitals in New York, yielding rec- tive patterns of schizophrenic individuals

ords on 9,790 admissions, unselected for may be summarized as follows.

diagnosis. Psychiatric reevaluation of 1. At the time of the survey admission

these records led to verified diagnoses of (i.e., the admission in 1934-36 or in

schizophrenia for 1,922 patients in the 1954--56 which was drawn through our

1934-36 period and 1,415 in the 1954-56 sampling procedures), proportionately

period. Marriage, fertility, psychiatric, more patients of both sexes in the 1954--56

and demographic data up to the time of sample were, or had been, married and

admission were recorded for all but 170 proportionately fewer had childless mar-

cases (110 in 1934-36, 60 in 1954-56) for riages than was true for the 1934--36 cases

which reliable information was unattain- (Table 1). As shown in Table 1, the child-

able. per-person rate (Line 5)--which provides

Randomly drawn subsamples consisting the best measure of the average reproducof approximately two-thirds of the white tive rate for the group--was significantly

cases in each sample were designated for higher in the 1954-56 sample, as was the

follow-up to the date of death, to the end proportion of patients who had produced of the reproductive period (age 45 for at least one child. The increase in mar-

women, age 50 for men), or to the time of riages, rather than higher fertility rates

investigation (1961-65). Follow-up was within marriage, accounted for the insuccessfully carried out for 81 per cent of creased reproduction of the later sample.

the cases attempted in the 1934-36 sample Male patients, starting from extremely low and 90 per cent of the cases attempted in marital and reproductive rates in the

the 1954--56 sample. No differences were 1934-36 sample, made greater gains than

found between the successfully followed did the females in the later sample.

cases and those unsuccessfully attempted, 2. The child-per-person rate was higher

or between the followed cases,and those for patients in the 1954-56 sample at all

TABLE l
MARRIAGE AND REPRODUCTION OF MALE AND FEMALE SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS AT "SURVEY ADMISSION"*

MARRIAGE AND
REPRODUCTION
Marriage Per cent ever married Per cent childless marriage
Reproduction Child/person Child/marriage Child/fertile marriage Per cent with one or more children
* Followed cases only; all ages combined.

MALES

1934-1936 (.V = 546)

1954-1956 (.V = 383)

24.2 40.6 28.7 24.1

0.4 0.7 1.9 1.6 2.6 2.2 17.3 30.8

FEMALES

1934-1936 (N = S72)

1954-1956 (X = 398)

S3.1 60.0 34.2 26.1

0.9 1.1 1.8 1.8 2.7 2.S 3S.0 44.4

Vol. 23, No. 2

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

129

historical reference points examined: onset 31, 1941, for the early sample and as of of illness, first admission, survey admis- December 31, 1961, for the later sample to sion (as noted above), and final date of provide standard reference points and follow-up. The differences between the' equal time intervals following survey adsamples with respect to this measure mission in which hospitalization patterns tended to widen over the course of the and reproductive histories could be examhistories, from onset forward (see Table ined. As may be seen in Table 3, the birth 2). rate during the interval (Line 1) was mar-

TABLE 2
REPRODUCTION MEASURED BY CHILD-PER-PERSON RATE AT REFERENCE POINTS IN MALE AND FEMALE SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS' HISTORIES

REFERENCE POINTS
Onset First admission . Survey admission .

MALES

1934-1936
0.3S 0.41 0.4S 0.60

1954-19S6
0.40 0.57 0.67 0.82

FEMALES

1934-1936
0.76 0.86 0.94 1.08

1954-1956
0.77 0.9S 1.10 1.21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

3. At final follow-up, the reproductive potential of the 1934-36 sample was nearly exhausted; only 8 per cent of the surviving patients were still within reproductive ages at that time. However, a number of patients in the later sample might have had additional children after the end of follow-up, as 57 per cent were then living and in the reproductive period.
4. Schizophrenic patients in previous investigations produced relatively few of the total number of children after first admission. In Kallmann's (1938) study of patients hospitalized in Berlin around the turn of the century, only 32 per cent of the offspring of male patients and only 20 per cent of the offspring of female patients were born after the parent's first hospitalization. Figures for our 1934-36 sample were virtually identical to Kallmann's findings. Compared to the earlier samples, patients in the 1954-56 sample had a substantially larger percentage of their children after first admission: 44 per cent of the children of male patients and 27 per cent of the children of female patients were produced after first admission.
5. Data were evaluated as of December

kedly higher in the 1954-56 group. For females, it was double the interval birth rate of the 1934-36 females, and for 1954-56 males it wasfour times as high as the rate for males in the early sample.
6. The hospitalization patterns of the two samples were quite different during the equivalent time intervals following survey admission. Of the patients admitted in 1934-36, 57 per cent remained hospitalized throughout the interval, and 70 per cent were resident patients at the end of the interval. By contrast, 27 per cent of the later group stayed in the hospital continuously, and 38 per cent were inpatients at the standard evaluation date. Time spent outside of hospitalization may be regarded as a measure of "opportunity" for marriage and reproduction, and the 1954-56 patients clearly had more opportunity (Table 3, Line 2).
7. The effect of increased opportunity upon the increased birth rate of the later sample can be assessed by comparing the average birth rate per year of opportunity in the two samples (Table 3, Line 3). First of all, this comparison demonstrates that when unequal amounts of opportunity are

130

Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

TABLE 3
BIRTH RATES OF SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS DURING THE STANDARD EVALUATION INTERVAL FOLLOWING SURVEY ADMISSION*

VARIABLES

MALES

1934-1936

1954-1956

Birth ratet for total interval Mean no. years out of hospital Birth rate per year out

0.04 0.16 1.8S 3.61 0.02 0.04

* All ages combined. t Birth rate = number of births/number of patients in the group.

FEMALES

1934-1936

1954-1956

0.06 0.16 2.06 3.93 0.03 0.04

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

controlled for, the intersample difference in the birth rates is markedly reduced. Thus, a large part of the gain in reproduction evidenced by the 1954-56 patients during the standard evaluation interval was indeed attributable to the greater degree of opportunity enjoyed by those patients compared to their peers in the earlier sample.
Second, controlling for differences in opportunity does not completely eliminate the between-sample differences in birth rate. It is evident, therefore, that patients in the 1954-56 sample actually utilized their opportunities to a greater extent than did patients in the earlier admission period. This finding fits with the observation that, even prior to onset and first admission, marriage and reproduction rates for the later group exceeded those for the 1934-36 cases at the same reference points in their histories.
Several factors probably account for the greater utilization of opportunity by the more recently admitted group. Especially important is the fact that, between the 1930's and 1950's, the general population of the United States experienced pronounced trends toward increased marriage and birth rates, earlier marriages, and less delay before birth of a first child.
8. To understand the implications--if any--of the rising birth rate among schizophrenic patients, it is necessary to examine the magnitude of changes in the differential reproduction of such patients relative to the reproductive rates in the

general population. Table 4 presents the reproductive rates of the schizophrenic women in each sample, at survey admission and at the end of the standard evaluation interval, as well as similar reproductive measures for cohorts of U.S. women.3 Figures for the U.S. women refer to cohorts that were between the ages of 15 and 44 in 1935 or 1955--as were the schizophrenic women at survey admission--and to the same cohorts of women between the ages of 22 and 51 at the end of 1941 or 1961, the same ages as the schizophrenic women at the end of the standard evaluation interval. The reproductive rate is calculated throughout as the child-per-person rate, using all women, married and unmarried, as the base for each age group.
Table 4 also gives the reproductive rates of the schizophrenic women as ratios of the reproductive rates of the U.S. women. Obviously, the rates for the schizophrenic women in the earlier sample were significantly depressed below those for the general population women. This fact was still true for the schizophrenic women admitted in 1954-56, and it is apparent from Table 4 that they were still not doing very well in comparison with the population of their time. Nevertheless, the data do show a small but significant narrowing of the
3 The calculations of reproductive rates of the U.S. women were derived from unpublished data on birth cohorts of native white women in the United States. These data were kindly supplied for our use by Dr. Arthur A. Campbell, Chief, Natality Statistics, National Center for Health Statistics.

Vol. 23, No. 2

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

131

TABLE 4
REPRODUCTIVE RATES AND RELATIVE FERTILITY RATIOS FOR SCHIZOPHRENIC WOMEN AT SURVEY ADMISSION AND STANDARD EVALUATION COMPARED TO U.S. WOMEN OF THE SAME AGES AND SAME PERIODS OF TIME

Periods and Ages

Schizophrenic Women

Earlier period Ages 15-44 in 1934-36 Ages 22-51 in 1941

0.7S 0.82

Later period Ages 15-44 in 1954-56 Ages 22-51 in 1961

1.09 LU

* Ratio = reproductive rate of schizophrenic women/reproductive rate of U.S. women.

U.S. Women
1.30 1.79
1.56 2^31

0.58 0.46 0.70 0.54

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

reproductive differential between schizophrenic and general population women.
Moreover, age-specific data reported in Erlenmeyer-Kimling et al. (1969) reveal that the reproductive rates of the 1954--56 schizophrenic women and those of the general population were closer at every age, both at admission and at evaluation, than were the reproductive rates of the 1934-36 schizophrenic women and of the general population of their time. Of particular importance is the fact that the largest differences were observed among the patients who were in the younger age groups at admission.
9. Figures on the reproductive rates of men in the United States population are not available. Data on the schizophrenic men in our samples, however, may be compared with those for U.S. women five years younger than the male patients to allow for a sex difference in the average age at marriage. At the end of the standard evaluation interval, men in the early sample had only 27 per cent (reproductive rate, 0.27) as many children as the general population women of their time, while men in the later sample had 40 per cent as many children as women in the United States in 1961. Similar differences between the two samples can be seen in every age group. Thus, between the two time periods under study, the schizophrenic men, even more than the schizo-

phrenic women, exhibited a sharp decline in the magnitude of the previously existing reproductive disadvantage relative to the general population.
In summary, the study indicates: (1) a trend toward increased marital and reproductive rates was apparent for schizophrenic patients of both sexes at the beginning of the era in which tranquilizing drugs and community-care programs came into prominence; (2) the decreased duration of hospitalizations was partly responsible for the trend in marriage and reproduction, but other factors must also have played a role; and (3) the differential between the reproductive rates of schizophrenic patients and those of the general population wasin the process of declining.
Data on schizophrenic women hospitalized in Norway in 1936 and in 19SS (0degaard, 1960) are consistent with our findings on the New York State patientsof both sexes. Theoretical calculations derived by Bodmer (1968) on the expected reproductive rates and fitness ratios of male and female schizophrenics in the United States in 1940, 19S0, and 1960 point to the same kind of trend observed in our sample, although Bodmer's estimates suggest even larger increases in reproduction and in "fitness" than we were able to show for our 1954--56 sample.
The extent to which relaxation of selection against schizophrenia may be ex-

132

Erlenmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

pected to increase the incidence of the illness in the immediate future depends upon two unknowns: the genetic basis for the disorder and the nature of factors responsible for maintaining schizophrenia--and the underlying gene or genes--in the face of strong negative selection thus far. Monogenic and heterogenic theories suggest more important immediate consequences than would be expected under polygenic theories. Even polygenic models, however, would predict increasing frequencies of implicated genes and of the disorder itself in future generations as an outcome of a long-term decline in a previously existing reproductive disadvantage.
Some of the increase in "fitness" displayed by the 1954-56 patients might have been pared down if genetic counseling had been available on a systematic basis following a first, or even a second, admission to a mental hospital. As noted above, these patients--unlike schizophrenic individuals observed in samples from earlier admission periods--contracted a considerable number of marriages and produced a considerable number of children after the first hospitalization. A good part of the difference in the reproductive rate of the two samples at final follow-up resulted from births that took place after patients in the 1954--56 group had already experienced a schizophrenic breakdown.
It is likely that patients being admitted to mental hospitals now, and those being treated outside hospital facilities, are following patterns similar to those seen for the 1954--56 sample, and possibly experiencing even greater gains in reproduction both before and after onset of the disorder. Certainly, genetic counseling could benefit persons already recognized as being ill, and to the extent that it might succeed in lowering their subsequent birth rate, counseling would help to attenuate a trend toward relaxation of existing selection pressures.

Nevertheless, it is clear that counseling of patients can have only a very limited impact upon the reduction of schizophrenia risks as a whole. The majority of children of schizophrenic parents probably will continue to be born before the parent's illness becomes evident; and the majority of schizophrenics-to-be still are born to parents who will never display a schizophrenic psychosis. To be effective, genetic counseling would have to reach both preschizophrenic individuals and the ostensibly unaffected persons who are capable of producing children with a genetic predisposition to develop the disorder. As I pointed out earlier, however, neither preschizophrenics nor potential parents of schizophrenics can usually be recognized at present.
EARLY IDENTIFICATION OF VULNERABILITY
Early identification of individuals with a predisposition to schizophrenia is the main goal of one type of research that is being pursued by a number of workers. These studies start with groups of individuals who are considered, on a statistical basis, to be at high risk for developing the disorder later in life, but who have not yet done so at the time of the initial examination.
The criteria used in defining risk are not the same in all studies. Some investigators (Watt, 1972) prefer to select subjects on the basis of specific behaviors or behavioral profiles that are hypothesized to be characteristic of preschizophrenics. Many researchers, though, consider that the association between given behaviors in childhood and later manifestation of schizophrenia remains to be documented and that groups of subjects for whom empirical risk figures are well established

Vol. 23, No. 2

Schizophrenia: A Bag of Dilemmas

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

make better candidates for high-risk research at this time.
In particular, children of schizophrenic mothers and fathers--for whom reported risk estimates average about 12 per cent (range, 7 to 19 per cent)--are being examined in infancy, childhood, and adolescence in several studies (see Garmezy, 1974). Two of our studies (ErlenmeyerKimling, 1973) allow comparisons to be made between groups of children with different levels of risk by including, in addition to children with one affected parent, children with two schizophrenic parents; the latter group has an estimated schizophrenia risk of 39 per cent.
The investigations of high-risk subjects share common objectives concerned with the evaluation of etiological questions, which retrospective research tends to obscure, and with the unfolding of the disease process. Above all, however, these studies aim at developing measures, behavioral or biological, that can be used for reliably identifying vulnerable persons well in advance of the onset of overt symptoms. By definition, of course, such measures would also reveal which members of a group at high statistical risk would actually be expected not to undergo serious mental difficulties.
It is not unreasonable to assume that vulnerable children in the statistically low-risk population at large could eventually be located through mass-screening programs using adaptations of the identification measures originally worked out in the studies of high-risk groups. Thus, it is quite possible that the majority of predisposed individuals could be recognized early in life and that they would therefore become accessible to genetic counseling.
Early identification, should have other more immediately satisfying ramifications beyond an increase in the efficiency of genetic counseling. Specifically, the ability to distinguish youngsters in need of atten-

tion is the sine qua non for preventive intervention efforts. The endeavor to develop intervention methods aimed at preventing, or at least moderating, a psychotic breakdown is a major long-term goal of much of the ongoing research on high-risk subjects.
To the extent that combined goals of detection, mass screening, and successful interventions can be realized, the frequency of manifest schizophrenia can be expected to decline dramatically.
However, the proportion of genotypically predisposed individuals would not decline as a consequence of preventive intervention. In fact, it might increase slightly because, if prevention worked well enough, any vestige of a former selective disadvantage would probably disappear. But, if prevention worked well enough--meaning that it could ensure adequate functioning in adult life--would an increase of "schizophrenic genes" matter? The answer, depending upon a number of factors including costs and personal inconveniences entailed in detection and intervention, might be "yes."
SUMMARY
I have called schizophrenia "a bag of dilemmas" because: (1) Until the disorder can effectively be prevented from developing through environmental interventions, the reduction of risks through genetic counseling is clearly desirable. (2) The role of genetic counseling is sharply restricted, however, until measures for reliable early identification of preschizophrenic individuals become available. (3) Once detection is possible at relatively young ages, vulnerable persons become accessible to both genetic counseling and preventive intervention. (4) Prevention of adverse effects of the illness may allow implicated genes to accumulate in greater frequency in the future. (5) Costs of intervention, and

134

Erienmeyer-Kimling

Social Biology

other considerations, might make genetic

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

counseling advisable despite prevention of distressing phenotypic manifestations. (6)

Research reported in this paper has been supported by Public Health Service grants

The ethical aspects of promoting genetic MH-03532 andMH-19S60 from theNational

counseling among persons whoare not ex- Institute of Mental Health and by a grant

pected toexperience a serious illness(and

from The Benevolent Foundation of Scottish Rite Freemasonry, Northern Jurisdiction,

whose children are not expected toeither) U.S.A. This paper was prepared fora confer-

are in doubt. (7) The effectiveness of ence on Genetic Counseling inPsychiatricDis-

counseling in such a situation is also in

orders: State of the Science and the Art, May 17, 1973, at the University of Indiana, In-

doubt.

dianapolis.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ALTSHULTER, K. Z., and B. SARLIN. 1962. Deafness SINGER, and B.JACOBSEN, 1975. Mental illnessin

and schizophrenia: Interrelation of communication the biological and adoptive families of adopted

stress, maturation lag and schizophrenic risk. In individuals whohave become schizophrenic: A

F. J. Kallmann, L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, E. V. preliminary report based on interviews with the

Glanville, andJ. D. Rainder (eds.), Expanding relatives. In R. R. Fieve, D. Rosenthal, and H.

goals ofgenetics inpsychiatry. Grune & Stratton, Brill (eds.), Genetic research in psychiatry. Johns

New York.

Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.

BODMER, W. F. 1968.Demographic approaches to NORRIS, V. 1956. A statistical study ofthe influence

the measurement ofdifferential selection in human of marriage in thehospital care of the mentally

populations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 59:691-699. sick. J. Ment. Sci. 102:467.

ERLENMEYER-KIMLING, L. 1973. Comments on ØDEGAARD, O. 1960.Marriage rate and fertility in

past and present: Genetic research onschizophre- psychotic patients before hospital admissionand

nia. Psychiat. Quart. 46:363-370, 585.

after discharge. Intl. J. Soc. Psychiat. 6:25-33.

ERLENMEYER-KIMLING, L., S. NICOL, J. D. ROSENTHAL, D. 1970. Genetic theory and abnormal

RAINER, and W. E. DEMING. 1969. Changes in behavior. McGraw-Hill, New York.

fertility rates of schizophrenic patients in New

. 1972. Three adoption studies of heredity in

York State. Amer. J. Psychiat. 125:916-927.

the schizophrenic disorders, p. 63-75. In L.

ERLENMEYER-KIMLING, L., J. D. RAINER, F. J.
KALLMANN. 1966. Current reproductive trends in schizophrenia: Apsychiatric-genetic survey. InP. H. Hoch and J. Zubin (eds.), Schizophrenia. Grune & Stratton, New York. ESSEN-MÖLLER, E. 1935. Untersuchunger über die Fruchtbarkeit gewisser Gruppen von Geisteskranken. Acta Psychiat. Neurol. Scand. Suppl. 8 GARMEZY, N. 1974. Children at risk: The search for the antecedents ofschizophrenia. Part II: Ongoing research programs, issues, and intervention. Schiz. Bull. 9:55-125. GARRONE, G. 1962. Étude statistique etgénétique de la schizophrénie à Genève de 1901 à 1950.J. génét, hum. 11:89-219.

Erlenmeyer-Kimling (ed.), Genetics and mental disorders. Intl. J. Ment. Hlth. 1. RÜDIN, E. 1916. Studien über Vererbung undEntstehung geistiger Störungen. I. Zur Vererbung und Neuentstehung der Dementia praecox. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. SCHARFETTER, C. 1972.Studies ofheredity in symbiontic psychoses, p. 116-123. In L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling (ed.), Genetics and mental disorders. Intl. J. Ment. Hlth. 1. SHIELDS, J. 1968. Summary ofthegenetic evidence. In D. Rosenthal and S. S. Kety (eds.), Thetransmission of schizophrenia. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
SLATER, E., and V. A. COWIE. 1971.The genetics of

GOLDFARB, C., and L. ERLENMEYER-KIMLING. mental disorder. Oxford Univ. Press, London.

1962. Mating and fertility trends in schizophrenia. In F. J. Kallmann, L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, E. V. Glanville, and J. D. Rainer (eds.), Expanding goals ofgenetics in psychiatry. Grune & Stratton, New York.

WATT, N. 1972.School-age children at risk by genetic and behavioral criteria. Position paper presented at Conference on Risk for Schizophrenia, Dorado Beach, Puerto Rico, October 18-22.

HESTON, L. L. 1966. Psychiatric disorders in foster WENDER, P. H., D. ROSENTHAL, and S. S. KETY.

home reared children of schizophrenic mothers. 1968. A psychiatric assessment of the adoptive

Brit. J. Psychiat. 112:819-825.

parents ofschizophrenics. In D. Rosenthal and S.

KALLMANN, F. H. 1938. Thegenetics of schizophre- S. Kety (eds.), The transmission ofschizophrenia.

nia. J. J. Augustin, New York.

Pergamon Press, Oxford.

KARLSSON, J. L. 1966. The biological basis of ZERBIN-RÜDIN, E. 1967. Endogene Psychosen. In schizophrenia. Charles CThomas, Springfield, Ill. P. E. Becker (ed.), Humangenetik, ein kurzes

KETY, S., D. ROSENTHAL, P. WENDER, F. SCHUL- Handbuch. Vol. V/2. Thieme, Stuttgart.

