Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Evolution of human behavior
S. L. Washburn & E. R. McCown
To cite this article: S. L. Washburn & E. R. McCown (1972) Evolution of human behavior, Social Biology, 19:2, 163-170, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987980 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987980
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 43 View related articles Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

Evolution of Human Behavior

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

S. L. Washburn and E. R. McCown
Department of Anthropology University of California Berkeley, California

Man strides bipedally (Napier, 1970), manufactures skillfully (Oakley, 19S4, 1972), and speaks using a phonetic code. These fundamental abilities are expressed by intelligent human beings living together in societies. Man's evolution is the complex process by which selection has moved the course of human evolution further and further from that of his ape-like relatives. During the lifetime of an individual, biology makes the behaviors possible, but from the long-term evolutionary point of view, both behavior and biology evolve in a feedback relationship. For example, a human child easily learns to speak because it has both the neurological base and the articulatory apparatus, whereas a chimpanzee cannot be taught to speak because it lacks the necessary biological base. In human evolution, the initial success of some system of sound communication, a system different from that of any existing primate, must have led to selection for the genes responsible for the new structures.
The fundamental human behaviors evolved at very different times, and to facilitate discussion, may be divided into four stages: Ape to Man; Australopithecus (in the widest sense); Homo erectus (in the traditional sense of Java, Peking, and related forms) ; and Homo sapiens. Since

evolution is a continuous process, using these divisions is not meant to suggest any major discontinuities in the process.
APE (Pongidae) TO MAN (Hominidae)
Recent studies show that man is much more closely related to the African apes than to any other kind of primate (study of higher organism DNA, Kohne, 1970; sequence data, Goodman, 1971; immunoIogical investigations, Wilson and Sarich, 1969, Sarich, 1970). According to the molecular information, man and chimpanzee are so similar that they are almost indistinguishable (Washburn, 1972). Goodman (1963) noted the great similarity of man, chimpanzee, and gorilla some years ago, but there was reluctance to accept this conclusion. It is now supported by so many lines of evidence that the matter may be considered settled. It is striking that the phylogenetic tree of the primates based on DNA hybridization published by Kohne in 1970 would have caused no comment in 1870; after all, it was the classic view of Huxley and Darwin.
The field studies of the behavior of the contemporary primates are in accord with the conclusion of the biochemical data. The results can be summarized under three headings. First, the use of objects by chim-

163

164

Washburn and McCown

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

panzees is far greater than in any other nonhuman primate (van Lawick-Goodall, 1970). Chimps use sticks in agonistic displays, in hitting, prying, digging, and in gathering food; they use leaves to cleanse themselves and get water; they throw stones in displays and sometimes use them for opening nuts. They use a wide variety of objects in play. Limited as these uses may be from a human standpoint, they constitute more than all object use of all other animals combined (Lancaster, 1968).
Second, hunting by chimpanzees may take the form of a sudden attack or a cooperative action by several males (van Lawick-Goodall, 1968). Third, the gestures used by chimpanzees are remarkably human. They beg with the palm of the hand held up and give reassurance by placing the arm around the shoulders of another animal (van Lawick-Goodall, 1971). Many similarities in gesture and posture are the result of having comparable anatomical structures (stretching with arms held out to the sides, balancing the same way, folding the arms, swinging the arms, leaping with hind legs and landing on the hind legs --a remarkably human way to jump which is very different from that of a quadrupedal monkey).
In summary, many of the behaviors which were thought to be unique to man have now been observed in free-ranging chimpanzees. Obviously, the evolution of ape behavior (of the general kind seen in contemporary chimpanzee) to human behavior would be a transition of a lesser degree than from monkey to ape behavior patterns.
The field studies have shown that rather than being arboreal, both chimpanzee and gorilla are ground-living and both are knuckle-walkers. This fundamentally changes the investigation into the origins of man; the question now is how did a

ground-living knuckle-walker become a biped, not how an arboreal ape came to the ground (Washburn, 1968).
The suggestion that there was a time when our ancestors were knuckle-walkers comes from several sources: (1) Human hands are basically ape-like rather than monkey-like (Marzke, 1971; Tuttle, 1969; Lewis, 1969). (2) Hand bones from Olduvai Gorge dated at about 1.8 million years ago are halfway between the hand of man and the hand of gorilla (Napier, 1970). (3) Man still uses the knuckle-walking position on occasion, and though uncommon, it is anatomically possible and might have been a part of the normal behavior repertoire of our ancestors who had shorter legs and longer arms.
Some investigators have taken the position that our ancestors could not have been knuckle-walkers because man lacks some anatomical features of the contemporary chimpanzee and gorilla. This reasoning is reminiscent of the argument that our ancestors could never have been brachiators, although humans can be seen swinging in typical ape style in any playground or gymnasium. Given the comparable problem of moving along a bar too high to reach from the ground, man, chimpanzee, and gorilla all swing under the bar, using the same anatomy in the same way. In the same situation, a monkey runs quadrupedally on top of the bar. The fundamental point is that if evolution is predominantly determined by natural selection, and if success is mediated through behaviors, then anatomy must be interpreted in terms of behavior; if man can perform an action today, he may have performed it more frequently in the past.
The anatomy must correlate with the whole range of behaviors by which a species adapts. A behavior profile is much more useful than a term describing a single activity. A great deal of confusion has come

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Behavior

165

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

from labeling behaviors by such terms as "brachiation," with its implication that the animal only did one thing. Chimpanzees knuckle-walk, climb, and brachiate. From a similar pattern of behaviors, our ancestors may have decreased their climbing activity, added bipedal running, and retained slow knuckle-walking.
In comparing the anatomy of ape and man, first the behavior must be considered and then the structures which make it possible. Comparable actions based on comparable anatomy form the basis for judgment. This can be illustrated in the case of the gorilla foot. In walking, the heel strikes the ground first and there is little midtarsal bending; the big toe is important in weight-bearing. The soft tissues make the foot far more human in appearance and function than would be predictable from the bones, traditional proportions, or deep anatomy.
However the problems of the origin of man may be settled, the molecular information (which is quantifiable, countable, and reproducible in different laboratories) is putting new limits on evolutionary speculations. Since this kind of information is increasing very rapidly, it can be expected to further limit evolutionary theorizing. The field studies suggest that the problems of coming to the ground, walking, hunting, and object-using all need fundamental reexamination. Anatomical studies need to be reevaluated in the light of behavior and molecular biology.
Australopithecus
The remarkable new discoveries in the East Rudolf and Omo areas have already been reported at this symposium. The interpretation of the specimens of Australopithecus from South Africa was hampered because of the complicated nature of the cave deposits and lack of radiometric dates.

Beginning with the determination of the K-A dates for Olduvai Gorge which were later supported by numerous dates from northern Kenya and southern Ethiopia, it became clear that there were at least two kinds of Australopithecus living in the African savanna for at least two million years before Homo erectus appeared, approximately one million years ago (Howell and Tattersall, 1971). Stone tools1 of simple forms (Oldowan) had appeared by 2.6 million years ago, and it is probable they will also be found in much earlier deposits since the fragments of Australopithecus have been dated at more than four million years.
The radiometric dates show that the stage of human evolution represented by Australopithecus was relatively long and that stone tools existed for millions of years before Homo erectus. These facts strengthen the notion that the success of object-using was the new selection pressure which led a knuckle-walker to evolve into a biped. The whole range of behaviors which become possible with carrying and skillful object-using would have changed the direction of evolution and made it possible for Australopithecus to live in the savanna and to hunt more effectively. However this may be, the new dates and fossils establish that the origin of man (the divergence of man and ape) is separated from the origin of large-brained man by some millions of years. The evidence suggests that most of what is regarded as human today (intelligence, skillful use of complex tools, language) evolved in the last million years, long after the human line had sepa-
1 On the basis of extensive study of hyenas and their lairs, Sutcliffe (1970) has shown that hyenas do collect bones and that the collections known to be of hyena origin are very similar to those found in the South African deposits with Australopithecus. Claims for an osteodontokeratic culture are certainly unfounded.

166

Washburn and McCown

Social Biology-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

rated from that leading to the contempo- (1961) proposed that the learned, cultur-

rary apes.

ally patterned behavior of early man be

Homo erectus

referred to as "protoculture," and that the word "culture" be reserved for modern man

Anatomically, Homo erectus differs from {Homo sapiens sapiens).

Australopithecus by having approximately twice the cranial capacity (Tobias 1971,

Homo sapiens sapiens

p. 98). As is to be expected, if Australopith- With the advent of anatomically modern

ecus evolved into Homo, there are inter- man, the rate of cultural evolution under-

mediate forms with corresponding capaci- goes a vast acceleration. The degree of

ties, a subject which has been carefully continuity between the populations of an-

reviewed by Tobias (1971). It is probable cient man and those of modern man may

that there were important changes in the have been exaggerated. In a period of a

pelvis and femur (Zihlman, 1971). Behav- few thousand years (about forty thousand

iorally, there appear to have been major years ago) man invented many kinds of

changes. Homo erectus may have evolved tools, weapons, and boats and established

from one species of Australopithecus and agriculture. In this moment, from an evolu-

displaced the other. After the advent of tionary point of view, man invaded the

Homo erectus there is no evidence for more Arctic and peopled the New World. It is

than one species of man, and this species possible that this cultural explosion was

was distributed all over the tropical and based in large part on the evolution of

temperate zones of the Old World. Hunting languages of modern form. Foster (1971),

was a major activity, and the evidence in- in particular, has developed the theory that

dicates that large animals were killed fre- all languages spoken today could have

quently. A variety of complex tools was evolved from a single language some 40,000

manufactured. In contrast to the earlier years ago. This is not to suggest that there

Oldowan stone tools, the Acheulian stone might not have been simpler forms of lan-

tools are very difficult to make, and their guage in earlier times. The extensive ana-

presence implies a level of skill far beyond tomical base for language indicates that

anything associated with Australopithecus. there must have been a long evolution in

This stage of unspedalized hunting has which simpler speech behavior evolved in

been described by J. Desmond Clark a feedback relationship with neural and

(1970) and the biological and cultural in- articulatory structures. The split brain op-

terrelations of evolution by Grahame Clark erations have settled the long controversies

(1970).

on the nature of localization of speech

But in spite of the use of fire and a way (Gazzaniga, 1970).

of life more human than apelike, material The interrelations of human behav-

progress was very slow. The unspecialized ior, as revealed by the archeological rec-

hunting way of life existed for several hun- ord, and human biology, as partially

dred thousand years, and even particular reflected in the fragmentary fossils, show

tools (Acheulian biface) were made over slow change over some millions of years,

long periods of time and were distributed ending with the evolution of a creature

over huge geographic areas. Archeological with a remarkable capacity for learning.

evidence suggests that these ancient men Yet this capacity is not unlimited, nor is it

were not fully human from an intellectual general, and the evolutionary approach is

point of view and for this reason Hallowell one way of examining the nature of modern

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Behavior

167

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

man. The matter may.be simply stated: Our biological nature evolved under conditions which no longer exist. Homo sapiens sapiens evolved in small social groups. Gathering and hunting supported sparse populations. It was a world in which most people died young (Vallois, 1961). There may have been no more than ten to twenty million people in the entire world twenty thousand years ago. Human brains evolved as adaptive mechanisms under these conditions, and this created an organ with remarkable abilities and peculiar limitations.
Consider some of the implications of viewing the human brain as an outmoded organ of adaptation. Man easily learns the kinds of behaviors which have been important in the evolution of the species (Hamburg, 1963) because of the feedback relationship between successful behavior and biological evolution. It produces brains which learn certain behaviors far more easily than others. This has already been mentioned in the case of language, and the point can be further illustrated with the example of skillful throwing. Chimpanzees throw both underhand and overhand. Powerful throwing requires the overhand throw, which is anatomically possible only for apes and man. However, chimpanzees only throw when actually displaying or attacking, while man practices repeatedly to attain skill in throwing stones, baseballs, spears, or whatever is determined by the cultural tradition. The skill is learned in play and is rewarded by society; thus, the abilities controlled by the brain only develop under social circumstances. Throwing has been of the greatest adaptive importance in hunting and war, and it is remarkable how many games include throwing and how pleasurable it is for the individuals involved. Even such an apparently simple act as throwing takes into account anatomy, the brain, learning, and social encouragement.

Hunting, a more complicated activity, has been so important in the evolution of man that people learn to enjoy it, even without reasonable reward, and will hunt or fish at great effort and expense. Our government for many years has raised fish and game exclusively for the pleasure of hunters, and no one questions these expenditures. Here again is a behavior which can be learned with facility and, unless taught otherwise, men enjoy the chase and the kill. Hunting not only illustrates the principle of "ease of learning," but points to the very specific personal and social rewards which can only be determined by studying human behavior. Examining the activities of throwing and hunting provides a new way of looking at human behavior.
The peculiarities of the human mind are not limited to cases of this sort in which evolution has produced a fit between human biology and formerly effective human behaviors. Confronted with the experiences of the small tribal world of primitive man, the human brain makes a series of fundamental mistakes which are common to all mankind. In the prescientific world, the human brain interpreted the world as small and flat; spontaneous generation was taken for granted; causes were human actions or the actions of spirits or gods; nature was personified; and there was profound confusion between the conscious nature of man and the nature of the world. In the physical and biological sciences this primitive view has been replaced, and every dimension of reality--time, space, size, cause--is new. All the theories of science are almost unbelievably different, a change due to the techniques of science, not to the greater intelligence of human beings.
But even in scientific thought, these changes are very recent. Belief in spontaneous generation was abandoned by scientists less than a hundred years ago. Some understanding of the nature of dreaming

168

Washburn and McCown

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

has been achieved only in the last twenty years. But social customs are old, and the categories of the social sciences remain the categories of the primitive world. This is the fundamental reason for the difficulty in relating biology to social science.
For example, all societies have religions (Murdock, 194S), and some notion of their variety may be obtained from the reader compiled by Lessa and Vogt (1965). Institutionalized religion has numerous social and psychological functions, and these cannot be attributed to biology. All religions are based on the way the untrained human mind deals with the problems of nature and causes. Without the peculiarity of the human mind there would be no religions. The personification of nature affects man's view of disease, law, economics, and political systems. The human mind is an organ of adaptation which evolved under conditions which existed during the period in which man lived in small hunting and gathering groups and continued evolving in agricultural societies. Under those conditions, the institutions of primitive society were a natural development; but in any other sense religion is not necessary, efficient, or real.
This point may be further illustrated by considering aggressive behaviors (Washburn and Hamburg, 1968). Man easily learns to be aggressive, and the nature and quantity of aggression through the ages surpasses modern belief (Freedman, 1964). Very aggressive behaviors were necessary for the survival of most human societies. The biological basis of aggression is in the brain (Mark and Ervin, 1970) and is regulated by hormones (Hamburg, 1971). In European society at least, aggression was practiced in play and highly rewarded socially, which does not mean that man had to learn to be aggressive, but that he was very likely to. In our time aggression does not account for the institution of war, but

it is very difficult to see how war could have been so prevalent and so exalted had man not been highly aggressive. Aggressive acts (acts inflicting damage on another) are not, and have not been, limited to war. In the European tradition, damaging acts were used in child rearing and teaching and were regarded as the natural way to guide the young. Over much of the world torture has been a common human activity. Aggressive acts permeate societies, and in this sense, it is not possible to understand aggression by studying only war. A full understanding comes when the social situation is seen as a product of biology and culture.
The notion that a species readily learns those behaviors which have been important in its evolutionary past is fundamental to the evolutionary approach to human behavior (Hamburg, 1963). Man easily learns to be religious, to be aggressive, to be social. Social learning is complex and is acquired more easily with the near and the few (for these are the dimensions of primitive society) than with the many and the remote. The Vietnam war exemplifies this most clearly, where standards of behavior tolerated in Vietnam would never have been allowed near home.
Another way of using the evolutionary data is to stress that customs are carried by people and that different ways of acting have different biological costs. For example, warfare among Plains Indians put such demands on young men that some could not adjust, and these men attired themselves in women's clothing and did not take part in the system of attaining prestige through extreme violence. Viewing customs as adaptations permits the assessment of ways of life. Because a custom exists does not mean that it is effective or necessary. The crosscultural method merely tells us what the customs are, not the costs. For example, at the present time there is much discussion

Vol. 19, No.2

Evolution of Human Behavior

169

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

about schools. For millions of people to would behard to devise a worse system for

spend a quarter of their lives in school isa educating human beings. The study of how

new social situation.

humans learn and of the evolution of learn-

It might be supposed that the study of ing is very different from the study of

the evolution of behavior would have little schools. The study of the schools cannot

to contribute to understanding newsocial possibly tell us how humans learn because

institutions, but the study of evolution tells natural learning situations have been ex-

a great deal about how animals learn.The cluded from the activities in the schools.

points have been considered in more detail There are many other consequences of

elsewhere (Washburn, 1971), but the fol- continuing to live in the primitive world.

lowing are the mean issues. Early experi- They relate to the political process, the

ence is tremendously important, partic- nature of leadership, law, our view of

ularly so in the case of slowly maturing causes, socialization, and the whole realm

man. Learning first takes place in emotional, close interpersonal situations and is later motivated by clearly defined objec-

of creative activity. One of thepurposes of the study of evolution is to see man in a

tives. Repetition is guaranteed by pleasur- new perspective. Whatever future there

able activity until skills are mastered. Peers may be, the actors in the newsocialsys-

are important in transmitting education. tems will be human beings with the pro-

Rewards are highly specific. The traditional found consequences this has for any soci-

American educational system hasnot been ety. Thephysical sciences have created a

operated in accord with what weknow about new world of technical possibilities far

how primates learn. It starts too late, relies beyond the dreams of our ancestors. Biol-

on words rather than actions andon disci- ogy and thestudy of evolution can help to

pline rather than play. Thegoals are not free man from the limitations of the primi-

clear to either teacher or student, and peers tive world so that he may live with fewer

are excluded from the role of teacher. I t constraints in this new world.

REFERENCES

CLARK, GRAHAME. 1970. Aspects of prehistory. S. L. Washburn (ed.), Thesocial life of early

University of California Press, Berkeley.

man. Aldine, Chicago.

CLARK, J. DESMOND. 1970. The prehistory of HAMBURG, D. A. 1963.Emotions in the perspec-

Africa. Thames and Hudson, London.

tive of human evolution, p. 330-317. In P.

FOSTER, MARY L. 1971. American Indian andOld Knapp (ed.), Expression of the emotions in

World languages: A model for reconstruction. man. International Universities Press, New

Paper presented at meeting of the American York.

Anthropological Association, New York.

. 1971. Understanding aggression. Internat.

FREEDMAN, DEREK. 1964. Human aggression in J. Soc. Sci. 23:36-46.

anthropological perspective. In J. D. Carthy HOWELL, F. C., and I. TATTERSALL. 1971. Homini-

and F. J. Ebling (eds.), The natural history of dae, p. 220-221. In. McGraw-Hill Yearbook of

aggression. Academic Press, New York.

Science and Technology. McGraw-Hill Book

GAZZANIGA, M. S. 1970. The bisected brain. Ap- Co., Inc., New York.

pleton-Century-Crofts, New York.

KOHNE, E. E. 1970.Evolution of higher-organism

GOODMAN, MORRIS. 1963. Man's place in the phy- DNA. Quart. Rev. Biophysics 3:327-375.

logeny of the primates as reflected in serum LANCASTER, J. B. 1968.Onthe evolution of tool-

proteins, p. 204-234. In S. L. Washburn (ed.), using behavior. Amer. Anthropol. 70:56-66.

Classification and human evolution. Aldine, LESSA, W. A., and E. Z. VOGT. 1965. Reader in

Chicago.

comparative religion: An anthropological ap-

GOODMAN, MORRIS, JOHN BARNABAS, GENJIMAT- proach. Harper and Row, New York.

SUDA, and G. W. MOORE. 1971. Molecular evo- LEWIS, O. J. 1969. The hominoid wrist joint.

lution in the descent of man. Nature 233:604- Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 30:251-268.

613. MARK, VERNON H., and F. R. ERVIN. 1970. Vio-

HALLOWELL, A. I. 1961. Theprocultural founda- lence and the brain. Harper and Row, New

tions of human adaptation, p. 236-255. In York.

170

Washburn and McCown

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

MARZKE, M. R. W. 1971. Origin of the human VAN LAWICK-GOODALL, JANE. 1968. The behaviour

hand. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 34:61-84.
MURDOCH, G. P. 1945. The common denominator of cultures, pp. 123-142. In The science ofman

of free-living chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Reserve. Animal Behaviour Monographs 1:161311.

in the world crisis. Columbia Univ. Press, New

. 1970. Tool-using in primates and other

York.

vertebrates, p. 19S-249. In R. A. Hinde and

NAPIER, J. R. 1970. The roots of mankind. Smith- Evelyn Shaw (eds.), Advances in the study of

sonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

behaviour, Vol. 3.

OAKLEY, K. P. 1954.Skill as a human possession, p. 1-37.In Charles Singer, E. J. Holmyard, A. R. Hall, and T. I. Williams (eds.), A history of technology, Vol. 1. Clarendon Press, London.
. 1972.Skill as a human possession, p. 1450. In S. L. Washburn and Phyllis Dolhinow (eds.), Perspectives on human evolution. Holt, Rinehart, andWinston, New York.
SARICH, V. M. 1970. Primate systematics with special reference to Old World monkeys, p. 175226. In J. R. Napier and P. H. Napier (eds.), Old World monkeys. Academic Press, New York.

. 1971.In the shadow of man. Houghton Mifflin, Boston. WASHBURN, S. L. 1968.Speculations on theproblem of man's coming to the ground. In B. Rothblatt (ed.), Changing perspectives onman. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
. 1971. On the importance of the study of primate behavior for anthropologists. In M. L. Wax, S. Diamond, and F. O. Gearing (eds.), Anthropological perspectives on education. Basic Books, New York.
. 1972. Primate studies and human evolution. In G. Bourne (ed.), Primates in biomedical research. Academic Press, New York.

SUTCLIFFE, A. J. 1970. Spotted hyaena: Crusher, gnawer, digester, andcollector of bones. Nature

WASHBURN, S. L., and D. A. HAMBURG. 1968.
Aggressive behavior in Old World monkeys and

227:1110-1113.

apes, p. 458-478. In P. C. Jay (ed.), Primates:

TOBIAS, P. V. 1971. The brain in hominid evolu- Studies in adaptation and variability. Holt,

tion. Columbia Univ. Press, New York and Rinehart, and Winston, New York.

London.

WILSON, A. C., and V. M. SARICH. 1969. A molec-

TUTTLE, R. H. 1969. Knuckle-walking and the ular time scale for human evolution. Proc. Nat.

problem of human origins. Science 166:953-961. Acad. Sci.63:1088-1093.

VALLOIS, H.V. 1961. The social life of early man: ZIHLMAN, A. L. 1971. The question of locomotor

The evidence of skeletons, p. 214-235. In S. L. differences in Australopithecus. Proceedings of

Washburn (ed.), Social life of early man. Al- the 3rd International Congress of Primatology,

dine, Chicago.

1970, 1:54-66.

