Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Reply to Mitra's observations on "heterogeneity of childless families"
Jerome Waller , B. Raja Rao & C. C. Li
To cite this article: Jerome Waller , B. Raja Rao & C. C. Li (1974) Reply to Mitra's observations on "heterogeneity of childless families", Social Biology, 21:3, 309-310, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988126 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988126
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Vol. 21, No. 3

Communications

Reply to Mitra's Observations on "Heterogeneity of Childless Families"

Jerome Waller, B. Raja Rao, and C. C. Li

Graduate School of Public Health University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

309

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

We appreciate the thoughtful comments case presented, considering the parsimony

of Dr. S. Mitra on our article "Heteroge- of our model. Brief comments on Dr.

neity of childless families" (Social Biology, Mitra's four points follow.

Vol. 20 [1973], No. 2, pp. 133-138). The 1. Dr. Mitra seems to suggest that the

discussion reminds us of the historical sit- heterogeneity is not limited to childless

uation surrounding the discovery of genetic families but exists for every family size.

linkage. In fitting the expected 9 : 3 : 3 : 1 If so, we have made a good start toward

ratio to the F 2 individuals of certain two- a more complete understanding of the disfactor crosses, the breeders found consistent tribution of family size in human popula-

deviations from the expected ratios. Such tions. In the observed data, the family

consistent deviations led to the formulation size ranges from 0 to 15+. We hope that

of the hypothesis of genetic linkage between Dr. Mitra is not suggesting that we in-

the two factors. Somewhat similarly, in try- troduce IS additional parameters to the

ing to fit a negative binomial to the ob- distribution. There is also the matter of

served distribution of the number of chil- definition. Whether we should define, for

dren of completed families, we found gen- example, a couple having four children but

erally good fit but with a consistent excess failing to produce a fifth as sterile or not

of childless families.

is open to question.

Although our paper cites only one set 2. A negative binomial distribution may

of data, we have tried the method on a be derived in several different ways. Per-

number of other published distributions haps it was unnecessary for us to give any

(census data) and found that the number of derivation at all, as it is permissible to

childless families is invariably in excess make use of a standard and established

and is apparently not a random deviation. distribution in applied problems. The deri-

It is this consistent excess that leads us vation we did give in our paper is, we

to hypothesize the heterogeneity of the thought, one of the simplest, as it is based

childless families. Of course, it is open to on a pure birth process and involves only

other" interpretations, as any hypothesis two assumptions. Dr. Mitra seems to argue

is. We have gone no further than the set that the birth of a child cannot affect the

of data permits us to.

probability of the next birth in the manner

Dr. Mitra specifically pointed out four shortcomings of our model, and we ourselves can think of still others. A model is never complete; its usefulness is judged by

inherent in the model. This is such a moot point that we can say neither yes nor no. In either case, it is irrelevant as far as fitting is concerned.

its goodness of fit with observations. As 3. Nearly the same comments may ap-

Dr. Mitra has noticed, the fit is good in the ply to the third point raised by Dr. Mitra.

310

Communications

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Although the language employed in our less biased. As to Dr.Mitra's final remark

derivation is X(O) = r, the latter need that we have forced a bell-shaped curve

not be an integer in fitting an observed upon a distribution that is nonincreasing,

distribution or in anyother type of appli- we may point out that in census data for

cation. The important feature of a negative women of ages 45 andover thenumber of

binomial distribution is that it has two women having one child is consistently

parameters, p and r, to be estimated from lower than either those having none or

the observed data.

those having two children (U.S. Bureau

4. Dr. Mitra regarded our selection of of the Census, 1964, Table 2). Hence we

data asunfortunate. The set of data we em- would not characterize the distribution of

ployed forillustration is the most carefully number of children as nonincreasing, and

compiled data weknow of. I t took Eliza- we would characterize the number of child-

beth and Sheldon Reed noless than fifteen less families as excessive.

years to check every birth of every family We are grateful to Dr.Mitra for his in-

recorded in their report (Reed and Reed, terest in our idea and wish to thank the

1965). We could have simply copied a cen- editor of Social Biology for giving us the

sus table, but we believe that the data of opportunity to discuss the matter more

Reed and Reed aremore homogeneous and fully.

REFERENCES

REED, E W., and S. C. REED. 1965. Mental re-
tardation: A family study. Saunders, Philadelphia.
U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS. 1964. U.S. census

of population: 1960. Subject reports. Women by number of children ever born. Final report PC (2)--3A. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

