Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Effect of father's education on child's cognitive ability
C. C. Li
To cite this article: C. C. Li (1986) Effect of father's education on child's cognitive ability, Social Biology, 33:3-4, 316-321, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1986.9988648 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988648
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

Brief Reports

Effect of Father's Education on Child's Cognitive Ability

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

C. C. Li
Department of Biostatistics Graduate School of Public Health University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA

ABSTRACT:In studying the effect of father's education on child's cognitive ability, we find that some models of analysis yield a negative effect, which does not seem plausible according to our current understanding of the nature of the two variables. Two new models are proposed to take account of the biological relationships between parents and children. The analyses based on these new models show a positive effect of father's education on child's IQ scores. While the results of the proposed models become more plausible, it cannot be claimed as "correct," because there is no conclusive and permanent "proof in empirical sciences.

The possible effects of fathers' education on the development of cognitive abilities of their children has long been a subject of study by social scientists. However, the results and the interpretations of such studies are not always clear or consistent for a variety of reasons. The writer, not being a student of social sciences, will not review the general problem of the effect of fathers' education on their childrens' IQ scores. The limited purpose of this paper is to introduce biological considerations to the father-son relationship. In the example to be considered, it will be seen that the incorporation of biological relationships does make the results of certain studies more plausible.
MULTIPLE REGRESSION MODEL
In a comprehensive book on the effect of family and schooling in America, Jencks et al (1972) have included the study of the effect of father's education

on their children's IQ scores at age 11. In the section on this particular subject, the analysis was based on six correlations among four variables: C = father's occupation, D - father's education, P = father's IQ score, and Q = child's IQ score at age 11. The six estimated true correlations are given in Table 1.
The model adopted for the influence of father's characteristics (C, D, P) on their sons (Q) is ordinary multiple regression: Q = aC + PD + yP + residual, where (a, p, y) are standardized partial regression coefficients (path coefficients). These path coefficients may be readily found by solving the three standardized normal equations, using the numerical values of correlations given in Table 1:
a + Pr(C, D) + yr(C, P) = r(C, Q) ar(C, D) + p + yr(D, P) = r(D, Q) ur(C, P) + pr(A P) + y = r(P, Q)
The solutions are shown in Figure 1.

316

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Brief Reports

317

TABLE 1
ESTIMATED TRUE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN CHARACTERISTICS OF NATIVE WHITE NONFARM MALES."

Variables Father's education D . . . , Father's occupation, C Father's IQ score, P

Father's Occupation
C
0.640

flExcerpted from Jencks etal., 1972, p. 337, B-2.

Father's IQ Score
P
0.680
0.502

Child's IQ Score
Q
0.345
0.357
0.522

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

.680 84

FIG. 1.--The multiple regression model of child's IQ (Q) on father's education (D), father's occupation (C), and father's IQ (P). The letter U with a short arrow represents the residual, (after Jencks et al., 1972, p. 340, Fig. B-3.)

On examining such results and remembering that the simple correlation between father's education and child's IQ is r(D, Q) = +0.345, the authors commented: "Unfortunately, the results are not at all plausible. One of the two status measures (father's education) takes on an appreciable negative coefficient. This suggests that we have

underestimated the correlation between father's education and son's IQ, (or) overestimated the correlation between father's education and father's IQ, or both." While these possibilities exist, I think the ordinary multiple regression model itself is largely responsible for the negative coefficient (--0.114) from father's education to child's IQ. The next

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

318

Brief Reports

Social Biology

section offers an alternative model, in which there will be no such negative coefficient.
PARENT-CHILD CORRELATION
We may view the parent-child correlation at three consecutive stages which may be called L, Y, Z, in that order: L = at the gene level, Y = at the genotype level, and Z = at the phenotype level. If the gene effects are simply additive (L level), the parent-child correlation is V2. If there is dominance at the genotype Y level, the parent-child correlation will be lower, being (V2) g2, where g is a fraction depending on domi-

nance. Finally, if there are environmental effects on the Z phenotype, the parent-child correlation will be even lower, being (V2) g2h2, where h is another fraction, depending on the magnitude of the environmental effect. Details of these statements and their justifications may be found in Li (1975, Chap. 8 and Fig. 256).
In certain models of correlation between relatives, the values of g and h cannot be found separately because they always appear together as one quantity, gh. This is the case for the parent-child correlation we shall consider. In our example (Fig. 2) we shall write only h for brevity instead of the more complete ex-

father's

child's
FIG. 2.--A model in which there is no direct path from father's IQ (P) to child's IQ ( 0 . They are connected via their genotypes (Z.)whose correlation isknown to be V2 on the assumption of additive gene effects. Meaning of other variables remains the same as in Figure 1.

Vol. 33, No.

Brief Reports

319

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

pression gh. This is simply a matter of notation and is not the same as assuming
We now consider father's IQ (P) and ^on's IQ (Q). In the multiple regression model (Fig. 1), there is a direct path from P to Q. In Figure 2, that direct path is being replaced by indirect paths going through the father's and son's genes (L). This is the crucial feature of our model. The two status measures, C and D, are then connected with both P and Q as shown in Figure 2. In this path diagram, we use only one "unanalyzed" correlation, viz., r(C, D) = 0.640. Hence there are five path coefficients to be found from the following equations:
r(Q, C) = a + 0.64ft = 0.357 r(Q,D) = 0.64a + b = 0.345 r(P, Q = c + 0.64d «= 0.502 r(P, D) = 0.64c + d = 0.680 r(P, Q) = (V2)/i2 + ac + bd
+ 0,64ad + 0.64bc= 0.522
The meaning of the path coefficients a, b, c, d, and h, as well as their numerical solutions are indicated in Figure 2, These equations are particularly easy to solve, noting the first four equations form two pairs, and each pair may be solved independently. Now we see that the direct effect of father's education D, to child's IQ score is ft = 0.20 instead of (3 = -0.114 as in Figure 1. The value of the combined heritability of IQ scores is h2 =? 0.545 and h = 0.738, which is not Ifout of line when compared with many other estimates of heritability. The new residual coefficient u = 0.55 is much smaller than the residual u = 0.84 in Figure 1.
OCCUPATION AS A CONSEQUENCE
Although the essential feature of Fig-

ure 2 is the connection hi}k)h between P and Q, there are other minor features we may also discuss. For instance, occupation Cis represented as a cause for father's IQ in Figure 2, while one may equally argue that occupation is a consequence of one's IQ. The path diagram in Figure 3 is an attempt to examine the consequences of replacing C» P by P » C, In this diagram, we use only one correlation as a path coefficient, viz., d (from D to P) - 0.68 ~ r(D, P) and there are five path coefficients to be found from appropriate equations. We shall omit the full details and will just point out that the values of a = 0.23 and b = 0,20 in Figure 3 remain the same as those in Figure 2, This may be seen from the following equation:
r(Q, C) = a + bt + bds = a + b(( + ds)

=a+

= 0.357

which is the first equation of the model in Figure 2. A similar situation exists for the second equation for r{Q, D). The two equations in s and t also form a pair. Finally, r(P, Q) = (V2J12 + a r(P, C) + b r(P, D) = 0.522, from which we obtain h = 0.74, the same as in Figure 2.
The analysis above shows that treating occupation C as a consequence of P instead of a cause for P changes the coefficientsof determination of P but does not alter the determination of Q.
Now, a general comment about the h coefficient from genes to phenotype. In both cases (Fig. 2 and 3) we have assumed that the h value for fathers is the same as that for sons. However, the father's phenotype is observed at mature age whereas the son's phenotype is observed at age 11.Conceivably, these two h coefficients may not be the same. Indeed, this may very well be the case. If

320

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

FIG. 3.--Model similar to Figure 2 except that occupation (C) is regarded as a consequence of education (D) and IQ scores (f), instead of as a cause. The path coefficients a, b, and h remain the same as those in Figure 2. The residual is also the same.

so, let h\ and h2 be the respective coefficientsfor fathers and sons. In our example, these two coefficients always occur as one quantity; and what we have found is the value of h2 = hih2. Hence, the value of h given in the path diagrams is the geometric mean of hi and h2.
DISCUSSION
In empirical studies there is no such thing as a "correct" model, as new observations are forthcoming continuously. The best an empirical scientist can hope for is that the new results more

or less "confirm" certain old results,

thus corroborating a certain model (hy-

potheses). The corroboration, however,

does not constitute a conclusive or per-

manent proof as in the deductive sci-

ence.

W

In empirical studies, we are con-

cerned with the plausibility of a model

most of the time. The plausibility of a

model is based on our current under-

standing of the nature of the variables

under study. In the present example,

our current understanding is that a fa-

ther's education would help (at least

would not hinder) the development of

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Vol. 33, No. 3-4

Brief Reports

321

the cognitive abilities in his child. When a model yields a negative path coefficient from father's education to child's IQ scores, the authors conclude without j^iesitation that the results are not at all plausible (not amenable to any explanation based on our current knowledge of the variables).
The two models proposed in this paper do make the path coefficient from father's education to child's IQ positive. However, all we can claim at this stage of research is that the proposed models are more plausible than the original one. Not much more than this can be said. In fact, a number of other models may be constructed with the given four variables and six correlations. Probably, none of them is "correct," especially in view of the complicated nature of variables such as education and occupation. The only positive aspect of the proposed models is the incorporation of the genetic relationship between a parent and his child. It is this feature that makes the

path coefficient from father's education to son's IQ positive.
It might be argued that the parentchild correlation at the L level is V2only when the parents are random mating with respect to IQ scores; under assortative mating that correlation might be considerably higher than indicated in the model. This is very likely true. A review of the five equations derived from Figure 2 shows that the path coefficients a and b are found from the first pair of equations; c and d are determined by the second pair of equations; and the value of h1 is obtained from the fifth equation, using the known values of a, b, c, d. Hence, if we replace r(L, L) = V2 by a higher value, it will decrease the value of h2, without affecting the other four coefficients. For example, letting r(L, L) = 3/4, a very high correlation, we will find h2 = 0.36, h = 0.60, and the path coefficient from father's D to child's Q remains positive: b = 0.20, the same as before.

REFERENCES

JENCKS, C., et al. 1972. Inequality. A reassessment of the effect of family and schooling in America. Basic Books Inc. Publishers, New York and London.

Li, C. C. 1975. Path Analysis: a primer. Boxwood Press, Pacific Grove, California.

