Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Discussion: Continuing evolution of man, session iv
Peter A. Corning
To cite this article: Peter A. Corning (1972) Discussion: Continuing evolution of man, session iv, Social Biology, 19:3, 259-265, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987993 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987993
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

Discussion: Continuing Evolution of Man, Session IV

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Peter A. Corning
Institute of Political Studies Stanford University Palo Alto, California

In order to develop a somewhat more coherent discussion, I would like to comment on the papers in a different order from that in which they were presented. I shall begin with Professor Carneiro's paper relating to how we define evolution, then discuss Professor Bajema's cybernetic model of the interaction between culture and the gene pool, leaving until last my comments on the two rather similar papers on cultural evolution by Professors Alland and Merrill.
With respect to Professor Carneiro's paper, first of all, being a newcomer to this long-standing debate, I am hesitant to inject myself into the argument. But since only one side of the debate is represented here, I hope I may be permitted to play the role of devil's advocate.
Perhaps the way to put the issue into sharp focus is to ask this question: Does evolution, as biologists use the term, favor complexity? Is there an inherent tendency in organic processes toward Professor Carneiro's kind of evolution? If so, what is the mechanism? Is there something inherent in the workings of natural selection (or the processes of mutation and recombination) that leads toward complexity? Darwinian and Spencerian evolution cannot be com-

plementary unless Darwin's mechanisms produce Spencer's processes.
It seems to me this is an empirical question and an unresolved one to date (Huxley to the contrary, notwithstanding). Some cyberneticists, at least, hold that the opposite is the case. The second law of thermodynamics implies that entropy is the long-range trend, rather than negentropy. And Garrett Hardin, in his paper on "The Genetic Implications of Population Control," contends that "evolution has no program." In any event, until (or unless) we can answer this question definitively, it seems to me we should reserve judgment about any dominant "trend" in the history of life on earth.
On the other hand, it is possible to separate this substantive issue from what is essentially the semantic question of whether or not the term "evolution" should be applied to the total process or only to a particular aspect of it.
Personally, I prefer to employ the Darwinian definition, that is, "descent with modification," and I will briefly summarize some of the reasons for my preference. First, to redefine "evolution" at this late date so as to refer only to increased complexity would seem to imply that the

259

260

Corning

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

larger process does in fact exhibit such a trend, even though in fact this is still an open question. Second, it tends to impose a value preference on the process. I suspect it would be very difficult to avoid creating the impression that increased complexity represents "progress"--and is somehow intrinsically desirable--while simplification is "bad" or regressive. In other words, the restricted definition introduces the risk of a normative bias.
Also, defining evolution as "increased complexity" creates some confusion in relation to some other associated terms. The basic and inescapable problem of all species is survival and reproduction. According to custom, we define those characters or behaviors that enhance the survival chances of an organism as adaptive, and those that reduce survival chances as maladaptive. But there are cases where increased complexity might actually reduce survival chances and rudimentation might do the reverse--as indeed Professor Carneiro's own example of the Peruvian Amahuaca illustrates. By Professor Carneiro's definition, then, evolution could be maladaptive, and devolution could enhance adaptiveness. (Furthermore, the term devolution may be a bit misleading. Strictly speaking, the clock can never be turned back; even "devolved" organisms or societies differ from their ancestral forms.)
I also wonder whether or not the notion of complexity as progress does not introduce a perhaps unwarranted ethnocentrism into the social sciences. While it is true that the larger, more complex societies currently are dominant, can we assume that this will necessarily continue to be the case? In the quaint euphemism of military men, "if the balloon goes up" (that is, if we have a nuclear war), it may turn out that the simpler societies would be the survivors and social complexity would have been proven to be only an evolutionary blind alley. So,

even if in the relatively short span of human cultural evolution there has been a discernible trend toward complexity (and Professor Carneiro himself has marshalled evidence that this may indeed have been the case), dare we imply that such a trend is inherent in the process and will continue in the future?
Professor Carneiro's main justification for what would have to be, at this juncture, a semantic shift, is that the Darwinian definition of evolution is too broad and therefore unusable. But is this really the case? "Descent with modification" implies (1) a unique historical process, (2) a cumulative process, and (3) a process in which there are changes through time (or adaptations). The Darwinian concept of evolution thus includes both "descent" (which determines the context within which contemporary changes will occur) and "modification." I t embraces all forms of change and takes no position on the issue of whether or not there exists a dominant trend in the process. It focuses instead on the central problem of survival and expresses no preference on how the problem should be solved. Darwin's definition is thus more value-free, in my judgment, and more closely associated with the functional relationship between adaptation (of all kinds) and survival. By leaving the outcome in doubt, moreover, the Darwinian definition better reflects the reality of the human condition.
Finally, if we are ultimately concerned here with what is at heart a problem of semantics, perhaps we should stick with the commonly accepted definition on the ground that it may marginally improve the chances that life scientists and social scientists will be able to communicate with one another.
Turning now to Professor Bajema's paper, my remarks can be relatively brief. They amount to an exhortation to press

Vol. 19, No. 3

Discussion: Session IV

261

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

on with his work. In my view, the model he has developed has great promise, and it is addressed, really, to a central concern of this symposium--the interaction between human culture and human evolution. But if Professor Bajema's model is to serve any purpose beyond being an illustration in his next book--the fate of all too many good cybernetic models--then we must begin generating the kind of data that will enable us to operationalize the model.
One promising effort along these lines-- perhaps a paradigm case for the sort of research that can be done--is James Spuhler's work on the genetic effects of changes in mating patterns and birth-control practices in Japan since World War II. One consequence of a decline in the age at which Japanese women complete their reproductive activities has been a decline in agerelated birth defects, such as Down's syndrome.
Another possibility for the immediate future, it seems to me, is to confront Garrett Hardin's expression of concern about the genetic consequences of voluntary versus compulsory population control measures. If I.Q. and various personality traits (such as aggressiveness) are highly heritable, as current evidence suggests, we might ascertain more clearly by means of a simple publicattitude survey, coupled with I.Q. tests, personality inventories and other psychometric measures, what might be the effects on mean I.Q., etc., in the population if we continue to permit free choice in family sizes and leave population control up to the individual conscience.1 Will higher I.Q. individuals tend to act more altruistically than those with low I.Q.s, and have fewer progeny, or not?
In commenting upon the two rather

closely linked papers by Professors Alland and Merrill, I am afraid that space constraints prevent a detailed critique. Instead, I will confine myself to a few of the more significant points and add a few general observations of a complementary nature.
First, with respect to Professor Alland's paper, I would urge that we not make too much of the distinction between somatic and cultural "levels" in evolution--a mode of thinking which I know is commonplace among evolutionists. For one thing, some recent work in population genetics suggests that genetic microevolution can proceed within a shorter time-frame than we have often heretofore assumed to be the case (see the example in house sparrows discussed in Goldsby, 1971, p. 88-89).
Second, perpetuation of the essentially limited distinction between somatic and cultural evolution tends to downgrade the "interactional" process by which behavior evolves and is expressed; it tends to slight the extent to which culture in turn reflects biologically-based, species-specific psychological characteristics and behavioral propensities. The progress of such interdisciplines as behavior genetics, physiological psychology and psychobiology suggests that we must at least keep an open mind about the genetic contribution to human behavior, including inter-individual differences. A recent paper of mine (1971) deals with the genetics, neurophysiology, and biochemistry of aggression at considerable length (see also Feshbach, 1970).
Also, ethologists studying animal behavior and the anthropologists who have devoted themselves to reconstructing the evolution of man have increasingly forced us to rethink and redefine what we mean by "culture." The word used to refer to such

1 In fact, the heritability issue may not even be germane. If there are strong parent-offspring correlations with respect to various behavioral traits, it may not be particularly important

whether or not these correlations are the result of genetic transmission or family culture, or both, unless we are specifically interested in determining the extent to which those traits can be manipulated in the environment.

262

Corning

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

things as tool-using and the accumulation of learned social traditions; but then we discovered that other species can fashion and use tools and can also learn and passon group "customs." So we seem to have retreated to "symbolic language" as the talisman of a cultural animal--even though bees, for example, can communicate with one another symbolically.
Indeed, the more we learn about our near relatives among the primates, the more striking, it seems to me, are the continuities between man and so-called lower animals. We have merely amplified well-established behavioral principles, as well as developing new combinations. Thus, many small differences of degree have combined to shape a species that is, to say the least, unprecedented.
Another, perhaps minor semantic point is that Professor Alland seemed to suggest that evolution continues to be biological because of man's need to accommodate to the environment. I would prefer to say that evolution continues to be biological because man, as a product of evolution, has ongoing biological (including reproductive) needs and because he is inescapably subject to natural selection. Man's needs can only be met in the environment, it is true, but his relationship to the environment is as much one of manipulation as accommodation.
I was also somewhat puzzled by Professor Alland's reference to the "dubious concept of group selection." Perhaps he meant that the concept has been misused. In a recent critique of evolutionary theory, George Williams (1966) rightly warns against invoking group selection to explain any evolutionary phenomenon that can be explained instead as a case of individual selection, a fortuitous effect, or a statistical artifact. However, Williams notes that group selection might be operative in groupliving species such as man, where there is a

division of labor, functional interdependence, and synergistic effects resulting from the behavior of the group as a collectivity.
In a recent paper, I reviewed the case for group selection in man at some length (Corning, 1971). Briefly, at least some of Sewell Wright's conditions for group selection may have been fulfilled by our evolving hominid ancestors--many small, semi-isolated populations in diverse environments. If Mayr (1970) is correct that early hominids practiced polygyny, with fertility differentials favoring the dominant males, then the effective breeding populations might have been extremely small; group selection could well have been a special case of kin selection.
Some evolutionists argue that group selection, to be a significant evolutionary force, would have to counteract genie selection. But is this necessarily so? It seems to me that group selection could also reinforce and accelerate selection pressures at the genie level. In contrast with the current preference, apparently, for single-factor explanations of human evolution,2 I would suggest that we entertain the possibility of a multifactor explanation, including group selection due to occasional intergroup conflict and differential group success in defense against prédation, as well as within- and between-group selection in relation to the evolution of hunting.
Of course, the evidence for group selection is partly circumstantial. There is the abrupt disappearance of Neanderthal man, Raymond Dart's controversial evidence of violence among Australopithecines, and so forth. But there is also the more direct evidence in the fertility differentials between human populations in recent times (in some cases, at one another's expense) and some fragmentary evidence of signifi-
2 Bigelow (1969) prefers warfare, while Pfeiffer (1969), among others, focuses upon big-game hunting.

Vol. 19, No. 3

Discussion'. Session IV

263

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

cant (mean) genetic differences between contemporary human populations with respect to some behaviorally relevant measure, the sort of genetically based differences that would be necessary for group selection to occur. A doctoral dissertation recently completed at the Institute for Behavioral Genetics by Thomas Klein (1971) reported significant genetic differences between different "ethnic groups" in Hawaii in relation to their threshold of fusion for a rapidly flickering light. Of more significance, however, is Marion de Lemos' dissertation (1966) involving the application of six of Piaget's cognitive development "tasks" to aborigines, Europeans, and mixed-bloods in Australia. She found that there were significant differences that could be attributed to genetic differences between these groups.3
I point to these data not in order to make odious comparisons, but only to underscore my argument that we must be open to the possibility that group selection may have been (and still may be) a significant factor in human evolution, whether we like it or not.
On the positive side, perhaps one of the most important aspects of Professor's Alland's paper is his discussion of various current efforts among anthropologists to analyze the total relationship of a human population (inclusive of its "culture") to its ecological niche. I might just complement Professor Alland's discussion with an additional example, perhaps one of the best such studies to date.
In Northern Plainsmen (1969), John Bennett examines in detail and comparatively how four different populations adapted to the same local environment--a small area of the Canadian Great Plains, in the province of Saskatchewan. The four

populations were Cree Indians, Hutterite Brethren, and ranchers and farmers of European stock. Bennett related what he called the "adaptive strategies"4 of each of these groups to their total cultural (including economic) systems.
In brief, the Indians, formerly nomads, had become dependents of the European communities, while the Hutterites created an essentially self-sufficient economy within a close-knit, kibbutz-like community--a strategy for which they had been culturally pre-adapted. On the other hand, the Europeans followed two different strategies. The ranchers were highly individualistic, with little communal sharing of work, and they depended upon a single cash "crop"-- beef sales outside the community. At first, there were many failures among the ranchers, but eventually the population stabilized in an extremely "conservative" relationship to the environment. By contrast, the European farmers had the more difficult task of transforming the land for agriculture, although theirs was also a cashcrop economy. Their strategy involved a great deal of team-work, sharing of machinery and labor and a somewhat more innovative relationship to the environment.
There is one other major aspect of Professor Alland's paper that I would like to endorse and reinforce: his discussion of man's current condition and evolutionary prospects. Recognizing that man's cultural evolution may be increasingly maladaptive, Professor Alland urges us to think farther ahead. I would like to suggest one approach that I have developed at length elsewhere (Corning, 1970). I t seems to me that an essential prerequisite to planning ahead should be a more rigorous effort to spell out what our survival needs as a species do in fact consist of and what constitutes

3 Subsequent to the symposium, Pierre R. Dasen 4 I have in my own writings preferred to use

reported that a follow-up study has produced con- "survival strategies," which is perhaps more stark

flicting results.

and neutral in connotation--and less optimistic.

264

Corning

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

an "adaptive" society. What qualities and strategies are most likely to ensure our continued survival as a species? And how can we go about measuring them, so that we might be better able to tell from day to day how we are doing?
Any kind of definitive answer is probably impossible, but at least we ought to have a go at it in a systematic way. Much work has been done of late on "social indicators," or measures of social well-being. But perhaps we ought to take a larger view and think about trying to develop some "evolutionary indicators," or indicators of evolutionary adaptiveness. At very least, we might gain some useful additional insights into the human condition.
With regard to Professor Merrill's paper, I have a few comments to make about his discussion of the mechanisms of cultural evolution (a discussion supplemented by Professor Alland in his paper). Professor Merrill has outlined for us some of the current thinking among anthropologists about the mechanisms of cultural evolution. While a multivariate concept of cultural evolution represents a great improvement over the reductionism of the past, I still have a few reservations.
I was troubled, for instance, by what appeared to be an implicit environmental determinism. Although Professor Merrill may not have intended to align himself with an extreme environmentalist position, I was struck with the emphasis in his paper on impersonal "institutional" modes of explanation. Professor Merrill seemed to slight the role of the individual and of humans in general as active shapers of cultural evolution. I had no sense of where individual innovation or problem solving activities fit in, or where the organizational skills of a leader enter in.
More generally, I felt that Elman Service's list of variables--(1) cultural characteristics, (2) the physical habitat, and

(3) the "societal field"--leaves out an entire category of biologically-based variables that derive from the individual's unique biological characteristics (as modified, of course, by an equally unique family and cultural experience). This is a point that Professor Alland seemed more sensitive to in his paper.
A related point about Professor Merrill's paper has to do with the cultural evolutionist's search for regularities. I would like to propose that the regularities can be derived from man's basic biological needs (and some instrumental psychological needs as well). With some variation due to individual differences and varying environments, these basic survival needs are fixed. What varies is the way in which men go about trying to satisfy these needs in specific environments with whatever cultural tools are at their disposal. The evolution of culture, then, involves the history of man's efforts to improve the tools and strategies he employs for meeting his needs (and wants).
Furthermore, in any rapidly evolving society, we need to conceive of the cultural system cybernetically, as a self-regulating, self-steering, adaptive system capable of coping in a concerted way with common problems and societal needs. If cultural adaptation does have a Lamarckian quality, as some have suggested, then we have to develop a model of the social system that incorporates the organ of purposive human adaptation--the human brain. Man can make evolution, and the role of innovation, entrepreneurship, collective decision-making activities, and leadership have to be accounted for.
To carry this point just a little further, I would like to engage in a bit of, I hope excusable, disciplinary chauvinism (being at least a nominal political scientist). Aristotle called man a "political animal," by

Vol. 19, No. 3

Discussion: Session IV

265

which he meant an animal capable of engaging in collaborative problem-solving and action with respect to the common needs of the community. One focal point of such "public" activities has traditionally been politics and political systems. In complex modern societies, particularly, politics can at times become the leading edge of cultural adaptation. Consider, for example, the great reform movements of the past

century and the enactment of broad programs of social insurance in most of the industrialized countries. Therefore, I would urge that we begin to look upon political life as a set of adaptations of great evolutionary significance for our species (and very often for other species as well). It is this point of view that I would like to see incorporated into our models of cultural evolution.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BENNETT, JOHN W. 1969. Northern plainsmen: Adaptive strategy and agrarian life. Aldine, Chicago.
BIGELOW, ROBERT. 1969. The dawn warriors. Atlantic-Little, Brown, Boston.
CORNING, PETER A. 1970. The problem of applying Darwinian evolution to political science. Paper read before the VIIIth World Congress of the International Political Science Association, Munich, Germany, August 31-September 5, 1970.
_____. 1971.Human violence: Some causes and implications. Paper prepared for the symposium, Value and Knowledge Requirements for Peace, 138th annual meeting, American Association for the Advancement of Science, Philadelphia, December, 1971.
CORNING, PETER, and CONSTANCE HELLYER CORN-
ING. 1971.An evolutionary-adaptive theory of aggression. American Political Science Association meeting, Chicago, September, 1971.

DE LEMOS, MARION. 1966. The development of
the concept of conservation in Australian aboriginal children. Ph.D. dissertation, Australian National University, Canberra.
FESHBACH, SEYMOUR. 1970. Aggression, p. 159-
259. In P. H. Mussen (ed.), Carmichael's manual of child psychology (3rded.), Vol. II. Wiley, New York.
GOLDSBY, RICHARD A. 1971. Race and Races. Macmillan, New York.
KLEIN, THOMAS W. 1971. Individual and racial differences in sensitivity to flickering light. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Colorado, Boulder.
MAYR, ERNST. 1970. Population, species, and evolution. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass.
PFEIFFER, JOHN. 1969. The emergence of man.
Harper andRow,New York.
WILLIAMS, GEORGE C. 1966. Adaptation and
natural selection: A critique of some current evolutionary thought. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

