Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Quantitative genetics: A critique
Edmond A. Murphy
To cite this article: Edmond A. Murphy (1979) Quantitative genetics: A critique, Social Biology, 26:2, 126-141, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988371 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988371
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 12 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Quantitative Genetics: A Critique

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Edmond A. Murphy
Division of Medical Genetics Department of Medicine TheJohns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland
ABSTRACT: The quantitative aspects of human genetics have hitherto been confined to (1) Mendelian categorization of qualities, which is enumerative and best applied to single-locus conditions; and (2) Galtonian analysis, which is an examination of the first and second moments of quantities and best applied to multiple-locus conditions. The latter analysis throws no light on the details of the genotype or how they shape the phenotype; and even as a descriptive device it is adequate only where narrowly restrictive assumptions (equality, additivity, and independence of the component contributions) are met. The utility of such general models as approximate describers, provided that they are tempered by explicit empirical inquiry, is illustrated by familiar analogies. Several examples are discussed where neither Mendelian nor Galtonian analysis is appropriate. Many mechanisms do not even fulfill the assumption of monotonicity. Heritability in the conventional sense is briefly discussed.

Marshal Von Grock was quite determined on the poet's death; and sent orders for his execution that very evening. A reprieve was sent afterwards to save him; but as the man carrying the reprieve died on the way, the prisoner was released, after all.
--G. K. CHESTERTON, The ThreeHorsemen of Apocalypse

It is a common failing in scholarly dinal, but commonly overlooked, princi-

humility that we make much of our ple that we may not claim to have

achievements, little of our ignorance. exhausted the aspects of a subject merely

Quantitative geneticists are no exception. because our imagination fails. We are re-

Because the Mendelian and the Galtonian quired to prove that no other aspect is pos-

modes, two out of a great many types of sible, often a difficult undertaking. I pro-

genetic mechanisms, are comparatively pose by examples to demolish any such

easy to handle and have elegant proper- claims of exhaustiveness made or implied

ties, they have made a vulgar display of for genetic analysis. I shall attempt also to

them. And they have had so little to say open the mind with ideas rather than to

about the rest, what Isaac Newton called stifle it with putative facts.

"the great ocean of truth" which awaits

discovery, that few geneticists, and fewer onlookers, ever imagine anything else.

QUALITY AND QUANTITY

Now, for my part, I view this perspective I would like to take from the Greek phi-

as grossly distorted; and although I shall losophers two seminal ideas which are

try to keep my discussion nontechnical, I widely ignored, and with dire conse-

think the time well spent in which I at- quences. Aristotle gave us his categories,

tempt to redress the balance. It is a car- nine in all, a scheme of descriptive para-

126

Vol.26, No.2

Quantitative Genetics

127

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

digms. In genetics, we have crassly re- jective within ready grasp. On the other

duced them to two--quantity and quality. hand, what we consider the capacity to

We have, for instance, paid little attention describe is a tenuous claim, apt to falter

until recently to relationship. For a cen- with improved resolving power of

tury there has been a polemic (see measurement.

Murphy, in press), which has too often Granted, then, that truth is elusive,

been destructive, between the adulation perhaps forever unattainable, there are

of quality (the Mendelian idea that traits three broad courses open. They represent

should be classified) and that of quantity the fundamental tension of Heraclitus: the

(the Galtonian idea that they should be one and the many, of particularity to the

measured). In a famous paper, Fisher point of idiosyncrasy at the one extreme

(1918) showed that, under certain highly and unity to the point of uniformity at the

constraining assumptions, the two claims other. First, intellectual nihilism: If reduc-

can be reconciled. But his splendid tion is impossible, it is impossible. Sec-

achievement.has, among the unadventur- ond, we retreat from the attack on reality

ous, sadly cramped the development of and content ourselves with certain sound

quantitative genetics, and in the heady ex- and unexceptionable statements that,

citement during the last quarter century of nonetheless, may not grapple with the is-

molecular genetics it has been all but sues we should be interested in. Thirdly,

trampled under foot. We are slowly and we make do with approximations which

painfully learning that we must return to we may hope to improve steadily, on the

quantitative genetics, as the study of regu- one hand attaining greater and greater ac-

lation of gene expression, reiterated curacy in our descriptions and, on the

DNA, and complex interrelation (for ex- other, gaining more and more insight into

ample in redundant pathways with feed- the essence of what we are studying. The

back mechanism) demands; but we also last course is the traditional method of

need more conceptual enterprise in our science and the only one to which I have

explorations.

any ultimate commitment. My experience

The second seminal idea is Plato's im- has suggested that where quantitative

age that what we call reality is like genetics is concerned geneticists fall

shadows cast on the wall of a cave. In mod- mainly into the first two groups: the ma-

ern terms, all our formulations are "pro- jority, who are not prepared to relinquish

jections," each an algebraic composite of their belief in the infinite particularity of

many fundamental units, individually phenomena, into the first; the minority

identifiable with difficulty, if at all. I shall (who include most of the quantitative

build extensively on this theme--that geneticists), into the second.

mere external description, however ac- As a simple analogy of the standpoints

curate, guarantees nothing about insight which I am trying to delimit, let us con-

into truth. It would be erroneous to sup- sider the shape of the mainland mass of

pose because one can describe something the United States (Figure 1). We may

that one understands it. This delusion is portray it in all its details, leaving out no

akin to the superstition, commonly twists or turns in the coastline, regarding

described by the cultural anthropologists, conservation of each one as vital (Figure

that to know a person's name gives one 1, Part A). Such portrayal would tax the

power over him. On the one hand, un- memory; and it seems to offer no insight as

derstanding is a metaphysical ideal to be to why the shape of the country is what it

pursued humbly, rather than a simple ob- is. Theories of continental drift, for in-

128

Murphy

Social Biology

B

Area 2-975million sq mi 10° 51'

34° 32'

14" I /'

23° 14'

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Fig. 1.--Representing the form of the mainland United States: A. Detailed map. B. Some cardinal dimensions: area, and the number of degrees of longitude or latitude to the most extreme point north, south, east, and west of the confluence of the Mississippi and the Missouri. C. A simplified outline subject to the constraint of symmetry about the horizontal axis. D. A more elaborate simplified outline. In C and D the components of the outlines are derived from segments of standard French curves. The dots represent the junctions between adjacent segments.
stance, would forever be stubbing their the outline for a greatly simplified diatoes against the minor irregularities, how- gram. The scientist making the model may ever well they fitted in the gross. There erroneously suppose that symmetry about can beno"editing" ofthe shape; every de- the horizontal axis is a feature of themass tail is message, none noise. The second (Figure 1, Part C). Further theory and representation comprises afew simple and analysis might suggest that, say, Cape Cod unambiguous dimensions--of extreme and Puget Sound are of particular reledistances, of area (Figure 1, Part B). To vance to some surmise and that they rerest content with these measurements is quire disproportionately detailed repreakin toattempting torepresent some com- sentation on the map(Figure 1,Part D). I plicated phenotype byitsmean or itsvari- would designate the first (A) as theraw ance. Thirdly, we can deal in broad data; the second (B) as a set of model-free sweeps of the brush: accept, perhaps, that (or almost model-free) describers; the the main importance lies in large masses third andfourth (CandD) astentativeseand abandon a slavish representation of rial models.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 2

Quantitative Genetics

129

THE NEED FOR QUANTIFICATION
Why does the issue of quantification arise at all? Even for the pure Mendelian disease (if it exists) the patient wishes to know prognosis as well as diagnosis--not merely what condition he may have, but how severe its course is likely to be. The parents of the achondroplast want to know not only what we call the disorder but also how tall the child may grow, what lifespan may be expected, how much (if at all) intelligence may be impaired, and so forth. But in what is called, rather pompously, constitutional short stature, the meaning resides entirely in the measurement. Once we have excluded specific diagnoses, we derive no more penetrating insight from analyzing this condition than the platitude that children are like their parents. Here what matters is what the phenotype is, not what it is called. A competent physician may be mistaken about whether a man has achondroplasia but not about whether he is over four feet tall. The disorder defined by quantity (given accurate observation) is infallible, because its meaning (unlike that of the diagnosis

"achondroplasia") embodies, but does not transcend,the evidence. If we agree to call any adult underfivefeet a dwarf, there is no diagnostic ambiguity and no conceivable way of disproving this definition empirically.
THREE BASIC CONCEPTS
Some distinctions need to be established (Figure 2)(Murphy, 1972). The notion of a Mendelian trait is the phenotype for a single gene or locus often with diverse effects; for example, arterial blockage, stunted growth, and susceptibility to pneumococcal infections are ascribable to a single abnormal gene, that for sickle hemoglobin. This diversification from a single cause is known as pleiotropy, the whole anomalous phenotype being dictated by one locus.
The notion of Galtonian inheritance is quite the opposite. It involves one phenotypic feature only--say, height, or weight, or intelligence, but not combinations of them. But while the outcome is simple, the causative mechanisms reside at a multiple loci, each contributing its small

cc

R

PLEtOTROPIC

COMPOSITE

HETEROGENEOUS

Fig. 2.--Threebasic patterns. In each, the cause is represented by C and the result by R. On the left is diversification of results from a single locus (pleiotropy); in the middle, a single results stems from multiple causes (the multilocal trait); on the right are displayed the relationships between multiple causes (loci) and multiple results (traits) united by their chromosomal localization, but otherwise quite heterogeneous.These patterns ignore totally the nongenetic components.

130

Murphy

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

component. The Mendelian trait is a tyranny; the Galtonian, a democracy. The misdeeds of a tyranny are readily fathered on the tyrant; but for the democracy, no one person is to blame. It is easy to categorize the views of a tyrant, but those of the assembly have to be measured. A tyrant may have fifty simultaneous decisions to make, but a democracy cannot decide more than one issue per vote.
We have no general name for a third rather vague group of conditions in which multiple loci are involved and have multiple effects. Such states have unity of neither cause nor consequence. They are exemplified by the anomalies of the number of chromosomes, where the unifying principle is topological. Such conditions are neither Mendelian nor Galtonian, and most of them, although theoretically heritable, are not even inherited, because of the sterility or severe mental retardation which they produce.
COMPOSITE EFFECTS
The image of an election will do our understanding no harm if used intelligently. It is a naive over-simplification to suppose than an election is a pure binomial or multinomial process and that the distribution of the outcome is well known except for one or at most a few parameters which have to be estimated. Even though in a properly conducted election the results are found by adding votes, there are all manner of factors at play in how the electorate votes. There is contagion, for instance: X's vote may well be changed if he knows how Y votes. The number who vote is influenced by the weather. There is diversity of views among voters and the strength of conviction with which they are held. There are defects, natural or cultivated, in the voting machines. In a nutshell, there are more ways of combining effects than simple addition of outcomes

and multiplication of probabilities. The explicit and strict assumptions of the binomial mode are always violated in some degree (Murphy, 1979).
Now the proposal in Fisher's 1918 paper (which originally was not intended to be either exhaustive or restrictive but has, deplorably, been treated as if it were so) was in effect that Galtonian genetics is a more or less ideal democracy with simple additive effects. This surmise does not commit us to the view that all multilocal systems, that is, systems ascribable to the effects of many genes, are in this sense Galtonian. As a prescription for all genetic reality, additive democracy is doomed from the start. But, of course, if the only rule of combination we will allow ourselves is additivity, why naturally all our successes will be for additive systems; and all nonadditive systems, proving intractable to such a restricted analysis, will remain obscure. To those who speak only English, it is fatally easy to suppose that their inability to understand foreigners means that foreigners are not saying anything intelligible. If the only provision we make is for the one kind of model, 100 per cent of the successes are going to result from that model. On these narrow terms we can scarcely wonder why we have not made more progress.
Let us note one feature, obvious but neglected, of Fisher's model. If any large part of the variation in the phenotype is due to discrete segregation at a single locus, we cannot expect a Gaussian distribution to result. But the whole object of the Mendelian is to find such lumps of causation. The very thing the Mendelian regards as a success is a failure to the Galtonian, and conversely. These two systems are based on the same fundamental units, operating according to the same laws. But there is no prospect of peaceful coexistence between them. Their emphasis, aims, and triumphs are not reconcilable.

Vol. 26, No. 2

Quantitative Genetics

131

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

EPISTEMOLOGICAL

by proposing that the analysis be directed

IMPLICATIONS

to the magnitudes of the sources of varia-

We have been lured into this intellec- tion, which seems eminently reasonable.

tual regimentation by a pernicious type of Under the democratic assumptions of

incorribibility. It is much easier to under- Fisher, we may appeal to a well-known

stand the shortcomings of the Galtonian group of principles of statistics known as

model by analogy with systems that have the central limit theorems (see Feller,

been abandoned. Ptolemy proposed that 1967). They, and the theory of sufficient

the path of a planet be described by a cir- statistics (Kendal and Stuart, 1961), tell us

cle on which are superimposed certain cir- that the analysis of variation in such cases

cular perturbations called epicycles. This can be reduced to the analysis of variance

structure can be made to agree with the and covariance, that is, the analysis deals

facts. Indeed, in the nineteenth century, with second moments, quantities derived

Fourier showed that any periodic form, from squaring measurements or multiply-

however complicated, can be resolved ing them in pairs. It should be, but is not,

into a mixture of such simple harmonic universally known among quantitative

forms. It follows that by invoking enough geneticists that the central limit theorems

epicycles, Ptolemy could account for any or their equivalent are being implicitly in-

regularly periodic planetary path what- voked not only for the formal analysis and

soever, no matter how bizarre. Hence, the interpretation of the results, testing hy-

Ptolemaic theory could not be disproved. potheses, estimation of unknown quanti-

Why, then, did we abandon it for Newtonian gravitation? It is only the naive who suppose that the main arguments are elegance and simplicity. We have no right to demand either of these properties in nature; and we know plenty of exceptions. The main issues are really ontological: How far do we believe in what we have postulated? We accept readily enough the complexities of a Fourier analysis of a musical note because we can grasp a physical model of the organ pipe or the vibrating

ties, and setting confidence limits, but also as a warrant for ignoring all possible manipulations of the data other than computation and analysis of these second moments. I do not say that there may not be other justifications for conventional methods of analysis, merely that geneticists have paid no attention to them. So, whether we realize it or not, by this course we have immediately excluded from our analysis a great many "nondemocratic" processes that I shall discuss later.

string, because ultimately we can reify the But the mischief does not end there.

"overtone." But we cannot comfortably For analysis of variance is, in its nature, a

reify the Ptolemaic epicycle. I could go tautological process. It consists of setting

through the life and death of the phlogis- up a balance sheet in which all entries are

ton theory of combustion in the same reined. Half a century ago, Eddington

terms, or many other discarded ideas. On- (1927) pointed my way with the dictum

tologically, we judge a model by its plausi- that the principal function of the balance

bility. Epistemologically, its acceptability sheet is to balance and that the means by

depends on corrigibility (see Gasking, which it is balanced have not necessarily

1956), on the fact that there are degrees of anything to do with reality. We have just

freedom for error--that it would be dis- so much variance in a genetic system to ac-

provable if false.

count for. It has been decreed (from

Now classical quantitative genetics is, Mount Olympus) that the origins of all

in the latter respect, decadent. It starts out variation are either genetic or environ-

132

Murphy

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
RATE OF CALCIFICATION

Concentration of phosphate ion (in arbitrary units)
1 (1+6)

Concentration of calcium ion (in arbitrary units)
1 (1 + a)

1 (1 + ft)

() (1 + «)(l + b) = (1 + a)(l + b)

mental. But when we add up the effects

NON-GALTONIAN SYSTEMS

from these sources estimated separately,

we find that they fall short of the total. The How can we rescue ourselves from this

discrepancy is accounted for by something confusion? It seems evident that the

called interaction. But what is the mathematical properties of the system

ontological standing of this interaction? must accord with the physical properties.

The honest answer is that it is a descriptive Our trouble is largely traceable to the

device to adjust for the incongruity of the neglect of that principle. Mathematics

model. Its standing is no more reputable without science is an art form. Science

than that of the Ptolemaic epicycle. In without mathematics is an epistemological

another system--just as in another wilderness.

planet--the number and size of these ad- For instance, consider calcification of

justments may be quite different. Well, in- bone. There are several disorders known

terpolation is apt to be a messy business as in which this process is disturbed, and

any numerical analyst knows. But it is doubtless the mechanisms are compli-

when we reify interaction, like a hole in a cated. Let me single out, not as a compre-

budget, when we try to endow this intel- hensive schema but as an isolated compo-

lectual hiatus, this embarrassment in a nent and simply for the purposes of

model, with entity, instead of making illustration, two factors: the serum con-

every effort both logical and empirical to centrations of calcium and of phosphate

track it down, then it is that we get into ions. The law of mass action tells us that

trouble. There is a perfectly respectable the rate at which calcium phosphate forms

genetic phenomenon in which the effect of depends on the product of the two. Now

one gene masks that of another-- let us denote the normal concentrations of

"epistasis." And an honest scientist will each and the rate of calcification as unity.

explore it by studying how the genes in- Consider the consequences of an incre-

terrelate physically and chemically. But ment a in the calcium and of b in the phos-

the classical quantitative geneticist has ac- phate. Then we may set up a simple table

quired the deplorable habit of ascribing a of results (Table 1). The standard statisti-

hole in a balance sheet to something called cal criterion of interaction is whether the

"epistasis, etc.," the chief property of sums of the diagonals are equal. Now here

which is that it fills a hole in a balance clearly

sheet. Naturally, the property is not independently testable. What results is not science, but devious accountancy. This criticism does not, of course, extend to

(l + a) + (l + b)± 1 + (1 + a) (1 + b) = (1 + a) + (1 + b) + ab.

cases where the various effects are all indi- There is an extra term, ab, on the right-

vidually studied.

hand side which is formally interpreted as

Vol. 26, No.2

Quantitative Genetics

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

a "positive interaction." On the other the start and not let the result emerge

hand, if we compare the products of the di- merely as a meaningless party trick result-

agonal terms or (what is equivalent) use ing from playing around on the computer.

logarithms, the diagonals are equivalent Many years ago Mustard and I found em-

and there is no interaction.

pirically that whole blood clotting time has

So far, so good. The statistical analysis a lognormal distribution (Murphy and

has told us that the effects of the two con- Mustard, 1962). The point was inciden-

centrations are not additive but may be tally important because we wanted to use

made additive by logarithmic transforma- normal (Gaussian) theory on some data.

tion. Once we have realized these facts, This transformation was a purely analyti-

the interaction becomes ontologically cal device with a narrow area of applica-

contentless, and there is no point in mea- tion. But a good scientist would wonder

suring it or trying to explain it. But those why this transformation should work.

who have neither the empirical scientist's Two years later Macfarlane (1964) pro-

aversion to finding evidence about an ab- duced his cascade theory of coagulation

straction nor the theorist's insight into the which, it can be shown (Murphy,1976),

arbitrariness of assuming additivity endow would lead to a lognormal distribution

this "interaction," which is merely the re- such as we had found.

sult of an incorrect model, with a false In Table 2,1 have laid out a list--which

reality. They set it scientifically on the I am sure is far from exhaustive--of ways

same footing as environmental or genetic in which the phenotype may be patho-

mechanisms; treat it as fundamental and genetically related to the genotype.

sacrosanct; and invoke it as if it had "ex- Monotonic systems are those in whch

plained" the discrepancies. And its the structure of the phenotype shows

magnitude, being calculated from the dis- either a nonincreasing or a nondecreasing

crepancy and designed to dispose of it, relationship to the genotype; for instance,

cannot be tested by comparing it with the in a Mendelian system, there is, in

discrepancy.

general, a "dosage" effect between the

It would be just as bad a mistake to sup- phenotype and the number of mutant

pose from this illustration that what the genes. The level of a metabolite, say, in-

competent analyst is doing is playing creases with the number of affected genes

around with transformations of the data or, conversely, decreases with the number

until results become additive. This ma- of normal genes. Where the heterozygote

neuver may be a valuable computational shows higher levels than either homozy-

or descriptive device which makes certain gote ("over-dominance"), the relation-

analyses much easier. But any geneticist ship is nonmonotonic. All additive sys-

who is not intellectually dead will wonder tems are monotonic, but the converse is

why some particular transformation not true. In calcification, the system is not

works. Where calcification is concerned, additive, but other things being equal an

the warrant for the method is the law of increase, however small, in calcium ions

mass action, a cornerstone from physical always results in an increase in

chemistry. If we were concerned with the calcification and conversely; and the same

genetics of myopia we would, I hope, re- is true for the concentration of phosphate

member that in optical systems focal ion.

lengths are not additive but their recipro- But there are also systems governed by

cals (lens strengths in diopters) are. I also a rate-limiting step, or, as in length of life,

hope that we would realize this fact from by whichever of several systems is first to

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

134

Murphy

Social Biology

TABLE 2
SOME POSSIBLE TYPES OF MULTILOCAL TRAITS

Type

Example

Reference

I. Monotonic A. Additive 1. Pure Galtonian 2. Mixed models (Mendelian and Galtonian) B. Additive on transformed scale 1. Logarithmic 2. Harmonic
3. Other special transforms C. Nonadditive systems
1. Parastasis (with fail-safe redundancies)
2. Bingo models (competing causes of failure)
D. Catastrophes 1. Threshold phenomena
2. Cumulative results

Height Isonicotinic acid
hydrazide inactivation
Blood coagulation Optical systems Collateral circulation Recombination of genes
Synthetic lethals
Length of life
Gout Kidney Stones Cerebral hemorrhage Coronary disease Retinoblastoma Polyposis coli

3. Unstable equilibria II. Nonmonotonic
A. Feedback systems 1. Regulatory defects

Schizophrenia Familial hypercholesterolemia

2. Compensatory
B. Faulty metric C. Nonmonotonic relationship
to intermediate phenotype D. Disruptive interloper E. Emergence or quasi-emergence

Intelligence quotient Compensatory scoliosis Complete transposition of the viscera Tracheal fistula and nutrition Height in Marfan syndrome Number of red cells bearing fetal
hemoglobin Laterality in Kartagener syndrome

Galton, 1889 Evans etal., 1960
Macfarlane, 1964
Bailey, 1961 Dobzhansky and Powell, 1975 Murphy, 19786
Falconer, 1965 Edwards, 1960 Murphy, 1967 Knudson, 1973 Ashley, 1969; Murphy, 1978a Zeeman, 1965
Brown and Goldstein, 1977 Murphy, 1975
Dover etal., 1977 McKusick, 1978 (Entry #24440)

fail. They are manifestly not additive and, to my knowledge, cannot be made so by transformation. Nevertheless, the phenotype is quantitatively related to the values of the individual phenotypes. Survival, for instance, is exactly related to the failure time of the most vulnerable system.
Finally, one may note that certain systems, which I shall call catastropic, are allor-none responses reflecting solely whether some critical level has been ex-

ceeded. Some such systems are static, the so-called threshold models; others are time-dependent, such as multiple-hit models. Some are, perhaps, unstable equilibria precariously maintained and randomly disturbed in an unpredictable way by chance stimuli (e.g., catatonic excitement or stupor in schizophrenia).
Nonmonotonic systems. But there are more violent disruptions possible than the foregoing. Much of health depends on

Vol. 26, No. 2

Quantitative Genetics

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

control mechanisms. A notable and wide- monly in an incongruous setting of

spread example is homeostasis, the auto- homeostasis.

regulatory feedback mechanism. Many But then I wonder to myself whether

systems are difficult to elucidate because these two disorders, high and low blood

we cannot tell whether what we are look- pressure, superficially so different, are in

ing at is the thrust of the primary disorder fact two manifestations of the same de-

or the counterthrust of a compensating fect. Perhaps the notion of a hypertensive

mechanism. I do not understand in any de- gene is a non-thing; perhaps what we

tail the Goldstein-Brown mechanism should look for is genes bearing on vaso-

(1977) of familial hypercholesterolemia. I motor instability. Perhaps we have mis-

do not suppose anybody does. But it taken what the selection pressures are do-

seems clear now that the disorder which ing. Perhaps my facile surmise (Murphy,

they studied is not due to a primary over- 1973), that what we call the range of nor-

production of cholesterol but to a break- mal blood pressure results from balancing

down in a negative feedback mechanism. selection against both extremes, is mis-

Doubtless there are other mechanisms in taken. Perhaps the genetically fittest types

other families.

are not the patients with high, medium, or

A rather fundamental point arises in the choice of descriptive measure. We demand certain properties of a measure including monotonicity; but this property

low blood pressure, but those with stable blood pressure. It has been supposed rather naively that high blood pressure bursts blood pressure. But it has been

must be proved. I have pointed out else- known for many years that blood vessels

where (Murphy, 1975) that an examina- obtained at necropsy can withstand much

tion candidate may not give the "right" greater pressures than are ever seen in hyanswers because the candidate is either pertension (Zehnder, 1955). It is quite much less or much more intelligent than possible that it is the fluctuation in blood

the examiner. Such a test is not monotoni- pressure which does the damage, as cer-

cally related to the intelligence of the can- tainly seems to be true of dissecting

didate. Again, anybody who has managed hy-
pertensive patients is familiar with the vigorous body responses which oppose attempts to lower blood pressure even from dangerously high levels; and these forces

aneurysm. This is by no means unfounded conjecture. The traditional analysis of the genetics of hypertension which treats the means of blood pressures, not their variances, as the point of the point furnishes, at best, indifferent evidence of a genetic

operate even when blood flow to vital or- factor (Miall and Oldham, 1963; Fox et gans is conserved, so it can hardly be al., 1969; Chazan and Winkelstein, 1974). viewed as an adaptive mechanism. I find it But it provides no opportunity for this isdifficult to escape the conclusion that the sue of instability to be explored at all. Inprimary defect in hypertension is likely to deed it seems clear that in such a system be a disturbance of homeostasis, rather we would predict little, if any, correlation than overactive vasopressor mechanisms between parent and child in the means of as the unhappy name "hypertension" im- blood pressure whereas there might be an plies. In spite of the patrician comments of excellent correlation in the variances.

the textbooks of medicine, there can be All this may sound fanciful, but I would

little doubt that low blood pressure must point out that we have at least casual evi-

also be harmful (Murphy, 1973); and dence that, where blood sugar is con-

again I surmise that the defect lies com- cerned, stability is a major prognostic fac-

136

Murphy ,

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

tor. The bane of the endocrinologist's life Now some may feel that I am cheating

is the "brittle" diabetic, the patient who is in this example, that naturally if we ana-

sensitive to small doses of insulin, but apt lyze irrelevant data we gain no enlighten-

to go into diabetic coma if these small ment. The neurologist knew from the start

doses are withheld. Perhaps we have here that he was interested, not in the position

a glimpse, in the light of broad genetic of the arms, but in the amplitude of their

principles, of why it is that florid diabetes movement; and he would have communi-

is a disorder of the young, while diabetes cated this fact to the geneticist. Exactly so.

in the elderly is relatively benign.

The neurologist would have explained

I need hardly point out the even more what this branch of science was concerned

obvious cases of manic-depressive psycho- with; he would not have laid a set of read-

sis, Cheyne-Stokes respiration, and tha- ings on the geneticist's desk and asked

lamic rage. These are all disorders not whether they show heritability. We might

mainly ofmeansbutof variances. A statis- surmise that what is segregating in families tician, it will be recalled, is a man who is a large-amplitude abnormal movement

drowns in a river with an average depth of (tremor) or a physiological unsteadiness.

one inch. I think we might with advantage The analysis might then be not of means

develop the art of analysis of variance of but of variances. Rather than analysis of

variance and of higher moments and other variance, the analyst might wish to do

characteristics of distributions as well. something like Bartlett's test for heteroge-

Let me try to construct a very simple example. Suppose we ask patients to stretch out their arms, and then we measure the height of their fingertips above the floor. Patients will vary in the

neity of variances. Covariances, heritability, and the other traditional measurements of quantitative genetics might tell him a great deal about the inheritance of shoulder height but nothing about tremor.

precise angle at which they hold their I would draw two conclusions from this

arms. So if we are to make anything of this example. First, the geneticist must be con-

measurement, for example, to explore cerned with what is going on before he can

how far it may be genetically determined, do useful analysis. Furthermore, the anal-

we will wish to deal with the mean of many ysis cannot be stereotyped. I have a pro-

independent determinations. The true found mistrust of the idea that a small

mean will vary from patient to patient, number of procedures laid out in slim ele-

and we can do analysis of variance to our mentary texts equip the geneticist to ana-

heart's content to see whether relatives lyze every set of quantitative data he may

are more alike than nonrelatives.

encounter. Indeed I suspect they are

But suppose that the study is being seldom of any real value at all. In the study

done by a neurologist who wishes to study of the disorder of coordination known as

the inheritance of tremor. Obviously it dysdiadochokinesis, the analysis would in-

would be futile to analyze the mean height volve correlation coefficients of correla-

above the floor which depends on height, tion coefficients, a subject certainly not

posture, the mobility of the shoulder covered in the primers.

joints, muscle strength, psychological atti- My second conclusion is more subtle

tudes, and much much more, but not the and more far-reaching. We can easily per-

short-term oscillation about the mean ceive the absurdity of analyzing the mean

which is the essence of tremor. A useful position of the fingers to study the inherit-

analysis in this case must concern itself ance of tremor. But this ready perception

with something other than the mean.

obscures two facts. For one thing, the

Vol. 26, No.2

Quantitative Genetics

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

neurologist has already decided what the pacitation than those with one. But those

point of the point is. The tremor has some with total reversal, the so-called complete

regularity of pattern, and it is the pattern transposition of the viscera, have less dis-

of movement which he proposes to study, ability than those with only the heart on

not the mean. But there may be no pattern the wrong side.

at all. The typical movements in choreic Much emphasis has been put in text-

disorders are recognized by the fact that books of physiology on how much can be

they are patternless. A quantitative learned about the normal from the study

geneticist doing analysis of variance on of the abnormal. But there are what we

pattern-free data would be a sight to see! may call the disruptive interlopers. Nutri-

But we do well to remember that perhaps tion has nothing ordinarily to do with the

the neurologist has not, after all, got the esophagus. But a tracheo-esophageal

point of the point. The history of medicine fistulamay cause serious feeding problems

is littered with such false perceptions: and hence, indirectly, malnutrition.

dropsy, the fever, fatty heart, and much Finally, let me just mention the prob-

more. I hold dearly to the view that the lem of emergence. There has been much

genetic analyst is there to throw light on debate in the philosophical literature in

science not merely to carry out docile this century about the following question.

computations inside a conceptual frame- Is it always possible in principle to infer

work dictated from without. We merely from an exquisite knowledge of the parts

have to look at the history of the what the nature of the whole may be? The

classification of muscular dystrophies to reductionist would claim that it is, but

see the futility of that policy and how mis- there are dissident opinions. The conflict

leading elaborations of the neurologist will presumably be gradually resolved as

could be put right by the geneticist.

failures or successes eventuate. But we

Again, consider the case where some may at least assert that an "ensemble

intermediate metric is monotonically re- effect" is often not readily understood.

lated to the genotype, but the overt When compared with the properties of the

phenotype--what the patient complains individual genes, the outcome of phenoty-

of--is not. An obvious illustration is the pic expression may be counterintuitive

patient with one short leg. To maintain and often baffling. I quote three problems

balance, a compensating spinal curvature of increasing difficulty, all involving ap-

is necessary. This scoliosis will occur in the parently Mendelizing traits.

appropriate direction according to 1. Why are subjects with Marfan's syn-

whether the right leg is shortened or the drome characteristically so tall? We be-

left. But if both are shortened, it will not lieve this disorder to be a defect in connec-

occur at all. Viewing the leg lengths as the tive tissue. Excessive growth is hard to

phenotype, a person with two short legs is explain as a simple consequence of a de-

twice as extensively affected as a person fective tissue, especially since height is a

with one. But where the spine is con- matter of bone length and we have no rea-

cerned we have the equation which (ex- son to believe that the long bones are

cept to the student of finite algebra) will qualitatively affected. Moreover, the ex-

seem very strange:

cessive height is not proportionate but due

1 + 1 = 0.

mainly to excessive lengths of the legs. 2. How can the level of the proportion

Again, we expect persons with two con- of red blood cells bearing fetal hemoglo-

genital defects to have more serious inca- bin, which Boyer and associates find

138

Murphy

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

breeds true in families (Dover et al., 1977), be controlled by a single gene?
3. How is laterality coded for? The evidence of physics seems to suggest that parity of laterality is not conserved except at the subatomic level. With special care, it would require at least three items of information to code for laterality. Yet McKusick (1978) identifies, on plausible evidence, the disorder known as Kartagener's syndrome in which the heart is right-sided, as a convincing Mendelizing condition, that is, that it is due to a change in one nucleotide. Furthermore, this disorder, we are to believe, is a recessive; the heterozygotes do not, for instance, have the heart placed symmetrically in the center of the chest.
I do not say these problems are insoluble or that it would be impossible to construct models for them. But they are in fact so far not solved. What is more to the point, one would have surmised (without the evidence of pedigrees) in all three cases--and especially the last--that they cannot be Mendelian. And apparently, the conclusions would be false.
We are thus led to propose a principle which is commonplace enough, but which is vital to the future of quantitative genetics. The analysis must be fitted to the biology, not the biology to the analysis. We analyze, at our peril, data, the inner workings of which we do not even attempt to understand.
HERITABILITY
However, I shall end on an orthodox note, and perhaps a somewhat less disillusioning one. In that restricted subset from Table 2 where we may invoke Galtonian theory, where effects are additive and where no moments higher than the second are germane, our traditional components of variance give us some measure of the relative importances of the factors of interest.

Let us suppose (Figure 3) that the standard deviation of the phenotype in the population at large and represented by the line AB in the "backdrop" plane, has magnitude t. The square of this quantity is the total or phenotypic variance. We shall express the quantities which follow as multiples of this unit. Now suppose that we can show that of this quantity, t2, similarity between parent and child can account for a fraction termed the additive genetic variance and denoted by h2a. Then we may construct a right-angled triangle,
ABC, shown on the backdrop. The square of the sine of the angle <}> is termed "heritability in the narrow sense." It is the proportion of the total variance accounted for by additive transmission. But the square of the remaining horizontal component BC can be made the hypoteneuse of a further triangle CBD, right-angled at D and further decomposed on the horizontal plane into an environmental component, e2, and a nonadditive genetic component, h2n. The latter comprises the less obtrusive heritable sources, those which may be temporarily concealed (such as the effects of dominance and epistasis, that is, obscuration by genes at the same and at different loci, respectively.) The total genetic variance in such a system is represented by h2, the square of AD; and the ratio it bears to the total variance is "heritability in the broad sense," sin2<j> which lies in the inclined right-angled triangle
ABD. Note that, in general, the use of right-angled triangles supposes there is no interaction. If there were interaction, we would have to appeal, not to the theorem of Pythagoras, but to that of Apolonius. However, heritability in the narrow sense is always Pythagorean.
Two further points are noteworthy. The deeply-ingrained nature of Galtonian genetics and the mystique of second moments is pointed up by the traditional use of the quadratic symbol h2 to denote heri-

Vol. 26, No. 2

Quantitative Genetics

139
A

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

D

Fig. 3.--A simple geometrical representation of heritability. The angles CDB, DCA, and BDA are all
right angles, but in differing planes. The total genetic component, ht, is decomposable into a nonadditive component, h\, in the horizontal plane and an additive component, hi, in the backdrop. Heritability in the narrow sense is sin2<)>, i.e., (ACJAB)2, and in the broad sense is sin2, i.e., (AD/AB)2. In this special case it is
assumed that there are no interactions (which would call for non-right-angled triangles).

tability. Second, there is a constant peril that as a result of repeated fragmentation into ever more subtle components of variance, such an analysis may become so ornate that it would be difficult, or even impossible , to demolish it if it were false. The quantitative geneticist grapples with this problem of incorrigibility by attempting to get independent estimates of the same component by different lines of evidence. The issue is brought most sharply into focus in the study of data from twins (Nance and Corey, 1976; Christian and Kang,

1977). But even there, it is a constant struggle to get enough degrees of freedom to test for error; and the tests, based on Gaussian theory, are heavily dependent on the central limit theorems and the notion of the Fisherian democratic assembly.
Although there are cases where such analyses appear to have some ontological value, I think the main dividend is as a means for assessing in broad terms the direction of inquiry. A large heritability, in general, suggests that the trait is heavily genetic and that preventive medicine lies

140

Murphy

Social Biology

in the area of genetic counseling and eugenics. But this equivalence must not be used slavishly. Wealth, accent, and whether or not a person goes to medical school all exhibit high heritability (Lilienfeld, 1959), but I do not imagine that any scientist doubts that these effects are mainly cultural. Low heritability suggests that genetic factors are unimportant. But, as we have seen in the discussion on brittleness, variance may be highly heritable and yet not show up in the means and hence in the conventional measure of heritability; and this counterexample is by no means isolated.
One final point. Heritability, by its nature, is a parochial index. On reference to Figure 3 it will be clear that the heritability of a trait can be made small either by flooding the system with environmental variance or by making our observations on highly inbred populations, and conversely. Thus, to find a trait has a herita-

bility of 50 per cent in Annapolis tells us little about what its heritability is likely to be in Verkhoyansk. The transfer of scientific inference from the one center to the other is of doubtful validity. Nevertheless, those who are interested in improving the health of their communities may be helped somewhat in formulating their policies by what their own studies of heritability have to tell them.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research in this paper was supported by Grant No. 24736, Theoretical Aspects of Clinical Genetics of the National Institutes of Health.
The original version of this paper was presented at the symposium "Genetics in Epidemiology," sponsored by the AAAS Sections on Biological and Medical Sciences, the Society for the Study of Social Biology, and the American Public Health Association at the Annual Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Houston, Texas, January 4,1979.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ASHLEY, D. J. B. 1969. Colonic cancer arising in polyposis coli. J. Med. Genet. 6:376.
BAILEY, N. T. J. 1961. Introduction to the mathematical theory of genetic linkage. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
BROWN, A. S., and J. L. GOLDSTEIN. 1977. Fami-
lial hypercholesterolemia: Unraveling a genetic receptor disease. Trans. Assoc. Amer. Phys. 90:91-108.
CHAZAN, J. A., and W. WINKELSTEIN. 1974.
Household aggregation of hypertension: Report of a preliminary study. J. Chron. Dis. 17:9.
CHRISTIAN, J. C., and K. W. KANG. 1977. Ma-
ternal influence on plasma cholesterol variation. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 20:462-467.
DOBZHANSKY, T., and J. R. POWELL. 1975. The
willistoni group of Drosphila. Chap. 21. In R. C. King (ed.), Invertebrates of genetic interest. Handbook of genetics, Vol. 3. Plenum, New York.
DOVER, G. S., H. BOYER, W. H. ZINKHAM, H. H.
KAZAZIAN, JR., D. PINNEY, and A. SIGLER.
1977. Changing erythrocyte populations-- Juvenile chronic myelocytic leukemia: Evi-

dence for disordered regulation. Blood 49:355-365. EDDINGTON, A. S. 1927. The nature of the physical world. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge. EDWARDS, J. 1960. The simulation of Mendelism. Acta Get. 10:63.
EVANS, D. A. P., K. A. MANLEY, and V. A. McK
USICK. 1960. Genetic control of isoniazid metabolism in man. Brit. Med. J. 2:485-491. FALCONER, D . S. 1965. The inheritance of liability to certain diseases estimated from the incidence among relatives. Ann. Hum. Genet. 29:51. FELLER, W. 1967. An introduction to probability theory and its application. Vol. I. 3rd ed. Wiley, New York.
FISHER, R. A. 1918. The correlation between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inheritance. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin. 52:399.
Fox, R. R., G. SCHLAGER, and C. W. LAIRD. 1969.
Blood pressure in thirteen strains of rabbits. J. Hered. 60:312.
GALTON, F. 1889. Natural inheritance. MacMillan, London.

Vol. 26, No. 2

Quantitative Genetics

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

GASKING, D . 1956.Mathematics and the world. In J. R. Newman (ed.), The world of mathematics. Simon and Schuster, New York.
KENDAL, M. G., and A. STUART. 1961. The ad-
vanced theory of statistics. Vol. II. Haffner, New York.
KNUDSON, A. G.1973. Mutation and human cancer. Adv. Cancer Res. 17:317-352.
LILIENFELD, A. M. 1959. Amethodological problem in testing arecessive genetic hypothesisin human disease. Amer. J. Publ. Hlth. 49:199.
MACFARLANE, R.G. 1964. An enzyme cascadein the blood clotting mechanisms andits function as a biochemical amplifier. Nature 202:498.
MCKUSICK, V. A. 1978. Mendelian inheritancein man. 5th ed. TheJohns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.
MIALL, W. E., and P. D . OLDHAM. 1963. The he-
reditary factor in arterial blood pressure. Brit. Med. J. 75:80. MURPHY, E. A. 1967. Some difficulties in the investigation of genetic factors in coronary disease. Canad. Med.Assoc. J. 97:1181-1192.
. 1972. Application of genetics to epidemiology. In G. T. Stewart (ed.), Trends in epidemiology. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill.
. 1973.Genetics in hypertension: Aperspective. Circ. Res21(Suppl. 1):129-137.

. 1975.The normal, eugenics, andracial survival. Johns Hopkins Med. J. 136(2):98-106.
1976. The logic of medicine. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.
. 1978a. Epidemiological strategies and genetic factors. Internat. J. Epidemiol. 7:7-14.
. 1978b. Genetics of longevity in man. In E. L. Schneider (ed.), The genetics of aging. Plenum, NewYork.
. 1979. Probability in medicine. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.
. Classification and its alternatives. In H. T. Engelhardt et al. (eds.), Clinical judgement. D. Reidel Publ., Dordrecht, Holland (in press).
MURPHY, E. A., and J. F. MUSTARD. 1962. Coagu-
lation tests andplatelet economy in atherosclerotic and control subjects. Circulation 25: 114-125.
NANCE, W. E., and L. A. COREY. 1976. Genetic
models forthe analysis ofdata from the families ofidentical twins. Genetics 83:811-826.
ZEEMAN, E. C. 1965. Catastrophic theory. Scient. Amer. 234 (April).
ZEHNDER, M. A. 1955. Zerreissfestigkeit und Elastizitat derAorta. Schweiz. Med. Wschr. 85:203-208.

