Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Abortion and sterilization: An insight into obstetriciangynecologists' attitudes and practices
Arthur T. Fort
To cite this article: Arthur T. Fort (1971) Abortion and sterilization: An insight into obstetriciangynecologists' attitudes and practices, Social Biology, 18:2, 192-194, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987916 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987916
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:54

Abortion and Sterilization: An Insight into Obstetrician-Gynecologists' Attitudes and Practices
Arthur T. Fort
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Louisiana Stale University Medical Center School of Medicine at Shreveport Shreveport, Louisiana

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

Persons interested in eugenics, whether latter at a potential conceptus. Conse-

they be social workers, educators, or child- quently, as is well known, these procedures

development workers, often see the need are considered fundamentally different in

for abortion or sterilization procedures to the minds of many. As a result, the ac-

prevent repetition of certain family trage- ceptability and availability of the two differ

dies. Probably more than most disciplines, greatly. The common denominator of the

they are aware of social problems engen- two is thedesire to prevent theexistenceof

dered byreproductive patterns which might a child. When is that desire regarded as

be altered by making abortion and ster- acceptable enough for an Ob-Gyn to act in

ilization procedures available. Therefore, a patient's behalf? The reasons a child may

they ought to acquire insight into the pre- be unwanted can be separated into two

vailing working philosophy among Ob- primary partitions, Acceptable or Un-

Gyn's regarding sterilization and abortion. acceptable. These twopartitions and their

This paper will attempt to provide that general subdivision are shown in Table 1.

insight derived from conversations with I will forego further subdivisions or a de-

other practicing Ob-Gyn's and from articles fense of theassignment of reasons to either

in the professional literature. It will be acceptable or unacceptable partitions as

modified to include the slightly more liberal they would be superfluous to the main

viewpoint of oncoming students and resi- theme of this paper.

dents. Since Ob-Gyn's are no more homo- Table 2 takes into account the previously

geneous than any other group, a wide mentioned dichotomy between abortion and

range of viewpoints must be acknowledged; sterilization and rearranges the acceptable

however, I will not include them. Neither reasons into those warranting sterilization

will I attempt to develop a statistical com- in the nongravid state and those warranting

posite of these viewpoints since thepurpose abortion coupled with sterilization. This

here is to depict the prevailing working arrangement also gives consideration to the

philosophy.

reversibility of a condition wherein preg-

Abortion and sterilization have as their nancy might be life-threatening during an

purpose the prevention of birth of an un- acute phase of maternal illness but harmless

wanted child by employing methods more after recovery. Also, as the reasons become

extreme than day-to-day birth control. The more voluntary, the number of existing

former is an act of interception, while the children in a family enters into the analysis.

latter is an actof contraception. The former An example would besterilization for popu-

is directed at an existing conceptus, the lation control. In such a case, if a couple

192

Vol. 18, No. 2

Brief Reports

193

have two children, are stably married, and are old enough to know their own minds, they might be offered sterilization but not abortion. Furthermore, such sterilization would be contingent upon the fact that their
TABLE 1
REASONS A CHILD IS UNWANTED SEEN AS
ACCEPTABLE OR UNACCEPTABLE TO
OBSTETRICIAN- GYNE COLOGISTS
Acceptable Parental resources have been exceeded Emotionally (reversible) (irreversible) Physically (reversible) Financially (reversible) Parental resources intrinsically very limited Unmarried (reversible) Mentally ill (reversible) Mentally retarded (irreversible) Congenital abnormality or disease Population limitation
Unacceptable
Chronic lack of foresight in use of contraceptives Contraceptive failure in a couple with adequate
parental resources

youngest child had survived at least one year and demonstrated normalcy.
If the foregoing has shown where ObGyn's sympathy lies, just what is the actual availability of these procedures? The answer is that Ob-Gyn's are more conservative in practice than in their talk. Few Ob-Gyn's care to gain distinction as the local abortionist, so that they are not apt to perform abortion except in the more extreme conditions of maternal risk or fetal abnormality. Many more will discreetly direct the patients to physician abortionists in their locality. The rapidly proliferating abortion services in New York and California offer an easy out for those who can afford them but remain outside the reach of most social service clientele. This pattern of response will not change in the near future.

TABLE 2
REASONS A CHILD IS UNWANTED ACCEPTABLE TO OBSTETRICIAN-GYNECOLOGISTS BY THOSE WARRANTING STERILIZATION, ABORTION, OR ABORTION PLUS STERILIZATION

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

STERILIZATION WARRANTED IN NONGRAVID SlATE

REASONS
Parental resources exceeded Emotionally Acute Chronic Physically Acute Chronic Financially Acute Chronic
Parental resources intrinsically
unuiea
Unmarried

Less than More than 2 Children 2 Children
No Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Yes
No Yes

Mentally ill Acute Chronic
Mentally retarded
Congenital abnormality or disease
Population limitation

No Yes Yes
Yes
No

Yes Yes Yes
Yes
Yes

ABORTION WARRANTED

ABORTION COOTLED
WITH STERILIZATION WARRANTED

Yes No Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No No No No

Yes (if dependent
teenager)
Yes Yes Yes
Yes
No

No
No Yes Yes Yes No

194

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Sterilization, on the other hand, is much more readily available. Sterilization prerequisites are usually set by hospital staffs and again tend to be more conservative than a consensus of sympathy would be. Recent progress has been made in that public or private patients are now offered sterilization for mental retardation or congenital defects in most urban centers. Abor-

tion coupled with sterilization is also readily offered under these circumstances,
The foregoing has been offered as a concise discussion of the prevailing attitudes and practices of Ob-Gyn's in regard to sterilization and abortion. It hopefully should be of value to social workers, educators, and child-development workers seeking cooperation from Ob-Gyn's.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:54 08 December 2015

