Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The scheinfeld center for human genetics in the social sciences
To cite this article: (1973) The scheinfeld center for human genetics in the social sciences, Social Biology, 20:4, 474-475, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988080 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988080
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

474

Communications

Social Biology

The Mindel C. Sheps Award in Mathematical Demography

Nominations are requested for the Mindel C. Sheps Award in Mathematical Demography, to be presented for the first time in 1974 and every second year thereafter. The award has been established by the Mindel C. Sheps Memorial Fund and is sponsored by the Population Association of America and the University of North Carolina School of Public Health. It will be given in recognition of outstanding contributions to mathematical demography or demographic methodology.
Individuals should be nominated for this award on the basis of important contributions to knowledge, either in the form of a single piece of work or a continuing record of high accomplishment. The award is intended to honor an individual whose future research achievements are likely to continue a past record of excellence rather than as a tribute to a demographer who is ending an active professional career. There are no specific requirements as to age, nationality, or place of residence, nor is the award restricted to members of the Population Association of America.
The award is named for Mindel C. Sheps who, at her death in January, 1973, was Professor of Biostatistics at the University of North Carolina School of Public Health and Second Vice-President of the Population Association of America. She enjoyed a distinguished career as physician, biostatistician, and demographer, applying mathe-

matics and statistics to studies in these areas. She received greatest recognition for studies of the relationships between the biological determinants of fertility and observable demographic variables. This work focused on the development of mathematical and computer simulation models of human reproduction and population change and on analysis of measurement problems in actual populations. She served as advisor or consultant to many international projects. Her extensive publications include several books, Public Health and Population Change, On the Measurement of Human Fertility (an annotated translation of work by Louis Henry), and Mathematical Models of Conception and Birth.
The recipient of the Mindel C. Sheps Award will be selected by a committee appointed by the President of the Population Association of America and the Dean of the University of North Carolina School of Public Health. Presentation of the award, comprising a certificate and $1,000, will be made at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America.
To be considered for the first award, nominations must be received by February 15, 1974. Nomination forms may be obtained from: Chairman, Mindel C. Sheps Award Committee, Population Association of America, P.O. Box 14182, Benjamin Franklin Station, Washington, D.C. 20094.

The Scheinfeld Center for Human Genetics in the Social Sciences

The growing interest in human genetics among social scientists has prompted the establishment of a new Center at The Hebrew University, through the medium of the American Friends of The Hebrew University.

Endowed by Mrs. Aaron Scheinfeld of Chicago in memory of her late husband (who was chairman of Manpower Inc.), and in honor of his brother Amram (author of many books on human genetics), the new educational unit has been named the

Vol. 20, No. 4

Communications

475

"Scheinfeld Center for Human Genetics in the Social Sciences."
The Center will offer courses and seminars in human genetics especially oriented toward students of psychology, sociology, anthropology, and education. It will also subsidize research in such areas as human behavioral genetics, sex-differences, twin studies, human growth and development, and physical features. The underlying emphasis will be on normal human traits and behavior, as distinguished from pathological conditions, and on clarifying the interacting influences of heredity and environment in producing variation among human beings.
The Scheinfeld Center will be affiliated

with the Faculty of Social Sciences of the Hebrew University, but will cooperate in its activities with all interested departments or individuals at the Hebrew University or elsewhere. The Center will be under the guidance of a specially appointed Board of Directors. It will formally begin its activities in November 1973, with the opening of the 1973-74 academic year at The Hebrew University.
Correspondence may be addressed to: Ruth Guttman, Ph.D., Coordinator, The Scheinfeld Center for Human Genetics in the Social Sciences, Department of Psychology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

