Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Comment on "excess and deficit fertility in the United States," by Weller
Barbara S. Janowitz
To cite this article: Barbara S. Janowitz (1975) Comment on "excess and deficit fertility in the United States," by Weller, Social Biology, 22:1, 89-90, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988150 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988150
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Comment on "Excess and Deficit Fertility in the United States," by Weller

Barbara S. Janowitz

Department of Economics Kent State University Kent, Ohio

In a recent paper, Robert H. Weiler (1974) suggests two reasons why some couples do not meet family-size goals. Some have more children than they desire, whereas others have fewer children than they desire. Therefore, he suggests that "family planning programs are incapable of allowing all persons to have the number of children they desire . . ." since the deficit fertility couples (desired fertility greater than expected fertility) include couples not only "physiologically incapable of bearing as many children as they would like to bear, but also couples who have voluntarily restricted their family size . . . ." For these voluntarily restricted families there would, of course, be no family planning program to help them reach their desired family size.
This suggestion raises the intriguing questions of why these "deficit fertility" couples report lower expected than desired family size and whether or not an improvement in socioeconomic level would raise their expected to their desired family size. If couples in answering a question on desired family size report a desired family size greater than expected, this suggests that they may base their answer on some

presumed, but not expected to be realized, more favorable situation that would allow them to increase family size. If this interpretation is correct, the only truly deficit families are families in which fertility is restricted by biological factors. For the voluntarily restricted families, the question on expected family size, which presumably is answered with reference to their current or expected economic situation, may be a better indication of their actual desired family size, since the answer is likely based on their assessment of the costs and benefits of rearing children in their particular family.
This interpretation leads to the speculation that an improvement in socioeconomic situation would increase expected family size, thus enabling such couples to reach desired size. However, Namboodiri's work (1970) indicates that desired family size rises with income, holding constant indirect costs. Thus, if these couples had an improvement in economic situation with indirect costs of children remaining constant, we could infer that expected fertility would rise (and perhaps desired as well). However, it is more likely that with the improvement in socioeconomic situation

89

90

Communications

Social Biology

indirect costs would rise (they would be like higher status families and not like themselves only with higher incomes). Therefore, it is by no means certain that improved economic status would raise expected fertility towards desired fertility.
If deficit fertility is not all biologically determined and if an improved socioeco-

nomic situation will not raise expected fertility, then the fertility of these voluntarily restricted families is desired in the light of their current situation. It may therefore be concluded that there are no nonbiologically deficit families since these families have voluntarily chosen a family size in light of their socioeconomic situation.

REFERENCES NAMBOODIRI, N. K. 1970. On the relation between 233-239.
economic status and family size preferences WELLER, ROBERT H. 1974. Excess and deficit fer·when status differentials in contraceptive in- tility in the United States, 1965.Soc. Biol. 21: strumentalities are eliminated. Pop. Stud. 24: 77-87.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

