Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Genetic epidemiology: Promise or compromise?
R. H. Ward
To cite this article: R. H. Ward (1980) Genetic epidemiology: Promise or compromise?, Social Biology, 27:2, 87-100, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1980.9988411 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988411
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Genetic Epidemiology: Promise or Compromise?

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

R. H. Ward
Department of Medical Genetics University of British Columbia Vancouver, Canada

ABSTRACT: Although our ability to define "genetic syndromes" has increased exponentially, we are less able to identify the relevant etiological factors in a precise fashion. Similarly, there is only inadequate evaluation of the contribution that genetic factors make to the burden of ill health. Genetic epidemiology, which attempts to integrate concepts from quantitative and population genetics with epidemiological principles, gives promise of solving these problems. Recent efforts in this area have not been uniformly successful, partly because of a failure to adequately define the aims of the field and partly because of a lack of appreciation for the importance of epidemiological principles. Consideration of the distribution of genetic disease along an etiological spectrum yields some valuable insights for generating valid research strategies in addition to indicating which segments of the population bear the heaviest affliction. In the area of common diseases, it is apparent that failure to incorporate epidemiological procedures into study designs has been a significant drawback in the past. To a large extent this stems from a reluctance to consider the problem of genetic disease in a biological context. Some simple remedies include: setting up study designs that emphasize a quasiexperimental approach; increased use of epidemiologically sound "fixed cluster" units rather than large complex pedigrees; a greater use of quantitative phenotypic information; and development of hierarchical hypothesis testing.

During the past two decades our society has been profoundly influenced by the exponentially increased awareness of the role played by genetic factors in disease. At the same time, the rate of recognition of newly defined genetic syndromes has been equally explosive. Eighty years ago when Mendel's laws were becoming incorporated into the nascent field of genetics, a small number of medical curiosities were recognized on the basis of their adherence to basic Mendelian principles. By the early 1960's, despite the rapid progress that had been made in other areas, human genetics had made relatively little progress (Dunn, 1962) with a total of 412 Mendelian traits being recognized by 1958, or an average rate of discovery of about 7 traits per year. For confirmed Mendelian traits this number rose to 692 by 1968 and 1,364 by 1978, while the corresponding totals for confirmed traits plus

presumptive Mendelian traits were 1,545 and 2,811 (McKusick, 1978). This corresponds to a rate of discovery of between 11 and 13 traits per year, and the total number of recognized traits in man (2,811) represents seven times the number of loci that have been identified in that extensively studied mammal--the laboratory mouse.
While the majority of these traits are too rare to separately impose a significant burden on society (as distinct from afflicted individuals and their families), the cumulative effect of the more common deleterious alleles is appreciable (Carter, 1977). Nonetheless, despite the impressive array of Mendelian traits that can now be catalogued, it is increasingly apparent that a far greater component of our burden of ill health stems from the contribution of genetic factors to the "common diseases," such as cardiovascular disease and

87

88

Ward

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

cancer. Here causation and apportionment of burden are much more difficult to specify than for the Mendelian traits, since etiology tends to be multifactorial. With genetic effects confounded with environmental factors and the existence of genotype-environment interactions, it is not surprising that estimates of the precise genotypic role in the etiology of common disease remain largely conjectural. Nevertheless, there is general agreement that the role of genetic factors in disease is highly significant (Morton and Chung, 1978; Sing and Skolnick, 1979).
Curiously, the increased identification of Mendelian traits and the growing awareness of the importance of a genetic contribution to the etiology of common diseases has created something of a paradox. The circumstantial evidence for an overwhelmingly pervasive contribution of genetic factors to the distribution of morbidity and disability in populations is impressive. Yet, relative to advances in the clinical, biochemical, and molecular aspects of human genetics, our progress in quantifying the extent of this burden has lagged behind. We can catalog a daunting number of genetic syndromes, but can specify population distribution and etiological complexity for only a small fraction. Still worse, the failure to quantify the apportionment of cause, especially genotype-environment interactions, has resulted in a failure to appreciate the complex interactions that underly the distribution of disease and disability. This in turn has led to an overly simplistic interpretation of group differences in disease frequency as being genetic or environmental in origin, depending on the bias of the observer.
The existence of such a paradox is not unique to genetic epidemiology, but has cropped up repeatedly in the history of human genetics (Dunn, 1962). In the present instance an undue reliance on biochemical

sophistication, in the expectation of a "technological fix" for genetic disease, has diverted attention from the necessity of evaluating the distribution of disease in populations. Even though the danger of extreme specialization within human genetics was pointed out some time ago (Neel, 1966), there is little evidence that any attempt is being made to bridge the widening gap between a preoccupation with molecular mechanisms and a concern for developing rigorous mathematical expressions for the distribution of genetic traits in populations. A more general approach is needed which places the concept of genetic etiology into the matrix of demographic, sociological, and historical factors which combine to influence the distribution of genetic disease. Ironically, it was this identical realization by Weinberg (1912) which established one of the major foundations of human genetics.
Adoption of such a perspective would suggest that an appropriate objective of the quantitative aspect of human genetics would be to evaluate the relative contribution of specific genotypes to man's burden of morbidity and disability. Achieving this goal would also help develop a genuine interface between the quantitative side of human genetics, defining the contribution of genetic variability to the frequency of disease, and the biochemical side, defining the genetic contribution to disease in molecular terms. In defining the genetic burden of disease, a quantitative approach is needed, but also an appreciation for the social, biological, and historical milieu of the population. The integration of elements from genetics and epidemiology into a holistic discipline as originally suggested by Weinberg (1908, 1912) would fulfill this need. However, despite the current enthusiasm for the rubric "genetic epidemiology," there seems to be an unfortunate tendency to disregard a solid epidemiological foundation in

Vol.27, No. 2

Genetic Epidemiology

89

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

favor of mathematical sophistry. The distinction between a temporary fad and a burgeoning discipline is a narrow one, and it is not entirely clear into which category "genetic epidemiology" will fall. One rather pessimistic viewpoint has already labeled "genetic epidemiology" as being the most recent example of a long series of continual failures to incorporate the principles of population genetics into the discipline of human genetics (Caplan, 1979). I do not believe the situation is so bleak to warrant such a dismissal at this time.
If there is to be a successful integration of elements from epidemiology and quantitative genetics into a division of human genetics called genetic epidemiology, then it is worth identifying impediments to this goal so they may be avoided. At this stage in the development of genetic epidemiology, there are two major criticisms that could be leveled at the field, as defined by its advocates. First, there is the general complaint that all too often the underlying biological nature of the disease being studied is ignored in favor of the development of a specific model of analysis. Such an apparent lack of sensitivity for the very real concerns of the nonquantitative biologist is not unique to genetic epidemiology. The only real solution is to break the barriers isolating the subspecialties so that communication between them can occur. This will take effort on the part of both the statistical geneticist and the clinical geneticist, but it is absolutely essential that this process of communication occurs if genetic epidemiology is to become an integral part of human genetics.
The second type of criticism is that the proponents of genetic epidemiology tend to employ ad hoc research strategies and to apply them with a disregard for basic epidemiological principles. To ignore ascertainment and the lack of independence between variables, for example, is not only bad epidemiology but also bad popu-

lation genetics. A number of characteristic approaches tend to place the individual investigator in a compromised position in this regard: an undue emphasis on a preferred statistical technique rather than a method of analysis tailored to the problem at hand; a failure to incorporate relevant phenotypic information; and a naive reliance on large pedigrees rather than an epidemiologically sound sample. It is these issues which will be addressed below. But first it is necessary to give some definition to the field of genetic epidemiology and place it in its proper perspective. This in turn will help identify both the range of research strategies that are required and the benefits of carrying out such research--issues which will also help in avoiding such compromises.
GENETIC EPIDEMIOLOGY IN PERSPECTIVE
In outlining the intent and scope of genetic epidemiology in terms of a formal definition, it becomes clear that the field of genetic epidemiology has two broad objectives. For example, if we follow Morton (1977,1979), who has been at pains to define "genetic epidemiology" following earlier adumbrations (Neel and Schull, 1954; Neel et al., 1965), the twin objectives can be defined as:
1. To focus on the etiological distribution and control of diseases in groups of "relatives," where "relatives" may be as close as twins or as extended as an ethnic group.
2. To elucidate the underlying causesof inherited disease, whether the inheritance be biological or cultural.
In short, the objectives are to define the distribution of risk and to identify the etiological factors that contribute to the burden of disease.
To meet these two objectives, which are central to the epidemiological method

90

Ward

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

in general, the distribution of disease in pole" of the etiological spectrum, these

space and time must be analyzed in such a comprise the classical "genetic diseases."

way that experimental contrasts can be set In total, they represent a vast number of

up and hypotheses tested. However, just syndromes, though as noted above their

as Murphy (1978) has reminded epide- total impact in most populations is not

miologists of the perils of ignoring the large. In this category the first epidemiolo-

"unifying concept of heritable transmis- gical objective, that of identifying etiolo-

sion," we need to remind geneticists of the gical factors, is not usually of primary con-

dangers that follow from an undue empha- cern, although a more rigorous

sis on simplistic genetic models. Indeed, application of segregation analysis would

Murphy (19796) has provided an impres- benefit the field (e.g., estimating pene-

sive demonstration of how limited our vi- trance and ascertainment from an epide-

sion will be if we confine attention to Men- miologically sound survey). However, the

delian and Galtonian methods of analysis second objective of specifying the distri-

without admitting the full range of epide- bution of risk should be pursued with vi-

miological possibilities. However, if the gor. More than twenty years ago, a start

epidemiological strategy is to be stressed, was made in this direction for two domi-

it is important to develop an overview of nant disorders by a careful evaluation of

the categories of disease in terms of the the nature of the diseases and the distribu-

underlying etiology. This is because the tions in space and time in defined popula-

appropriate strategy required to meet the tions (Crowe et al., 1956; Reed and

twin objectives of genetic epidemiology Chandler, 1958; Reed and Neel, 1959).

will depend on the type of interaction be- Little has been done to follow up on this

tween genotype and environment and pioneering work and, apart from the ex-

hence different categories of disease will ceptional studies in Finland (Norio et al.,

merit emphasis on either the first objec- 1973; Nevanlinna, 1980), there seem to be

tive of genetic epidemiology or the sec- few nations or territories where the distri-

ond, as well as requiring very different bution of Mendelian diseases in the popu-

methods of attack.

lation is adequately characterized.

A rather simplified view of the etiologi- Given the current level of biochemical

cal dimension of disease is to consider a sophistication, coupled with the move to

spectrum ranging from wholly genetic upgrade the quality of genetic screening

causes (e.g., the Mendelian disorders) to and counseling (e.g., National Academy

wholly environmental causes (e.g., of Sciences, 1975), it is imperative that the

trauma). For purpose of discussion, a set distribution of Mendelian disorders be

of six rather arbitrary categories can be placed in a sound epidemiological setting.

identified along this spectrum. Obviously It remains a curious anomaly, that even

this oversimplification obscures the fact today there is but a single population in

that the etiological distribution within North America--British Columbia--for

each category is complex and may involve which there is any hope of obtaining even

a variety of genotype-environmental in- elementary estimates of the general bur-

teractions. Nevertheless, the six catego- den due to Mendelian diseases (New-

ries identified below do provide a useful combe, 1967,1978; Trimble and Doughty,

means of identifying the range of prob- 1974).

lems and possible research strategies in 2. Chromosomal etiology. In this cate-

the area of genetic epidemiology.

gory, genotype also plays a dominant

1. Mendelian etiology. At the "genetic etiological role, inasmuch as the clinical

Vol. 27, No. 2

Genetic Epidemiology

91

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

condition is attributable to a disruption or imbalance of genetic material. However, since the occurrence of chromosomal aberration is not usually due to Mendelian segregation, but instead stems from nonMendelian factors, more effort needs to be expended in determining the etiological parameters than is the case for disorders with a Mendelian etiology. In many instances this can be done by application of classical epidemiological methods as in the case of the initial demonstration of maternal age effect in Down's syndrome (Penrose, 1933). However, following the recent advances in cytology, such as the ability to identify both the parent and the meiotic phase that gave rise to a nondisjunction event, epidemiological studies should be designed to incorporate such techniques.
The identification of high-risk groups would also fall into the province of genetic epidemiology. While cytological surveys have contributed much to this area, there are still substantial gaps in our knowledge. With the need to obtain accurate costbenefit estimates for amniocentesis and similar programs, epidemiologically sophisticated studies should not remain too long in abeyance.
3. Multifactorial etiology--"highheritability". Here the etiological component shifts further from the "genetic pool" and also becomes more complex. Disorders are placed in this category rather than the following one on the premise that here genetic factors make a major contribution to the variability of phenotypic expression associated with the disease. While the separation of the "multifactorial" category into two groups is clearly arbitrary, the distinction is important in terms of devising research strategies. Even so, it should be frankly recognized that diseases falling into this category are a heterogeneous group and may often be placed here because of ignorance. In many instances,

dissection of heterogeneity by techniques of genetic epidemiology will identify subsets of the disorder that have a predominantly Mendelian etiology as opposed to those that have a predominantly environmental etiology. The identification of specific genetic lesions in the hyperlipidemias (Goldstein and Brown, 1977) is a case in point.
The primary objective for the genetic epidemiologist will be to identify the genetic contribution to the etiological pathway, since identification of populations at risk is already well established. Since many of the diseases in this category are common, and impose massive burdens on society, the goal of identifying genetic elements in etiology is an important one. It is also a difficult and demanding one. Although most of the recent research effort of "genetic epidemiology" has occured in this area, there is much to do in terms of devising study designs and analytic techniques that will ensure success. This will be elaborated on below.
4. Multifactorial etiology--"low heritability". This category is rather arbitrarily distinguished from the former by the presumed higher contribution of environmental factors to phenotypic variability. As long as identification of the underlying nongenetic etiology is a major preoccupation of epidemiologists, geneticists are unlikely to have much impact. However, at the elementary level of specifying whether diseases fall into this category or the preceding one, genetic epidemiologists do have a distinct role. This would imply that reliable estimates of heritability do have some intrinsic value as a means of evaluating whether a specific condition warrants further genetic study or not, though care should be taken not to confuse "heritability" with "etiology."
5. Infectious agents. Long the traditional province of epidemiologists, there is increasing evidence that "host factors"

92

Ward

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

under genetic control play an important role in diseases caused by infectious agents. It now appears likely that functional differences in immune response caused by genetic factors are likely to influence morbidity and mortality for a wide variety of infectious agents. A case in point is the involvement of the B27 allele at the HLA-B locus in the development of ankylosing spondylitis and reactive arthritis (Brewerton, 1978). Evidence is now accumulating suggesting involvement of the HLA region in rheumatoid arthritis (Stastny, 1978; Karr et al., 1980) as well as in a host of other diseases in which an initial infection may act as the precipitating event (Dausset and Svejgaard, 1977).
Malaria has long been as a model for the role of genetic susceptibility in mediating the effect of parasitic diseases. It now appears that for many other tropical infectious diseases, the burden of morbidity is influenced by genotype as exemplified by the recent findings in schistosomiasis (Salam et al., 1979). Familial aggregation of response to respiratory virus infections (Fox and Hall, 1979) and the demonstration of a major locus effect on the development of immune response to streptococcus (Greenberg et al., 1980) suggest that genetic factors are also important in influencing the burden of infectious disease in temperate developed countries. In general, it seems that the field of infectious disease is an extremely important but sadly neglected area of genetic investigations. The evidence to date suggests this would be a fertile field for genetic epidemiology with a major emphasis on identifying populations at risk in terms of their specific genotypes.
6. Environmental hazards. Morbidity and mortality due to environmental hazards used to be of little concern to the geneticist. However, now that the environment can be defined in molecular terms, a broader perspective needs to be

taken. Along with the recognition that certain populations are exposed to a variety of potentially mutagenic and carcinogenic agents comes the realization that genetic susceptibility might play a major role in the subsequent expression of disease and disability. Since the analogous concept has proved very successful in the area of pharmacogenetics, it is likely that this component of genetic epidemiology could come to assume a prominant position as society grapples with the pervasive problem of deteriorating environments. As in the area of infectious disease, an immediate goal would be to identify susceptible genotypes at the population level.
BURDEN OF GENETIC DISEASE
Having placed genetic epidemiology in some perspective by classifying disease in terms of etiological attributes, we could ask whether genetic epidemiology has made any contribution toward its first objective, namely, specifying the distribution of the burden of disease. Ideally, this would be done not just in terms of point prevalence but also in terms of agespecific rates with appropriate calculations of relative risk for identifiable subpopulations. Besides allowing a realistic assessment of research priorities and the development of sampling strategies, this procedure could also initiate the establishment of public health policies keyed to community needs. Unfortunately, assessment of disease pressure in these terms has rarely been attempted. For children, some attempt has been made to estimate the overall burden of "genetic disease" (Trimble and Doughty, 1974; Trimble and Smith, 1977) as well as mortality (Carter, 1956; Roberts et al., 1970) or hospital admissions (Day and Holmes, 1973). In the majority of such surveys the focus has been on Mendelian diseases and congenital malformations. More recently the con-

Vol. 27, No.2

Genetic Epidemiology

93

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

tribution of disorders with a chromosomal etiology has begun to be assessed at the population level (Hook and Hamerton, 1977).
Such surveys indicate that "geneticdiseases," broadly defined, make a considerable contribution to the burden of mortality andmorbidity in childhood. Mendelian and chromosomal diseases combined account for about 12 to 15per cent of childhood mortality, with congenital malformations contributing an additional 25 to 30 per cent. If general morbidity, rather than mortality, is assessed, the pattern is similar, with 17 to 30 per cent of hospital admissions being attributable to "genetic disease." More important for the genetic epidemiologist istheevidence that the distribution of burden may shift drastically by etiological category during early childhood as shown by the risk ratios in Table 1. While these risk ratios are crude indications of the real burden, it seems clear that the distribution of burden due to Mendelian disorders during childhood is different than the burden due to congenital malformations. There are also differences within the Mendelian disorders, with recessive disorders having a more significant mortality component than the dominant disorders, as was first posited by Macklin (1932). Even with such crude measures, it is apparent that a useful evaluation of community burdens can be made. The effective administration of health services and development of research strategies could then follow.
For adults, the situation is less clear. Compared to the burden for children, the burden for adults of Mendelian disease is not striking if mortality or hospital admissions are used as guides (Trimble and Doughty, 1974;Day and Holmes, 1973). The major portion of the burden due to dominant Mendelian disorders is derived from a very few clinically severe conditions occurring during the third to fifth

TABLE 1
AGE-SPECIFIC BURDEN OF "GENETIC DISEASE" IN CHILDHOOD EXPRESSED AS INCREASED RISK RELATIVE TO THE RISK FORTHAT AGE GROUP
IN THE GENERAL POPULATION*

BURDEN or GENETIC DISEASE IN CHILDHOOD

AGE (YEARS)
12 3 4 5

Dominant disorders Mortality Hospital admissions Days of hospital stay Total
Recessive disorders Mortality Hospital admission Days of hospital stay Total
Congenital malformations Mortality Hospital admission Days of hospital stay Total

4 11 4 7 7 57979 9 13 12 13 33 18 31 24 27 49
4 19 33 39 22 7 8 10 10 7 12 13 16 24 13 23 40 59 73 42
5 6 6 45 56667 7 9 8 9 11 17 21 20 19 23

*Thc total burden ismerely the sum of the individual speeitie burdens and is presented solely as a heuristie variable. Data is taken from Trimble and Smith. 1977. and refers to ihe experience of approximately 840.001) children born in British Columbia from 1946 to1970.

decades of life plus a slightly larger number of milder conditions with an earlier age of onset (Carter, 1977; Newcombe, 1978). Nothwithstanding the devastating and highly publicized effects of certaindisorders such as Huntington's disease, the total contribution of Mendelian disorders to the burden of ill health and mortality in adult life appears very small compared to that of the more common diseases. Since admissions to specialist hospitals will tend to overestimate the impact of diseases with predominantly genetic etiology, the magnitude of this burden in the general population is hard to assess. If admissions to semirural general hospitals are analyzed, it isclear that theimpact of such diseases pales into insignificance beside the impact of disorders due to inadequate environments (Barton andSchull, ms.). This finding implies that wehave an inadequate

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

94

Ward

Social Biology

and biased viewpoint concerning the genetic contribution to the national burden of ill health.
Despite these limitations, enough preliminary evidence exists to make an initial guess at the overall distribution of the burden of genetic disease. Such an attempt is portrayed graphically in Figure 1 for the six etiological categories defined above. For each category, the relative burden is expressed by the width of the column and as the magnitude of the burden changes by age, the column becomes thicker or thinner. Similarly, depending on whether genetic or environmental factors play an increasingly important role with increasing age, the column is displaced to the left or the right respectively. This graph is only a crude approximation of the actual distribution of the burden by age for the various etiological categories, especially since this "gestalt" is only relevant to a population

like that of the United States. Nevertheless, it has some use in providing a focus for discussion. As genetic epidemiology develops, this kind of overview will become progressively refined. Ultimately, the impact of diseases within each etiological category will be accurately monitored at both the local and national level.
STRATEGIES FOR GENETIC EPIDEMIOLOGY
The rough approximations of Figure 1 suggest some directions for research strategy in genetic epidemiology. Concentration on the classical genetic disorders (diseases of Mendelian and chromosomal etiology) implies that the focus should be on childhood diseases, as already tends to occur in clinical genetics where pediatric concerns predominate. Alternatively, diseases that impose a more dramatic burden

ETIOLOGICAL CATEGORY

Age Elder

Adult

Juvenile
Child Infant
Birth

100% Genetic

Etiological Spectrum

100% Environment

Fig. 1. Representation of the distribution of the age-specific burden of disease within each of thesixetiological categories. Thewidth of the band at a given agedepicts the relative magnitude of the burden at that age as well as indicating the changing pressure of environmental and genetic factors contributing to the burden. No comparison should be made across etiological categories since the horizontal axis isscaled separately for each category.

Vol.27, No. 2

Genetic Epidemiology

95

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

on society may be tackled only by relin- immunological attributes that character-

quishing simple Mendelian models. Since ize genetic susceptibility. In the initial

many models of the genetic involvement stages, while there will be little need for

in the etiology of common diseases are the complex genetic statistics, there will be a

products of faith or imagination, it is pressing requirement for genetic input in

difficult to specify the most appropriate devising sound study designs that will

mode of attack (Murphy, 1979a, 19796). identify genotypic susceptibility. If this

Consideration of the six etiological cate- strategy were successfully applied to tropi-

gories and their distribution in Figure 1 cal and parasitic diseases, the global im-

suggests three general strategies.

pact could be profound. In the developed

1. Application of epidemiological prin- countries the potential benefits are also

ciples to define thespatial and temporal dis- appreciable, given our current exposure

tribution of diseases that have an underly- to environmental hazards and the ad-

ing Mendelian or chromosomal etiology. vances that have been recently made in

--This is a ready-made area for the development of sensitive biological as-

collaboration between epidemiologist and says.

geneticist. As well as identifying the popu-

lation at risk and thus indicating ways of alleviating the burden, this strategy may also lead to a better understanding of com-

PRECEPTS FOR THE ANALYSIS OF COMMON DISEASES

plex etiologies as in the case of the chro- From the above, it appears that the

mosomal disorders.

most immediate problems in genetic epi-

2. Integration of epidemiologicalprin- demiology revolve around issues of study

ciples with genetic statisticsto develop re- design and methods of analysis for disor-

search strategiesthat aim to quantify the ders with a multifactorial etiology--the

etiological interaction in the two multifac- "common diseases." This is also the area

torial categories.--Once the relative that has received most attention by geneti-

magnitude of genetic involvement has cists (Inouye and Nishimura, 1977; Mor-

been used to discriminate between these ton and Chung, 1978; Sing and Skolnick,

two categories, the emphasis should then 1979). Although some rather sophistica-

be on specifying the exact nature of the ted statistical issues have been identified,

genetic etiology as well as on determining insufficient attention has been given to the

the role played by environmental interac- necessity of incorporating basic epide-

tions. Only then can populations at risk be miological principles into study designs.

defined in terms of genotypes interacting Frequently, genetic parameters are esti-

with specified environments.

mated from data collected for a com-

3. Evaluatingthe roleplayed bygenetic pletely different purpose and a good deal

susceptibility in influencing the distribution of epidemiological information (stem-

of disease caused by infectious agents or ming from case control comparisons, dis-

environmental hazards.--Although the underlying etiology can be considered in

tribution of concomitant variables, etc.) is disregarded. In addition, basic genetic

terms of specific genotype-environment interactions, the initial research will have to incorporate time-honored epidemiological methods in order to identify the susceptible genotypes. Confirmation can occur by demonstrating biochemical or

concerns like ascertainment, penetrance, and genotype-environment interactions are also neglected. Such issues should not be avoided. Instead, they should be merged into a coherent study design that is both epidemiologically and genetically

96

Ward

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

sound. While some complications will remain intractable, attention to the following precepts will resolve many problems and will enhance the probability of success.
1. Biological definition of the problem,--Before any extensive statistical modeling is done, the biology of the disease should be given careful consideration. Failure to do so is at the root of much that is untoward in genetic epidemiology today. Clinical heterogeneity, physiological processes, concomitant variables, the existence of discontinuous or varying environments--all must be evaluated and accounted for in the genetic study design. Only then can hypotheses be constructed and parameters estimated.
2. Development of quasi-experimental studies.--Among others, Kempthorne (1978) has recently stated with vigor that causation cannot be estimated from studies that are merely observational. I agree. The difficulty of developing quasiexperimental study designs when dealing with human disease is little excuse for ignoring the issue altogether. This is especially true for genetic epidemiology, since developing an adequate study design to substitute for direct experimentation is one of the hallmarks of epidemiology. Since genotype-environment interactions are likely to play a major role in many diseases of multifactorial etiology, experimental study designs are likely to become a critical factor in the resolution of etiology.
The essential requirement of such study designs is the ability to evaluate the response of different genotypes in the face of specific environmental perturbations. While this may be impossible in the strict experimental sense, such a design can be approximated whenever related individuals are distributed over contrasting and changing environments. In these situations, genotypic similarity can be approxi-

mated via coefficients of genetic relationship, while response to environmental perturbation can be estimated from physiological differences between contrasting environments standardized by the distribution in one environment. This approach could be readily adopted by the development of study designs that focus on transitional isolates, small populations with measurable coefficients of genetic relationship that are experiencing a major transition in the relevant environmental variables (Ward et al., 1979; Ward, 1980).
3. Appropriate selection of genetic units.--Usually it appears that little thought is given to the selection of appropriate genetic units (clusters of related individuals) when research strategies are formulated. Ideally, the selection of genetic units for study would flow from a consideration of both epidemiological and genetic principles (e.g., Schull et al., 1970, 1977). Unhappily, expediency rather than scientific considerations tends to dictate the structure of the genetic units that are analyzed in most studies. Besides acerbating the problems of ascertainment bias and confounding of genotype and environmental distributions, this has helped contribute to the acrimonious and profitless debate between the protagonists of different statistical methods which are locked into a particular sampling unit. While nuclear family units and large complex pedigrees are influenced by different sources of bias, larger pedigrees with their attendant statistical problems seem least suited for epidemiological studies. In particular, large pedigrees suffer from the defect that their probability of ascertainment from the general population is difficult or impossible to quantify and the influence of culturally transmitted environments is extremely difficult to control for. From an epidemiological standpoint, a form of fixed cluster design (Chakraborty and Schull, 1979) is most likely to yield valid

Vol. 27, No. 2

Genetic Epidemiology

97

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

information, since the set of individuals in a cluster (e.g., index, spouse, sib, first cousin) can be designed to control for confounding variables, and the clusters themselves can be sampled in an epidemiologically sound manner. Even here there are problems, since in many instances a given sample design will not necessarily discriminate between alternate genetic hypotheses (Beatty, 1980). Hence, it is clear that the sampling design has to be constructed with reference to the accumulated epidemiological knowledge of the disorder as well as to take account of the set of hypotheses to be tested.
4. Maximize use of phenotypic information.--The frequent application of sophisticated quantitative models which treat the phenotype as a qualitative or one-dimensional variable leads to considerable loss of information and consequent ambiguity of interpretation. This is unnecessary since there is usually an abundance of phenotypic information available, much of it clinically relevant. Incorporation of such information into methods of analysis will increase the power of detecting etiological heterogeneity as well as allow more critical tests of hypothesis. Age of onset is but one example of an extremely useful variable which is almost universally disregarded. Also ignored are the changing interrelationships between concomitant variables as a function of age, local group of origin, and adherence to cultural norms.
In this regard, it should be noted that the actual distribution of a phenotype in time and space, conditional on a given genotype, will not only influence the type of analysis to be used in uncovering etiology (Murphy, 1979a, 19796) but will also influence the probability of ascertainment. Hence, information about phenotypic distribution should be used to a greater extent in defining the type of genetic unit to be sampled than is cur-

rently the case. This principle applies to simple procedures such as calculating recurrence risks as well as to more complex analyses aimed at defining etiology. An example of the way in which knowledge of age of onset distributions can be coupled with a fixed cluster design is given in Chakraborty et al. (1980) where the objective is the analysis of familial cancer.
5. Hierarchy of hypothesis testing.-- Present studies in "genetic epidemiology" tend to be motivated by the desire to use a favorite model which allows testing of but a single hypothesis. In the study of complex diseases like hypertension or diabetes, such a strategy is unlikely to be profitable. There is much more promise in a research strategy that involves a carefully constructed set of procedures so that estimation at one level leads to hypothesis testing at another. A hierarchical strategy like this will only be achieved if geneticists and epidemiologists work side by side to develop both the study design and the appropriate statistical tests. In this regard, the utilization of case control studies has been much neglected by geneticists. With the efflorescence of methods to analyze a variety of case control study designs (Bishop et al., 1975), it should not be difficult to set up a genetically based case control study to explicitly test a hypothesis generated by a previous analysis involving genetic statistics. An obvious genetically based design is the use of monozygous twin pairs appropriately selected for concordance and discordance in one trait (case vs. control) and evaluated for the distribution of a second trait. This kind of design has been used to disentangle some of the genetic and environmental influences on the relationship between smoking and health (Cederlof et al., 1977). Such study designs could be extended to include families of monozygous twins, or other types of fixed cluster designs, with great effect. However, it would

98

Ward

Social Biology

be difficult to conduct such case control a variety of obstacles, both conceptual and

studies in large complex pedigrees which technical, must be identified and over-

is an additional factor weighing against come before the potential ofthefieldcan

their usefulness in epidemiological be realized. Many of the issues identified

studies.

above will have to be addressed and re-

solved before the main objectives of

CONCLUSION

genetic epidemiology can be attained.

The above comments should not be construed as an indispensable nostrum for success. The sporadic merger of genetics and epidemiology has along history andis unlikely to be inhibited in thefuture because of our present inability to perceive clearly defined research strategies that will illuminate the field. There can be no doubt that there isa pressing need fordevelop-

Since there are many strategies fordoing this, it seems likely that resolution of the issues and attainment of these goals will eventually occur. What is less clear is what contribution the present protagonists of "genetic epidemiology" will make in this regard or what will be the label ultimately used to address the discipline that does resolve these issues.

ment in this intersection of geneticsand

epidemiology andfurther that someim-

portant steps have already been taken.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Unless societal concerns suddenly change, This paper was adapted from apresentation level of integration of the two fields will in- at the AAAS Symposium "Genetics in Epide-

crease rather than the reverse. However, miology," Houston, January 4,1979.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BARTON, S. A., and W. J. SCHULL. The burden of

ment and heredity and their implications for

genetic disease ineight Texas counties. Ms.

disease etiology. Acta. Med. Scand. Supple-

BEATTY, T. H. 1980. Discriminating among single

ment 612:2-128.

locus models using pedigrees. Amer. J. Med. CHAKRABORTY, R., and W. J. SCHULL. 1979.

Genet. 6:229-240.

Fixed cluster designs in human genetic

BISHOP, Y.M.M., S. E. FIENBERG, and P. W. HOL-

studies: Interpretations and usefulness. In C.

LAND. 1975. Discrete multivariate analysis.

F. Sing and M. H. Skolnick (eds.), The

M.I.T. Press, Cambridge.

genetic analysis of common disease: Applica-

BREWERTON, D. A. 1978. Inherited susceptibility

tions to predictive factors in coronary heart

to rheumatic disease. J. Roy. Soc. Med. disease. Alan Liss, New York.

71:331-338.

CHAKRABORTY, R., K. M. WEISS, and R. H.

CAPLAN, A. 1979. Genetic counseling, medical

WARD. 1980. Evaluation ofrelative risks from

genetics and theoretical genetics: Anhistori-

the correlation between relatives: A theoreti-

cal overview. InA. M. Capron, M. Lappé, R.

cal approach. Med. Anthrop. 4:395-414.

F. Murray, T. M. Powledge, S.B. Twiss, and CROWE, F. W., W. J. SCHULL, and J. V. NEEL.

D. Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts,

1956. A clinical, pathological and genetic

values and norms. Alan Liss, New York.

study of multiple neurofibromatosis. Thomas,

CARTER, C. O. 1956. Changing patterns in the Springfield.

causes of death at the Hospital for Sick DAUSSET, J., and A. SVEJGAARD. 1977. HLA and

Children. Great Ormond St. J. 11:65-68.

disease. Munksgaard, Copenhagen.

. 1977. The relative contribution ofmutant DAY, N.,and L. B. HOLMES. 1973. Theincidence

genes and chromosomal abnormalities to

of genetic disease in a University Hospital

genetic ill health in man. In D. Scott, B. A. population. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.

Bridges and F. A.Sobels, Progress in genetic

25:237-246.

toxicology. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

DUNN, L. C.1962. Cross-currents inthe history of

CEDERLOF, R., L. FRIBERG, and T. LUNDMAN.
1977. Theinteraction of smoking, environ-

human genetics. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 14:1-13.

Vol. 27, No. 2

Genetic Epidemiology

99

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Fox, J.P., andC. E.HALL. 1979. Viruses in families. Publishing Sciences Group, Littleton, Mass.
GOLDSTEIN, J. L., and M. S. BROWN. 1977. The
low density lipoprotein pathway and its relation to atherosclerosis. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 46:897-930.
GREENBERG, L. J., P. W. BRADLEY, R-L CHOPYK,
and J-M LALOUEL. 1980.Immunogenetics of response to a purified antigen from group A streptococci. Immunogenet. 11:145-167.
HOOK, E. B., and J. L. HAMERTON. 1977. Fre-
quency of chromosome abnormalities detected in consecutive newborn studies-- differences between studies. In E. B. Hook and I. H. Porter (eds.), Population cytogenetics. Academic Press, NewYork.
INOUYE, E., and H. NISHIMURA (eds.). 1977.
Gene-environment interaction in common diseases: University Park Press, Baltimore.
KARR, R. W., G. E. RODEY, T. LEE, and B. D.
SCHWARTZ. 1980. Association of H L A DRW4 with rheumatoid arthritis inblack and white patients. Arth. Rheum. 23:1241-1245.
KEMPTHORNE, O. 1978. Logical, epistemiological and statistical aspects of nature-nurture data interpretation. Biometrics. 34:1-23.
MACKLIN, M.T. 1932.Therelation ofthe modeof inheritance to the severity of an inherited disease. Hum. Biol. 4:69-79.
MATTEI, J. E., S. AYME, M. G. MATTEI, and F.
GIRAUD. 1980. Maternal age and origin of non-disjunction intrisomy 21. J. Med. Genet. 17:368-372. MCKUSICK, V. A. 1978. Mendelian inheritance in man. 5th ed. TheJohns Hopkins Press, Baltimore. MORTON, N. E. 1977. Some aspects ofthe genetic epidemiology of common diseases. In E. Inouye and H. Nishimura (eds.), Geneenvironment interaction in common diseases. University Park Press, Baltimore.
. 1979. Diseases determined by major genes. Soc. Biol. 26:94-103.
MORTON, N. E., and C. S. CHUNG (eds.). 1978.
Genetic epidemiology. Academic Press,New York. MURPHY, E. A., 1978. Epidemiological strategies and genetic factors. Int. J. Epidem. 7:7-14.
. 1979a. Where arewegoing? In C. F. Sing and M. H. Skolnick (eds.), The genetic analysis of common disease: Applications to predictive factors in coronary heart disease. Alan Liss, New York.
. 1979b. Quantitative genetics: Acritique. Soc. Biol. 26:126-141.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OFSCIENCES. 1975. Genetic
Screening. National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C. NEEL, J. V. 1966. Between twoworlds. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 18:3-20.
NEEL, J. V., and W. J. SCHULL. 1954. Human

heredity. University of Chicago Press,Chicago.
NEEL, J. V., M. SHAW, and W. J. SCHULL (eds.).
1965. Genetics and epidemiology of chronic diseases. DHEW. Public Health Service Publ. 1163. Washington, D.C.
NEVANLINNA, H. R. 1980. Rare hereditary diseases and markers in Finland: An introduction. In A. W. Eriksson et al. (eds.), Population structure and genetic disorders. Academic Press, London.
NEWCOMBE, H.B. 1967. Record linking: The design of efficient systems for linking records into individual and family histories. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 19:335-359. . 1978.Problems of assessing the genetic impact ofmutagens on man. Canad. J. Genet. Cytol. 20:459-470.
NORIO, R., H. R. NEVANLINNA, and J. PERHEEN-
TUPA. 1973. Hereditary diseases in Finland: Rare flora in rare soil. Ann. Clin. Res. 5:109-141.
PENROSE, L. S. 1933. The relative effects of paternal and maternal age in mongolism. J. Genet. 27:219-223.
REED, T. E., and J. H. CHANDLER. 1958.
Huntington's chorea inMichigan. I. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 10:201-206.
REED, T. E., and J. V. NEEL. 1959. Huntington's
chorea in Michigan. II. Selection and mutation. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 11:107-136.
ROBERTS, D. E., J. CHAVEZ, and S. D. M. COURT.
1970. The genetic component inchild mortality. Arch. Dis.Child. 45:33-38.
SALAM, E. A., S. ISHAAC, and A. A. F. MAH-
MOUD. 1979. Histocompatibility-linked susceptibility for hepatosplenomegaly in human Schistomiasis mansoni. J. Immun. 123:1829-1831.
SCHULL, W. J., E. HARBURG, J. C. ERFURT, M. A.
SCHORK, and R. RICHARD. 1970. A family set
method forestimating heredity and stress.II. J. Chron. Dis. 23:83-92.
SCHULL, W. J., E. HARBURG, M. A. SCHORK, and
R. CHAKRABORTY. 1977.Heredity, stress and blood pressure, a family set method. Epilogue. J. Chron. Dis. 30:701-704.
SING, C. E., and M. H. SKOLNICK (eds.). 1979.
The genetic analysis of common disease: Applications to predictive factors in coronary heart disease. Alan Liss, New York.
STASTNY, P. 1978. Association of the B-cell alloantigen DRW4 with rheumatoid arthritis. New Eng. J. Med. 298:869-871.
TRIMBLE, B. K., and J. H. DOUGHTY. 1974. The
amount of hereditary disease inhuman populations. Ann.Hum.Genet. 38:199-223.
TRIMBLE, B. K., and M. E. SMITH. 1977. The inci-
dence of genetic disease and the impact on man of altered mutation rates. Canad. J. Genet. Cytol. 19:375-385. WARD, R. H. 1980. Genetic epidemiology in an

100

Ward

Social Biology

anthropological context. Med. Anth. 4:293-306.
WARD, R. H., P. G. CHIN, and I. A. M. PRIOR.
1979. Genetic epidemiology of blood pressure in a migrant population: Prospectus. In C. F. Sing and M. H. Skolnick (eds.), The genetic analysis of common disease: Applications to predictive factors in coronary heart disease. Alan Liss, New York.

WEINBERG, W. 1908. Über den Nachweis der Vererbung beim Menschen. Jahreshefte des Vereins für vaterländische Naturkunde in Wurthemberg 64:368-382.
. 1912. Weitere Beiträge zur Theorie der Vererbung. IV. Über Methode und Fehlerquellen der Untersuchung auf Mendelschen Zahlen beim Menschen. Arch. Rass. Ges. Biol. 9:165-174.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

