Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Discussion: Methodologies in human behavior genetics
Robert C. Elston
To cite this article: Robert C. Elston (1973) Discussion: Methodologies in human behavior genetics, Social Biology, 20:3, 276-279, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988054 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988054
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Discussion: Methodologies in Human Behavior Genetics

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Robert C. Elston
Department of Biostatistics University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, North Carolina

I wish to make it clear at the outset, in discussing the four papers that have been presented at this symposium, that I know very little about the genetics of schizophrenia; and the only possible justification I can see for my being asked to be a discussant here is that this ignorance is shared by the other speakers, who have been studying the subject much longer than I have. It therefore seems pertinent to ask why we know so little about the genetics of schizophrenia, and what we can do about this state of affairs. To this end, it -will be convenient for me to group my remarks into four sections, in an attempt to answer in turn the following four questions:
1. Why have we been unable to demonstrate Mendelian segregation?
2. Is there any good evidence for polygenic inheritance?
3. What is the heritability of schizophrenia?
4. Where do we go from here?
1. Why have we been unable to demonstrate Mendelian segregation? Several answers to this question have been suggested. The first possibility is that we have not yet tested the appropriate genetic model. Only segregation patterns for one-

and two-locus models have been considered, and perhaps more loci are involved. Indeed, the lack of fit to a one-locus model is often used as evidence that the underlying genetic model must be polygenic, i.e., each family must be segregating simultaneously at several loci that determine the presence or absence of schizophrenia. But, as far as I know, no one has examined family or pedigree data to see if the observed segregation patterns agree with what might be expected from such a polygenic model. As we have seen today, analyzing the data in the form of pairs of relatives cannot distinguish between a simple major gene model and the simplest of polygenic models. Such an analysis can only distinguish between models if we include pairs of relatives from families in which there has been inbreeding, or if the polygenic models considered involve a fair amount of linkage or epistasis (see James, 1971).
The second possibility is that there is genetic heterogeneity among the families being analyzed. It could be that in any one family in which there is schizophrenia the disease is determined by segregation at a single locus, but that in different families different loci are involved; so that in the population as a whole many loci are in-

276

Vol. 20, No. 3

Discussion

277

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

volved. This is not polygenic inheritance, though it is sometimes confused with it. I do not think this can be a major reason why we have been unable to demonstrate Mendelian inheritance, for some investigators have in fact unsuccessfully studied large single pedigrees, which would not have this heterogeneity.
The third possibility that has been mentioned is what I shall call "noise." Different investigators define schizophrenia differently, and this gives rise to "measurement noise"; and the fact that the environment plays an important role leads to "environmental noise". Measurement noise can be greatly reduced by not pooling the data obtained by different investigators. At present we can do little about environmental noise; but if we knew what environmental factors are important, then we could control them (at the very least statistically) and so sharpen our genetic analysis. The fact is that if heritability is not high it will be very difficult to identify the genetic mechanism underlying any segregation pattern, even if we consider complete two-generational family data (see Smith, 1971).
Lastly, I want to mention something that has hardly been considered, and that I think may be the most important cause of all for our inability so far to demonstrate Mendelian segregation. I refer to the variability in the age of onset of schizophrenia. Extensive analyses that I have recently undertaken would indicate that the age of onset distribution for schizophrenia is virtually lognormal. I t should not surprise us, therefore, if a genetic analysis that ignores this fact, either by not applying any age corrections at all or by applying an inappropriate age correction (e.g., using Weinberg's correction, which assumes the distribution of age of onset is symmetrical), fails to demonstrate Mendelian segregation. In fact, I have performed preliminary pedigree analyses utilizing the lognormal distribution for

age of onset as part of the model, and these appear to demonstrate clear segregation of two alleles at one locus. That is why I think this may be more important than all the other causes listed above; but at this stage these findings are only tentative.
2. Is there any good evidence for polygenic inheritance? Here I am in perfect agreement with the conclusions arrived at by Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza on the basis of their analysis. However, I should like to take up again a couple of points raised by the other speakers, in case they may have misled you into believing that there is in fact some good evidence that schizophrenia is polygenically inherited.
It is simply not true that a single-gene model cannot explain an increased morbid risk among the proband's siblings as the number of affected relatives in the parent generation (including the proband's aunts and uncles) increases. The monogenic theory, whether formulated in the manner presented by Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza or by Elston and Campbell (1970), would predict just this same increase.
With regard to the low concordance found between monozygotic twins, this is as easily explainable (or unexplainable) on either a monogenic or a polygenic hypothesis. In fact, when a monogenic model is fitted to the data, the observed concordance is found to be higher than that expected. Although we must certainly expect monozygotic twins to differ from each other for both environmental and non-environmental reasons, such as differences in X-inactivation and autosomal allelic suppression, any variability in these differences from twin pair to twin pair is hardly relevant to the question of whether the trait is monogenically or polygenically determined; I personally think it is a poor argument to say that we expect genotype-environment interaction to be greater if more genes are involved. Similarly, the fact that the herit-

278

Elston

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

ability of liability to schizophrenia can be in Figure 1 of Kidd and Cavalli-Sforza's

high even when the concordance between paper; what is happening is that two differ-

monozygotic twins is low is also irrelevant. ent phenotypes are being considered. This

This does not so much imply that monozy- does not raise doubt about the meaning of

gotic twin pair differences may include a the term heritability, but does about the

purely genetic component as that there is meaning of the term liability. If we analyze

something wrong with our definition of the phenotype that is actually observed

heritability. This brings me to my third (assuming this to be a dichotomy), then

question.

we can let the absence and presence of

3. What is the heritability of schizophre- schizophrenia be represented by any two

nia? In the first place, we must readily distinct quantitative values (e.g., 0 and 1),

admit that any estimate of heritability de- and we shall always come up with the same

rived from human data is basically ques- estimate of heritability from a given set of

tionable. Even if pairs of relatives reared data: whether the model is monogenic or

apart are included in the analysis, there is polygenic will have no effect, so long as we

no way to disentangle the effects of the have random mating, no linkage, and no

uterine environment. If individuals reared epistasis. The result will be the heritability

apart are not included, then we can see of schizophrenia.

immediately from Fulker's Table 1 what I do not, however, think that such a

the dangers are. It is not unreasonable to parameter will be very useful. Heritability

suppose that, for the individuals raised of susceptibility to schizophrenia may be a

together, the appropriate coefficients in the little more useful; here a person is classi-

column headed "common environment vari- fied according to what his eventual pheno-

ance" could be the same as those in the type would be, if he lived long enough (of

column headed "additive variance". In such course this has to be done by means of a

a situation, without data on individuals statistical analysis that takes into account

reared apart, the additive genetic variance the age of onset distribution). This sub-

and the common environment variance tracts from the denominator of the herit-

would be completely confounded. Including ability ratio the variance due to variable

in the analysis individuals raised apart cer- age of onset, so that the parameter is no

tainly helps, but we still have no guarantee longer affected by the age structure of the

that the coefficients then used for common population being considered. But in general

environment are really appropriate.

I tend to agree with Fisher (1951), who

But how do we explain that, with exactly pointed out the foolishness of the concept

the same assumptions about common en- of heritability in animal breeding. I con-

vironment, a monogenic model of schizo- sider it even more unfortunate in human

phrenia leads to a heritability of about genetics, not only because we can never be

10-15%, whereas an equally well-fitting sure that our estimates are unbiased, but

polygenic model leads to a heritability of also because the parameter itself is so often

75% or more? The paradox is easily ex- misunderstood.

plained when we realize that what has been 4. Where do we go from here? There is

estimated is not the heritability of schizo- no doubt in my mind that if formal genetic

phrenia but the heritability of liability to analysis is going to help us unravel the

schizophrenia. This "conceptual phenotype" mode of inheritance of schizophrenia exten-

has a completely different distribution sive pedigrees nesd to be examined, and by

under the two different models, as is seen much more sophisticated techniques. At the

Vol. 20, No.3

Discussion

279

same time, we must use as much data as can be readily observed concerning the phenotype of each individual in the pedigree; it is wrong to suppose that pedigree analysis can only be used fordiscontinuous, or clearly bimodal, traits (seeElston and Stewart, 1971).
Furthermore, whatever the mode ofinheritance, the finding of a genetic linkage relationship between schizophrenia and a definite polymorphic genetic marker would provide incontrovertible proof of genetic involvement in the etiology of thedisease. Recently, tentative evidence has been found

suggesting such a linkage relationship with the Gm locus (Elston, Kringlen, and Namboodiri, 1972). Although this result must be considered highly speculative at present, I dobelieve it points to a method of analysis, complementary to biochemical studies, that will lead to future success. I t will help in the identification of groups of families in which the main determinant of schizophrenia is in all probability aparticular allele at a particular locus, and hence supply more homogeneous material for determining biochemical correlates of each form of thedisease.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ELSTON, R. C., and M. A. CAMPBELL. 1970. Schizo-

model

phrenia: Evidence for the major gene hy-

for the genetic analysis of pedigree data.

pothesis. Behav. Genet. 1:3-10.
ELSTON, R. C, E. KRINGLEN, and K. K. NAM-
BOODIRI. 1972. Possible linkage relationships

Hum. Hered. 21:523-542. FISHER, R. A. 1951. Limits to intensive production
in animals. Brit. Agric. Bull. 4:217-218. JAMES, J. W. 1971. Frequency in relatives for an

between certain blood groups and schizophrenia all-or-none trait. Ann. Hum. Genet. 35:47-49.

or other psychoses. Behav. Genet.

SMITH, C. 1971. Discriminating between different

ELSTON, R. C., and J. STEWART. 1971. A general

modes of inheritance in genetic disease. Clin. Genet. 2:303-314.

