Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The flower children of Sudbury: A note on social work services for a counterculture population
Charles W. Smiley
To cite this article: Charles W. Smiley (1975) The flower children of Sudbury: A note on social work services for a counterculture population, Social Biology, 22:2, 189-193, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988164 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988164
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Brief Reports
The Flower Children of Sudbury: A Note on Social Work Services for a Counterculture Population
Charles W. Smiley
School of Social Welfare University of Calgary Calgary, Alberta Canada

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

In the summer of 1973, an effort was made to provide social work services to a "Hippie" or counterculture population in Sudbury, a city of 50,000 people located in northern Ontario, Canada. Because of its primitive frontier style, the fact that Sudbury is the main city in northern Ontario, or just "strange vibes," a collection of young people who were disengaging themselves from an active role in society began to move into the area early in 1973. By the end of the winter, several hundred had swelled the population, usually living in isolated areas outside the city limits. Most of the newcomers were unemployed or employed only part-time. Some were writers, artists, merchants of hip ornaments, or publishers of hip publications. Others panhandled, and many sold drugs.
The Hippie movement was and still is characterized by the use of drugs, the espousal of free sex, the elimination of the "double standard," and personal philosophies based on love and sharing with one's companions. Groups of young people shared living quarters and food, sometimes as a manifestation of their philosophy, but also as a result of the limited

housing available and the general meagerness of their incomes. Intellectualism was scomed; "action," "sensing," "meditation," and "Eastern mystic experience" were considered of more value.
As the winter ended, the.Hippies living in the area were heralding a coming "summer of love." There was talk of an immigration of several hundred more counterculture people.
Several community agencies and social service people in Sudbury were acutely aware of the problems involved in the Hippie migration. There were reports of illness, malnutrition, and unsanitary living conditions. There seemed to be drug problems, runaway children problems, and a wide array of emotional problems.
Because of the general concern and a need to find out more about the situation, a special project was set up. This project was organized within the structure of the Social Services Department of Cambrian College. As a member of the faculty, I was placed in charge. The objectives were: (1) to provide direct counseling whenever possible; (2) to refer counterculture people to the medical and social agencies in

189

190

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Sudbury; (3) to report the immediate and long-range needs of these people to the agencies; and (4) to receive and refine impressions of the factors that dispose young people to become Hippies. This paper is a report on the project, what we did, and what we learned.
In developing the project, we felt some initial misgivings, based on our following impressions of the Hippie movement.
1. The Hippies' characteristic detachment from struggle and from involvement with the "straight" world, their emphasis on easy accepting relationships with one another, and the absence among them of overt aggressive behavior might conceal a deep covert hostility to society. These factors would render them inaccessible to any kind of relationship with any agency of the Establishment.
2. Because the theme of the Hippie movement was "tune in, turn on, and drop out," the movement seemed to attract young people with one common attribute, a passive rejection of the mores and values of our culture. Their feeling was that active social protest was a waste of time.
3. The unconventional dress and behavior characteristic of the Hippies suggested a deep nostalgia for earlier times, presumed to be simpler, more idyllic, and more conducive to clearly defined social and personal relationships. The long hair and beads, the dress styles borrowed from the past, such as the tunic and sandals of early Christian-Roman times, suggested the search for a lost childhood. Other evidence that regressive withdrawal tendencies were pervasive among these young people could be found in their predilection for discussing mystical philosophy and their search for "mind-expanding experiences," either vicariously through the arts or directly through the use of drugs.
4. The Hippies tended to ask for. nothing, but accepted whatever was made

available to them. There seemed to be a pronounced social trait among these young people of deep passive dependency. As social workers, we have dealt with this trait in individual clients, and we know its clinical manifestations and causes. But what did it mean as a general social trait?
5. The Hippies' speech patterns and new vocabulary as well as the style of their arts and crafts revealed a consistent use of vague, abstract, symbolic forms as substitutes for clear precise definitions in communication. Here again seemed to be evidence of a tendency to turn away and look inward and backward. Was this tendency an early symptom of regressive reaction to cumulative stress from society? If so, did the movement attract the more maladjusted members of our young population? Where did social movement and personal pathology diverge?
With these factors in mind, we decided to set up a "free" or "street" clinic. This clinic was a drop-in center where medical and counseling help was provided by volunteers. It was designed to operate on the following principles.
1. There was no paid staff. Medical treatment was provided by qualified people. However, the clinic was usually staffed and run by interested nonprofessionals. They provided the counseling. 2. It was an evening clinic, opening at 6:00 P.M. and closing when the last patient was seen. 3. Other than medical records, we did not keep files, notes, or any written material on the patients. They did not have to give us any information, including their names. 4. The services were free. We did not ask for payment or insurance numbers. 5. There were no appointments. We had a series of numbers from one to fifty. As the patients came in, they were

Vol. 22, No. 2

Brief Reports

191

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

given numbers. When their numbers met at 7:30 in the evening and sometimes

came up, they were seen.

ran until 2:00 in the morning. It included

6. The clinic was kept as informal as one or two observed interviews with new

as possible, in terms of procedure, dress, patients, a lengthy discussion of psycho-

atmosphere, feeling, etc.

logical problems presented in nontheoret-

At the clinic, I organized a lay counseling program, which developed from several needs. First, we were seeing a large and growing number of young people with serious psychological problems. For them, a one- or two-shot exposure to therapy was inadequate. What these people needed was a chance to explore their problems in depth over a long period of time. This exploration needed to be with someone who was interested in commiting himself to the patient in a close individual relationship. I t was clear that there were not enough professionals available in the community to provide such a service.
Second, there were people in the community who were interested in making this type of commitment. They were both young and old with a wide variety of backgrounds. They tended to be people who identified with the philosophy and values of the counterculture. However, they were making careers and lives within the Establishment.
Third, it became clear a large proportion of the young people we were seeing were sick partly because they had refused to make use of the traditional medical and psychological services in the community. These were young people who were afraid to go into what they considered an "uptight" Establishment clinic. They were using our services precisely because of the presence of interested nonprofessionals who were clearly not Establishment, but

ical terms, and a discussion of the dynamics of interviewing. At times, there was a discussion of a tape a counselor had made with a patient he had been seeing. We discussed the problems of ongoing counseling. In addition, I would meet with counselors individually on other evenings to go into more depth on individual cases.
The counselors were recruited by personal contact, word of mouth, and free advertising through the mass media. A potential counselor would participate in the seminar meetings until I felt he was ready. There were some people who entered the seminars and found they were not interested in making the commitment or did not have the necessary sensitivity. They quietly dropped out. When I assigned a counselor to a patient, I was not always certain he would be able to help him; but I felt quite comfortable that he was unlikely to hurt him.
One aspect of the program was unusual. We had a rule that a patient was free to seek counseling from as many different counselors, either concurrently or consecutively, as he wanted. He was told: "If you feel something is going wrong with your counseling relationship, if you feel you are not being helped, you are free to ask to see another counselor. You need not even mention this to the counselor you are seeing. All you need do is speak to me, and it will be arranged." It rarely happened, but the option was there.

yet were well put together and running The free clinic and its programs were

the place. These were people with whom operational by May of 1973. They became

they could identify.

more intensive and extensive during the

The lay counselor training program re- summer. However, by November, as the

volved around a weekly seminar which new winter approached, the level of activ-

192

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

ity dropped off. In December, it was decided to phase out the program.
While it lasted, it was interesting and exciting. There was considerable activity and a large number of counterculture people received medical and psychological help. We were not involved in formal research, but there are factors on which we can report. The following are the impressions we received and the evaluations we made.
1. The initial misgivings we felt were substantiated and reinforced: (a) The counter-culture people did have a deep covert hostility to society, (b) There was a passive rejection of the mores and values of our culture, (c) There was a nostalgia for earlier times. In effect, it was a search for a lost childhood, (d) They did have deep passive dependency needs, (e) The counterculture movement did attract the severely maladjusted. Personal pathology seemed to be a major part of and was intertwined with the Hippie phenomenon.
2. The free clinic concept worked in terms of the counterculture people being willing to make use of it. The clinic was accepted and, I believe, appreciated. The majority of clients made use of the medical services available. This aspect of the program was invaluable as they needed medical help.
3. The lay counseling program was popular with the volunteer counselors. In terms of recruiting, training, and using nonprofessional people as counselors, it seemed to be successful. It should be tried again.
4. Some of the flower children made use of the lay counselors. It is hard to evaluate the effectiveness of this service, but there was some success. I would base this judgment on the length of the counseling relationships, the referrals we received from our patients who tried to draw their friends into the program, and

the length of time the volunteer counselors stayed with it. It is hard to imagine that these "lay people" would waste so much time and energy and make the type of commitment they did in an unrewarding and failing activity.
5. The objective of referring the Hippies to other social agencies did not work at all. The clinic was not a bridge to the "straight community." We were also not effective in reporting the immediate and long-range needs of the Hippies to the community agencies.
We received the following impressions of the people in the counterculture movement.
They were willing to take the services offered them--meals, clothing, money, medical help, counseling, etc. They received any form of relief from immediate need with appropriate feeling, but always in terms of the present without reference to the past or future. Their dialogue, analysis, and planning stemmed from the current "scene," and the*current scene did not allow for considerations of the future. They were not interested in resolving a problem by changing their present pattern of adjustment. I t was very difficult to make the transition from resolving an immediate crisis to an examination of deeper emotional problems. Once a crisis was relieved, the patient tended to drift away until the next crisis.
Some of our patients were people who could not find emotional support in their affiliation to the counterculture movement. For them, the Hippie experience was but another phase in a long history of personal rejection and maladjustment. It had not brought them gratification. They were deviates from a deviant culture and thus were more amenable to counseling.
With the younger people, the magnet of Hippieland reinforced an already existing adolescent conflict. Their runaway ex-

Vol. 22, No. 2

Brief Reports

193

perience offered an opportunity to resolve long-standing family problems. They would tend to go into counseling and find some success.
We met a large number of deeply disturbed people for whom the camaraderie and outer symbols and rituals of the Hippie movement seemed a materialization of their fantasy life. These people were usually excessively dependent persons, whose need to cling to and exploit others and whose lack of any sense of reciprocal obligation seemed to represent a displacement to friends and "pads" of emotional grievances against their families and homes. They had a repetitive pattern of flight, clinging, and rejection. The invariable use of drugs complicated matters.

Most of the Hippies were between the ages of 14 and 24, the majority being between 17 and 22. These ages encompass the period of life when young people are apt to rebel against parental and societal authority. This rebellion is an attempt to achieve a sense of identity, a sense of integrity, and a sense of firmness of self and outlook. Their entry into the counterculture movement represented a pathological attempt to achieve this self-realization. The movement was also extremely destructive to the physical and emotional health of its members. As a deviation from social norms, the counterculture movement we observed was regressive, infantile, and sick.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

