Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Predicting immediate outcome of genetic counseling following genetic screening
Lawrence Fisher , Peter T. Rowley & Mack Lipkin Jr.
To cite this article: Lawrence Fisher , Peter T. Rowley & Mack Lipkin Jr. (1979) Predicting immediate outcome of genetic counseling following genetic screening, Social Biology, 26:4, 289-301, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988387 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988387
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

Predicting Immediate Outcome of Genetic Counseling Following Genetic Screening

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

*Lawrence Fisher, Peter T. Rowley, and Mack Lipkin, Jr.

*Department of Psychiatry, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine and Division of Genetics, and Departments of Psychiatry and Medicine, University of Rochester Medical School, Rochester,New York
ABSTRACT:Because genetic counseling provides potentially stressful information to the patient, it is important for the screener of genetic disorders (1) to create effective counseling strategies sensitive to groups of patients at risk for stressful outcome and (2) to identify and scale variables to designate such groups prior to counseling. In this study, patients in a health maintenance organization were screened for thalassemia trait as part of regular health care. Positive individuals were randomly placed in one of two counseling groups. One group received information from a videotaped program; the second, from a lecture in person by a physician. Four domains of potential outcome predictor variables were identified and quantitatively scaled: demographic, attitudinal, personality, and intellectual. These variables were then used to predict knowledge gained and mood change immediately after counseling. No variable or variable domain reliably predicted short-term outcome. These findings were consistent across counseling method. These data indicate that prospective genetic counseling leads to no untoward immediate outcomes when undertaken in a primary health care setting and that audiovisual procedures can be used effectively to provide relevant information.

In the last ten years there has been an increased recognition of the genetic basis of many disorders, and improved methods of detection have been developed. As a result, large-scale public screening has been proposed for the identification of carriers of genetically transmitted disorders so as to prevent the birth of defective children. Several such programs have already been undertaken, e.g., for sickle trait (Satcher, 1976) and Tay-Sachs trait (Kaback et al., 1974). Because genetic counseling for identified carriers provides potentially stressful information (Kenen
*Present address: Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, Fresno-San Joaquin Medical Education Program, Veterans Administration Hospital, 2615 E. Clinton Ave., Fresno, California 93703.

and Schmidt, 1978), it is incumbent upon the screener (1) to identify individuals on whom genetic counseling may have a negative effect, (2) to identify variables which will designate such individuals prior to counseling, and (3) to determine whether alternative methods of counseling reduce the risk for such individuals.
The present study was designed to investigate which demographic, personality, attitudinal, and intellectual variables assessed prior to genetic counseling for thalassemia trait predicted amount learned and/or changes in mood response immediately following counseling when such counseling occurred in a primary health care setting. In addition, the study aimed at developing scales which would assess these variables for use in both im-

289

290

Fisher et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

mediate and long-term outcome studies of genetic counseling.
Knowledge of which individuals are at risk for favorable or unfavorable outcome prior to counseling would be helpful in choosing the most effective and appropriate counseling strategy. For example, for certain types of patients, several authors (Pearn, 1973; Falek and Britton, 1974) have suggested a series of counseling sessions (Emery et al., 1972) rather than just one.
In studies of outcome of genetic counseling following the birth of a defective child, Emery (1972) reported that a large majority of counseled women understood the genetic information communicated during counseling; Carter (1975) reported similar results. On the other hand, Leonard et al. (1972) found that very few parents understood recurrence risks after counseling. Sibinga and Friedman (1971) reported that only a small portion of their sample could adequately recount information on follow-up. Thus, there is little uniformity of outcome with respect to learning as a result of counseling.
A possible explanation for this variability has to do with psychological factors in retaining newly learned information. Meyerowitz and Lipkin (1976) postulated that the defense mechanism of denial often impairs the retention of information provided during counseling. Such denial often causes major cognitive distortions or a rejection of the information. They likened the denial following counseling to the denial of heavy smokers or drinkers who know the risks but keep them out of mind.
Several other representative studies (Pearn, 1973;Ingall et al., 1973;Reiss and Menashe, 1972) and reviews (Shaw, 1971) also reported mixed results, but the consensus of two recent overviews (Meyerowitz and Lipkin, 1976; Antley, 1976) was

that the psychological mechanisms of denial or grief limit the ability of counselees to process the new information and hence reduce the likelihood of a favorable outcome in terms of effective decision making.
Pearn (1973) pointed out that an individual's reaction to counseling and his/ her subsequent reproductive behavior reflect a personality characteristic which might be similar to the concept of locus of control. Under stress, some individuals feel that they have no power or control to effect change and cast their fate to the wind, whereas others take a more active stance and reevaluate plans in light of the new information.
A number of other papers have dealt with the psychological implications of genetic counseling, although many are reports of anecdotal information or surveys rather than tightly controlled empirical studies. Salk and Hilgariner (1972) and Sorenson (1974) reported an increase in marital disruption following counseling with some increase in divorce rate. This result is consistent with anecdotalfindings of increased divorce rates among parents following the death of a child. Salk and Hilgartner also reported an increase in neglect of other children with resulting grief and resentment. Antley and Hartlage (1973) described increased anxiety, hostility, and depression in couples who recently had a child with Down's syndrome. Antley and Hartlage demonstrated a decrease in these symptoms and a slight increase in self-concept in these couples after genetic counseling. Tips et al. (1964) reported an increase in hypochondriacal tendencies in patients following counseling, and others have reported similar findings as a result of the counseled patients' increased stress and greater concentration on bodily processes. Consequently, how much one learns or how one

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling

291

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

reacts to genetic counseling is related not only to intellectual ability, but also to psychological and attitudinal factors.
Most of the studies reported above are based on retrospective or probandoriented genetic counseling (Rowley et al., 1979) in which counseling occurs following the identification of a symptomatic individual. This type of study has the difficulty of matching patient samples prior to counseling as well as that of interpreting the influence of powerful emotions, for example, such as those occurring following the birth of a defective child. A second type of study, however, employs a prospective design, i.e., the identification of individuals at risk prior to the appearance of symptoms in an offspring. This approach, which is the one employed in this project, has the advantage of making available larger samples of patients having varying experience with the disease.
Within the prospective counseling strategy, one can screen individuals by various techniques of public recruitment or as part of primary health care. Public recruitment, however, often raises concerns about potential stigmatization, and various degrees of prior knowledge, experience, and interest make the creation of matched groups and generalizability of findings more difficult. Unlike those in previous studies, the subjects in the present study (1) were not preselected for interest and (2) were not preconditioned by illness, but (3) were screened and counseled as part of their primary health care as described below. Consequently, these data are based on a somewhat different population of patients from which generalizations about the efficacy of genetic screening and counseling within the context of primary health care can be made.
Previous reports (Rowley et al., 1979; Fisher et al., 1979, ms.) have demonstrated four important findings. First, he-

terozygous carriers, not aware prior to the results of screening that they were being checked for beta-thalassemia trait, demonstrated a significant increase in knowledge following genetic counseling when compared to uncounseled nontrait patients. Second, following counseling, patients also demonstrated significant changes on the Nowlis Mood Adjective Checklist: increased Surprise, decreased Deactivation, decreased Skepticism, and a moderate increase in Depression. Third, two methods of counseling were compared--counseling in person by a physician and counseling through a videotaped program. The two were equally effective in teaching about both thalassemia and genetics. Fourth, changes in mood following counseling were similar in each of the two counseling groups.
The present study was undertaken with two goals. The first was the identification of and development of scales for a broad range of potentially predictive variables. While several authors had reflected on the potential relationship between a variety of variables, such as religiousness (Kenen and Schmidt, 1978) and outcome of genetic counseling, no systematic effort had yet been undertaken to both identify relevant predictors and develop logistically useful instruments for their assessment. The second goal was to determine which of these variables, individually or in combination, significantly predicted outcome when used in a multiple regression model.
We studied members of a health maintenance organization (HMO) who were screened for beta-thalassemia trait as part of a multiphasic health evaluation. These individuals expected to be screened for a variety of unspecified disorders as part of preventive health care. Consequently, the patients detected were not self-selected by response to public recruitment or by the

292

Fisher et al.

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

birth of a defective child. This approach differs from those of other recent studies in which counselees had some prior knowledge of or experience with the disorder, having volunteered to be screened or having experienced the birth of a defective child. It should again be noted that this approach represents a distinct difference between data generated by this and by the majority of previous studies. Our aim was to learn more about the incorporation of genetic screening and counseling in primary health care.
Transmission of thalassemia follows simple Mendelian genetics. Any given offspring of two beta-thalassemia-trait parents has a 25 per cent chance of having beta-thalassemia major (Cooley's anemia). This disorder is caused by the deficient synthesis of the beta chain of adult hemoglobin (hemoglobin A). Children display severe anemia, delayed growth, and abnormal faciès and generally require regular transfusions to maintain life. The disorder is not accompanied by intellectual retardation, but individuals live only to the second or third decade. At present, there is no curative treatment. While present in most ethnic groups in the United States, beta-thalassemia trait is found in 4 per cent of Italian-Americans (Neel and Valentine, 1975) and in 5 per cent of Greek Americans.1 Individuals with beta-thalassemia trait usually have no symptoms, although at times they may have a mild anemia. Since the carrier is generally asymptomatic, identification of the trait condition often comes as a surprise. The birth of a beta-thalassemia major child places a heavy burden on the family and society. Consequently, prevention may have considerable value, and the benefits and burdens of genetic screening in the context of general health care deserve careful assessment.
1Pearson; W. Personal communication, 1977.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
SUBJECTS
The Genesee Valley Group Health Association (GVGHA) is an HMO in northwestern New York State with approximately 36,000 members. All patients 18-65 years having a phlebotomy for any reason were screened. Each patient having a mean cell volume ^77 and a hemoglobin A2 3=3.5 per cent was diagnosed as having beta-thalassemia trait. Each was invited by mail to come in for an explanation of his/her hemoglobin results.
Of 15,534 patients screened, 128 were identified as having beta-thalassemia trait. The physician requested that counseling not be undertaken in 4 cases due to the presence of other medical problems (e.g., terminal cancer). In 4 additional cases, the patient contacted the physician and was informed by him. Of the remaining 120 patients, 110 came in for an appointment and 10 are awaiting scheduling. Of the 110, 93 agreed to participate in the study and were counseled; 3 were used as pilot subjects; 7 claimed sufficient knowledge; 3 were non-English speaking; 2 did not desire information; 1 requested counseling without participation; and 1 refused participation with no reason given. Therefore, the study had a 91 per cent participation rate which increases the generalizability of the findings to similar populations.
Patients were then assigned on a stratified basis either to the group viewing the videotape or the group counseled in person by a physician so that the groups were demographically similar. The demographic characteristics of each group are presented in Table 1, and there were no significant differences on any demographic variable by group. Although the vast majority of the carriers were married, no spouses were included in the present sample.

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling
TABLE 1 DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS OF PATIENT SAMPLE

293

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Characteristics
Number
Education x
SD
Sex Male Female . . . .
Marital status Single Married . . . . Divorced....
Age x
SD
Social class* x.... . . .
SD
No. children x SD . . . . . .

Programmed Counseling
41
4.83 1.48
22 19
4 34
3
38 27 12.80
3 29 0.90
1.63 1 50

Conventional Counseling
53
4.40 1.29
26 27
12 38
3
35.60 13.72
3.37 0.88
1.43 1.68

·Social class wasassessed using the Hollingshead and Redlich scale.

DESIGN

of two methods: a physician communicat-

Details ofthe research strategy and design have been presented elsewhere (Rowley et al., 1979). Briefly, patients were asked to participate in a study aimed at developing "better methods of com-

ing inperson a standardized body of information on thalassemia and genetics or a videotape of a physician communicating the same information followed by an opportunity to question a physician in per-

municating health information." Conse- son. In both cases the aimwasto inform

quently, they were asked to participate in the patient of the genetic condition, along

the project without prior knowledge ofthe with accompanying risks, without specif-

disorder for which counseling was to be ically recommending changes in family

provided. Following informed consent, planning or testing of other family mem-

patients underwent a two-hour battery of bers. After theforty-five minute counsel-

attitudinal and personality tests, along ing session, patients completed thethalas-

with precounseling measures of thalasse- semia and genetic knowledge question-

mia knowledge, genetic knowledge, and naires and the mood measure to assess

mood.2 They were then counseled by one change.

2The Nowlis Scale was administered twice during precounseling assessment: after informed consent and immediately prior to counseling. Change scores reported here arebetween mood scales administered at the beginning of the assessment and after counseling.

IDENTIFICATION AND SCALING OF VARIABLES
An important goal of the study was to

294

Fisher et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 2
POTENTIAL PREDICTOR VARIABLES WITHIN EACH MEASUREMENT DOMAIN

Demographic Domain
Age
Sex
Marital Status Social Class Education Number of Children Childbearing Status

Attitudinal Domain
Number of Physical Complaints Marital Adjustment
Frequency of Sexual Activity Sexual Satisfaction Frequency of Change in Sexual Activity
Attitude Toward Contraceptives
Attitude Toward Abortion Attitude Toward Risk Taking Frequency of Use of Contraceptives Type of Change in Sexual Behavior Experience with Abortion Knowledge of Abortion Religiousness

Personality Domain
Self Concept Variables Personality Variables

Intelligence Domain
IQ

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

identify variables which were potentially predictive of counseling outcome in terms of learning and mood change as assessed immediately after counseling. A total of 23 such variables were identified from the literature and from our prior experience. These variables were grouped into four measurement domains: demographic, attitudinal, personality, and intellectual, as shown in Table 2.
In the demographic domain, social class was assessed by the Hollingshead and Redlich Scale. The upper limit of childbearing status, or the potential for bearing additional children, was arbitrarily set at age 39. In the attitudinal domain, scales were developed to assess each of the variables with the exception of marital adjustment for which the Locke-Wallace Scale (Locke and Wallace, 1959) was used. Within the personality domain, selfconcept was assessed by the California

Personality Inventory (CPI) (Gough, 1948). The Shipley-Hartford Intelligence Scale (Shipley, 1940) was utilized to assess IQ.
Factor analyses were then undertaken in each measurement domain to reduce the number of potential predictor variables and to create a series of more reliable and inclusive dimensions for analysis of predictive data.
PREDICTION OFOUTCOME
The dimensions within the demographic, attitudinal, personality, and intelligence domains were used to predict learning and mood change following counseling. Change scores for knowledge of thalassemia, knowledge of genetics, and five mood change scores derived from the Nowlis Mood Adjective Checklist were used as outcome variables. Each of

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling

295

TABLE 3
FACTOR ANALYSIS OF NOWLIS MOOD ADJECTIVE CHECKLIST INTO FIVE DIMENSIONS

Nowlis Scales

Dimension

Per Cent of Test Variance

Social Affection Pleasantness Nonchalance
Deactivation Depression I Depression II*
Anxiety Skepticism Startle
Aggression Egotism
Concentration Activation

Factor 1: Sociability
Factor 2: Depression
Factor 3: Fear
Factor 4: Defensiveness Factor 5: Active
Concentration

26.7%
16.3%
11.4%
9.6% 7.5%

"Depression II is not an original Nowlis Scale but was added to reflect more severe aspects of clinical depression.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

the four predictor domains predicted each of the outcome measures using both simultaneous and step-wise multiple regression equations. Counseling method was also entered as a predictor dimension in each equation so as to assess whether one counseling method was more effective than the other for patients with given characteristics.
Multivariate procedures maximize outcome and capitalize on chance due to the fact that the weight statistically selected by the multiple regression format optimizes predictability to the criterion. To control for this potential statistical inflation due to chance, it is common practice to adopt a replication strategy. If one can demonstrate similar findings in two independent subject groups, then one can be more reasonably assured that false positive outcomes are not occurring. With this in mind, the sample was randomly divided into two replication groups, balanced for equal numbers of patients from the two counseling groups. Analyses were run separately for the total group and for each of the two replication groups.

RESULTS
OUTCOME MEASURES
The outcome measures for the study consisted of two measures of learning and fivemood-change dimensions.
1. Knowledge. The thalassemia knowledge questionnaire is a 21-item true-false scale assessing understanding of thalassemia major and minor, including symptoms, manifestations, and inheritance patterns. The genetic knowledge questionnaire is comprised of 8 true-false items assessing understanding of simple Mendelian genetics. Both scales were tested on samples of nontrait patients to insure an adequate distribution of scores.
2. Mood. The Nowlis Mood Adjective Checklist, used to assess mood, is comprised of 12brief scales (plus an additional scale to assess severe depression) which were factor analyzed on independent samples using a principal components factor analysis with varimax rotation into five mood dimensions.3 The scales and result-
3Details of all statistical analyses can be obtained from the first author.

296

Fisher et al.

Social Biology

TABLE4
PREDICTOR DIMENSIONS WITHIN THE ATTITUDINAL DOMAIN

Variables
Frequency of sexual activity Sexual satisfaction Frequency of change in sexual activity
Religiousness Attitude toward contraceptives Attitude toward abortion
Frequency of use of contraceptives Type of change of sexual behavior
Experience with abortion Knowledge of abortion

Predictor Dimensions*
Sexual Behavior (23.8)
Attitudinal Response (21.3)
Consistency of Sexual Behavior (13.5)
Abortion (10.2) Health Check List Locke-Wallace Marital Adjustment Inventory Attitude Toward Risk Taking Counseling Method

·Numbers in parentheses refer to per cent of variance accounted for by factor.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

ing dimensions are presented in Table 3. Each of the twelve scales plus the five dimensions demonstrated substantial variability within the sample.4 The five factors accounted for 71.5 per cent of the variance. Consequently, the two knowledge-change variables and five moodchange variables constituted the outcome measures for the study.
PREDICTOR MEASURES
1. Demographic variables. The factor analysis demonstrated that the seven demographic variables were relatively independent of each other with the exception of an expected correlation between social class and education (r = 0.64). Therefore, education was omitted from the list of predictors and, along with counseling method, the remaining six demographic variables were included in the multiple regression analyses.
4The standard deviations of predictor and outcome measures are available from the first author.

2. Attitudinal variables. The thirteen attitudinal variables underwent a principal components factor analysis with varimax rotation and the resulting dimensions are presented in Table 4. Ten of the thirteen original scales showed sufficient redundancy to be legitimately grouped into four dimensions--Sexual Behavior, Attitudinal Response, Consistency of Sexual Behavior, and Abortion--accounting for 68.8 per cent of test variance. The Health Checklist (a measure of number of physical complaints), Locke-Wallace Marital Adjustment Inventory, and Attitude Toward Risk-Taking Scale maintained sufficient independence from the rest of the scales to warrant inclusion in subsequent analyses as individual predictors. Hence, these seven scales plus counseling method were used as predictors within the attitudinal domain.
3. Personality variables. The Tennessee Self-Concept Scale and the California Personality Inventory (CPI), used to assess several broad personality dimen-

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling

TABLE 5
PREDICTOR DIMENSIONS WITHIN THE PERSONALITY DOMAIN

297

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

CPI Variables
Responsibility, Socialization Self Control, Tolerance Good Impression, Achievement via Conformance
Dominance, Sociability Self Acceptance
Achievement via Independence Psychological Mindedness Flexibility

Predictor Dimensions*
Responsibility and Maturity (44.5)
Interpersonal Adequacy (15.4)
Sensitivity and Intellectual Efficiency (8.7)
Total Self-Concept (Tennessee Scale) Total Variability (Tennessee Scale) Counseling Method

"Numbers in parentheses refer to percentage of variance accounted for by factor.

sions, were selected because they were standardized on nonpsychiatric populations and were designed to assess variations within the normal range of behavior. The Tennessee Self-Concept Scale yields a number of subscales of which 21 were subjected to a principal components factor analysis using varimax rotation. The results of the initial correlation matrix plus the factor analysis indicated that the total self-concept score and a measure of variability of self-perception across several areas of self-concept (physical self, moral self, etc.) accounted for most of the test variance. Consequently, these two scores were used to indicate overall self-concept.
The CPI yields 18 scaled dimensions which were submitted to a principal components factor analysis with varimax rotation. As presented in Table 5, a threefactor solution accounted for a substantial percentage of variance (68.6 per cent). Hence, the two Tennessee Self-Concept Scales, the three CPI scores, and counseling method were used as predictors in the personality domain.
4. Intelligence variables. The ShipleyHartford IQ test is a brief intellectual scale highly correlated with longer intellectual

measures. Thetotal IQ score plus counseling method were used as predictors in this domain. Consequently, these analyses permitted the establishment of four domains of predictor variables, each with relatively independent dimensions for use in predicting outcome of genetic counseling.
PREDICTION OF OUTCOME
1. Simultaneous analyses. For each of the four domains, all predictors including counseling method, were entered into the multiple regression equation simultaneously to predict each of the seven criterion variables. As shown in Table 6, the findings indicate that only three R's reached statistical significance. However, the importance of these findings is reduced due to the fact that equally significant R's did not occur in the two replication subgroups.
2. Step-wiseanalyses. The various precounseling predictors within each domain were permitted to enter the equation freely in this series of analyses, and counseling method was stepped-in at the end. The goal of these analyses wasto seeifany individual predictors or groups of predic-

298

Fisher et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 6
SIMULTANEOUS MULTIPLE REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS OF PRECOUNSELING VARIABLES ON OUTCOME*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

PREDICTORS
Demographic Personality Attitudinal IQ

Knowledge
Thalassemia Genetic
0 33 0.21 0 23 0.31 0.40 0.32 0.13 0.11

OUTCOME VARIABLES

Mood

Active Soc. Depr. Defens. Concen. Fear

0.35 0.28

0.30 0.32 0.16

0.29 0.26 0.21 0.38 0.26

0.32 0.31 0.28 0.46* 0.18

0.20 0.33t 0.22 0.12 0.39§

*None of the three significant coefficients reported were found to reach statistical significance in the two replication groups. Multiple regression coefficients are nondirectional and imply only amount of covariation. The cut-off points to reach statistical significance depend on the degrees of freedom which, in turn, depend on the number of predictors and the A'in each equation. Since the number of predictors vary among the several equations reported above, cut-off points for statistical significance at the three levels reported above are not uniform across equations.
tp = 0.05.
tp = 0.025. ip = 0.001.

tors significantly and reliably predicted have assumed to have some discriminative

outcome as well as to determine the value, we found no predictive utility was

specific role of counseling method. The re- demonstrated when these variables were

sults indicated that in several cases thefirst utilized in a prospective counseling setting

and/or second predictor accounted for a as part of primary health care. In fact,

significant percentage of variance, but the even using multivariate techniques which

ordering of variables was inconsistent maximize outcome and capitalize on

across replication groups and little consis- chance phenomena, we found these varia-

tency of findings emerged. This variability bles were not predictive, singly or in com-

is illustrated in Table 7 where the ordering bination, of immediate post-testing out-

of variables from several illustrative equa- come. In addition, the type of counseling

tions is presented. While some variability did not interact with any of the predictor

of outcome is to be expected, the notice- variables such that patients with given atti-

able inconsistency in ordering of entrance tudes or attributes benefited more from

as well as the lack of replication of statisti- one type of counseling than another.

cal significance reduces the impact of the These findings differ from those of

data. several other studies, described earlier,

which demonstrated an unfavorable out-

DISCUSSION

come for some groups. There are several differences between previous studies and

As mentioned earlier, it is incumbent the present research which might explain

upon the screener of a genetically trans- the apparent discrepancy. First, previous

mitted disorder to identify subgroups of research most often was based on counsel-

patients for whom information about trait ing as a result of public recruitment or

states may have untoward effects. Using birth of a defective child where issues of

demographic, personality, attitudinal, public stigmatization and guilt can come

and intelligence variables which many into play. The patients in this study were

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling

TABLE 7
ORDERING OF ENTRANCE OF PREDICTOR VARIABLES IN ILLUSTRATIVE EQUATIONS*

299

ORDER OF ENTRANCE

EQUATION
Demographic - Predicting Change in Thalessemia Knowledge
Personality - Predicting Change in Genetic Knowledge
Attitude-Predicting Change in Genetic Knowledge

Total Group

Replie. No. 1

Replie. No. 2

PS, Sex, MS, Age, SESt
7V,CPM, CPI-3 TP, CPI-2}
A, CSB,HCL,MA, RTA,SB,AR§

Sex, PS, Age, MS, SES
TV, CPI-2, CPI-3, CPI-1,TP
CSB, SB, HCL, RTA, AR, A, MA

Age, MS, PS, Sex, SES
CPI-2, CPI-l.TP, CPI-3, TV
MA, AR, SB, RTA, CB,A,HCL

"Italicized scales entered equation with significant (p<0.05) per cent variance. Replication groups were run to reduce the risk of false positive findings due to the tendency of multivariate procedures to statistically maximize outcome.
tPS = Parental Status; MS = Marital Status; SES = Social Class. ÎTV = Tenn. Scale Total Variability; CPI scales 1, 2, 3; TP =Tenn. Scale Total Positive. § A = Abortion ;CSB = Consistency of Sexual Behavior; HCL = Health Checklist; MA = Marital Adjustment; SB = Sexual Behavior; RTA = Risk Taking Attitude; AR = Attitudinal Response.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

assessed prior to counseling and hence were naive at point of contact. Also, other studies utilized groups which by the nature of their identification represented a somewhat restricted range of patient characteristics, hence reducing the flexibility of assessment, group composition, and immediacy of counseling possible in a prospective research strategy. Second, because of this greater freedom in our subject selection and study design, we were able to utilize more uniform evaluation procedures, quantitatively scaled and statistically tested in a more highly controlled manner. Third, the counseling in this study was undertaken as part of regular health care and was delivered in a familiar setting.
Three points are worthy of note. First, it could be postulated that differences were not obtained because the precounseling and outcome variables were not reliably assessed. It is unlikely, however, that characteristics of the scales themselves substantially contributed to the findings since (1) the constructed scales were related to existing standardized measures in the expected direction, and

(2) all scales demonstrated susbstantial test variance.
A second possibility is that the immediate postcounseling assessment occurred before psychological mechanisms could affect learning. The distribution of mood change scores, however, indicated a range of mood reactions from relatively minor to extreme. Evidently, some patients did have sufficient time to react psychologically. The influence of psychological mechanisms in altering retention will be assessed in a follow-up study now in progress.
Third, although these variables were not reliable predictors of immediate postcounseling outcome, they may account for significant variance at long-term followup. With this in mind, all patients will be assessed at two and ten months after counseling, and the results will be the subject of future reports.
The findings demonstrate that it may not be necessary to assess patients prior to genetic counseling on attitudinal, personality, demographic, or intellectual variables in order to maximize immediate outcome. We found these variables to be

300

Fisher et al.

Social Biology

unrelated to immediate reactions to genetic counseling. Both programmed and conventional counseling proved equally effective, demonstrating that audiovisual techniques can be effective communication aids.
This analysis demonstrates the value of controlled studies of genetic counseling using empirical methods. It further indicates that simple effective genetic counsel-

ing methods can take place in primary health care settings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Supported by NIH Grant No. R O 1 HL17456 and New York State Health Research Council Grants No. 146 and 664. Appreciation isexpressed to Mrs. Starlene Dick for her competent assistance throughout the course ofthis project.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ANTLEY, R. M. 1976. Variables in the outcome of LOCKE, H. J., and K. M. WALLACE. 1959. Short

genetic counseling. Soc. Biol. 23:108-115.

marital adjustment and prediction test: Re-

ANTLEY, R. M., and L. C. HARTLAGE. 1973. The

liability andvalidity. Marr. Fam. Living 21:

effects of genetic counseling for Down's syn-

251-255.

drome. Ped. Res. 7: 345-353.

MEYEROWITZ, S., and M. LIPKIN. 1976. Psychoso-

CARTER, C. O.1975. Comments on genetic coun-

cial aspects of prevention of developmental

seling. In J. F. Crow and J. V. Neel (eds.), disorders. In R. L. Brent and M. I. Harris

Proceedings of the Third International Con-

(eds.), Prevention of embryonic, fetal, and

gress of Human Genetics. John Hopkins

perinatal disease. Fogarty International Cen-

Univ. Press, Baltimore.

ter Series onPreventive Medicine, 3. DHEW

EMERY, A. E., M. S. WATT, and E. R. CLARK.

No. 76-853.

1972. The effects of genetic counseling in Du- NEEL, J. V., and J. WILSON. 1973. Acute

chenne muscular dystrophy. Clin. Gen. 3: Werdnig-Hoffman disease: Acute infantile

147-150.

spinal muscular atrophy. Arch. Dis. Child. 43:

FALEK, A., and S. BRITTON, 1974. Phases in cop-

425-430.

ing: The hypothesis and its implications. Soc. NEEL, J. V., and W. N. VALENTINE. 1975. The

Biol. 21: 1-7.

frequency of thalassemia. Amer. J. Med. Sci.

FISHER, L., M. LIPKIN, and P. T. ROWLEY. 1979.

209: 568-572.

Effects of genetic counseling method on knowledge and mood: Videotaped instruction vs. live physician counselor. Unpublished manuscript. FITTS, W. H. 1965. Manual, the TennesseeDepartment of Mental Health Self-Concept Scale. Department of Mental Health, Nashville.
GOUCH, H. G. 1948. A new dimension of status: I. Development of a personality scale. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 13: 534-537.
INGALL, E. J., P. M. PETERSON, and S. E.

PEARN, J. H. 1973. Patient's subjective interpretation of risk offered in genetic counseling. J. Med. Genet. 10: 129-134.
REISS, J. A., and V. D. MENASHE. 1972. Genetic
counseling and congenital heart disease. J.Pediat. 80: 655-656.
ROWLEY, P. T., H. L. FISHER, and M. LIPKIN.
1979. Screening and counseling for Bthalassemia trait in a population unselected for interest: Effects onknowledge and mood. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 718-730.

CARDWELL. 1973. Genetic counseling de- SALK, L., and M. HILGARTNER. 1972. The psycho-

livery: Isit adequate? Amer. J. Hum. Genet.

social impact ofhemophilia on the patient and

25:35A.

his family. Soc. Sci. Med. 6: 491-505.

KABACK, M. D., R. S. ZEIGER, L. W. REYNOLDS, SATCHER, D. 1976. Acritical look at genetic coun-

and M. SONNEBORN. 1974. Approaches tothe

seling for sickle cell trait and disease. InR. Ca-

control and prevention of Tay-Sachs disease.

bannes (ed.), La drepanocytose sickle-cell

Prog. Med. Genet. 10: 103-104.

anemia. Editions de l'Inserm., Paris.

KENEN, R. H . , and R. M. SCHMIDT. 1978. SHAW, M. W. 1971. Review of published studies

Stigmatization of carrier status: Social impli-

of genetic counseling: A critique, p. 35-52.In

cations ofheterozygote genetic screening pro-

H. A.Lubs and F. dela Cruz (eds.), Genetic

grams. Amer. J. Publ. Hlth. 68: 1116-1120.

counseling. Raven Press, New York.

LEONARD, C. O., G. A. CHASE, and CHILDS. B. SHIPLEY, W.C. 1940. A self administering scale

1972. Genetic counseling; Aconsumer's view.

for measuring intellectual impairment and de-

New Engl. J. Med. 287: 433-439.

terioration. J. Psychol. 9: 371-377.

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling

301

SIBINGA, M. S., and C. J. FRIEDMAN. 1971. Com-
plexities of parental understanding of phenylketonuria. Pediatrics 48: 216-224. SORENSON, J. R. 1974. Genetic counseling: Some psychological considerations, p. 61-68. In

Lipkin and P. T. Rowley (eds.), Genetic responsibility. Plenum Press, New York.
TIPS, R. L., G. S. SMITH, and H. T. LYNCH. 1964.
"Whole family" concept in clinical genetics. Amer. J. Dis. Chid. 107: 67-76.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

