Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Multivariable causal modeling in alcohol use research
John R. Nesselroade & J. Jack McArdle
To cite this article: John R. Nesselroade & J. Jack McArdle (1985) Multivariable causal modeling in alcohol use research, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 272-296, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988614 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988614
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Multivariable Causal Modeling in Alcohol Use Research
John R. Nesselroade and J. Jack McArdle
Department of Individual and Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania; and Department of Psychologr, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
ABSTRACT: For a variety of reasons, multivariate approaches to the study of behavioral phenomena have received increased attention during the past several decades. These include: (1) greater awareness of the value of studying relationships among concepts defined over several variables rather than focusing on single variates as indicators of important constructs; (2) more sophistication in mathematical and statistical analysis; and (3) wider availability of computers and improved computer programs. Although once largely identified with "exploratory" analysis methods, multivariate applications are now found across a wide range of exploratory to explanatory activities. Currently, one of the most popular applications of the multivariate orientation concerns the development and testing of explanatory models of relationships among variables that feature a distinction between latent and manifest variables. To some extent these methods have already been employed to model: (1) drug and alcohol use; (2) genetics-behavior relationships; and (3) case study dynamics. In both exploratory, descriptive application and hypothesis testing multivariate methods promise to be of considerable value in developing a fuller understanding of biological and behavioral mechanisms involved in patterns of alcohol use.
The convergence of two lines of activ- study of behavioral phenomena has, esity defines the central focus of this pa- pecially since the 1950's, been an imporper. One line has to do with the enuncia- tant influence on the way issues and tion and subsequent development of the problems are conceptualized and studmultivariate perspective on the study of ied. Many behavioral scientists have behavior. The other, which is related to urged the adoption of multivariate perthe first but is somewhat more specific, spectives in the conduct of research. involves the development and applica- Cattell, however, more than any other tion of a subset of multivariate correla- person, made clear that "the multivaritional methods, especially causal model- ate approach" is indeed a conceptual ing procedures, for application in social framework for thinking about behavior and behavioral science. Rather than and how to study it and not just a bag of presenting novel aspects of multivariate analytical tricks (e.g., Cattell, 1957, analysis, the discussion to follow will in- 1966b, 1979,1980; see Horn, 1984, for volve reviewing salient features of these overview). The theme is played out in two themes and identifying common as- various writings that, in admitting to an pects that bear on alcohol use research. inherent complexity of behavioral phe-
A multivariate orientation to the nomena, (1) warn of the futility of trying
272

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

273

to capture important psychological concepts with single observable variables or "indicators"; and (2) emphasize the value of defining outcomes or other behavioral manifestations in terms of patterns of relationships among several variables. In alcohol use research, for example, Wanberg and Horn (1983) identified 15 different dimensions underlying self-reported symptoms and

other drinking behavior variables. The multivariate complexity of alcohol use patterns underscores the diversity of the manifestations as well as the likelihood of different etiologies and the probable necessity of multiple approaches to treatment.
The data box (Cattell, 1966a), a representation of which is given in Figure 1, identifies various relational systems and

I Datum

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

T

Persons

Occasions
Ck=ltot)

Variables

"Cj=l to p)

FIG. 1.--The "covariation chart" or "data box" (after Cattell, 1966a). Each datum, d¡¡k, is simultaneously defined by person, variable, and occasion: R-technique involves covarying variables over persons (for one measurement occasion); P-technique involves covarying variables over occasions (for one person) ; and T-technique involves covarying occasions over persons (for one variable).

274

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

derivative covariation techniques and describing the nature of differences

provides a systematic framework for dis- among individuals? In that regard, an

cussing several aspects of the multivari- area of growing concern in both substan-

ate study of behavioral phenomena. tive and methodological multivariate re-

These include design, measurement, search is the utilization of P-technique

and data analysis procedures. R- and P- designs in the pursuit of nomothetic laws

techniques, in particular, as they are (Lebo and Nesselroade, 1978; McAr-

represented in Figure 1, are the covaria- dle, 1982; Zevon and Tellegen, 1982;

tion approaches that bear most directly Nesselroade and Ford, 1985). Also, we

on the present discussion. T-technique, may ask: How replicable across differ-

which involves the covariation of varia- ent individuals are the patterns of intra-

bles defined over persons who have individual change and variability that

been measured on one variable over are derived from P'technique studies?

many occasions, is identified but will not Recent research indicates that substan-

be further discussed. R-technique in- tial agreement can be found among in-

volves the covariation of variables traindividual change patterns deter-

defined over persons who have been mined by P-technique analyses (Zevon

measured one time each. P-technique and Tellegen, 1982; Nesselroade and

involves the covariation of variables Ford, 1985).

defined over occasions with all measurements being based on the individual case. Thus, R- and P-techniques are forms of cross-sectional and longitudinal designs, respectively. The two kinds of information produced thereby are conceptually related (Cattell, 1963; 1966c) and, under particular statistical frameworks, formal expectations of their relationships can be derived (Nesselroade, 1983a, 1983 b).

One of the relatively recent crystallizations of method in which a multivariate orientation has played an integral part is the line of activity encompassed by the label "causal modeling with latent variables" (see, e.g., Bentler, 1980, 1986). It involves the formal statistical estimation and testing of the goodness of fit to empirical data of models of causal relationships hypothesized to obtain among latent variables (see, e.g.,

Further specification of the relation- Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1979; Horn and ships between cross-sectional and longi- McArdle, 1980; Schaie and Hertzog,

tudinal data is a major need in social and 1982). This development, which has its

behavioral science. For example, in the own unique history, spans many disciarena of personality research the dis- plines, including genetics (e.g., Wright,

tinction between trait and state rests, in 1921).

part, on these relationships (Nes- At the present time in social and be-

selroade, 1983a). In developmental re- havioral science, causal modeling with

search, understanding the relationships latent variables is very much in the lime-

between changes (longitudinal informa- light as an alternative to manipulative

tion) and differences (cross-sectional in- experimentation for trying to build ex-

formation) is a central objective (e.g., planatory models and to test them

Baltes et al., 1977). We may ask, for in- against empirical data in a rigorous and

stance: Do individuals change along di- systematic fashion. The approach has

mensions that are also appropriate for seen ready application in a wide variety

Vol. 32,No.

Multivariable CausalModeling

275

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

of substantive areas, including those of of behavior (e.g., Cronbach, 1957,

drug and alcohol use (Aneshensel and 1975). However, developments in the

Huba, 1983). These generic modeling formalization of design properties and

procedures have also been used to study analysis procedures have tended to blur

genetic influences on behavior (e.g., considerably the distinction between ex-

Eaves et al., 1978; Fulker, 1979; McAr- planatory and descriptive, exploratory

dleetal.,1980).

approaches in the past twenty years or

The objective of the present paper is so (Nesselrpade and Labouvie, 1985).

to review selected aspects of both the The multivariate orientation repre-

multivariate orientation to the study of sents an attempt to improve on the way

behavior and causal modeling proce- we study behavior. It has led to a num-

dures and to highlight features of their ber of valuable gains in the definition

communality that pertain to research on and clarification of measurement, de-

alcohol use. Three selected applications sign, and analysis issues and has fostered

of modeling to the study of alcohol use the development of a line of method-

will be presented.

ological innovations by which to deal

with the empirical questions arising

THE MULTIVARIABLE ORIENTATION

therefrom. For example, the multivariate orientation leads to a number of considerations that bear importantly on the

The study of relationships among study of changes (e.g., developmental

variables is, of course, central to sci- processes) as well as on the evaluation of

ence. The major assumptions that un- differences. Many of these issues do not

derlie how one believes that the matter emerge clearly in a bivariate format.

should be approached are often only im- Among them, for example, are con-

plicit in one's behavior. That is, viewing cerns with measurement equivalence

events as inherently multifaceted and (Labouvie, 1980) and invariance of rela-

complexly determined is one thing. Whether one attempts to apprehend the myriad relationships by multivariate design and analysis methods or by means of classical, randomized, bivariate experimental design is quite another. Of-

tionships among variables over different subpopulations (Meredith, 1964; Nesselroade, 1983Í»; Horn et al., 1983).
ASSUMPTIONS UNDERLYING THE MULTIVARIABLE APPROACH

ten, the label multivariate has been con- In line with prior discussions by Catstrued as synonymous with descriptive, tell (19666), Coan (1966), and others,

exploratory research; the so-called Baltes and Nesselroade (1973) defined a "correlational" approach. We believe multivariate approach to the study of that this label with its associated surplus developmental phenomena as embody-

meaning does not accurately reflect con- ing three assumptions. These are: (1) temporary affairs. The literature, grad- Any dependent variable (or conseuate training practices, and general lore quent) is potentially a function of multiin psychology have tended to stress fun- ple determinants; (2) any determinant

damental distinctions between manipu- or antecedent has potentially multiple lative experimental and differential (or consequences; and (3) the study of mulcorrelational) approaches to the study tiple antecedent-consequent relation-

276

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

ships provides a useful model for the or- The number of possible combina-

ganization of complex systems. These tions of leveis of these six dimensions at-

three assumptions appear, at least on tests to a rich variety of design possibili-

the surface, to run counter to bivariate ties. In the context of life-span

research practice. Conceptually, they development and aging research, Nes-

provide a means for defining both selroade and Labouvie (1985) discussed

"causes" and "effects" in terms of pat- the linkage of these dimensions to

terns of relationships among several var- Campbell and Stanley's (1966) concepts

iables. Appropriately illustrative of the of internal and external validity of repoint, given the general focus of this se- search design. ries of papers, are McClearn's (1983)

characterizations of polygenic inheri-

MULTIVARIATE COMPOSITES AND

tance and pleiotropy. In the former, one

FACTORS

phenotype is influenced by several Analytically, the multivariate ap-

genes; in the latter, one gene influences proach is rendered operational by com-

many phenotypes.

bining two or more variables into

DIMENSIONS OF RESEARCH DESIGN

"meaningful" composite variables, most often in a linear, additive fashion.

Within the framework of a multidi- Although the linear and additive aspects

mensional comparison scheme, Cattell are somewhat constraining, they are

(1966Ô) systematically identified and temporary boundaries that more power-

discussed multivariate and bivariate re- ful computers and better statistical esti-

search designs. He argued that the dif- mation procedures will help to enlarge.

ferences that have led to quite divergent In préparation for a more detailed look

practices in aspects of conceptualiza- at the nature of structural modeling pro-

tion, research design, and data analysis cedures, it will be helpful to consider

are not accurately portrayed by the tra- briefly the criteria by which linear com-

ditional dichotomy experimental versus binations are formed.

correlational. He also made it clear that A distinction that is often made in

the label multivariateshould not be con- discussions of multivariate analysis pro-

sidered to be synonymous with the label cedures and one which will illustrate dif-

correlational.

ferent kinds of linear combinations is

The dimensions identified by Cattell that between principal components and

along which research designs can be dif- principal factors. Principal components

ferentiated include:

are derived variables that are formed by

(1) bivariate versus multivariate in num- weighting and summing observed varia-

ber of variables;

bles according to particular criteria. For

(2) presence versus absence of manipula- example, Yk, in the expression tion;

(3) simultaneity versus succession of observations;

bk22XX2 bknXn

(la)

(4) degree of situational background control;
(5) representativeness of choice of variables; and
(6) representativeness of subjects or ex-

would be a principal component of the
set of observed variables, Xi, X2, · · ., Xm provided that the weights, bkl, bk2, etc., are chosen so that Yk manifests cer-

perimental units.

tain optimal attributes related to the

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

277

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

variance of the A"s and Yk's covariance with the other principal components of the set of X*s. The nature of the relationships between observed variables and principal components is such that one can also solve for each observed variable, Xj, as a linear combination of the full set of n principal components as symbolized in Equation (lb). That is,

Xj =

+ WßY2 +

wjnYn.

(lb)

ample, principal component or factor analytic solutions, clusters, and multidimensional scaling outcomes. They are internal in the sense that the resolution achieved derives from the interrelationships of the variables in the set being analyzed. One seminal application in psychology involves Spearman's (1904) use of factor analysis to characterize the interrelationships of ability performance measures in terms of a single general ability dimension.

By contrast, principal factors are By contrast, external criteria are em-

defined according to the model

ployed in techniques such as multiple

Xj = lnFi + + \jkFk + Uj

+

regression, canonical correlation, MANOVA, and discriminant function (2) analysis. These latter methods involve

where X¡ is an observed variable that is the combining of a set of variables so as

accounted for as a weighted combina- to maximize the relationships between

tion of k hypothetical variables or com- composite variables defined on the set

mon factors, F\, Fi, . . . , Fk, and a and one or more variables that are exter-

unique factor Uj. The weights, l¡\, Iß, . nal to the set from which the composite

. . , ljk, that define the contribution of is being derived. Obviously, the internal each factor to the variance of the ob- structure of the variables from which the

served variable, X¡, are referred to as composite is formed plays a role in de-

factor loadings. Subsequently, the com- termining the specific nature of the com-

plete matrix of factor loadings will be posite, but the fact remains that it is con-

symbolized as L.

structed in relation to at least one

Both the principal component and variable that is external to the set. In the principal factor expressions involve multiple regression, for example, a linobserved variables, Xs, but in the prin- ear composite of predictor variables is cipal components case the Xs are them- formed that best predicts (correlates selves combined. In the principal factors most highly with) some external critecase, it is the hypothetical factors that rion measure (e.g., predicting graduate combine to account for the Xs. This is school performance from GRE scores, an important theoretical distinction undergraduate GPA, etc.).

that, when not observed, creates a great These ideas concerning composites,

deal of confusion.

which reflect, by and large, the analysis

In general, two major kinds of crite- of cross-sectionally measured individual

ria are used to define the linear combi- differences, are rather familiar ones. In

nations of variables that are developed the sequel we will attempt to broaden

in multivariate research. They can be the discussion somewhat by focusing

classified as internaland externalto the more on intraindividual change and var-

set of variables from which the compos- iability, while maintaining a concern for

ites will be formed. Internal criteria in- between-persons differences. The

clude those used to determine, for ex- causal modeling to be discussed will be

278

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

seen to involve both internal and exter- nuity of meaning of variables from per-

nal criteria. Before proceeding to an ex- son to person that translates into: (1)

amination of causal modeling issues, whether or not the variables are the

however, we will attend to some aspects same for each observational entity (e.g.,

of data aggregation that bear on the gen- persons); and (2) whether or not the na-

eral research issues on which the confer- ture of the relationships among varia-

ence is focused.

bles is the same for each observational

entity. Let us consider each question

AGGREGATION OFDATA

briefly. Labouvie (1980) examined issues of

Discussions of the differences be- equivalence both at the measurement

tween traditional experimental and dif- variable and the construct levels and ex-

ferential approaches to the study of be- plored the use of multivariate ap-

havior have been influential in proaches to resolve them. The central

articulating the role that individual dif- question here has to do with the extent

ferences have already played, and can to which the nature of variables with re-

be expected to play, in the study of law- spect to the individual cases justifies

ful relationships (Cattell, 1966Í>; Cron- pooling data for the purpose of estimat-

bach. 1957, 1975). Attempts at rap- ing covariances, correlations, or other

prochement have been sporadic and not population parameters where popula-

generally successful and the distinction tion definition rests on multiple orga-

continues to be rather widely observed. nisms rather than, say, multiple occa-

Although both "experimentalists" and sions for a single organism. Concern for

"individual differences types" can point the meaningfulness of such operations

to discoveries to be positive about, pes- has been evident for several decades

simistic conclusions regarding current (e.g., Guilford, 1952) although in prac-

levels of knowledge development and tice it is still largely ignored. Such con-

the ultimate generality of lawful behav- cerns, however, have deepened on the

ioral relationships (Cronbach, 1975; part of differentially-oriented research-

Sinnott, 1981; Gergen, 1984) provide a ers in part, at least, because of empirical

reason for occasional reflection about work conducted in the P-technique tra-

what we can hope to accomplish in the dition (Cattell and Scheier, 1961; Cat-

study of behavior. Any need for caveats, tell, 1963; Luborsky and Mintz, 1972;

however, can be interpreted to reflect Lebo and Nesselroade, 1978; McArdle,

on the way we study behavioral phe- 1982; Zevon and Tellegen, 1982; Nes-

nomena as much as on the fundamental selroade and Ford, 1985).

nature of behavior.

Related to the same versus different

An area of concern on which we wish variables question, but in some respects

to focus briefly has to do with the simple more compelling, is the question of

pooling of data across persons in order whether or not the nature of relation-

to estimate relationships such as the co- ships among variables is the same, in

variances or correlations among varia- some sense, across persons. The devel-

bles on which inferences regarding law- opment of prediction schemes that in-

ful relationships are based. In brief, this volve moderator variables and, in the

kind of aggregation presupposes a conti- extreme, personalized beta weights tes-

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

279

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

tifies to the realization that pooling indi- cal randomized, manipulative, experi-

viduals can, in some cases, obscure mental designs. Indeed, in comparing

rather than stabilize estimates of rela- classical experimental and multivariate

tionships (cf. Pruzek and Frederick, experimental research designs, Cattell

1978). For example, Tucker (1966) de- (1966ft) identified as one of the primary

veloped procedures for simultaneously differences their relative standing on the

defining generalized process curves and manipulative versus non-interfering di-

individualized weights for combining mension. Although at the time Cattell

them to account for the observed was concerned more with differences in

changes in each individual. This work what could be accomplished with the

further illustrates a concern to maintain use of factor analysis and related corre-

an awareness of individual differences above and beyond pooled dimensions of performance and change. Zevon and Tellegen's (1982) arguments for an idiographic/nomothetic approach to the development of behavioral laws are supportive of the importance of these questions about the nature of variables and the generality of their interrelationships.
The points just raised are intended to sensitize the reader to ways of broadening traditional individual differences concerns in order to improve our ac-

lational procedures in contrast to analysis-of-variance-based experimentation, his discussion applies to the methods currently referred to as causal modeling. Describing how these advanced tools can and should be used involves questions that are complex and difficult to answer directly. A variety of mathematical and statistical model building devices and plans have been defined by, among others, Bentler (1980), Jöreskog and Sórbom (1979), McDonald and Krane (1979), and Horn and McArdle (1980).

counts of behavior and behavior Causal modeling procedures offer a

change. Combining such concerns with statistical approach to testing the good-

a multivariate orientation to measure- ness of fit between a specific network of

ment, design, and analysis issues leads hypothesized causal relationships and

to many avenues yet to be explored in empirical data. In implementing such a

the search for lawful relationships that test, systems of equations that describe

account for behavior. We now turn to an the hypothesized relationships are de-

examination of selected aspects of veloped with a sufficient degree of speci-

causal modeling that offer some promise fication that their ability to account for

for the further exploitation of individual the empirical interrelationships among a

differences information in the pursuit of set of variables can be rendered dubi-

explanatory schemes.

ous; i.e., it is possible to falsify the

model. The equation system is then

CAUSAL MODELING IN SOCIAL

solved with the values of free and constrained parameters of the system being

AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE estimated in light of both the empirical

Whether because of ethical con- data and the values of the fixed parame-

straints, inaccessibility of variables, or ters specified in the model. A statistical

the inherent complexity of a system, it is verdict concerning the goodness of fit not always possible to implement classi- can be used to evaluate the plausibility

280

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

of the model. Modeling procedures can well. For instance, the definition and

also take the form of comparative evalu- representative sampling of the content

ation of alternative plausible causal domains of the latent variables typically

models against the same data set. It is require a multivariate measurement sys-

important to realize that decisions in ei- tem. Having a sufficient number of valid

ther case can lead to disconfirmation but observables to define the factor or latent

not confirmation of models. In a con- variable adequately is necessary if a rig-

cluding stage of model building, thefinal orous test of the hypothesized causal

parameter values are relinked to the network is to occur. Moreover, there

original substantive concepts.

are statistical advantages that accrue

from the use of multiple indicators of the

constructs but these can be negated to a

MEASUREMENT MODELS

large extent by a poor choice of mea-

A simple example of one kind of causal model is represented pictorially in Figure 2. It illustrates the distinction between observed variables and latent variables that is often made in causal modeling applications. We will briefly

sures. In that sense,- the longstanding concerns of factor analysts regarding such issues as heterogeneity versus homogeneity of marker variable sets remain pertinent to the modeling situation.

consider the major aspects of that dis- A major question that arises in prac-

tinction.

tical applications is "What should a

The observed variables, which are measurement model look like?" An-

used to "mark" the unobserved or latent swers to this question are an ever-

variables, play a key role in the model- present concern of causal modelers.

fitting procedure. Those two classes of Some guidelines are provided by eighty

variables and the relationships between years of work on factor analysis (see,

them constitute what some have labeled e.g., Spearman, 1904; Cattell, 1966a).

the measurementmodel (e.g., Bentler, For example, given the eight manifest

1980; Jöreskog, 1979). In principle, the variable and three latent variable model

measurement model is analogous to the presented in Figure 2, we can write three

common factor model given by Equa- alternative factor pattern matrices as

L,= s 0 0 s 00
s 00 s 00 0s 0
0s 0 00s
00s

s 00
s mO
s 00 s 0m 0s 0 0s0 mû s 00s

s 00 s mh s hh s hm hs h 0s 0 mh s 00s

(3a)

tion (2). Many of the concerns about the where the three columns represent Fignature of the relationships between vari- ure 2's 5, N, and A, respectively. The ables and factors that have arisen in the symbols "s," "m," and "h" represent context of factor analysis apply here as factor loading coefficients that may be

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

281

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

.88 .17 (.03) (.03)

TJ TJ
.12 .15 (.03) (.05)

Graphic Key:
[ j = Manifest (Given) Variable
·": = Latent (Hidden) Variable
= Asymmetric (Regression) Parameter
= Symmetric (Covariance) Parameter
Labelled Values are Maximum-Likelihood Estimates (with Standard Errors) Parameters not labelled are Unit-valued
FIG. 2.--Latent variable path model of within-occasion (P-technique) factor model (after McArdle, 1982). Labels of latent variables are prefixedbyC (common factor). Common factors include CS(Psychological State), CN (Narcissism-Comfort), and CA (Alcohol Interest). Ss are specific factors. Manifest variables represent daily recording of Eight State Questionnaire levels of Stress (ST), Depression (DE), Fatigue (FA), and Arousal (AR); and Motivational Analysis Test levels of Alcohol Interest-Integrated (AI), Alcohol Interest-Unintegrated C/li/>, and Narcissism-Comfort-Integrated (Nl) and Unintegrated (NU). Values represent final maximum-likelihood parameter estimates with standard errors in parenthe-

282

· Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

estimated from the data, and the "0" el- a new factor for three of the manifest

ements represent predefined "fixed" variables. The inclusion of two non-zero

zero relationships (i.e., "hyperplanes"). loadings for a manifest variable implies

Taken collectively, the pattern of that it is constituted from two operation-

zero and non-zero loadings defines a ally distinct sources--an arrangement

multivariate hypothesis about the num- that bears a striking resemblance to the

ber and nature of the relationships be- familiar genetic representation of pleio-

tween the latent and manifest variables. tropy (see McClearn, 1983). In any case,

The first loading matrix, Ls, defines a this pattern matrix, Lm, may be considmultivariate hypothesis that is particu- ered to be of medium complexity be-

larly simple;the manifestations are each cause the new factors may turn out to be

presumed to be the result of only one relatively more difficult to label and un-

common, underlying latent construct derstand.

(one non-zero element per row). The first factor is proposed to account for four manifestations, while the other two factors are posited to account for only two manifest variables each. The simplicity of this pattern hypothesis, sometimes referred to as a "simple structure" pattern (see Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1979; cf. Thurstone, 1947) makes it particularly easy to characterize the nature of the latent variable: The loading pattern can be understood, and given a label to match, in terms of the natural grouping of the variables. Thus, in the simple example presented in Figure 2, factor three may be considered "alcohol interest" (labeled A) because it is presumed to be the only direct underlying source of the manifest measures of "interest in alcohol" (labeled AI and AU; for details see McArdle, 1982).

The final loading matrix presented, Lh, includes both the simple loadings, "s," and the medium loadings, "m," and further includes a third set of loadings, "h." In a typical application this global pattern is referred to as an "unrestricted" factor loading pattern; that is, the minimum number of zeroes required for statistical identification is hypothesized. However, because the three marker variables remain "simple," the original simple factors defined by Ls are not confounded (or collapsed) with one another. So, although other "rotations" may yield the same level of fit, this configurationrepresents a particular factor orientation that is defined by a minimum hyperplane which can yield maximum information about the non-zero loadings. It follows that this particular loading pattern is oihigh complexity be-

The other two hypothetical loading causefiveof the eight manifest variables matrices are more complex. In matrix may load on all three latent factors.

Lm we pose a set of non-zero loadings The configuration of these three

that contain all of the prior eight "s" loading patterns can be described in

loadings, but we also add three new terms of the increasing complexity of in-

loadings labeled "m." The representa- terpretation, in terms of the increasing

tion of the latent variables remains sim- number of parameters required, or by

ple with respect to five manifest varia- the way simpler alternatives are

bles, so these five may still be used "nested" inside one another (i.e., L, is a

simply to mark the factors. But new proper subset of Lh, etc.). There are

loadings labeled "m" are introduced on other important aspects of these mea-

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

283

sûrement models such as the statistical estimation of the free parameters, but for now we simply want to recognize that these are all valid measurement model choices in a model-building process. That is, these three alternative factor loading patterns represent specific knot points on a much broader continuum of possible measurement models.
STRUCTURAL MODELS
The latent variables and their hypothesized interrelationships can be said to comprise the structural model (Jöreskog andSörbom, 1979) tobeeval-

uated. These relationships, which specify thecausal linkages among latent variables or constructs, may be either unidirectional or bidirectional. They can also simply represent correlated, but notnecessarily causally related,variables. A simple example of a structural model is presented graphically here as Figure 3.
As before, a major question that arises in practice is "What should a structural model look like?" Also as before, answers to this question are an ever-present concern; some guidelines are provided by nearly seventy years of

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

-.46 (.89)
FIG. 3.--Path model of within-occasionlatent variable regression (after McArdle, 1982). Factor model is shown in Figure 2.

284

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

path analysis(see Wright, 1921; McArdle and McDonald, 1984). Now, for example, given the three latent variables presented in Figure 3, we can use path analysis concepts to represent the asymmetric or causal relationships among the latent variables as "S," "N," and "A," and write three alternative latent variable path matrices P,as

ther posits four "h" parameters representing additional direct effects as well as complex "non-recursive" orfeedback mechanisms. This final model, which may represent a theoretically defensible position, is so intricate that it is usually difficult to identify on a mathematical or statistical basis (but see Kenny, 1979; McArdle, 1981,1982).

P, = [~0 0O" .000
\j 0 0_

"o 0 0 ph = 0 0 h

00 0

h0h

S «0

s mh

(3ft)

where; as before with the L¡ matrices, These three alternative path models

the elements of path matrix P, are de- illustrate the broad range of possibilities

scribable with free parameters "s," available with the latent variable path

"m, " and "h" and fixed parameters "0." concept. At the same time, they repre-

The first model, Ps, illustrates a very sent the variety of possibilities that the basic path concept. Here, the first fac- model builder needs to consider.

tor, labeled "S" for "Psychological State," is posited to be the only cause of

CAUSAL MODELS

the third factor, labeled "A" for Alco- Taken together, the measurement

hol Interest." Among other hypotheti- and the structural models can be said to

cal restrictions, this model explicitly pre- represent a causal system that might or

sumes that there is no direct effect of the might not be tested against empirical

second factor, labeled "N" for "Narcis- data. As opposed to focusing solely on

sism," upon the A factor. Any possible observed or manifest variables, a well-

indirecteffect of N upon A would de- specified measurement model permits

pend on the pattern of background cor- one to interrelate "errorless" latent var-

relations posited in further matrices iables in the structural component

(which for brevity are not presented (Huba and Bentler, 1982; cf. Martin,

here; but see McArdle and McDonald, 1982). The resulting verdict may be that

1984).

the model is not disconfirmed or it may

The second path model, Pm, is considered to be of medium complexity be-

be that the model should be rejected as a plausible representation of how ob-

cause it contains the simple model given served and latent variables are related.

by parameter "s," and further allows, as The linkage of the measurement and

signified by parameter "m," a direct ef- structural components into one model

fect of factor N on factor A. This repre- creates new questions, viz, "What

sents the particular path pattern dia- should my combined causal model look

grammed in Figure 4.

like?" The inherent complexity of this

The third path model, Ph, is consid- problem is realized when we view the ered to be of high complexity because it possible combinations of the three load-

contains both the simple and the me- ing matrices L, of Equation (3a) with

dium complexity parameters and fur- the three path matrices P¡of Equation

Vol. 32,No.

Multivariable CausalModeling

285

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

(3b) ;even in this simple example we can for extant common variance. These pos-

create nine different alternative causal sibilities can be accommodated by the

models.

modeling procedures but they may be

One way to deal with this emergent "forced" onto the solution due to an ini-

causal complexity is to relate both com- tially poor fit (see, e.g., McArdle and

ponents to a broader modeling strategy. Horn, 1981).

In our example the strongest a priori The dependence of the measurement

causal model described above is repre- and the structural components on each

sented by the combination of Ls and Ps. other is germane to our discussion. If the

This combination of a simple measure- two components of the causal system

ment model with a simple path model are estimated simultaneously, they both

leads to the simplest explanation. Un- contribute to the goodness of fit (or lack

fortunately, it is often the case that, un- thereof) of the model to the data. In

less some care is taken to proscribe the principle, if one or the other component

experimental variables, this causal represents a poor fit, the entire model is

model is rejected as being "too simple" jeopardized. It may be possible, how-

for the problem at hand. Alternatively, ever, to disentangle these sources in

the weakest a priori causal model that many ways, the most familiar of which is

may be directly estimated is represented by sequential fitting procedures (see

by the combination of Lh and Pm, and Bentler, 1980). Nevertheless, the two

this combination can be used to provide aspects underscore the importance of

maximum fit. But, again, unless some having valid "indicators" or "marker"

care is taken to provide for internal re- variables for constructs if tests of ex-

plicability, the mathematical and statis- planatory schemes are to be productive.

tical basis of the model may be too "unstable" for a definitive interpretation. Perhaps the most salient point to be made here is that mixtures of these loading models and path models represent flexiblealternative views on the meaning and interpretation of latent variables themselves (James et al., 1982; cf. McArdle, 1984a, 19846).

Thus, causal modeling with latent variables is a clear extension of multivariate analysis procedures in two ways: (1) Multiple indicators are utilized to provide a more valid representation of the latent variables; and (2) the hypothesized models can include multiple antecedent and multiple consequent latent variables. In the context of discussing

Modification of the initial model is the pluralistic orientation that seems to

possible and may lead to a significant im- characterize much of life-span develop-

provement in the goodness of fit. mental research, Dixon and Nes-

Clearly, however, ad hoc modifications selroade (1983) recognized both the

shift the emphasis from confirmatory to- merit and timeliness of causal modeling

ward exploratory analysis and require techniques. They observed, however,

some independent assessment such as that although it is not clear whether this

by cross-validation techniques (Cliff, particular chapter of methodological

1983; Nesselroade and Baltes, 1984). history will be long or short, it clearly

With several marker variables, for ex- will not be the last. However, for re-

ample, there is the possibility that more searchers whose scientific questions do

than one factor is involved in accounting not admit of answers derived from ma-

286

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

nipulative, randomized experimental number of friends who cut class); Rebel-

research paradigms, it is important that liousness (6-item, self-reported Law

all possible value be wrung from these Abidance scale; 2-item, peer-rated Law

methods even as we inexorably move on Abidance scale; 6-item, self-rated Lib-

to alternatives.

eralism scale; 2-item, peer-rated Liber-

alism scale); Perceived Behavioral Pres-

sure (number of friends who drink beer ILLUSTRATIONS OF MODELING or wine at least once a month, number

To illustrate how causal modeling with latent variables can contribute to the development of explanatory schemes in the field of alcohol use, some

of friends who drink hard liquor, number of friends who give the participant beer or wine); and Alcohol Use (beer, wine, and liquor use frequencies).

examples of applications of modeling The structural model, as represented

will be presented. Of course, we do not in Figure 4, reflected the hypotheses

wish to downplay the excellent prior that Rebelliousness and Alcohol Use at

work produced using other methods Year I had direct influences on Alcohol

that represent latent variable modeling Use at Year II, that Rebelliousness at

using traditional multivariate tech- Year I also had an indirect effect on Al-

niques (see, e.g., Foster et al., 1972; cohol Use at Year II that was moderated

Horn et al., 1974; Wanberg et al., 1977; by Intimate Culture Support and Per-

Skinner, 1979, 1981). Here, however, ceived Behavioral Pressure, that Inti-

we will simply overview three examples mate Culture Support indirectly in-

from the contemporary modeling litera- fluenced Alcohol Use at Year II through

ture on alcohol consumption, genetic in- Perceived Behavior Pressure, and that

fluences, and individual systems analy- Perceived Behavioral Pressure had a di-

sis. rect influence on Alcohol Use at Year

CAUSAL MODELING OF ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION

II.
After a series of model fitting and testing estimation procedures were car-

Huba and Bentler (1982) reported on ried out, Huba and Bentler (1982) con-

the development and testing of explana- cluded, for example, that the influence

tory models of alcohol and drug use. In of Rebelliousness and Perceived Behav-

addition to a construct of Alcohol Use, ioral Pressure on subsequent Alcohol

their models involved a set of psycho- Use complements the way it influences

social antecedents that included the con- previous Alcohol Use. The influence of

structs of Rebelliousness, Perceived Be- Intimate Culture Support characteris-

havioral Pressure, and Intimate Culture tics on subsequent Alcohol Use was

Support. A simplified representation of found to be moderated through Per-

their models is presented in Figure 4. ceived Behavioral Pressure rather than

The R-technique measurement influencing it directly.

model included the following constructs and their indicators: Intimate Culture . MODELING GENETIC INFLUENCES

Support (number of friends who cheat Many common-sense notions about

on an important exam, number of alcoholism center on theoretical differ-

friends who might quit high school, ences between the genetic and environ-

Vol. 32, Ño. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

287

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

fiimiffff
FIG. 4.--Latent variable path model of relationships among personality, subculture, and alcohol use (R-technique) factors (after Huba and Bentler, 1982,p. 191). Labels of common factors are prefixed with C. Subscripts 1 and 2 designate year of testing. R = Rebelliousness, / = Intimate Culture Support, P = Perceived Behavioral Pressure, znáA = Alcohol Use. Dp, D\, and D2 are latent disturbances acting on the common factors. Chi-square = 84;df = 63;z = 1.8.

288

Nesselroade and McArdle

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

mental determinants of alcohol use. labeled here). Note the correspondence

There has been a wide range of studies of this genetic-factor model to concepts

of genetic disposition to alcoholism based on the actions of a "polygenic in-

based on psychophysical responses. In- heritance" mechanism (McClearn,

deed, this work ranges from traditional 1983).

multivariate analyses of the EEG (e.g., The analysis was designed to provide

Propping et al., 1981; Begleiter et al., only preliminary results. The authors

1984) to the examination of "flushing" suggested that the "alcohol-genetic fac-

(e.g., Johnson et al., 1984). In terms of tor loadings were small but of borderline

causal modeling techniques, a general significance" (p. 95). They concluded

approach to the genetic and environ- that individual environmental effects

mental determinants of behavior was and broad genetic differences were

detailed by Eaves et al. (1978) and more salient determiners of perform-

Fulker(1979);

ance on the tasks being investigated (see

An example of causal modeling also Martin et al. 1985a, 19856).

methodology applied to alcohol use was Of course, we have not here detailed

presented by Martin et al. (1981). In many critical assumptions of the genetic

that study, 79 pairs of monozygotic modeling (but see Eaves et al., 1978)

(MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins, aged 18 and there remain many ways to expand

to 35 years, were initially administered a upon this basic work. In one such at-

number of psychomotor tasks. Next, all tempt, McArdle et al. (1980) introduced

subjects drank a diluted dose of ethanol the simultaneous estimation of genetic

(0.75 g/kg body weight). These subjects latent variable models with an invariant

were then measured on the same psy- phenotypic measurement model and

chomotor tasks once each hour for the longitudinal latent variance decomposi-

ensuing 5 hours. A variety of alternative tion. They further showed how this

causal models is proposed by Martin et combined model could be specified, es-

al. (1981) to account for the patterns of timated, and fitted using available struc-

covariation. One of their models is dia- tural equation programs (e.g.,

grammed in Figure 5.

LISREL). Martin et al. (1984) have

The basic model attempts to account since overviewed additional research on for the observed covariation of the first this topic.

four time points of measurement (i.e., To to 73) on a simple arithmetic task by MODELING INDIVIDUAL CAUSAL SYSTEMS

introducing a variety of T-technique The intensive case study of problems

based measurment models. In the diagnostically classified as "episodic al-

model of Figure 5, latent variables are coholism" is usually clinically indicated,

introduced to represent: (1) a "general- but there are other good reasons to con-

genetic" influence (labeled DR) com- sider the case-study design as a useful re-

mon to all measures; (2) a "general- search tool. For example, recent multi-

environmental" influence (labeled E\ variate research on alcoholism (e.g.,

common to all measures; (3) an Horn, 1978; Skinner, 1981) shows that

"alcohol-genetic" influence (labeled the population of persons with alcohol-

DRÍA) common only to the post-alcohol related problems is highly heteroge-

times of measurement; and (4) four neous with respect to individual life

"specific-environmental" factors (not courses and problem behaviors. These

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

289

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

FIG. 5.--A genetic-alcohol model of across-occasion (T-technique) factors (after Martin et al., 1981). P¡ proportions are fixed parameters from genetic theory. Other estimates are maximum-likelihood ones standardized across MZ (N = 21)andDZ(iV = 15) between- and within-pair matrices (chi-square = 31 with25df;z = 0.9).
kinds of studies have also shown that tial"diagnosis" based on "multiple synsuccessful treatment of problems can drome" models. Thus, it may be approresult from the application of "difieren- priate to characterize the treatment of

290

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

alcohol-related dependencies in terms linear "trend" component; and (3) an

of "different strokes for different folks" over-time "dynamic-lag" component.

(Skinner, 1981, p. 75). Furthermore, The basic measurement model for these

the "episodic" classification supports data has already been presented in Fig-

the behavioral tendency towards high ure 2 and discussed in the earlier sec-

fluctuation which, again, lends credence tions, but with this in mind we recognize

to the use of the case-study design.

a potentially valuable move away from

Although we have previously dis- the "concurrent-time" structural

cussed the basic intraindividual design model, as given by Figure 5. That is,

structure termed P-technique, there with multivariate time-sequenced data

have not been many applications of this we can move toward a model represent-

methodology in either the alcohol use or ing both non-linear "trends" in the

latent-variable causal modeling litera- mean levels and "lagged-time" dynamic

ture. However, in one preliminary ap- paths. The parameters resolved for the

plication of dynamic P-technique, latter component are presented graphi-

McArdle (1982) reported a variety of cally in Figure 6. The most critical fea-

structural equation models for the anal- ture of this dynamic component is the

ysis of data from a single "episodic alco- representation of the salient causal

holic" subject.

pathways for all three latent variables as

The data analyzed by McArdle (1982) were originally collected and reported by Birkett and Cattell (1978). In the original data collection, daily observations on variations in motivational traits and emotional states were re-

they affect one another over time. The effects upon latent variables measured "today" (i.e., C,_o) are understood to emanate from those same latent variables measured "yesterday" (i.e., C,_i) and "one-week ago" (i.e., C,_7).

corded over a period of 92 consecutive The structural illustration of Figure 6

days. The subject was a 54-year-old, helps to illustrate both the basic benefits

married, professional man, whose and the complexities of modeling the in-

drinking and social history were highly dividual case. In effect, we might wish to

representative of the "episodic alco- characterize thisindividual, especially in

holic" classification. In a 95-minute contrast to other individuals, by his final

daily testing session with a skilled clini- model parameters. Molenaar (1985)

cian, the subject was asked to respond to provided a more sophisticated statistical

standardized test stimuli and to keep a model using this same basic approach.

diary. The basic variables used in the As McArdle (1982) reported, this par-

modeling study included multiple mea- ticular model fits the data well and the

sures of the subject's emotional state, parameters displayed (in both Figs. 2

interest in self, and interest in alcohol and 6) are all large relative to their

(actual drinking was prohibited). More standard errors. However, even the

details on the measures are found in strongest effects are very small. So, al-

Birkett and Cattell (1978).

though the design and model merge

McArdle (1982) fitted a model containing three major latent variable subcomponents: (1) an "invariant" factor measurement component, (2) a non-

well, we still have not developed a satisfactory understanding of the basic causal mechanisms that are operating within even this single individual.

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

291

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

FIG. 6.--Final dynamic path model of single subject's daily alcohol interest. Fartor model of Figure 2is invariant over all days. Only lags of one day (i-1) and one week (i-7) were modeled. Factor stationanty is assumed for all lags, including r-0 (after McArdle, 1982). Chi-square = 381;df = 252; z = 5.0; T = 85.

CONCLUSIONS
Many would argue that theoretical developments regarding alcohol use are currently at the level where researchers

a r e m o r e appropriately engaged in model building than model testing. Be that as it may, the multivariate orientation we have just described offers a general methodological framework for ex-

292

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

plicitly bringing together the rich variety marker variables or indicators for the

of antecedents and observable manifes- constructs that one is able to provide.

tations that appear necessary to "cap- The history of multivariate research in

ture" the phenomenon of alcohol use. psychology reflects concern for domain

The illustrations presented earlier indi- specification and definition and how to

cate how the multivariate orientation as sample in a representative manner from

reflected in structural modeling with la- such content domains in order to guar-

tent variables can be applied to the study antee proper coverage of the major di-

of antecedents and consequents of alco- mensions (Cattell, 1966a). Concepts

hol use-related behaviors. The anteced- such as simple structure (Thurstone,

ents include genetic as well as environ- 1947) represent important tools for re-

mental information and the models can solving such matters as adequacy of do-

be applied at both the group and individ- main coverage, and they have not yet

ual level. The recognition that it is possi- been smoothly assimilated by the mod-

ble to build and test such models should eling procedures.

not be permitted to obscure the fact that there are several requirements on which these procedures must rest if they are to be used fruitfully.

Third, the promise of modeling techniques for apprehending geneticsbehavior linkages will rest to a great extent on the "indicators" that can be

First, it is clear that model testing is devised to represent genetic and, of

indeed model testing and not model course, non-genetic influences. Classi-

building only if there is available a suf- fication schemes such as mono- versus

ficiently well articulated theory that per- dizygotic twins offer one approach to

mits the derivation of explicit, testable constructing such variables. More com-

empirical implications. Otherwise, plex schemes such as those focused on

these high-powered statistics get turned the decomposition of covariances and

to the task of exploratory rather than ex- the MAVA designs of Cattell that utilize

planatory work. This is not to denigrate several different family constellations

exploratory, descriptive work. Rather, are also possibilities to be explored (see,

the point is that exploratory and explan- e.g., Loehlin, 1979).

atory tasks involve different activities In any case, the statistics develop-

and different criteria of success and, to ment aspect of modeling is blossoming. the extent that it is possible, these activi- New computational and estimation al-

ties should be distinguished from each gorithms, including robust ones for non-

other. A "worst-case scenario" in this normally distributed data, are appearregard involves the inadvertent (or de- ing (Browne, 1984). It remains to be

liberate) interpretation of the outcomes seen whether the quality of our meaof exploratory analyses as confirmatory surement variables and the precision of

or hypothesis testing outcomes (Nes- available theories will keep up with the

selroade and Baltes, 1984).

technical developments. If so, then

Second, the idea of modeling causal multivariable modeling procedures in-

relationships among "error-free" con- volving latent variables may help to adstructs is an appealing one. However, vance our understanding of relation-

success in that arena will depend, to a ships such as those between genetics and

large extent, on the quality of the behavior that have important theoreti-

Vol. 32,No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

293

cal and practical consequences for understanding alcohol use.
With regard to modeling alcohol-use mechanisms more effectively, it might also be the case that we need to develop novel ways of considering multiple variable combinations.

contemporary multivariate analysis. But, if for no other reason than this one alone, we see the need to enter the joust wearing our most advanced multivariate armor and vigorously engage this troublesome problem of the human condition.

No single set of traits invariably defines alcoholism. Just as light can consist of both waves andparticles, just so alcoholism canexist both as oneend of a continuum of drinking problems and as aspecific disorder. Alcoholism can simultaneously reflect both a conditioned habit and a disease; and the disease of alcoholism can be as well defined by a sociological model as by a medical model. . . . Thus, alcoholism is a construct of a higher order of complexity than, say,pregnancy or measles. (Vaillant, 1983,p. 308)
Obviously, the problems associated
with understanding alcohol use are com-
plex; so complex in fact that the attend-
ant data analytic challenges may very
well threaten the basic foundations of

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Preparation of this manuscript wasaccomplished in part while the senior author was spending a sabbatical leave at the MaxPlanck-Institute for Human Development and Education, Berlin, FRG. The supportof the MPI isgratefully acknowledged. Thanks are due Jennifer Harris forher valuable comments on an earlier version of the mantfscript. Sherry Corneal provided technicalassistance with the preparation of the references.
The second author's research has been funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA Grant AG-04701, with J. L. Horn) and theNational Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA Grant A A 05743).

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ANESMENSEL, C. C., and G. J. HUBA. 1983. De-

. 1986. Causal modeling via structural

pression , alcohol use, and smoking over one

equation systems. InJ. R. Nesselroade and

year: A four-wave longitudinal causal

R. B. Cattell (eds.), Handbook of multiva-

model. J. Abnor. Psychol. 92:114-150.

riate experimental psychology. Plenum,

BALTES, P. B., and J. R. NESSELROADE. 1973.

New York.

The developmental analysis of individual BIRKETT, H., and R. B. CATTELL. 1978. Diag-

differences on multiple measures, p. 219- nosis ofthe dynamic roots ofa clinical symp-

251. InJ. R. Nesselroade and H. W. Reese

tom by P-technique : A case of episodic alco-

(eds.), Life-span developmental psychol-

holism. Multivar. Behav. Res.3:173-194.

ogy: Methodological issues. Academic BROWNE, M. 1984.Asymptotically distri-

Press, New York.

bution-free methods for the analysis of co-

BALTES, P. B., H. W. REESE, and J. R. NESSEL-

variance structures. Brit. J. Math. Stat. Psy-

ROADE. 1977. Life-span developmental psy-

chol. 37:62-83.

chology: Introduction toresearch methods. CAMPBELL, D. T., and J. C. STANLEY. 1966. Ex-

Brooks/Cole, Monterey, Calif.

perimental andquasi-experimental designs

BEGLEITER, H., B. PORJESZ, B. BIHARI, and B.

for research. Rand McNally, Chicago.

KISSIN. 1984. Event-related brain potentials CATTELL, R. B. 1957. Personality and motiva-

in boys at risk for alcoholism. Science.

tion structure and measurement. World

225:1493-1495.

Book Co., New York.

BENTLER, P.M. 1980. Multivariate analysis

. 1963. The structuring of change by P-

with latent variables: Causal modeling.

and incremental-R technique, p. 167-198.

Ann. Rev.Psychol. 31:419-456.

In C. W, Harris (ed.), Problems in measur-

294

Nessetroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

ing change. University of Wisconsin Press, research, p. 337-380. In J. R. Royce and

Madison, Wis.

L. P. Mos (eds.), Theoretical advances in

. 1966a. The data box: Its ordering of to- behavior genetics. Sijthoff & Noordhoff,

tal resources in terms of possible relational Germantown, Md.

systems, p. 67-128. In R. B. Cattell (ed.), GERGEN, K. J. 1984. Experimentation and the

Handbook of multivariate experimental myth of the incorrigible, p. 27-42. In V.

psychology. Rand McNally, Chicago.

Sarris and A. Parducci (eds.), Perspectives

. 1966b. Multivariate behavioral re- in psychology experimentation: Toward the

search and the integrative challenge. year 2000. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,

Multivar. Behav. Res. 1:4-23.

Hillsdale,N.J.

. 1966c. Patterns of change: Measure- GLENN, N. D. 1981. Age, birth cohort, and

ment in relation to state-dimension, trait drinking: An illustration of the hazards of

change, lability, and process concepts, p. inferring effects from cohort data. J. Geron-

355-402. In R. B. Cattell (ed.), Handbook tol. 36:362-369.

of multivariate experimental psychology. GUILFORD, J. P. 1952. When not to factor ana-

Rand McNally, Chicago.

lyze. Psychol. Bull. 49:26-37.

. 1979. Personality and learning theory, HORN, J. L. 1978. Comments onthemany faces

Vol. 1. Thestructure of personality in its en- of alcoholism, p. 1-40.In G. Mariatt, P. Na-

vironment. Springer, New York.

than, and T. Lobert (eds.), Alcoholism:

. 1980. Personality and learning theory, New directions in behavioral research and

Vol. 2. A systems theory of maturation and treatment. Plenum, New York.

structured learning. Springer, New York.

. 1984. To set the stage. Multivar. Be-

. 1982. The inheritance of personality hav. Res. 19:115-120.

and ability: Research methods and findings. HORN, J. L., and J. J. MCARDLE. 1980. Per-

Academic Press, New York.

spectives on mathematical/statistical model-

CATTELL, R. B., and I. H. SCHEIER. 1961. The

ing (MASMOB) in research on aging, p.

meaning and measurement of neuroticism 503-541. In L. Poon (ed..), Aging in the

and anxiety. Ronald Press, New York.

1980's. American Psychological Associa-

CLIFF, N. 1983. Some cautions concerning the tion, Washington,D.C.

application of causal modeling methods. HORN, J. L., K. W. WANBERG, and G. ADAMS.

Multivar. Behav. Res. 18:115-126.

1974. Diagnosis of alcoholism: Factors of

COAN, R. W. 1966.Child personality andde- drinking, background and current condi-

velopmental psychology, p. 732-752. In tions in alcoholics. Quart. J. Stud. Alc.

R. B.Cattell (ed.), Handbook of multivari- 35:147-175.

ate experimental psychology. Rand HORN, J. L., J. J. MCARDLE, and R. MASON.

McNally, Chicago.

1983. When is invariant not invariant? A

CRONBACH, L. J. 1957. The two disciplines of

practical scientists' look at theethereal con-

scientific psychology. Amer. Psychol.

cept of invariance. Southern Psychol.

30:116-127.

1(4):179-188.

. 1975 Beyond the two disciplines of HUBA, G. J., and P. M. BENTLER. 1982. A de-

scientific psychology. Amer. Psychol. velopmental theory of drug use: Derivation

30:116-127.

and assessment of a causal modeling ap-

DIXON, R. A., and J. R. NESSELROADE. 1983.

proach, p. 149-203. In P. B. Baltes and

Pluralism and correlational analysis in de-

O. G. Brim, Jr., (eds.), Life-span develop-

velopmental psychology: Historical com-

ment and behavior, Vol. 4,Academic Press,

munalities, p. 113-145. In R. M. Lerner

New York.

(ed.), Developmental psychology: Histori- JAMES, L. R., S. A. MULAIK, and J. M. BRETT.

cal and philosophical perspectives. La- 1982. Causal analysis: Assumptions, models

wrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J. and data. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills,

EAVES, L. J., K. LAST, P. A. YOUNG, and N. G.

Calif.

MARTIN. 1978. Model-fitting approaches to JOHNSON, R. C., C. T. NAGOSHI, S. Y. SCHWIT-

the analysis of human behavior. Heredity

TERS, K. S. BOWMAN, F. M. AHERN, and

41:371-376.

J. R. WILSON. 1984. Further investigationof

FOSTER, F. M., J. L. HORN, and K. W. WAN-

racial/ethnic differences and of familial re-

BERG. 1972. Dimensions of treatment out- semblances in flushing in response to alco-

come: A factor-analytic study of alcoholics' hol. Behav. Genet. 14:171-178.

responses to a follow-up questionnaire. JÖRESKOG, K. G. 1979. Statistical estimation of

Quart. J. Stud. Alc. 33:1079-1098.

structural models in longitudinal-

FULKER, D. W. 1979. Some implications of bio- developmental investigations, p. 303-351.

metrical genetical analysis for psychological In J. R. Nesselroade and P. B. Baltes

Vol. 32,No. 3-4

Multivariable Causal Modeling

295

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

(eds.), Longitudinal research inthestudyof

Wilks. 19856. A twin study of ethanol me-

behavior and development. Academic tabolism. Behav. Genet. 15:93-109.

Press, New York.

MCARDLE, J. J. 1981.Book review: Correla-

JÖRESKOG, K. G., and D. SÖRBOM. 1979. Ad-
vances in factor analysis and structural

tion and causality. Appl. Psychol. Meas. 5:275-280.

equation models. AbtBooks, Cambridge, Mass.

. 1982. Structural equation modelingof an individual system: Preliminary results

KENNY, D. A. 1979. Correlation and causality. Wiley, New York.

from "A case study ofepisodic alcoholism." Grant proposal tothe National Instituteon

LABOUVIE, E.W. 1980. Identity versus equiva-

Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA

lence of psychological measures and con- AA-05743).

structs, p. 493-502. In L. W. Poon (ed.),

. 1984a. On the madness inhis method:

Aging in the 1980's: Psychological issues. American Psychological Association,

R. B. Cattell's contributions to structural equation modeling. Multivar. Behav. Res.

Washington, D.C.

19:245-267.

LEBO, M. A., and J. R. NESSELROADE. 1978. In-
traindividual differences dimensions of mood change during pregnancy identified in five P-technique factor analyses. J.Res.

. 1984b. Simple structure or simpledynamics: Remodeling complex factor patterns using longitudinal and multiple group structural equation models. Paper pre-

Personal. 12:205-224. LOEHLIN, J. C.1979. Combining data from dif-

sented atthe annual meeting ofthe Psychometric Society. June, Santa Barbara, Calif.

ferent groups in human behavior genetics, MCARDLE, J. J., and J. L. HORN. 1981. Strucp. 303-334. In J. R. Royce andL.P. Mos tural equation models ofGf-Gc intelligence

(eds.), Theoretical advances in behavior ge-

theory. Invited paper presented at the an-

netics. Sijthoff & Noordhoff, Germantown, Md.

nual meeting of the American Psychological Association, August, LosAngeles, Calif.

LUBORSKY, L., and J. MINTZ. 1972. The contri- MCARDLE, J. J., and R. P. MCDONALD. 1984.

bution of P-technique to personality,psy-

Some algebraic properties of the Reticular

chotherapy, and psychosomatic research,p. 387-410. In R.M. Dreger (ed.) Multivariate personality research: Contributions to the understanding of personality in honorof Raymond B. Cattell. Claitor's Publishing Division, Baton Rouge, La.

Action Model formoment structures. Brit. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 37:234-251.
MCARDLE, J. J., J. P. CONNELL, and H. H.
GOLDSMITH. 1980. Structural modeling of stability and genetic influence: Some results from a longitudinal study of behavioral

MARTIN, J. A. 1982.Application of structural

style. Behav. Genet. 10:487 (abstract).

modeling with latent variables to adolescent MCCLEARN, G.E. 1983. Genetic factors in al-

drug use: A reply to Huba, Wingard,and

cohol abuse: Animal models, p . 1-30. In B.

Bentler. J. Personal. Soc.Psychol. 43:598-

Kissen andH. Begleiter (eds.), Thebiology

603. of alcoholism, Vol. 7. The pathogenesis of

MARTIN, N. G., J. B. GIBSON, J. G. OAKESHOTT, A. B. WILKS, G. A. STARMER,

alcoholism: Biological factors. Plenum, New York.

J.CRAIG, and J. PERL. 1981. A twin study of MCDONALD, R. P., and W. R. KRANE. 1979. A

psychomotor performance during alcohol

Monte Carlo study of local identifiability

intoxication: Early results, p. 89-96. InL.

and degrees of freedom in the asymptotic

Gedda, P. Parisi, and W. E. Nance (eds.),

likelihood ratio test. Brit. J. Math. Stat.

Twin research 3: Epidemiological andclini-

Psychol. 32:121-132.

cal studies. Alan R.Liss, New York.

MEREDITH, W. 1964. Notes on factorial invari-

MARTIN, N. G., R. JARDINE, and L. EAVES.

ance. Psychometrika 29:177-185.

1984. Isthere only one set of genes for dif- MOLENAAR, P.C.M. 1985.A dynamic factor

ferent abilities? A reanalysis ofthe National

model for the analysis of multivariate time

Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test

series. Psychometrika 50:181-202.

(NMSOT) data. Behav. Genet. 14:355- NESSELROADE, J. R. 1983a. Some implications 370. of the trait-state distinction forthe study of

MARTIN, N. G., J. G. OAKESHOTT, J. B.GIB-
SON, G. A. STARMER, J. PERL, and A. V.
WILKS. 1985a. A twin study of psychomotor and physiological responses to an acute dose

aging: Still labile after all these years. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association, August, Anaheim, Calif.

of alcohol. Behav. Genet. 15:305-347.

. 1983b. Temporal selection andfacto-

MARTIN, N. G., J. PERL, J. G. OAKESHOTT, J. B. GIBSON, G. A. STARMER, and A. V.

rial invariance in the study of development and change, p. 60-87. In P.B. Baltesand

296

Nesselroade and McArdle

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

O. G. Brim, Jr. (eds.), Life-span development and behavior, Vol. 5. Academic Press, New York.
NESSELROADE, J. R., and P. B. BALTES. 1984.
From traditional factor analysis to structural-causal modeling in developmental research, p. 267-287. In V. Sarris and A. Parducci (eds.), Perspectives in psychological research: Toward the year 2000. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J.
NESSELROADE, J. R., and D. H. FORD. 1985.
Multivariate, replicated, single-subject designs for research on older adults: Ptechnique comes of age. Research on Aging 7:46-80.
NESSELROADE, J. R., and E. W. LABOUVIE.
1985. Experimental design in research on aging, p. 35-60. In J. E. Birren and K. W. Schaie (eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging, 2nd edition. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
PROPPING, P., J. KRUGER, and N. MARK. 1981.
Genetic disposition to alcoholism: An EEG study in alcoholics and their relatives. Hum. Genet. 59:51-59.
PRUZEK, R. M., and B. C. FREDERICK. 1978.
Weighting predictors in linear models: Alternatives to least-squares and limitations of equal weights. Psychol. Bull. 85:254-266.
SCHAIE, K. W., and C. HERTZOG. 1982. Longi-
tudinal methods, p. 91-115. In B. B. Wolman (ed.), Handbook of developmental psychology. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. SKINNER, H. A. 1979. A multivariate evaluation of the Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test. J. Stud. Alc. 40:831-844.
. 1980. Factor analysis and studies of al-

cohol: A methodological review. J. Stud. Alc. 41:1091-1101.
. 1981. Primary syndromes of alcohol abuse: Their measurement and correlates. Brit. J. Addict. 76:63-76. SINNOTT, J. D. 1981.The theory of relativity: A metamodel for development? Hum. Dev. 24:293-311. SPEARMAN, C. 1904. General intelligence objectively determined and measured. Amer. J. Psychol. 15:201-293.
THURSTONE, L. L. 1947. Multiple factor analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
TUCKER, L. R. 1966. Learning theory and multivariate experiment: Illustration by determination of generalized learning curves, p. 476-501. In R. B. Cattell (ed.), Handbook of multivariate experimental psychology. Rand McNally, Chicago.
VAILLANT, G. E. 1983. The natural history of alcoholism: Causes, patterns, and paths to recovery. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
WANBERG, K. W., and J. L. HORN. 1983. As-
sessment of alcohol use with multidimensional concepts and measures. Amer. Psychol. 38:1065-1069.
WANBERG, K. W., J. L. HORN, and F. M. FOS-
TER. 1977. A differential assessment model of alcoholism: The scales of the Alcohol Use Inventory. J. Stud. Alc. 38:512-543.
WRIGHT, S. 1921. Correlation and causation. J. Agricultural Res. 20:557-585.
ZEVON, M. A., and A. TELEGEN. 1982. The
structure of mood change: An idiographic/ nomothetic analysis. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 43:111-132.

