Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Genetic counseling and the presenile dementias
L. L. Heston
To cite this article: L. L. Heston (1976) Genetic counseling and the presenile dementias, Social Biology, 23:2, 135-141, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988219 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988219
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Genetic Counseling and the Presenile Dementias

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

L. L. Heston
Department of Psychiatry University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota
ABSTRACT: The clinical application of genetic counseling techniques to the presenile dementing illnesses is discussed, using examples. The problems encountered in adult-onset illness are very different from those seen in illnesses affecting children. Some general guidelines and some specific ones are presented.

I shall discuss the clinical problem of providing genetic counseling to persons at risk for a presenile dementia. Because these disorders are rare ones, systematic studies are difficult to do. Further, the clinical problems are very different from those encountered in diseases mainly affecting children, so that little of the experience developed in the pediatric area is relevant. The development of expertise in dealing with the presenile dementias seems likely to come from the accounts of individual clinicians with special interest in these disorders. In that spirit, I offer this paper.
Although the presenile dementias are individually rare, the whole group forms a substantial part of psychiatric practice. I have been working with a consecutive series of 2,224 autopsies done on persons dying in Minnesota state hospitals and state nursing homes. First, I picked out all cases where dementia was clinically significant. After I excluded all cases where the putative onset occurred over age 65, and also all cases where toxic, vascular, metabolic or other likely cause was present, there remained 119 cases of dement-

ing illness or S.4 per cent of the autopsies. This figure represents about 2 per cent of all first admissions, or by a rough projection 1 in every 750 persons in the general population living long enough to be at risk. These estimates are not startlingly high, but they do outline a significant medical problem, especially for physicians in specialty practice.
The specific diagnoses include, of course, the diseases named after Huntington, Alzheimer, Pick, and Wilson. Also, Parkinson's disease is heritable, the empirical recurrence risk for siblings is 6 per cent and dementia is one of its constant features, although it may be mild (Martin et al., 1973). Several other rare diseases also fall into the group of presenile dementias; but the classification is quite inadequate. In the autopsy series mentioned earlier, 55 per cent of the cases afflicted with a clinically evident presenile dementia had no specific clinical or neuropathological diagnosis. Eight brains were normal; the others had demonstrable pathology, but of a nonspecific kind. The unsatisfactory state of classification is a serious handicap to the counselor and

135

136

Heston

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

clinician; but much can still be done with the available data.
GENETIC COUNSELING IN PSYCHIATRIC PRACTICE
Genetic counseling seems to me to be a necessary part of clinical practice, and the needed skills are well within reach of general psychiatrists. In contrast, counseling in disorders mainly affecting children often requires special laboratory facilities and a subspecialist's knowledge. As a part of routine psychiatric practice, a positive offer of counseling should be made to the relatives of patients. This can be done easily and naturally sometime during the period when the patient is in care. The fact is that many patients and their relatives-- actually, most in my experience--have heard from someone somewhere about possible genetic aspects of their disease and many have wildly wrong ideas about it. The genetic risk is nearly always exaggerated by relatives, and the genetic facts are reassuring. It is cruel to withold them.
HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE
Huntington's disease (chorea) can be taken as the prototypic genetic counseling problem in this group of diseases. It is inherited as an autosomal dominant with complete penetrance. Practically speaking, all affected persons will have an affected parent and, on the average, onehalf of the children of an affected parent will develop the disease.
The facts are beautiful in their simplicity, and it would be very nice if a young person with an affected parent came in wanting advice before marrying and before having children. But this situation, though beloved by armchair geneticists, is rarely encountered in practice. Much more usual is the case of the wife (or husband) of a newly diagnosed patient who has just gone through months of watching her

spouse deteriorate from an undiagnosed or misdiagnosed illness. Usually she will have only a vague idea that there is some sort of hereditary disease in her husband's family. The last thing she wants to hear about now is the risk to her children--and there are usually many of them, all alive and well. This sort of difficult and dirty problem is the common real-life one. Dealing with it takes all the clinical skills that one can master.
I will now take up the major problem situations as they commonly are presented. But as in any clinical problem, only guidelines can be given. Each counseling problem will be at least as varied as problems from other areas of clinical practice.
CASE 1: A young person with parent known to be affected wants to know his risk and the risk to children he might have.
In the case of Huntington's disease, the diagnosis is usually clear. But in many other dementing illnesses it is not, and even in Huntington's the counselor must obtain all the clinical data about relatives that he possibly can. Do not proceed until the diagnosis is established. In this first example, the risk to the counselee is 0.5, and the risk to any of his children can be estimated as 0.2S. But even in this straightforward example there are other considerations.
First, even a young person has lived through part of the age of risk (see Table 1), although until a counselee has reached his mid-30's, I do not ordinarily weigh the risk by introducing age corrections. Second, it is often helpful to the counselee to construct risk tables for families of different size to answer questions such as "If I have two children, what are the chances that both will be unaffected?" and so on. This method is more realistic than measuring the simple risk estimates.
While I have found that counselees or-

Vol. 23, No. 2 Genetic Counseling and Presenile Dementias

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
DISTRIBUTION OF AGES OF ONSET IN HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE*

Age Intervals

Per Cent

1-5
6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50 51-55 56-60 61-65 66-70 71-75

0.1 0.7 1.4 3.2 7.6
8.9 13.4 16.4 19.8 14.0 9.6 3.5 1.1 0.3

* Data from Wendt et a!., 1959.

Cumulative Per Cent
0.1 0.8 2.2 5.4 13.0 21.9 35.3 51.7 71.5 85.5 95.1 98.6 99.7 100.0

dinarily have no difficulty in understanding the probabilities, even the conditional probabilities involving their children, this information cannot be imparted on a busy ward. Time must be set aside. If the problem is even slightly complicated and requires more than simple reassurance, I now have counselees return for a second visit and usually have them write out in their own language their understanding of the situation. Besides providing an excellent opportunity for correcting misunderstandings, this method provides the counselee with a written record for future reference.
Another reason for scheduling enough time is that the counselee's emotional responses must be monitored. We have recently had a tragic result of genetic counseling given to a mother whose child was affected with chronic liver disease. For several years the child's illness had been a severe strain on the family. A pediatrician working with a newly measurable enzyme found that the affected child and two of her healthy siblings had lower than normal activity of that enzyme. He told the mother that the two healthy siblings were going to develop the same disease. The mother later reported, "I can hardly re-

member anything he said, but I saw him diagram my family on a blackboard and mark X's over my children." She left the office and pushed the three children, one ill, two perfectly well, off a high bridge killing all of them.
Although in this example the prognosis given the mother was questionable, the principal lesson is that the counselor must sometimes impart emotionally loaded information. The impact must be carefully observed, and the psychological effects dealt with. I have yet to see a major psychiatric problem develop out of the stress of counseling, but I have often slowed or stopped the giving of genetic information in order to deal with feeling states.
CASE 2: Counselee's grandparent had disease; parent at risk, but not affected. What are the risks for the counselee and the children he might have?
At first sight, this is a very difficult situation. The risk to the counselee depends on what happens to the intervening parent. If that parent remains well, the counselee's risk is 0. If the parent later becomes affected, the counselee's risk is 0.5. But the counselee must decide about marriage and family before knowing what will happen to the parent.
It is for this situation that genetic linkage or some method of detecting the asymptomatic carrier is wanted. Having such a method would be helpful, but it is not so critical to practice as has been thought. The reason is that age correction usually brings the risks down to where most people seem to consider them too low to warrant action.
For example, the counselee will usually be a young adult, and the parent whose status is critical will thus be age 35-45. The mean age of onset for Huntington's chorea is about age 42 with a standard deviation of 12 years. An actual distribution is shown in Table 1. If the parent is

138

Heston

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

42, about half the risk period will have one has the task of gradually leading him

passed. Hence, the remaining risk to the toward a more objective understanding of

parent is 0.33; to the counselee, it is 0.165, the disease and sensible actions to take.

and to a child of a counselee, it is 0.08. In Second, the counselor must aim at inform-

theory, one might further correct the risk ing the children. This will usually have to

by including age-of-onset data for the fam- be done over time. I have come to see the

ily. The correlation between relatives for overall approach to counseling in this

age of onset is about 0.3. In practice, it is group of diseases as one of establishing a

generally not possible to get trustworthy longitudinal relationship with the family.

age-of-onset data for enough relatives to The first point to be made about dealing

warrant making corrections.

with the family is that the counselor

Now the counselee can do nothing should expect hostility toward doctors and

about his own risk; his only option is hav- medicine. These families have had generaing or not having children of his own. A tions of experience with an untreatable

risk of 0.08 is just not large enough to most disease that is devastating in its effects.

people to be taken very seriously. In my Somewhere along the line, unjust, insensi-

experience, those counselees who are tive, or inept medical care will have been

going to be concerned about the possibility given. There will have been misun-

of major adult onset disease in their chil- derstandings and the family's mispercep-

dren begin to worry when the risk reaches tions. So the counselor must probe for hosabout 0.2. Carter et al. (1971) report that tility and deal appropriately with it. Oth-

for diseases affecting children, the equiva- erwise, progress will be slow indeed.

lent figure is 0.1. A risk of 0.2 would occur when the intervening parent was 32 years old, and his oldest children could hardly be in their reproductive years. Then the wisest thing for the counselor and the counselee to do is to wait a few years before reaching conclusions.

The first question regarding genetic risks on the counselee's mind is usually, "What can be done to minimize the risk to my children?" And, right now, the answer is, "Nothing." But then it can truthfully be said that advances in neurobiology are coming so rapidly as to be revolutionary.

It now appears possible that early diag- There is real hope that the expression of

nosis may be possible though the use of dementing diseases can be greatly mini-

L-dopa to evoke choreaiform movements mized if not prevented. From this fact

in asymptomatic carriers (Klawans et al., comes legitimate leverage for encouraging

1972) and that a dramatic new treatment the family to stay in touch with medicine.

may be at hand, effective at least against Another main element is family lore,

the movement disorder (Dalen, 1973). If which the counselor should inquire about.

these methods prove out, counseling will Most families afflicted with dementing

have valuable new tools, perhaps even disease have a considerable body of

revolutionary ones.

knowledge about their affliction. Often

Now to the case I said was the common there is a family authority who makes a

one. point of maintaining the genealogy. How-

CASE 3: Counseling the spouseandpos- ever, not all family members are given the

sibly the children of a newly diagnosed data, and some who get it chose to ignore

patient. I think that this is genetic counsel- it. The information itself is usually accu-

ing (although others might disagree) and rate in most respects. The basic patterns of

that there are two main objectives. First, genetic transmission are usually well

starting from wherever the counselee is, known; but there will very often be family

Vol. 23, No. 2 Genetic Counseling and Presenile Dementias

139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

superstitions also, usually about matters heimer's disease is in fact heterogeneous,

such as ageof onset. For example, one From the literature, it appears that fami-

family believed that if the disease didnot lies whose disease featured the early onset

begin by thespring of the year in which of dementia and prominent extrapyrami-

one turned 40, it would not develop. This dal signs show an unmistakable autosomal

was almost true of the experience of that dominant pattern of inheritance. Later

family; but there had been two recent ex- onset cases ofdementia without extrapyr-

ceptions. One case, thefamily attributed amidal complications tend tobesporadic;

to shell shock; the other, to a difficult indeed, this form of Alzheimer's disease

pregnancy. Like all of us, the family may well be anearlier onset form ofsenile

members .found rationalizations to pre- dementia.

serve favorite beliefs.

Obviously, for Alzheimer's families, the

Those are the initial issues. Dealing family history will have to beascomplete

with them will usually establish the as possible. Often, intensive investigations

needed degree of rapport with the spouse will be necessary. Corrections forage

and very often with other adults in the should also be made; the necessary data

family.

will be found in Table 2.

Many times one will come upon demen-

OTHER DISEASES

t i a p a t j e n t s w h oc a n n o t be given a specific

I will now more briefly consider other diagnosis. Even the distinction between

diseases. Pick's disease is analogous to Alzheimer's and Pick's diseases cannot al-

Huntington's, and the same considerations ways be made; it depends on neuro-

apply. Alzheimer's disease is less well de- pathological examination of brain tissue.

Iineated. In studies of families where the In all such cases, I think counseling can

diagnosis of probands was based on the be based on the history of that specific

combination of presenile dementia as- family. Presenile dementia is clinically dis-

sociated with senile plaques and neurofib- tinct enough sothat if the disease is heri-

rillary changes, the inheritance appears to table, a reasonably thorough investigation

be multifactional (Sjogren et al., 1952). of the pedigree will yield the data needed

However, the neuropathological changes for counseling,

are notspecific, and it is likely that Alz- I shall not describe in detail the several

TABLE 2
DISTRIBUTION OF AGES OF ONSET IN ALZHEIMER'S AND PICK'S DISEASES*

AGE OF ONSET

ALZHEIMER'S DiSEASEf

Cumulative

PerCent

Per Cent

PICK'S DisEASEt

Cumulative

PerCent

Per Cent

20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69
70-74

... 9.S 9.5 21.4 30.9 16.7 4.8 2.4 4.8 ...
...

... 9.5 19.0 40.4 71.3 88.0 92.8 95.2 100.0 ...
...

4.2 2.1 6.4 4.2 12.8 29.8 19.1 8.5 6.4 4.2
2.1

4.2 6.3 12.7 16.9 29.7 59.7 78.7 87.2 93.4 97.9
100.0

* Data of Zerbin-Riidin and Schenk compiled by Slater and Cowie, 1971. t Numbers are small: 42 Alzheimer's cases and 47 Pick's cases. Alzheimer's mean age of onset is41.4 ± 8.4; Pick's mean age ofonset, 47.3 ± 10.2

140

Heston

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

forms of spino-cerebellar degenerations, which usually go to the neurologist in any case. So far as counseling is concerned, the problems are similar to those described for Huntington's disease.
Wilson's disease, porphyria, and possibly low pressure hydrocephalus (or normal pressure hydrocephalus) provide opportunities for counseling of a different kind. In all three cases, the genetic risks are either too small or are not well enough known to warrant consideration in family planning. Wilson's disease is probably inherited recessively, but with very wide variation in expression and probable genetic heterogenity. Porphyria is an autosomal dominant, also with a wide range of expression; but the expected disability is not great.
Low pressure hydrocephalus may also have a definite recurrence risk. Based only on incomplete medical record searches, I have found 2 secondary cases among 29 siblings of 8 probands. This estimate of the recurrence risk (7 per cent) may increase or vanish when the necessary field work is done; but for now it is the best available.
The very important point to be made is that all three of these diseases are treatable, and the serious long-range effects may be prevented. Therefore, I think it is essential that physicians advise those relatives known to be at increased risk to seek examinations at regular intervals. The optimal interval between examinations is not known; research on this point is needed. But I believe this sort of counseling--it might be called preventative genetic counseling--will be an important part of future psychiatric practice.
In closing, I shall briefly describe some results from counseling. There are nosystematic follow-up data, that I know about, applicable to the presenile dementias. I can give only anecdotal material. First, the results of counseling vary great-

ly. People are usually as surprising as they are interesting.
A few people do in fact choose not to reproduce; and for them what can we offer? Adoption is not an option. There are no children available unless the counselees wish to adopt an Asian or Black child. But more importantly, the reason some people at risk for dementing disease do not choose to reproduce is that the disease may begin before the rearing period is finished. The genetic risk to the child is also a consideration, but it seems to be the smaller one. People responsible enough to want to avoid disability or death during the rearing period of their biological children will not adopt for the same reason. I have seen couples in this situation find satisfaction as temporary foster parents.
But most persons at risk will come to a different conclusion which may be expressed as follows: "My father lived forty damn good years before he became ill. I'm twenty now, and if I can get 20 more years I will feel pretty good about my life. If whomever I marry wants to take the chance, I am sure any children we might have will thank us for their lives." Even in such cases, genetic counseling can make a substantial contribution. Just knowing the objective facts aids in making objective decisions, and the objective facts are a basis for overcoming pathological adjustments.
An Alzheimer's family I came to know well provides some examples. The family was a closely knit group of Missouri farmers and tradesmen. The disease began between age 35 and 45 and was inherited as an autosomal dominant. These facts were well understood by the family. According to family lore, the earliest sign was deterioration of handwriting.
One young woman in the family was well until her mother developed the disease. The young woman then moved to California and, like several other members

Vol. 23, No. 2 Genetic Counseling and Presenile Dementiag

141

of the family, would not write letters or even sign Christmas cards. Later she dropped all contacts with her family. When I saw her as part of a follow-up of the family, she was depressed and hypochondriacal. Every little twinge was a sign of the disease beginning.
It was easy to reconstruct the history of her mental state. As long as her mother was well, she was successful in ignoring her own risk. When her mother became ill, her defensive structure collapsed. She responded to counseling of a rationalemotive kind--perhaps it was psychotherapy--based on her genetic risks and on the nature of the disease. She has not married, but has a satisfying life. However, I was involved in a court case in which a woman in exactly the same situation, except that the disease was Hun-

tington's, murdered her child and made a very determined suicide attempt.
In contrast, the brother of the first woman deliberately made a career out of a very dangerous oil industry job handling explosives. He worked alone, and a feature of the job was a generous insurance program. Remembering that early manifestation of the family illness was deterioration of fine movements of the fingers, it would be impossible for any psychiatrist or counselor to arrive at a more realistic solution to the problem.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This paper was prepared for a conference on Genetic Counseling in Psychiatric Orders: State of the Science and the Art, May 17, 1973, at the University of Indiana, Indianapolis.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

DALÉN, P. 1973. Lithium therapy in Huntington's chorea and tardive dyskinesia. Lancet 1:107-108.
KLAWANS, H. C., G. W. PAULSON, S. P., RINGEE, and A. BARBEAU. 1972. Use of L-dopa in the
detection of presymptomatic Huntington's chorea. New Engl. J. Med. 286:1332-1334.
MARTIN, W. E., W. I. YOUNG, and V. E. ANDER-
SON. 1973. Parkinson's disease: A genetic study. Brain 96:495-506.

SJOGREN, T., H. SJOGREN, and A. G. H.
LINDGREN. 1952. Morbus Alzheimer and morbus Pick. A genetic, clinical and patho-anatomical study. Acta Psychiat. Scand. Suppl. 82.
SLATER, E., and V. COWIE. 1971. The genetics of
mental disorders. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
WENDT, G. G., I. LANDZETTEL, and K. SOLTH.
1960. Krankheitsdauer und Lebenserwartung bie der Huntington's chorea. Arch. Psychiat. Nervenkr 201:298-312.

