Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The problem of the evolution of human races: Classification or clines?
Joseph B. Birdsell
To cite this article: Joseph B. Birdsell (1972) The problem of the evolution of human races: Classification or clines?, Social Biology, 19:2, 136-162, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987979 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987979
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 12
View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

The Problem of the Evolution of Human Races: Classification or Clines?
Joseph B. Birdsell
Department of Anthropology University of California Los Angeles, California

«MI
etmm

'

N J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Race formation within a species provides Such a belief fails to take into account the

opportunities for the study of ongoing directed complexities of selection and the

microevolution, but at the same time pre- indeterminacies of random genetic drift.

sents obstacles to the construction of a It presumes that gene flow is the only

scientific taxonomy of its races. The identi- evolutionary process operative. After several

fication and evaluation of evolutionary pro- centuries of effort, there is still no agree-

cess in economically simple human popula- ment among anthropologists even as to how

tions will be the major concern of this many major races can be found in the

paper. At the same time, it is appropriate human species. Therefore, it should not be

to present some past and present efforts to surprising that subdivisions within the major

classify the races of man and to examine groups achieve no consensus of opinion.

the various reasons for their failures. De- Nonetheless, there is something real about

scription and classification have been visibly the concept of race, and if efforts to classify

successful in ordering genera and higher were limited to the description of central

categories; hence, many workers have as- tendencies among regionally varying popu-

sumed that similar results can be obtained lations of man and if efforts to geographi-

within the species.

cally bound such groups were given up,

From the times of classical Greece on- perhaps progress might be made.

ward, men have attempted to classify their After a brief review of some past and

own kind and have never produced a present efforts to impose a scientific tax-

scientifically successful, closed taxonomy onomy upon man, this paper will pass on to

system. In part, their failures can be traced a more fruitful area, a quantitative analysis

to the essentially continuous variation of of clines. Data will be presented to indi-

biological characters in space, a reality now cate that in simple human populations in

amply demonstrated by the prevalence of nature, microevolution proceeds rapidly,

clines in various polymorphic traits. At the with random genetic drift triggering the

same time, classifiers have incorrectly as- initial disturbances and the coadaptive pro-

sumed that similarities within the species cesses of selection stabilizing the resultant

are a measure of relationship by descent. gene pools.

136

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

PAST EFFORTS TO CLASSIFY
HUMAN RACES
A recent rereading of many papers devoted to the analysis and classification of race has been a depressing task. They reflect a few limited themes, greatly overlapping in time, and in general their authors reject the biological principles of evolution. The racial classifications of the seventeenth century were naturally descriptive in nature, based upon observations of colonial travelers and explorers, and contained much error. Even so, the major races of man were recognized as well by eye in those days as they have since been identified by complex computer exercises in our time.
A few landmark figures should be noted. The great naturalist Buffon (1749 et seq.) summarized the known variability of man in the mid-eighteenth century in a travelogue manner and attempted little formal classification. Blumenbach (1795), recognized as the father of craniometry, correctly classified mankind as belonging to a single species, which he divided into five principal varieties or, as we would call them today, races. His criteria included the shape of the skull when viewed from above, plus some variable factors in body build. The Caucasian race was the basic and superior form, from which the others had degenerated. Mongolians and Ethiopians were of primary importance among the fallen varieties, while the Americans and Malays occupied intermediate positions between the Caucasoids and the other two poles of his scheme.
This visual kind of classification continued down through the next century and usually involved more numerous and finer subdivisions. Background noise in such schemes included visible ethnocentricity, theocratic concern as to whether man sprang from a single or from multiple origins, and economic overtones reflecting white destiny as a superior race and, of course, Negro degradation leading to

slavery. Still, some taxonomic progress was made; for it was realized that no single character could serve to divide the human species into natural regional populations and thus an increasing variety of traits were used in the construction of the taxonomies of the day.
Biological anthropology, in common with other more matured sciences, passed from a stage of qualitative description to one in which characters were quantified by measurement. Usually such a trend is beneficial; but it created something of a disaster for students of man. In 1840 the Swedish anatomist, Anders Retzius, (1860) invented the first accurate anatomical measurement of the human skull. The cephalic index was a simple ratio derived by dividing the maximum breadth of the skull by its length. Thus armed, Retzius divided the peoples of the world into two polar types: the longheaded or dolichocephalic, and the broadheaded or brachycephalic. For the next century the classifiers of man focused their attention upon craniology, especially the cephalic index. The metrical side of this approach culminated in the first quarter of the twentieth century in Karl Pearson and his school. Pearson was a gifted statistician, but posessed no great biological knowledge. He and his coworkers turned out many studies on human crania and reached an intellectual climax with the formulation of the "coefficient of racial likeness." This single-number statistic purported to describe the distance or proximity between populations in terms of real relationship by descent. Its use led to the embarrassing claim by Woo and Morant (1932) that the little Negritos of the Andaman Islands in the Bay of Bengal must be closely related to the diminutive Mongoloids of Southeast Asia because the coefficient of racial likeness between them was very low. They necessarily argued that the dark skin and woolly hair of the former and the contrast-

138

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

ing light skin and lank hair of the latter logical insights. Too often they were used

must be superficial characters, whereas to promote nationalism on a racial level,

those of the skulls were of fundamental compounded with factors of language,

nature. Thus, it was claimed that dimen- politics, and culture. Claims for both Celtic

sional similitude overrode morphological and Aryan superiority were fueled by these

differences. With the passing of Karl Pear- efforts.

son, this racial school rapidly lost vigor and At the expense of omitting reference to a

went on to extinction. Of course, Pearson's host of worthy workers throughout Europe,

statistical contributions remained vital and it is appropriate to focus attention upon a

are much used today.

brilliant American physical anthropologist,

Thomas Huxley (1865) represented a Ernest A. Hooton. He was a superb teacher

different and unfortunately rather minor and for a quarter of a century trained most

intellectual thrust in racial analysis. He of the physical anthropologists in this

concluded that cranial characters were of country. He was a convert from the clas-

secondary importance and based his classi- sics, self-taught in his professional field,

fication of the races of man upon variations and unfortunately not knowledgeable in

in hair form and color, and skin pigmenta- biology. Methodologically, he was impor-

tion. His taxonomy had serious defects, tant for inventing a form of typological

including the positioning of his Australoid analysis which was practiced by some of

type in such disjunct areas as Australia, his students until recent decades. A few

southern India, and a portion of Egypt. He still reveal cryptic signs of typological

categorized two kinds of Caucasoids, a fair thinking in their current researches.

Northwestern and a dark Mediterranean Hooton (1930) was convinced that he

type. Negroids were identified below the could detect the origins of populations by

Sahara in Africa and in Melanesia. He typing each individual in terms of the major

correctly placed Mongoloids throughout racial types they revealed to his eye. He

Asia and out into both Indonesia and the was intuitively an excellent morphologist,

American continents. While he leaned too so that a very real plausibility became built

heavily upon the belief that similarities into his claims. Hooton's rationale for this

were the key to relationship, he was of approach lay in his belief that ancestral

some importance in opposing a general trend forms "occasionally Mendelize out" in in-

toward craniology.

dividuals and give clues to those ancient

The investigation of living men received elements which hybridized to produce

a new impetus from the survey by Otto present populations.

Ammon (1890) who measured recruits for Hooton's analytical approach was much

the army in the Grand Duchy of Baden. more sophisticated than that of most of his

This late nineteenth-century study revealed contemporaries, but he was caught up in

a higher frequency of longheaded recruits the feeling of that period that a skull was

from the cities than from the country. He what it looked to be. If a cranium looked

speculated that brachycephalic individuals Negroid, because of a combination of fea-

died out faster in cities, a hypothesis which tures including a long, high, narrow vault

implied selection. Similar surveys were con- combined with a broad nasal aperture and

ducted by others on the living in France, some subnasal prognathism, it must be

Italy, and Germany. These provided ma- Negroid, no matter where the individual

terial for the study of regional variations on it belonged to had lived and died. Thus,

a population basis, but produced no bio- Hooton, along with other anthropologists of

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

the day, could see Negroids in such geographically unlikely places as northeast Asia, the tip of Baja California, or as members in prehistoric communities in New Mexico and Ohio. This confidence rested upon a belief that morphological and metrical similarity positively identified individual skulls according to their ancestral racial origins. Needless to say, this typological approach was totally in biological error.
One of the interesting aspects of racial anthropology is that it has been practiced by so many individuals with little or no training in biology. William Z, Ripley published a definitive study on The Races of Europe in 1899 in which he extensively documented the existence of three principal racial types, the Teuton, the Alpine, and the Mediterranean. It was not a bad study for its day, considering that its author was a professor of sociology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Roland Dixon, a well-thought-of ethnographer at the Peabody Museum of Harvard University, in 1923 produced a mechanistic scheme of analysis which he applied to the peoples of the world. Using three cranial indices, he arbitrarily defined eight fundamental types of races from their polar distribution and a further 19 permutational types of races involving intermediate combinations of the indices. Dixon is said to have laughingly referred to this work as "my crime," and perhaps it was.
Other interesting endeavors of comparable nature include the zones and strata hypothesis put forward by geologist Griffith Taylor (1937). Hooton's typological conclusions applied to the peopling of the New World inspired Harold Gladwyn, a retired businessman turned archaeologist, in his Men Out of Asia (1947). Even Kenneth McGowan, a retired movie producer, in collaboration with archaeologist Joseph Hester, produced a simpler work

Early Man in the New World (1950) following the Hootonian hypothesis. The typological approach to the classification of race has faded out everywhere but in Poland, where even today practitioners exist. Geneticists have backed them into the corner of conceding that in order for their racial typological schemes to work, most racial characters must be carried by a single gene.
Throughout the long decades in which students of racial anthropology groped for understanding and continued their fumbling analyses, biological principles were glaringly absent from their work. Charles Darwin might never have lived, and the work of Gregor Mendel not have been rediscovered, for the notice that was taken of their findings. In a general way, they all began with archetypal races of unexplained origin, from which they derived the living peoples of the world by hybridization alone. It is not surprising that they ignored mutational pressures and random genetic drift in their schemes, but it is appalling that the forces of selection were totally disregarded too.
A fortunate turning point in the study of human population variation occurred with the organization of the Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology by Theodosius Dobzhansky in 19S0. It was conceived to expose younger biological anthropologists to geneticists and other practitioners of the new systematics. Its impact was enormous and successful. Reflecting the same stirrings of the period, Carleton S. Coon was the first anthropologist to seriously inject hypotheses involving the process of selection into schemes of racial evolution. His ideas were primarily framed as speculative assertions, but generally rested upon sound biological and physical principles. His book Races (1950) was generally greeted by his peer group with disapproval and displeasure; yet, as a seedbed for ideas, it has been a profitable work, and the ideas it contained are today

140

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

being subjected to tests, including those of laboratory nature.
Coon had, quite independently, reinvented the basic racial classification of Immanuel Kant (177S), in which the philosopher proposed as sensible a racial scheme as anyone has since. Kant divided mankind into four major races: Whites, adapted to cold, damp climates; Mongoloids, living in cold dry regions; Negroids, originating in the dry heat of tropical Africa; and finally the inhabitants of Peninsular India, similar in their dark skins and linear body builds, evolving in a regime of the same climatic characteristics. While the insights of Kant were hardly framed in Darwinian terms, it is surprising that a sterile century and three-quarters passed before Coon again tied the diversity of man to geographic differences of domain.
NEW TREND IN RACE RESEARCH
The advent of the computer generated a whole new series of thrusts in the area labeled numerical phenetics. This has been manifested in the generalized measure of distance, D2, of Malanabois, in the way in which Penrose has partitioned his measures of similitude into those referring to form on the one hand and size on the other, and of course the "numerical taxonomy" of Sokal and Sneath (1963). The relation between the new taxonomy generated by computers and the taxonomy based upon classical morphological principles has been incisively discussed by Mayr (1965) in his paper "Numerical Phenetics and Taxonomic Theory." There is a general consensus that the taxonomies generated by the principles of numerical phenetics do not necessarily reflect pathways of descent as generated by classical taxonomy. In the few instances in which pertinent tests have been made of the validity of phenetic taxonomy, the results are unconvincing. Slight changes in

numerical value produce different family trees. Species which can be demonstrated by morphological taxonomy to be closely related are shown by numerical phenetics to be distantly so. For all of the intriguing statistical devices utilized in such schemes, the biological consequences are chaotic.
Thus, at a time when students of human races have gradually come to the conclusion that the game of classification cannot be conducted scientifically because of the biological complexities inherent in subspecification, the new generation of statistically-minded researchers have turned once more to classification as a primary goal. Whatever the new numerical phenetics may achieve at higher categorical levels, where genetic distances are great and lapsed time intervals long, their exercises now have little validity when applied at the subspecies level, particularly as demonstrated with human materials. Even the idea that a single figure can adequately summarize and measure biological variability between populations is unrealistic. When the single figure of magnitude approaches are compounded with the necessary assumption that the degree of similitude is a measure of relationship by descent, the venture becomes unsupportable. It may be excusable to ignore mutational pressures, since these operate slowly in evolutionary time and are generally unmeasurable; but to assume in numerical phenetics that the varied and complex directive changes produced by selection can be ignored is to cut the heart out of adaptive evolution as a concept. To further remove all indeterminacies from biological systems is to ignore the stochastic realities which are present in nature. It is probably fair to conclude that no scheme of numerical analysis can succeed which necessarily precludes both selection and drift from its perspectives and believes evolution to proceed by gene flow alone.

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution oí Human Races

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

THE PROBLEM OF RACE I N THE FUTURE
One of the realities which complicates the classification of human populations is the growing evidence that man as a species characteristically shows the regional gradations which are called clines. Wherever population structure is suitable, clinal patterns emerge for the simple serological genes and for both simple and complex phenotypic characters. Livingstone (1962) stressed that clinal patterns for different characters are independent of each other and so produce a chaotic effect where classification is attempted. There is a general agreement that in most organisms, and certainly in man, clines are evidence of the operation of either gene flow or selection or both conjointly. This generalization does not preclude mutational components and stochastic influences from drift from the total scene, but stresses that uniform clines are primarily structured by the former two evolutionary processes.
Once deterministic selection and indeterminate drift become a part of the admitted picture of subspeciation, efforts at classification, whether by eye or whether aided by the computer, become untenable. A scientific subspecific taxonomy could only be held valid where both selection and drift were known and incorporated into the analytical schema. It is unlikely that this will ever be realistically achieved. Therefore, it may well be that the investigation of the nature and intensity of evolutionary forces is the endeavor to be pursued, while the pleasures of classifying man fall away, perhaps forever.
THE REAL PROBLEM POSED BY REGIONAL
VARIATION IN MAN
With the dismissal of future exercises in racial taxonomy, the polytypic nature of human population presents a challenging question. What evolutionary forces have

produced the regional variations so evident in our species? It is ironic that the hypothesis proposed by Sewall Wright (1931) forty years ago has been almost totally ignored by racial anthropologists. In this formative paper, which developed the theory of shifting balance, Wright indicated clearly that random components did have a place in evolution and that evolution would proceed most rapidly when they were combined with selection in properly structured populations. He noted that the conditions which were most favorable for rapid evolution involved a numerous species subdivided into small local breeding populations, or demes, which were partially isolated from each other. In this situation, chance changes in gene frequencies, particularly those involving bottlenecks such as founder effect, would produce random deviations, some of which would trigger new selective direction and so new levels of adaptive equilibrium in the gene pools. Where the level of genetic coadaptation has been heightened, the new combinations might be expected through interdemic competition to spread widely in the species. Wright has reasonably claimed that much of the materials of general evolution substantiate his view, and he has successfully refined the theory of shifting balance in subsequent papers (1959, 1964).
Other contributors to the new systematics have expressed concordant views. Julian Huxley (1943, p. 208) obviously referred to genetic coadaptation without using the term as follows:
Let us now consider what will happen within a continuous population spread over a large area in which markedly different climatic conditions occur in different regions, but with the extremes connected by environmental gradations. Selection will then be operative and will tend to adapt the population locally; however, this local adaptation will be impeded and graded by gene flow. But whenever some accident, such as a temporary or partial isolation, allows selection full scope, local adaptation will be

142

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

intensified and the major adaptive genes will be fortified by internal adaptation until a locally harmoniously-stabilized gene-complex is built up. Once this occurs, the resultant extra vigor and fertility will permit the bearers of their gene-complex to spread beyond the area to which they were originally adapted.
While this is a convincing statement about genetic coadaptation, it should be noted that random components in the evolutionary process are not specified here and that the emphasis is essentially upon directed processes, however local the forces of selection might be.
The well-developed experimental procedures with Drosophila allow for the design of critical experiments in the laboratory. Dobzhansky and his collaborators have investigated the relationship between the interaction of random genetic drift and natural selection. Dobzhansky and Pavlovsky (1957) and Dobzhansky and Spassky (1962) in a pair of elegant experiments have demonstrated that both random and directed components do occur in evolution, but each has its own type and time of importance. Essentially, some degree of indeterminacy is present in microevolution. These results should have interested students of human races, but both are systematically omitted from their constructs and their analyses. Since man does not lend himself to laboratory experiment, it is necessary to investigate his evolution in natural populations. With the fossil record as scanty as it is, living populations recommend themselves for this effort.
AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES REPRESENT AN
EXPERIMENT IN NATURE
In well-designed laboratory experiments, nonessential and confusing factors are either eleminated or held constant, while attention is focused on the relationship between two or more important covarying characters. While all natural populations evolve, few of them are so structured as to provide

meaningful insight into evolutionary processes. In some, evolution proceeds too slowly. In others, the basic breeding populations are difficult or impossible to identify and are only definable through that leveling factor, isolation by distance. In many existing human populations, numerical expansion proceeds at a relatively rapid rate, personal mobility is high, and social structure complex and even stratified. The Australian aborigines possess very special features which give them some of the characteristics of a carefully designed laboratory experiment.
At the time of contact, the natives of Australia are estimated to have numbered 300,000 persons. They populated the entirety of the continent leaving no empty spaces, so their distribution was continuous. Everywhere they lived in a hunting and gathering state of economy. Their material technology was simple and relatively uniform throughout their continental domain. Aboriginal tools were sufficiently adaptable to allow them to live in a wide range of temperate to tropical environments, with mean annual rainfall varying from a minimum of four inches to a maximum of 160 inches. This represents an environmental range from stony desert on the one hand to climax Indo-Malayan rain forest on the other. Everywhere these natives were in an optimal equilibrium with their environment (Birdsell, 1953), and their densities were related to their land with a mathematical precision. Under such circumstances, their overall population numbers were constant, with only a little transient fluxing at the local level.
The population structure of the Australian aborigines is characterized by strong homeostatic tendencies and fortunately is well known. Field research by Norman B. Tindale, my longtime collaborator (1940, 1941, 1953), and myself (Birdsell, 1950, 1953, 1957, 1968) has demonstrated the

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

following structural details. Aboriginal society consists of three essential units, all of which socially and demographically represent stable equilibrium systems. The basic unit is the nuclear family which is the primary foraging unit, especially in impoverished environments and at difficult seasons of the year. Its numbers are carefully regulated through rigorously practiced infanticide, which in its net effect is preferentially female. Reproduction follows a truncated Poisson distribution with numbers of children surviving into adulthood ranging from zero to eight in number. At a given time, such a steady-state family averages a man, his wife, and about three offspring. Multiple wives occur only in about 15% of the marriages in desert regions.
A primary landowning unit in Australia is the band, or horde, which consists of a group of related families in which residence and land ownership pass down through the male line. Territoriality is strongly manifest in these bands, and they serve as a primary spacing mechanism throughout the continent. Marriage is exogamous, with wives coming into the band in exchange for daughters and sisters sent out. Thus, the bands themselves do not constitute the genetic isolate, but are subdivisions of it.
The largest social unit in Australia is the dialectal tribe, which consists of a group of contiguous and presumably distantly related bands. Its cohesion comes without political force, which is totally lacking, but rather through a dialect spoken in common and maintained by the density of communication arising from foot mobility and the array of face-to-face contacts. The tribe does not operate as a cohesive unit in any sense, but it does have the important attribute of representing a true island type of genetic isolate.
Tindale (1953) established that in precontact time the overall rate of intertribal

marriages in Australia averaged 14.7%. Conversely, 85.3% of the marriages involved individuals within the same dialectal tribe. This is an island type of isolate and a very tight one. Further, a great majority of the intertribal marriages were contracted with members of immediately adjacent tribes, with only a small minority representing matings between tribes once removed. Thus, the rate of exchange of persons is such that m equals 0.074, which, as will be shown later, is not sufficient to swamp out and degrade evolutionary changes occurring on each local scene.
The size of the effective breeding population in the Australian tribe is essentially indeterminate, but some bracketing estimates can be made. It has been shown (Birdsell, 1953) that dialectal tribal numbers range around a mean value of 500 persons. The minority of tribes larger than this tend to proceed toward fragmentation as isolation by distance produces linguistic differentiation. Tribes smaller than the average tend to lose their identity since their rate of intertribal marriage is necessarily higher. In another experimental aspect in aboriginal Australia it can be shown (Birdsell, in press) that the spread of such initiation ceremonies as circumcision and subincision produced transient fragmentation, in which tribal populations were reduced on the average to perhaps 150 persons. The evidence indicates that with the passage of time these smaller units reintegrated and later stabilized around the average number of 500 individuals.
Rough estimates of the size of the effective tribal breeding population suggest a figure of magnitude of about 185 persons. This is based upon such demographic variables as differences in sex ratios, the proportion of families not raising children to adulthood, and ages of marriage in terms of effective reproduction. However, the calculation of this figure does not take into

144

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

account the periodic phases of drastic population reduction which certainly occurred throughout much of this essentially arid continent. With the understanding that the harmonic mean of such oscillations is closer to the lower figure than to the homeostatic optimum value, a better estimate of the effective size of the tribal breeding population might be in the neighborhood of 100 persons. The exact value is surrounded by the indeterminacy resulting from the impossibility of now ever recording the past cyclical variations in weather and their impact upon the human populations. In spite of its essential indeterminacy, it is clear that the effective size of the breeding population of these aboriginal isolates was sufficiently small to favor random components in their evolution.
DATA
The data presented here was obtained on 1,678 full-blooded Australian aborigines who constitute a total sample of those to whom access was available at the time of this fieldwork, 1953-54. The research was undertaken to identify and, if possible, to evaluate the various microevolutionary processes operating in populations of this advantageous structure. The survey was made around the fringes of the Western Desert in the state of Western Australia. This region was chosen solely because it offered the largest number of tribes continuously distributed in a space which could be sampled at that late date. Originally it had been hoped to survey 50 contiguous tribes; in actuality 28 tribal isolates were sampled, together with scatterings of aborigines in surrounding areas of older settlement. Figure 1 shows the area sampled. I t will be noted that three southern tribal isolates are separated from 25 northerly ones by an unfortunate gap. This resulted from the fact that at that time the interior desert tribes had not yet come into white

settlements, while an earlier wave of migrants out of the desert to the stations at the southern end of the Canning Stock Route were already nearly extinct. Tindale (1941) has shown through his careful genealogical investigations that once effective white contact was established, Australian natives declined 50% per generation.
Each individual was identified genealogically by his own tribal affiliation, those of his parents, and where possible, those of his grandparents. This tedious but necessary work was undertaken during the first year of fieldwork by Norman B. Tindale, with the task falling upon the writer during the second year. Blood group determinations were made by Roy T. Simons and the maximum-likelihood calculations by John Graydon, both of the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, Parkville, Victoria.
Tribal samples varied in size from a few in the high twenties to one approaching 200 individuals. On the average, the 28 isolates are represented by about 50 bloods each. The statistical reliability of such small samples is worth some discussion. In one paper (Birdsell and Brooks, ms.), it is shown that tribal isolates such as are found in Australia constitute small, unique, and finite genetical universes. Each can be treated as a separate entity whose gene pool reflects the cumulative effects of clines independent in nature and varying in slope at all of the variable loci. In another paper (Brooks and Birdsell, ms.) it is shown that for genetical universes of this type the best estimate for the confidence limits is obtained by the Bayes method. The nature of this statistic, which is appropriate for small finite universes, is such that its 95% confidence limits, when compared to others frequently used, result in a sampling error of ascertainment so compressed that a sample of 50 persons, that is 100 bloodgroup genes, has an error of approximately ± 5 % . If binomial-sampling confidence

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

100 200

300

T-28

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

FIG. 1

limits were used, the population size necessary to produce equal reliability would approximate 160 genes, or 80 persons.
The environment represented by this sample of aboriginal tribes is relatively unvarying, a point of some importance in Sewall Wright's (1964) discussion of the theory of shifting balance. While a few of the northern tribes in the sample live in a coastal and monsoonal regime with as

much as forty inches of rainfall annually, most of our tribal series were more impoverished. Twenty-three of the 28 tribes were inland in their location, thus lacking all marine resources. In 16 of the central and southerly tribes, mean annual rainfall averaged less than IS inches and fell below 10 inches in 11 of them. Thus, the majority of these tribes lived in a uniform desert environment. This is reflected in the floristic

146

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

regime in which all of the 16 desert tribes consisted basically of spinifex, or as it is better known, porcupine grass. In the southern margins this was relieved with patches of mulga scrub, while in the northern tribe there was some scrub acacia. The ecological monotony of these interior tribes is stressed here, for below it will be shown that their genetic variation is great.
A METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE
ANALYSIS OF CLINES
Students of microevolution agree that clines hold some of the secrets which may lead to the evaluation of processes. Clines are sloping surfaces, usually characterized by some irregularities, which define the frequency of spatially varying genes or phenotypes. The cline itself is usually sufficiently complex to defy ordinary mathematical attempts of analysis. However, transects through such two-dimensional surfaces are simpler to handle. Early empirical attempts included the finding of Alpatof (1929) that in honeybees the length of the tongue changed in so regular a gradient from north to south in Europe that the relationship could be mathematically expressed in an equation. Salomonson (1933) quantified Bergmann's rule through finding that regular increases in wing length correlated with degrees north latitude for three polytypic species of birds in western Europe. The equational constant differed with each species.
The new breed of evolutionists showed a mounting interest in characters which varied continuously in space. R. A. Fisher (1937) mathematically defined the form of the wave of advance of an advantageous gene in linear space. Julian Huxley (1939) wrote the definitive article on spatially graded characters and proposed the title of cline for the phenomena. Huxley summa-

rized the clines reported in the literature and showed their frequent occurrence. He was primarily concerned with using clines as an auxiliary method in taxonomy and did not stress that they might hold the key to unlock some of the secrets of evolutionary processes. Haldane (1948), using data on the Floridian deer-mouse (Peromyscus) showed that the coefficient of selection required to maintain the stationary cline separating the lighter beach form from the darker inland race could be calculated, yielding the very low value of about 0.1%. Fisher once more (1950) returned to the problem of clines, mathematically investigating the special case in which a gene enjoys a selective advantage in one portion of the species range, while it is at a disadvantage in the remainder of its range. These early investigations were all limited to the examination of the properties of transects through a clinal surface. A clinal transect provides only a fraction of the information contained in the full regional display of a continuously varying character. Holgate (1964) extended Wahlund's formula to a cline maintained by the random diffusion of a simply advantageous gene. The method allowed the calculation of overall genotype frequencies, the selection and diffusion constants, and rates of change of gene frequencies at the boundaries of the section being considered. Perhaps because of the limiting assumptions involved, this method does not seem to have been applied to natural populations. Crow and Kimura (1970), in An Introduction to Population Genetic Theory, do not consider the problem of the cline, possibly because of the complexities it would introduce into mathematical genetics.
One method for a quantitative analysis of a cline in two-dimensional space can be illustrated by the use of the simple model shown in Figure 2. The data are in the

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

2O *2O *2O *20* +20
25* *25 ·25* +25' ·25
30* »30* *30* +30* -»30 35< >35* ·: 40* *40* -»40* *40* *40
CLINE

20* +20* -»35 ·35* »40
25<
RANDOM

20 T7
15-
O
§ 10-J
er

20-
N=40 Mean= 2.50 S.D.=2.55

N=40 Mean=8.25 S.D.=5.93

Dyadic Differences

15 20
Dyadic Differences
FIG. 2

cjc

form of adjacent genetic isolates and are presented in the geometry of a 5 X S matrix. Since the data utilized are in terms of genetic isolates, the data are transformed from geographical space into genetic space (Birdsell, 1950). On the left-hand side of the figure, genetic data range from 0.20 to 0.40 by 0.05 intervals and have been arranged to represent a simple sloping surface of uniform gradient in one direction.
An appropriate method for analyzing this

surface is to take the paired differences between all adjacent isolates in all interface of contacts. In this particular model, these dyadic differences number 40, of which the 20 transverse ones show no difference, while an equal number of vertical dyads show a difference of 0.05. The resulting polygon shows a very limited range. I t allows the calculation of the mean and the standard deviation of the dyadic differences which in this case are both low

148

ßirdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

in value. The mean of the cumulative dyadic differences expresses the degree of overall slope of the clinal surface. The standard deviation reflects numerically the irregularity of the surface.
On the right-hand side of Figure 2 is a model in which the same data have been placed at random in the 25 cells representing the genetic isolates. If clinal contours were drawn for these values they would result in a visual hodgepodge. When the dyadic differences are again summarized, they deviate markedly from those of the first model. Now the frequency polygon is spread out to cover the full extent of the range of the data. The mean value of the differences has risen from 2.50 to 8.25, a more than threefold increase. At the same time the standard deviation has risen from 2.55 to 5.93. Granting that this is only one random arrangement out of a great many possible ones, these same tendencies would be expected where the data are essentially random in their distribution.
Models are much simpler than real nature, and the actual geometry of the 28 Australian tribal isolates shown in Figure 1 emphasizes the point. There, tribal samples are indicated by the prefix T and arranged from 1 to 28. Pooled samples, representing individuals from a number of tribes and thus heterogeneous in nature, range on this map from P-l through P3. They are not used in the following analysis, but their data lend security to the projection of the isogenes displayed outside of the area covered by the individual isolates. Visually, these 28 tribes cover an impressive regional area in Australia; but in fact they constitute only between 4 and 5% of the total number of breeding isolates originally upon the continent.
The first model illustrated a method of analysis which is quite feasible but somewhat unwieldy, even for the computer, in that each random arrangement would re-

quire the separate calculation of such statistical constants as the mean of the cumulative dyadic differences and their standard deviation. The ingenuity of Dr. Samuel B. Brooks, who programmed the problem for the computer, devised the necessary changes. The problem was visualized as one in which an operational scale is established for each genetic variant. At one polar end, the scale is limited by the ideal cline for the data which produces the most uniformly sloping clinal surface, as judged by the minimum value of the cumulative dyadic differences. The other polar end of the scale is fixed by that random combination of the data which produces the greatest irregularity in the clinal surface as shown by its maximum value for the cumulative dyadic differences. With this numerical scale defined, it is then possible to take the cumulative dyadic differences for the real cline in nature and place it in its proper position upon its own scale.
The random end of the scale is the more easily fixed. The real data for a given genetic variant are assigned to the specific tribal isolates survey by a random numbers technique. This exercise is replicated a thousand times with the sum of the cumulative dyadic differences between adjacent isolates calculated in each instance. Even with this considerable number of replications, the frequency polygon never exactly represents the normal distribution. Therefore, from the values provided by the computer, the mean cumulative sum of the dyadic differences, and ± 3 times its standard deviation, it is possible to construct a normal probability curve defining the full set of expectations which random combinations of the data should yield. As a reasonable convention, a point three standard deviations greater than the mean of the distribution is taken to define the absolute random pole of the scale. The mean minus

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

149

three standard deviations is used to indicate the lowest cumulative sum of dyadic differences that random distributions of the data would yield. The effect can be seen in Figure 3.

27 values in such a wayaround this arbitrarily chosen peak that theclinal slopes as expressed through the dyadic differences will constitute a cumulative minimum. This solution provides the smoothest and

Mean= 6.1764-

140

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

R2(T-IIPeak)

-120 2
o¡5
_l
Hoo Sj
ir

-80

Mean -60 ooo

+3SD"

Best Cline 1.434

Actual Cline 4.462

7.975 -40
o

Lü

-20

o
LU

-M3 SeaDin--i r
4.37J8jLÜLJ

ce

1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0

CUMULATIVE SUM OF DYADIC DIFFERENCES Fio. 3

The next step in the analysis involves the identification of the ideal cline into which the real data could be arranged in the geometry of this series of tribal populations. Since the possible permutations represent a very large number, this exercise has been kept close to the evolutionary reality by assigning a fixed peak value in the computer simulation to the same tribal cell in which it occurs in nature. Thereafter, the computer exercise is to arrange the other

hence the most perfect cline, in that secondary peaks and troughs will be eliminated in the computer construct. An ideal cline constructed in this fashion is always considerably more perfect than any aptto be found in nature, andthis has some effect upon theuse of the scale.
The search for the ideal cline could have been programmed in a linear fashion, but at considerable expense in time in perfecting the program. Instead, it was decided to use

150

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

a random walk search type of program which had been used by Dr. Brooks for other optimal goal-seeking problems. In essence, with the highest frequency fixed at the real natural peak, the remaining 27 values were assigned at random to the other cells. Thereupon, adjacent pairs of values were exchanged at random, and the results in terms of the cumulative dyadic means calculated. If the value was reduced, that pair remained temporarily fixed. If the value was increased, showing a heightening of the clinial irregularity, the trial was rejected. The pair interchange went on a random rotating basis covering the whole configuration of the data until terminated after 300,000 trials. Long before this number was reached, no further improvement in the cline emerged, so that the value of the best cline and the configuration of the data which produced it were both fixed and recorded. It is this optimal cline with the actual data which determined the righthand pole of the scale as shown in Figure 3. Since the highest random end of the scale included 99.75% of the theoretically possible random universe, the scale for all intents and purposes exhausts the possibilities in a given set of data.
The actual position of the cline for the rhesus chromosome R2 is shown in Figure 3. It falls on the lowest side of the random probability distribution, and it can be calculated that there are two chances in 1,000 of the distribution found in nature being random in origin. This is a very low likelihood; thus it must be concluded that the real cline is actually selectively structured, since here gene flow could not have produced it.
ANALYSIS OF THE CHROMOSOMAL VARIANTS AT THE RHESUS LOCUS
In this Australian data, five chromosomal variants at the Rh locus were identified. Of these Dn involved but 11 individuals out

of the series of 1,678 and is not considered here, being included in the frequencies for R1. By this convention, the data yield four chromosomal arrangements, R1, R2, R° and Rz. This of course gives three degrees of freedom. In Figure 4 all four clines are displayed together for visual purposes. In each case it will be noted that the major features reveal a rather systematic cline, but that the uniformity of the surface in every case is interrupted by peaks and sinks of greater or lesser magnitude. In no sense do the data create a chaotic or mosaic impression, so that it may be tentatively concluded that in all four of these genetic variants the distribution is primarily structured by selection, with some random components present. This preliminary impression is concordant with the expectations of the shifting balance theory of Sewall Wright.
With the three degrees of freedom resulting from the data, the R1 chromosome has been considered to be the residual category. In part this decision arises from the fact that it is the most frequent chromosome in the data, with values running from 0.40 to 0.84; thus it is numerically proponderant. At the same time it shows rather less interesting clinal features than the other three chromosomes and so its discussion will be put off until later.
The R2 (cDE) cline is given in Figure 5 and shows a systematic major clinal structure in which the highest values are marginal to the south and west where peaks in the range of 0.S0 to 0.54 are reached. Then the surface generally slopes to the north and east in our 28 tribal isolates. These peak values are worth a comment for they reach a maximum found nowhere else in the world but among the coastal Indians of British Columbia. Since no one would claim a close relationship by descent between Western Australian aborigines and the British Columbian natives, the parallel

Vol. 19, No. 2
CENE FREQ\lE*iC>tS

Evolution of Human Races

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

FIG. 4

frequencies stand in direct evidence against
any contention of similar gene frequencies
indicating relationship. The analytical constants for the R2 chro-

mosome are given in the top row of Table 1, and it will be noted that its relative position has a value of 53.7%. This value means that taking the distance defined by the two

152
GENE FREQUENCIES .05-09 .10 - .14 .15 -.19 .20-.24 .25 -.29 .30 -.34

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

FIG. S

Vol. 19, No.2

Evolution of Human Races

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

4.462 6.54 2.359 2.727 2.80 4.682

1.434 1.292 1.391 1.423

I!
(A PL,

CÏ (^ o
V5 1O

«I CN O

CQ G

7.975 4.020 4.194 7.949

4.378 1.965 1.812 4.503

..799 .027 .191 ,723

±0.600 ±0.342 ±0.397 ±0.574

Xq
+1 +1 + 1
8

·aO 4) O)

d. a.

OI OH

poles of this scale--in this case the most random configuration three standard deviations higher than the mean, 7.949, and the other end of the scale where the best cline is 1.42--the position of the actual cline, with a cumulative dyadic difference of 4.682, is 53.7% of the scale away from the worst random pole and toward the best cline. At first thought, this would not seem to be a very satisfactory value since the computer has been able to take the actual gene frequencies for the 28 isolates and arrange them in a considerably better pattern, thus minimizing the average genetic slope between the adjacent isolates. However, returning to Figure S it will be noted that thereal distribution shows some rather abrupt genetic escarpments. Both of the peak values to the south and west rapidly pass through four or more isogenes, revealing very steep clinal surfaces and, of course, great dyadic differences in gene frequencies. At thesame time, the northerly portion of the cline is chopped up with no less than three sinks or depressions in which the value of the chromosome falls below 0.09. Thesinks to the north and the higher values to thesouth are separated by a band of intermediate value in which the changing slopes are nonetheless moderately steep. I t is apparent that, even though the real data presents a very visible cline, the position taken on thebipolar scale hasbeen considerably degraded, that is, pushed toward therandom end of thescale. I t may be concluded that the scale is very sensitive toward the end represented by the ideal cline and very few real surfaces will approach closely to the computerized optimum rearrangement of their values.
The chromosome R° (cDe) is the next to the rarest genetic variant at this locus in Australia. Its values range from zero to 0.30 in terms of tribal isolates in this series. No particular configuration of its clinal surface was visualized during field-

154

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

work so that the plotting of the actual values produced a surprise, yielding the most regular cline of any among the five serological loci. The configuration is shown in Figure 6. Note the rather unusual arrangement of the group intervals, designed to show the three tribal isolates in which the frequency was zero.
The clinal topography of R° is characterized by a crest of peak values arising out of a rather extensive plateau. The highest values occur in three adjacent tribes, increasing in value from west to east. This area of high frequencies is bounded by a steep genetic escarpment, involving no less than four isogenes, to the south and east of the peak. This drop amounts to two-thirds of the total range and, of course, is dramatic when related to these numerical values. There are no other special features in this clinal topography whose surfaces otherwise are generally uniform and concentric about the peak.
In quantitative terms R° has a relative scale position of 60.9% which reflects the uniformities of the clinal surface. Nevertheless, its position does fall within the possible random universe, and the probability of it having occurred by chance is 34 in 1,000. It becomes evident that the scalar position of the cline does not relate directly to its position relative to the random probability distribution. Here again the scale penalizes this genetic variant which represents a dynamic microevolutionary thrust, rather than an old static stabilized selective surface. Had selective forces remained constant over a long period of time, the central peak of value should be surrounded in all directions by a uniformly sloping concentric gradient. The ideal cline generated by the computer is of this type. Therefore, the genetic escarpment dropping off from the peak penalizes the scale position of R° since it involves dyadic differences of considerable magnitude.

If we interpret the R° cline in terms of Sewall Wright's theory of shifting balance, then the high central peak should correspond to the isolate in which some stochastic disturbance, possibly set off by a population bottleneck, changed the contents of the isolate gene pool. After this trigger effect, Wright's construct calls for competition within the tribe, that is, at an intrademic level. In Dobzhansky's terms, this would involve genetic coadaptation within the originating tribe. Thereafter, the situation shifts to interdemic competition according to Wright, and the favorable combinations of genes previously evolved now spread to adjacent isolates.
The reality in the Australian isolates does not altogether fit such an explanation. The steep escarpment to the east and south of the peak represents no features in the real topography of the region and thus cannot result from physical isolation. The suggestion that it might result from social inhibitors finds no support in the other genetic variants either at this or other loci. Wright seems to have conceived of his third phase of interdemic competition in terms of more fit people actually replacing less fit ones. His spread seems to involve physical migration, or at the very least gene flow. This is difficult to accept in the present situation, for all of the other genetic variants which should reflect such movements do not. The R° peak stands alone on its own. This fact suggests that Sewall Wright's model may not yet be complex enough, and that we are not yet ready to handle various indeterminate aspects of genetic coadaptation.
The chromosomal arrangement Rz (CDE) is relatively rare in all human populations. In aboriginal Australia its frequencies seem a little higher than elsewhere and generally range from 0.02 to 0.04. Its distribution is shown in Figure 7. The general appearance of the cline is choppy

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

FIG. 6

155

156

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

with three isolated peaks, each limited to a single tribal isolate, rising out of the generally undulating surface of low values which shows no consistent slope.
The three peaks which dominate this clinal topography are well separated in space. The central one, representing the Mandjildjara tribe shows a chromosome frequency of 0.18. To the west stand the Indjibandi in which Rz reaches the unprecedented value of 0.20. To the east lie the Ngardi in whose gene pool Rz reaches 0.24. All three of these tribal peak values greatly exceed previously recorded world frequencies. They naturally are surrounded by very steep escarpments which involve four isogenes in both the Indjibandi and the Ngardi cases. These steep genetic cliffs cover 80% of the chromosomal frequency here recorded. If this surface was modeled in three dimensions these peaks would stand out like great mesas. With regard to the errors of ascertainment in sampling it is worth noting that the individual members of all three of these tribes early established the final value which oscillated very little as the tribal samples increased. Sample size ranged from 35 to 58 persons in these three instances (i.e., 70 to 116 genes).
The positions of these three Rz peaks are best illustrated in the frequency polygon displayed in the upper portion of Figure 8. The range throughout Eurasia for this chromosome varies from zero to 0.10. The Australian range vastly exceeds this, spreading from zero to 0.24. In the lower portion of figure, frequency polygons are given for the dyadic differences for this chromosome between adjacent Australian isolates. The freestanding clusters of eight high dyadic values relate to the three peaks and their neighbors. Not shown is the interesting fact that separated by a narrow strip of land from the Ngardi, with their world's record value of 0.24, are the Wandjira among whom the 35 individuals

sampled had a frequency of zero. Thus, the world's extremes for this rare chromosome occur in nearby tribes who actually do exchange women.
Insofar as gene flow would be expected to swamp these peaks and degrade them toward the values of their low-frequency neighbors, their sharp escarpments suggest that they are of relatively recent origin. They surely arose as a result of genetic bottlenecks resulting from drastic population reductions in numbers in the three affected tribes. Falling as they do in approximately the same rainfall regimes and below the fringe of reliable monsoonal weather, it is tempting to speculate that a single severe and prolonged drought may have been the actuating factor. The fact that other tribal isolates in this geographical situation do not show peaks for this same chromosome is of course expected, since drift operates in indeterminate directions.
The quantitative analysis of the Rz cline, shown in Table 1, reveals a few interesting points. The relative position of this chromosome upon its own polar scale is 52.3% away from the random pole and has 242 chances in 1,000 of being a chance arrangement. This is very little below the value for R2, and as will be seen, higher than for R1. How much the relative scale position is affected by the numerical magnitude of the frequencies, the number of group intervals used, and the type of geometry of the distribution is not yet certain. Generalized models of these variables will be analyzed on the computer in the near future. The moderate scale value for this chromosome, in spite of its three dramatic peaks, may result from the fact that the rest of the distribution is relatively uniform with variation counting for no more than 40% of the total value recorded. Thus, for most dyadic comparisons, their differences are small. This general uniformity is apparently

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

Fie. 7

157

158
EURASIATIC rRANGE

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

GENE Rz FREQUENCIES BY ISOLATES

N = 28 Range > .00-.26 Mean < .065
S.D. · .061 1 V ; 93.5i

,10 .20 .30 .40 .50 .60 .70 .80 .90 1.00
Rz Gene Frequency

18 18 17- 17

16

DIFFERENCES IN Rz GENE FREQUENCIES

16

15- 15

14-

BETWEEN ADJACENT ISOLATES

14

13- 13

12 12

11 11

10- -10

9-

N -. 49

-9

8"

Ronge = .00-.22

-8

7-

Mean ' .057

-7

6-

S.D. · .056

-6

5-

V = 98.25

-5

44

3- -3

2- ·2

J1-
0

-1 0

.00 .10 .20 .30 .40 .50 .60 .70 .80 .90 1.00

Rz Gene Frequency Differences

FIG. 8

enough to offset the disturbing effects and the dramatic differences surrounding the peaks. Another contributing factor in the tribal distribution involves the fact that all three peaks are isolated in marginal positions relative to the general geometry. This factor reduces the number of dyadic comparisons that they could influence. Had

they been embedded in a more central
tribal geometry it is safe to predict that the relative scale value of Rz would be
considerably lowered.
The fourth chromosomal arrangement, R1 (CDe) shows the highest frequency and
the next to the largest total range of fre-
quencies. Because it has been excluded

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

from the three degrees of freedom, it is dealt with last. The cline shown in Figure 9 is clearly under selective control with a tendency for the lowest values to occur in the south and west, while the highest ones are concentrated in the north and east. It is complementary in a general way to the R2 cline. However, the surface of the R1 cline contains many irregularities, including a sink defined by two tribal isolates in the center of its distribution surrounded on three sides by a rising escarpment three isogenes in height. Immediately adjacent to the east is a minor, single tribe peak. In a variety of other locations, the compressed nature of the isogene indicates relatively steep sloping surfaces for the clinal topography. These features serve to explain the statistical consequence of the quantitative analysis of this chromosome. Its relative scale value is the lowest of the four genetic variants at this locus, 50.1%. On the other hand, the cumulative sum of the dyadic differences of the cline lie at the outside edge of the random distribution, so that there are only four chances in 1,000 that the real arrangement is of chance structuring. Were it not for the degrees of freedom involved, the cline for R1 would be visually satisfactory in an overall sense, and interesting in its details.
Errors in ascertainment have not been important in producing those clines. In the first place, these small, unique, and finite populations are represented in the Bayes method by considerably tightened confidence limits. Again, many of the topographic features show serial concordance. There tend to be neighborhood effects in the terms of Cain and Currey (1963). This is most evident in the cline for R°; but in R2 the northerly tribes are all depressed in value, and the sinks within this region in one instance are multitribal in makeup. In the same fashion, in R1 the high values for the chromosomal frequency in the north

cover a good many tribes. The central sink involves no less than three tribes. These internal features suggest that while errors of ascertainment of true chromosomal frequencies are present, they are relatively unimportant.
SUMMARY
Data for the four chromosomal arrangements for the rhesus locus for 28 minimal tribal isolates in Western Australia reveal clinal topographies.
A quantitative method for the analysis of such clines is given, with the cline in nature positioned on a scale operationally defined by the most random arrangement of the data at one end and the most ideal cline derived from the data at the other. The relative scalar positions range from 50.1% for R1 to 60.9% for R°. It is explained why actual natural clines will never closely approximate the ideal cline, which presumes long established and static natural selection.
The four clines differ in character but in common show that selection is the primary structuring force, that random genetic drift operates, particularly in the chromosomes of lower frequency, and that together these processes override gene flow which in these populations approximates 0.075 persons exchanged per generation. In these populations evolution is predominantly Darwinian.
While the clines for R1 and R2 are primarily structured by selection, their general characteristics are complementary to each other. In two areas, R2 exceeds values of 0.50 which approximates the world's maximum recorded frequency.
The cline for R° shows a central elongated peak rising out of a plateau of heightened frequencies. It appears to be the coadaptíve spread of a gene complex caught in action, that is, an example of Sewall Wright's interdemic competition. Neither

160
El
GENE FREQUENCIES 40-44 45 _ 50 -.54 55 -.59 .60-64 .65 -.69 .70-74 75 -.79 SO -.84

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

FIG. 9

Vol. 19, No. 2

Evolution of Human Races

161

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

topographic features nor cultural behavior explain the steep genetic escarpment to the east of the peak, suggesting a need for more complex evolutionary models.
The cline for Rz shows three isolated, single tribal peaks, each of which exceeds the frequencies previously recorded for this rare chromosome. This pattern is attributed to random genetic drift, presumably operating through its founder-effect bottleneck, in so recent a period in the past that gene flow has had little time in which to depress the high values of this chromosomal arrangement.
These Australian aboriginal populations are ideally structured to further test the shifting balance theory of evolution originated by Sewall Wright. At the rhesus locus, as well as for other serological loci, the visible features offer additional validation for the essential operation of evolution as described in Wright's construct, even in areas of environmental uniformity.
CONCLUSIONS

revision. At the present time it seems clear that no such revision is possible, for the very processes of race formation contain indeterminacies as well as strong selective thrusts. Neither of these are taken into account by any present method of analysis, even the most modern, nor is it likely that they can be. Instead, it seems fair to propose that since microevolution is here revealed as proceeding at very rapid rates, producing extremes in the fluctuations of genetically simple characters, these manifestations should be used to study evolution itself, and the relatively sterile exercise of classifying subspecies should give way to that goal. After all, the classifications by eye two centuries ago have been little improved today by the use of sophisticated serology, multiple quantitative measurements, and the speed of the uncomplaining computer. If major races can be convincingly identified by the uneducated eyes of travelers and explorers, and further subdivisions do not yield to say scientific method, the practice seems pointless.

This paper began as a discussion of methods of analysis of race and some of the problems such ventures pose. More than twenty years ago this writer stated (1951) that the methods of racial analysis then used were bankrupt and needed drastic

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support for this project by the National Science Foundation, the WennerGren Foundation for Anthropological Research, the Fulbright Exchange Program, and the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

ALPATOV, W. W. 1929. Biometrical studies on variation and races of the honey bee (Apis mellifica). Quart. Rev. Biol. 41:1-58.
AMMON, OTTO. 1890, Anthropologische Untersuchungen der Wehrpflichtigen in Baden. Samml. gemeinverst. wiss. Vortrage, near Folge, Ser. V, Heft 707, p. 1-36.
BIRDSELL, JOSEPH B. 1950. Some implications of the genetical concept of race in terms of spatial analysis, p. 259-314. In Origins and evolution of man, Cold Spring Harbor symposium on quantitative biology, Vol. 15. Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, New York.
. 1951.The problem of the early peopling of the Americas as viewed from Asia, p. 1-68a. In Papers on the physical anthropology of the American Indian. The Viking Fund, New York.
. 1953. Some environmental and cultural

factors influencing the structuring of Australian aboriginal populations. Amer. Natur. 87:171207.
. 1957. Some population problems involving Pleistocene man, p. 47-69. In Population Studies, Animal Ecology, and Demography, Cold Spring Harbor symposium on quantitative biology, Vol. 22. Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, New York.
. 1968.Some predictions for the Pleistocene based upon equilibrium systems among recent hunters, p. 229-240. In R. Lee and I. DeVore, Man the hunter. Aldine, Chicago.
. A basic demographic unit. Current Anthropology, in press.
BIRDSELL, JOSEPH B., and SAMUEL B. BROOKS.
On the occurrence of unique, finite, small populations in nature. Ms.
BLUMENBACH, JOHANN FRIEDRICH. 1795. De Ge-

162

Birdsell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

naris humani Varietate nativa. (Translation of third, revised edition by Thomas Bendysshe.)
BROOKS, SAMUEL B., and JOSEPH B. BIRDSELL.
A comparison of methods for estimating confidence limits in gene populations. Ms. BUFFON, COMTE DE (George Louis Leckre). 1860.

Racen der Menschen. Zur Ankündigung der Vor lesungen der physischen Giographie in Sommer lohre jahre 1775.
LIVINGSTONE, FRANK B. 1962. On the nonexistence
of human races (with comment by Theodosius Dobzhansky). Curr. Anthrop. 3:279-281.

A natural history. (Translated by William Smallie. First editions began to appear in 1749.)
CAIN, A. J., and J. D. CURREY. 1963. Area effects in Copaea. Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. London (Series B) 246:1-81.

MACGOWAN, KENNETH, and JOSEPH A. HESTER,
JR. 1950.Early man in the New World. Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y.
MAYR, ERNST. 1965. Numerical phenetics and taxonomic theory. System. Zool. 14:73-97.

COON, CARLETON S., STANLEY GARN, and JOSEPH
B. BIRDSEIX. 19S0. Races. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Ill.
CROW, JAMES F., and MOTOO KIMURA. 1970. An
introduction to population genetics theory. Harper and Row, New York. Dixon, ROLAND B. 1923. The racial history of man. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York.
DOBZHANSKY, T., and O. PAVLOVSKY. 1957. An
experimental study of interaction between genetic drift andnatural selection. Evolution 11: 311-319.

RETZIUS, ANDERS. 1860. A glance at the present state of ethnology, with reference to the form of the skull. From translation in theBritish and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review 25:503514; 26:215-229.
RIPLEY, William Z. 1899. Theraces of Europe. D. Appleton-Century, New York.
SALOMONSEN, F. 1933. Troglodytes-Studien. J. Ornithol. 81:100.
SOKAL, R. R., and P. H. A. SNEATH. 1963. The
principles of numerical taxonomy. Freeman, San Francisco.

DOBZHANSKY, T., and B. SPASSKY. 1962. Genetic TAYLOR, T. GRIFFITH. 1937. Environment, race

drift and natural selection in experimental pop- and migration. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

ulations of Drosaphila pseudoubscura. Proc. TINDALE, NORMAN B. 1940. Distribution of Aus-

Nat. Acad. Sci. 48:148-156.

tralian aboriginal tribes: A field survey. Trans.

FISHER, R. A. 1937. The wave of advance of ad- Roy. Soc. South Australia 64:140-231.

vantageous genes. Ann. Eugen. 7:355.

. 1941. Survey of the half-caste problem in

. 1950. Gene frequencies in a cline deter- South Australia. Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. South

mined by selection and diffusion. Biometrics Australia 42:66-161.

6:353-361.

. 1953.Tribal and intertribal marriage

GLADWIN, HAROLD STERLING. 1947. Men out of
Asia. McGraw-Hill, New York.

among the Australian aborigines. Hum. Biol. 25:169-96.

HALDANE, J. B. S. 1948. The theory of a cline. J. Genet. 48:277-284.
HOLGATE, P. 1964.Genotype frequencies in a section of a cline. Heredity 19:507-509.
HOOTON, ERNEST A. 1930.The Indians of Pecos Pueblo. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.
HUXLEY, JULIAN S. 1939. Clines: An auxiliary method in taxonomy. Bijdr. Dierk. 27:491-520. . 1943. Evolution. The modern synthesis. Harper and Brothers, London.
HUXLEY, THOMAS. 1865. On the methods and
results of ethnology. Fortnightly Review [in "Lectures and LaySermons"].

Woo, T. L., and G. M. MORANT. 1932. A preliminary classification of Asiatic races based on cranial measurements. Biometrika 24:108-134.
WRIGHT, SEWAIX. 1931.Evolution in Mendelian populations. Genetics 16:97-159.
. 1959. Physiological genetics, ecology of populations and natural selection, p. 429-475. In J. Tax (ed.), Evolution after Darwin. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
. 1964. Stochastic models in evolution, p. 199-244. In John Garland (ed.), Stochastic models in medicine andbiology. Univ. ofWisconsin Press, Madison.

KANT, IMMANUEL. 1775. Von den verschiedenen

