Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
A model of fertility motivation, desires, and expectations early in women's reproductive careers
Warren B. Miller & David J. Pasta
To cite this article: Warren B. Miller & David J. Pasta (1988) A model of fertility motivation, desires, and expectations early in women's reproductive careers, Social Biology, 35:3-4, 236-250, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988704 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988704
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 5
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

A Model of Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations Early in Women's Reproductive Careers

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Warren B. Miller and David J. Pasta
Transnational Family Research Institute, Palo Alto, California; and DMA Corporation, Palo Alto, California

ABSTRACT: We propose a general model of the relationships connecting fertility motivations, desires, and expectations in which motivations are antecedent to desires, which in turn are antecedent to expectations. We describe differences in the model as it applies to women early in their reproductive careers, specifically, after marriage but before their first birth and after their first birth but before their second. We test the model with data from 311 just-married and 318 just-mothered women, using LISREL to estimate structural equations for both groups. The general model fits the data well. There are three primary differences in the model with respect to the two groups of married women. How soon a woman expects her next child affects how many children she expects only among the just-married woman. The number of children expected by the woman is the only antecedent to how soon she expects her next child among the just-mothered women. Both positive and negative maternal motivation has effects among the just-married women, but only negative maternal motivation has effects among the just-mothered women. These and other differences are discussed in terms of psychological and situational developments occurring early in women's reproductive careers.

In two recent reports, Miller described the results of research that dealt with fertility behavior and its antecedents (Miller, 1986a, b). These reports focused on two specific types of behavior: (1) regularity of contraception and (2) proception (i.e., attempting to achieve conception). They demonstrated that each of these two types of behavior was an important, separate determinant of the occurrence of conception. The reports also demonstrated that expectations about future childbearing, both about the total number of children and about the timing of the next child, were major antecedents to both contraceptive nonuse and proceptive behavior. Taken together, these reports describe two major causal pathways along which childbearing expectations affect

fertility. In the current report, we will extend these causal pathways further back in time by exploring a model of the relationships connecting fertility motivations, fertility desires, and both child number and child timing expectations. In order to understand how these pathways are structured in the early stagesof reproductive careers, we will examine data from two groups of women: justmarried women with no children and married women who have just borne their first child.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
MODEL RATIONALE
There have been a number of approaches to modeling the relationship between fertility attitudes or motiva-

236

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35,No. 3-4 Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

237

tions and fertility itself (Adler, 1979; Miller, 1981). The more successful of these approaches have included individual intentions or expectations as intermediates between attitudes/motivations and fertility (Davidson and Jaccard, 1976; Beach et al., 1982; Beckman et al., 1983). In the research reported here, we have followed the lead of these previous approaches by utilizing both attitudes/motivations and intentions/expectations in our model. We have also incorporated a third psychological construct, namely fertility desires. A brief description of all three constructs will help to clarify the differences among them.
Attitude and motivation are trait concepts, while desire, intention, and expectation are state concepts. Attitudes and motivations refer to the disposition people have to think and feel in certain ways. In the research reported here, we are concerned primarily with motivations. They are conceptualized as traits that provide the push to action. When actualized from their latent (dispositional) form, they manifest themselves as more or less conscious desires. Desire is a state concept because it describes a person's state of mind or what he/she wants at a particular point in time. Desires may or may not lead to intentions and expectations, depending upon other intrapsychic and situational influences. For example, you may desire a(nother) child but not intend to have one because you believe you are too old or unable to afford it. Intentions and expectations are also state concepts, de-

scribing either the behavior that a person intends or expects to pursue in the future or the goals that he/she intends or expects to achieve. Although it is possible to make distinctions between behavioral intentions and expectations, the evidence from fertility survey research suggests that they function very similarly (Ryder and Westoff, 1971). Only expectations are utilized in this report because the interview questions that generated the data were framed exclusively in those terms. However, virtually everything said about expectations can be assumed to apply as well to intentions.
These relationships among motivations, desires, and expectations are illustrated schematically in Figure 1. As it stands, this model is largely self-evident and of limited value. However, it provides the basis for developing a more complex and interesting model through extension and refinement of the concepts. To begin the refinement, fertility motivations may be divided according to whether they are positive or negative. Positive motivations provide the individual with a push toward having children, while negative motivations provide a push in the opposite direction. Fertility motivations may also be divided according to whether the motivation is general or specific. A general motivational trait is similar to the "G" or general factor of intelligence, also known as IQ. Just as IQ represents an individual's overall mental ability as distinct from a variety of specific mental skills in different functional areas, so too

Fertility

Fertility

Fertility

Motivations

Desires

Expectations

FIG. 1.--A schematic illustration of the relationship between fertility motivations, desires, and expectations.

238

Miller and Pasta

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

a "G" or general fertility motivation represents an individual's overall push toward or away from having children. In this report we utilize two general motivational traits, which we call Positive and Negative Maternal Motivation. As might be expected, they have a moderate negative correlation. We will leave for subsequent reports an examination of the contribution of specific childbearing motivations to our general model.
Fertility desires may be divided into the individual's own desires and the perceived desires of his or her spouse. We postulate in our model that the individual's own desires are determined to a large degree by his or her own motivations. These motivations, however, have also been shown to affect the individual's perceptions of his or her spouse's desires through the process of projection (Miller, 1981). For this reason, and because both homogamy (like marrying like) and mutual influence during the course of marriage tend to produce similar desires within couples, fertility desires and perceived fertility desires of the spouse tend to be positively correlated with each other. In spite of this fact, we expect each to have a separate effect on an individual's fertility expectations. In other words, the number of children expected by an individual is a function of both the number of children desired by the individual and the number he or she perceives the spouse as desiring. If a woman wants three children and her husband wants only one, she is more likely to expect two than three.
Fertility expectations and the fertility desires that partially determine them may usefully be divided into several categories, including those concerned with the number, timing, and gender of children. In this report we do not consider

gender expectations because of limitations in the data set that we utilize and because we are concerned with individuals early in their reproductive careers for whom child gender generally has not yet become a major issue. We do consider both number and timing expectations which, as we have already suggested, are partially determined by the corresponding desires and perceived spouse desires. In addition, each expectation may affect the other. For example, on an intuitive basis and on the basis of earlier research by Bumpass and Westoff (1970), it seems likely that the number of children expected would affect how soon the next child is expected, with the expectation of more children leading an individual to expect the next one sooner. It is also possible that the reverse is true, namely that how soon the next child is expected affects how many are expected. However, even though it is plausible that, for example, women who expect their next child sooner might expect more children than those who expect their next child later, the limited evidence that has been reported to date does not support the existence of such a causal effect (Miller, 1981). In any case, we leave that question open for empirical examination.
One final element that should be added to our elaboration of the model shown in Figure 1 is age, which has effects on several components of our model. Miller (1981) observed that greater age is correlated with lower positive motivation and higher negative motivation for childbearing in a sample of women aged 18to 27. He also found that greater age was associated with the expectation of fewer additional children and the expectation that the next child will arrive sooner.
Figure 2 is a schematic illustration of

Vol. 35, No.

Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

239

Perceived Spouse Child Number , Desires
Child Number Desires --
' Perceived Spouse " Child Timing -
Desires

N . x child Number
* Expectations
IJ
Child Timing
Expectations

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

FIG. 2.--A schematic illustration of the elaborated fertility motivation-desire expectation model.

the fertility motivation-desire-expectation model as we have outlined it thus far. The figure accurately represents our general model but does not take into account differences that may be expected to occur as individuals move through their reproductive careers. In this report we are interested not only in testing the general model but also in detecting the existence of differences between married women who have no children and women who have one child. There are reasons to postulate significant differences between these two groups of women at each of the three steps of the motivation-desire-expectation sequence. Consider first the expectation step. For the recently married, childless woman, timing the start of her reproductive career is a major concern. How much time should she give the marriage before a child is introduced into the picture? How soon can a child be afforded? Should she delay childbearing for the sake of her career? Answers to these and other questions will determine how

soon she expects her first child, which in turn may well affect the number of children she expects. On the other hand, once she has had her first child, a woman's expectations about the timing of the next child may no longer have much effect on her number expectations because the question of when she should launch her reproductive career has already been settled.
Consider next the desire step in our model. A report by Udry (1982) explores whether early reproductive career differences exist with respect to fertility desires. He concludes that normative pressures for and against childbearing have their strongest effects at zero parity. If this is true, then perceived spouse desires should have a greater impact for married women who have not yet begun childbearing than for women who have already had theirfirst child.
Consider finally the motivation step in our model. There is evidence for the existence of early reproductive career

240

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

differences in fertility motivation. Fawcett (1978), citing both his own research and that of others, concludes that positive motivations are generally higher and negative motivations generally lower for one-child women than for childless women. Although he was discussing specific positive and negative utilities reported by his subjects, his observations do suggest that our general motivational trait measures may follow a similar pattern.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The data that were analyzed in testing the model described above were collected during the Psychology of Reproduction (POR) Study. The latter was begun in 1972 and used a prospective design to collect data from approximately one thousand San Francisco Bay Area women through interviews and self-report inventories and questionnaires. The focus of the investigation was on the psychological and behavioral aspects of marriage, sexuality, contraception, childbearing, and gender role activities. The data have already been extensively analyzed, and the results of these first analyses are available in a monograph (Miller, 1981). Although these data are approximately 15 years old at the present writing, we do not believe they are dated with respect to providing a good test of our general model. We will comment further in the discussion section about specific findings that might have been different if more contemporary data had been analyzed.
In this report we are concerned with two subsamples of the POR study: a group of 311 just-married women with no children (initially interviewed 4 to 6 months following their first marriage) and a group of 318 just-mothered women who had just borne their first

child within their first marriage (initially interviewed 4 to 6 months following that first birth). Within both of these groups, age was stratified from 18 through 27, with approximately 30-35 women at each age level. All of the women were Caucasian, English-speaking, U.S. citizens. Each group consisted of a probability sample of women from a designated geographic area within two adjacent urban/suburban counties in the San Francisco Bay Area. All socioeconomic levels typical of urban/suburban United States were present in this area and are well represented in the two subsamples. Because the POR study focused on the psychological antecedents to childbearing, any woman known to be infertile was screened out of the sampie.
When we compared the two subsamples on a set of demographic and personal background variables, no significant differences were found with respect to age, religion of upbringing, or most recent type of employment (classified according to Hillingstead, 1957). However, the following significant differences were found: The just-married women reported lower frequency of religious worship, higher levels of education achieved, and lower total annual income in comparison with the just-mothered women.
Although each subject was interviewed four times, data from only the initial interview are considered in this report. The initial interview was conducted in person, using a combined structured and semistructured format. The interview was designed to elicit information about the woman's demographic and family background and about a variety of her current motivations, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors relevant to reproduction. The interview

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Vol. 35,No. 3-4 Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

241

lasted one hour and was followed by the administration of a battery of self-report inventories and questionnaires. For a discussion of the woman's demographic and family background, see Miller, 1981, or, in less detail, Miller, 19866. A detailed treatment of reliability of the structured interview and of the construction, reliability, and validity of the self-report inventories is available in the appendices to Miller, 1981.
During the initial interview each woman was asked how many children she actually expected to have and how soon she expected to have her first child (for the just-married subsample) or her second child (for the just-mothered subsample). Table 1 shows summary statistics on these variables for the two subsamples. In the table, those women never expecting a(nother) child were excluded from the summary statistics of the child timing variable. However, in the multivariate analyses reported below they were included by placing them in a category beyond what otherwise would have been the highest category, namely "60 months or more."
Among the self-report inventories

administered during the initial interview, the only one of relevance for this report was the Maternal Attitude Questionnaire. This instrument contained two sections. The first consisted of a list of 32 items that described more or less desirable aspects of childbearing. The second consisted of a list of 26 items that described more or less undesirable aspects of childbearing. The respondents were asked to rate how desirable or undesirable each item was. The respondent's average score on the 32 desirable items provided a measure called Positive Maternal Motivation. Her average score on the 26 undesirable items provided a measure called Negative Maternal Motivation. Cronbach's alpha coefficient for these two measures (N = 966) had the values of 0.91 and 0.94, respectively. Four-week testretest reliability scores (N = 46) were 0.87 and 0.80, respectively. The justmarried subsample's mean scores on these two measures were 2.54 and 2.70. The correspondent scores for the justmothered subsample were 2.90 and 2.46.
In order to test the general model dis-

TABLE 1
SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR TWO FERTILITY DESIRE VARIABLES AND TWO FERTILITY EXPECTATION VARIABLES BY SUBSAMPLE

VARIABLES
How many children desired How many children desired by husband How many children expected How soon next child expected (in months)"

SUBSAMPLE

Just-married (N = 311)

Mean

Modal Category

% Choosing Mode

2.27 2.27 2.08 34.9

2 2 2 37-48

56.1% 54.7% 63.4%
17%

Just-mothered (N = 318)

Mean

Modal Category

% Choosing Mode

2.53 2.58 2.40 25.6

2 2 2 13-18

46.6% 49.4% 54.4%
20%

"Three per cent of the just-married subsample and 6 per cent of the just-mothered subsample indicated they never expected a(nother) child and were excluded from the summary statistics.

242

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

cussed above andillustrated in Figure 2, that were associated with only oneorthe

we used version VI of the LISRELpro- other of the subsamples. Third, we re-

gram developed by Joreskog and Sor- peated step twobut constrained allcoef-

bom (1984). This data analytic tool uti- ficients to be equal for both data sets.

lizes a maximum likelihood method of The goal here was to determine the ef-

estimation. For present purposes, it has fect of constraining the model for both

the advantage of estimating a large num- subsamples to be equal. Several further

ber of equations simultaneously and of modifications of the model were intro-

accommodating ordinal as well as inter- duced during this step. Fourth, weagain

val variables. During our analysis, we allowed the parameter coefficients to

assumed that error variances were un- vary across the two subsamples. Our

correlated. The seven variables in- purpose was to identify coefficients that

cluded in the analysis were age,Positive were significant when constrained

and Negative Maternal Motivation, and across two subsamples but which were

the two desire variables and two expec- not significant for one subsample when

tation variables included in Table 1.

unconstrained. As a result of this step

The data analysis proceeded as fol- we further refined the general model to lows. First, using a single correlation fit the data by dropping several nonmatrix based on the data from both the significant coefficients for each subsamjust-married and thejust-mothered sub- ple. Fifth, we again applied equality samples combined into a single sample, constraints to those coefficients that we tested the fit of the model shown in were present in both the just-married Figure 2to the data. Thegoal of this step and the just-mothered versions of the was to make an initial estimate of the pa- model. Our goal was to identify coeframeter coefficients and reduce the size ficientspresent in both versions of the of the overall chi-square as much as pos- model for which modification indices sible. Second, using separate correla- and normalized residuals indicated a tion matrices from each of the just- significantly better fit would occur were married and just-mothered subsamples' they not constrained to be equal. One data, wetested thefit of themodel tothe such coefficient was identified and altwo sets of data separately. In this sec- lowed to vary freely. At the conclusion ond step we set the pattern of variable of these steps, we tested the two morelationships to be the same for both dified versions of the model on the data data sets but left the parameter coef- of the two subsamples. This final test inficients free to vary. After only a few it- dicated an extremely good fit to the data erations we developed a slightly mo- for each subsample and a highly satisfacdified model that worked well in both tory endpoint for thecombined analysis.

subsamples but with localized specifica-

tion errors (as judged by the modification indices and normalized residuals1)
1Modification indices andnormalized residuals are measures provided byLISREL that allow a detailed assessment of a model's fit to the data. The former represent the expected decrease in the chi-

square goodness-of-fit statistic if a fixed or constrained parameter is relaxed and all other parameters are held fixed at their estimated value. The latter are residual variances and covariances for every pair of observed variables in the model,normalized by their estimated standard deviation for comparison purposes. Both measures areguidesto specification errors in the model.

Vol. 35,No. 3-4 Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

243

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

RESULTS
The structural equation models that were developed during our analysis of the just-married and just-mothered data are given in Tables 2 and 3. Not shown in the tables are the correlations between the two desire variables and between the two motivation variables, which were 0.57 and -0.24 respectively, for both subsamples. A schematic illustration of each model is presented in Figures 3 and 4. Notice that the box representing the child timing desires variables is retained in both figures, even though no data was available on these two variables for inclusion in the analysis. In order to suggest the hypothesized role of the child timing desires variables as intermediate between the motivation and expectations variables, we have drawn the lines connecting the motivation and expectations in Figure 3 through the child timing desires box.
The goodness-of-fit index for the two subsamples was 0.989 and 0.978 respectively. The root mean square residuals were 0.038 and 0.053. These are both highly satisfactory end-points, although they do suggest a slightly better fit to the data for the just-married subsample. Only two modification indices were greater than 5 (5.6 and 5.3), both of which are far from statistical significance. Only two normalized residuals were greater than 2 (2.1 and 2.1), which implies that all deviations can be assumed to be due to chance. Although none of these four values is significantly elevated, all had to do with the relationship between the motivation variables and the timing expectation variable in the just-mothered subsample. They suggest a slight but nonsignificant tendency for the motivation variables to predict

the timing expectation variable. This undoubtedly accounts for the slightly worse fit of the just-mothered model. For the combined analysis of the two subsamples, the chi-square with 31 degrees of freedom was 37.25. This has a probability level of 0.203, indicating that deviations of the data from the two versions of the model were at the levelof chance.
A description of the findings presented in Tables 2 and 3 and illustrated in Figures 3 and 4 follows. In the justmarried subsample, how soon the next child is expected is predicted by four variables. The more children the woman expects, the higher her positive motivation to have children, the lower her negative motivation, and the older she is, the sooner she expects her next child. How many children she expects is also predicted by four variables. The sooner she expects her next child, the fewer children she and her husband desire, and the lower her positive motivation, the fewer the number of children she expects. How many children she desires is predicted by the two maternal motivation variables, with higher positive motivation and lower negative motivation leading her to desire more children. The same relationship holds for her perception of the number of children desired by her husband: higher positive motivation and lower negative motivation lead her to perceive his wanting more children. Finally, greater age is associated with less positive motivation and more negative motivation for childbearing.
In the just-mothered subsample, how soon the next child is expected is only predicted by the woman's child number expectations, with the expectation of more children leading her to expect her

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Equation Number 1
2
3 4 5 6

TABLE2
STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL FOR THE JUST-MARRIED SUBSAMPLE

Predictor Variable(s)
How many children expected Positive Maternal Motivation Negative Maternal Motivation Age How soon next child expected How many children desired How many children desired by husband Positive Maternal Motivation Positive Maternal Motivation Negative Maternal Motivation Positive Maternal Motivation
Negative Maternal Motivation Age Age

Dependent Variable How soon next child expected
How many children expected
How many children desired How many children desired by husband Positive Maternal Motivation Negative Maternal Motivation

Standardized Parameter Estimate
(SPE)
-0.385 -0.249
0.235 -0.334
0.188 0.539
0.308 0.221 0.265 -0.244
0.229 -0.203 -0.246
0.210

SPE/ Standard
Error Ratio
-9.625 -4.527
4.434 -6.423
4.821 15.853
9.625 5.973 4.907 -5.083
4.164 -5.205 -6.308
5.385

Multiple R2 for
Dependent Variable 0.287
0.641
0.164
0.117 0.061 0.044

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Equation Number 1 2
3 4
5 6

TABLE 3
STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL FOR THE JUST-MOTHERED SUBSAMPLE

Predictor Variable(s)
How many children expected How many children desired How many children desired by husband Negative Maternal Motivation Negative Maternal Motivation Negative Maternal Motivation
Age Age Age

Dependent Variable How soon next child expected How many children expected
How many children desired How many children desired by husband
Positive Maternal Motivation Negative Maternal Motivation

Standardized Parameter Estimate
(SPE)
-0.385 0.539
0.308 -0.089 -0.350
-0.203 -0.105 -0.246
0.210

SPE/ Standard
Error Ratio
-9.625 15.853
9.625 -2.543 -7.447
-5.205 -2.500 -6.308
5.385

Multiple R2 for
Dependent Variable 0.161 0.646
0.126
0.063
0.061 0.044

I
5
a. M
8
g
5'
g

246

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

How Many

r Children Desired %

. 2 W / * by Husband

\.3O8

{ ·"

-.246

Positive-""^ Maternal

How Many · Children j> Desired

___i539 -·

How Many Children

-- Motivation ^ ~ - ^ -.244 ^

Expected

Age; .221^ .188 1J-.385

^ Negative \^s^

How Soon

Maternal

How Soon

-.249 ** Next Child

Motivatlori---^^

Next Child Desired

_ Expected

\ ^ ^ by Husband ^*

/

How Soon Next Child
Desired

/ -.334/

FIG. 3.--A schematic illustration of the structural equation model for the just-married subsample.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

-.105

How Many Children Desired y by Husband

.308

How Soon Next Child Desired
by Husband
How Soon Next Child
Desired

How Many Children Expected
|-.385 Bow Soon Kext. Child Expected

FIG. 4.--A schematic illustration of the structural equation model for the just-mothered subsample.

next child sooner. How many children vation leading her to desire fewer she expects is predicted bythree varia- children. Greater negative motivation bles. The fewer children she and her also predicts that sheperceives herhushusband desire andthegreater herneg- band aswanting fewer children. Greater ative childbearing motivation, thefewer age does the same. Finally, as inthe justchildren sheexpects. Negative motiva- married woman, greater age is assocition is theonly predictor of childnum- ated with less positive andmore negaber desires, with greater negative moti- tive childbearing motivation.

Vol. 35,No. 3-4 Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

247

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

DISCUSSION
Both the version of the model developed for just-married women and the version developed for just-mothered women confirm our general model of the motivation-desire-expectation sequence, illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. Specifically, both demonstrate that maternal motivations affect the number of children a woman desires and the number she perceives her husband as desiring. Both demonstrate that both of these child-number desires separately affect the number of children she actually expects. Both demonstrate that childnumber expectations affect child timing expectations. Because of limitations in the data set, the role of child timing desires in this sequence could not be tested.
Beyond these confirmations of our general model, the results of the LISREL analysis provide interesting insights into how the motivation-desireexpectation sequence varies according to the early marital and reproductive life cycle status of the woman. When women who have just married and have yet to have their first child are compared with women who have just had their first child within marriage, three important differences are apparent. First, it is only in the just-married women that child timing expectations affect child number expectations. What is especially noteworthy is that this effect is opposite to what we discussed in the rationale section as plausible but uncertain. What we find is that just-married women expecting their next child sooner expect fewer, not more, children. The mechanism does not seem to be what we suggested earlier, namely that just-married women who expect more children do so in part because they expect to have their

firstchild sooner and therefore expect to have more time for childbearing. Rather, it seems to be that they expect fewer children because, expecting their first child sooner, they can complete their childbearing sooner. It may be conjectured that they want to complete childbearing so that they can move on to other activities (such as labor force participation, educational and careerrelated pursuits) that are not compatible with having a large family. In other words, some just-married women may not be postponing but rather speeding up childbearing for the sake of careers. Because this finding may be dated, it would be of interest to see if it persists today when child-care institutions are stronger and women may feel more comfortable combining childbearing with career activities.
A second important difference between the two versions of the model is that among the just-mothered women the number of children expected is the only antecedent to how soon they expect their next child, while among the just-married women, age, Positive Maternal Motivation, and Negative Maternal Motivation are also antecedents. Because the two motivation variables are assumed to act through child timing desires, their absence in the just-mothered women suggests either that they have relatively little impact on child-timing desires in that group or that the desires themselves have little impact on childtiming expectations. Perhaps both are true. In any case, if we accept the assumption that motivation acts through child timing desires, it appears that before the birth of the first child, timing desires and age assume importance along with number expectations in determining timing expectations. On the other hand, with the arrival of the first child,

248

Miller and Pasta

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

the number of children expected becomes the only consideration (among the variables in the model) in the timing expectations for the next child.
These findings are entirely consistent with Bumpass and Westoff s (1970) conclusion that the length of birth intervals was determined primarily by desires for a given family size and for a specific span of childbearing. They are also consistent with our earlier inference that some just-married women hasten childbearing for the sake of a career. We may integrate these interpretations as follows. Before her first child, when a woman is setting her child-timing expectations, she may consider how many children she wants, over what period of time (the span) she wants to be involved in childbearing, and how soon she wants to launch her reproductive career. Once her first child is born, and the childbearing span has begun, her primary consideration in subsequent timing is how many children she expects to have.
The third and final important difference between the two versions of our motivation-desire-expectation model is that Positive Maternal Motivation has no effects in the just-mothered women in contrast to the multiple effects it has in the just-married women. On the other hand, Negative Maternal Motivation has similar effects in both subsamples, with the exception that its direct effects are on child-timing expectations in the just-married but on child-number expectations in the just-mothered. These differences appear to contrast with the earlier cited results of Fawcett (1978). Our findings suggest that after the birth of the first child and the childrearing experiences that follow it, the general motivational push toward childbearing may be relatively more satisfied, leaving the general motiva-

tional push away from childbearing in a stronger position to determine future childbearing expectations. Of course these observations apply only to the two "G" factors or general motivations. The relative importance of more specific positive and negative motivations toward having a first or second child remains to be explored.
We conclude, then, that the three major differences between the justmarried and the just-mothered versions of our general model confirm our thesis that the motivation-desire-expectation sequence undergoes reproductive life cycle changes. What of other findings? One difference between the justmarried and just-mothered models that we had expected to find did not appear. Perceived spouse desire did not have a greater effect in the just-married women. Thus, we failed to find support for Udry's (1982) contention that normative pressures are most important during the interval before couples launch their reproductive careers.
For both the just-married and the just-mothered woman, maternal motivation affects how many children she perceives her husband as desiring. In a previous analysis (Miller, 1981), it has been shown that much of this effect of the woman's own motivation remains after controlling for the husband's actual child number desires. The present findings,therefore, confirm that to some extent the woman projects her own childbearing motivations when assessing the desires of her husband.
The effect of age on the woman's perception of her husband's childbearing desires probably involves a different process. In the analysis cited just above, Miller found that the husband's age was another factor independent of his actual desires that influenced the woman's per-

Vol. 35,No. 3-4 Fertility Motivation, Desires, and Expectations

249

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

ceptions. This suggested that women mistakenly assume that greater age reduces men's desire for children. Because the woman's age is highly correlated with her husband's age, it seems likely that the same mistaken assumption is at work in the current findings. Why this age effect is only apparent among the just-mothered women is not clear. Perhaps it is related to the ascendance of negative maternal motivation after the first child is born.
One aspect of the present findings not anticipated in our original model is the direct effect of motivation on childnumber expectations. In the justmarried women it is Positive Maternal Motivation, and in the just-mothered women it is Negative Maternal Motivation, that bypass child-number desires to affect expectations directly. The implication is that, depending on where the women are in their reproductive career, one of these two general motivational traits influences them to expect either more or fewer children than they and their husbands actually desire. This conclusion rests on the assumption that factors other than general motivation determine child number desires.
One finding that holds for both subsamples is that older women have less Positive Maternal Motivation and more Negative Maternal Motivation. The problem with interpreting this simply as a causal effect of age on motivation is that both subsamples were selected by age (the just-married by age at marriage, the just-mothered by age at first birth). It is, therefore, quite possible that the association between age and motivation represents, at least in part, the fact that women who marry or have their first child at an older age have less

Positive and more Negative Maternal Motivation than those who do so at a younger age. Therefore, the causal effect probably moves in both directions, and it would require a different sample to sort out the relative strength of these two effects.
There are two important caveats regarding our findings. First, it should be noted that much of our discussion focuses on the differences between the just-married and just-mothered subsamples and draws conclusions about the effects on women of moving through their reproductive careers. However, the differences in the two versions of the model could result from subsample differences unrelated to parity. Therefore, these findings should be confirmed by studying one sample of women longitudinally, that is, both before and after the birth of their first child. A second caveat has to do with our intentional exclusion from the model of specific childbearing motivations and other predictors of childbearing desires and expectations. Although we believe that such an exclusion isjustified in this initial effort, many questions that arose in the discussion of findings might well be answered and many uncertainties clarified by including the specific motivations and other variables. Accordingly, we plan to expand the present model to include them in a subsequent report.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is based on a study funded by the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development, Center for Population Research, under the following grants and contract: RO1-HD-06266, R01-HD09887, and NO1-HD-82831.

250

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

REFERENCES

ADLER, N. E. 1979. Decision models in population research. J. Pop.: Behav. Soc. Environ. Iss. 2:187-202.
BEACH, L. R., A. HOPE, B. D. TOWNES, and
F. L. CAMPBELL. 1982. The expectationthreshold model of reproductive decisionmaking. Pop. Environ.: Behav. Soc.Iss. 5:95-108.
BECKMAN, L. J., R. AIZENBERG, A. B. FOR-
SYTHE, and T. DAY. 1983. A theoretical analysis of antecedents of young couples' fertility decisions. Demography 20:519533.
BUMPASS, L. L., and C. F. WESTOFF. 1970. The
later years of childbearing. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,N.J.
DAVIDSON, A. R., and J. J. JACCARD. 1976.
Social-psychological determinants of fertility intentions, p. 131-137. In S. H. Newman and V. D. Thompson (eds.), Population psychology: Research and educational issues. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. FAWCETT, J. T. 1978. Thevalue andcost of the first child, p. 244-265. In W. B. Miller and

L. F. Newman (eds.), The first child and family formation. Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill, NC. HOLLINGSHEAD, A. 1957. Two factor index of social class. Ms. New Haven,CT.
JORESKOG, K. G., and D . SORBOM. 1984.
LISREL VI: Analysis oflinear structuralrelationships bythemethod of maximum likelihood. Scientific Software, Inc. Mooresville,IN.
MILLER, W. B. 1981.Thepsychology of reproduction. National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA. . 1986a. Why some women fail to use their contraceptive method: A psychological investigation. Fam. Plan. Persp. 18:2732. . 1986b. Proception: An important fertility behavior. Demography 23:579-594.
RYDER, N. B., and C. F. WESTOFF. 1971. Re-
production in theUnited States, 1965. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ. UDRY, J. R. 1982.The effect of normative pressure onfertility. Pop. Environ.: Behav. Soc. Iss. 5:109-122.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

