Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Limiting conditions for the operation of the Probable Mutation Effect
R. H. Byles
To cite this article: R. H. Byles (1972) Limiting conditions for the operation of the Probable Mutation Effect, Social Biology, 19:1, 29-34, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987962 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987962
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

Limiting Conditions for the Operation of the Probable Mutation Effect

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

R. H. Byles
Department of Sociology and Anthropology Ohio University Athens, Ohio

The purpose of this paper is to describe the limiting conditions for the operation of the Probable Mutation Effect (Brace, 1963). The conditions listed here are, of course, not the only limiting conditions, and several of them have been intensively discussed by other investigators. I present them here for two reasons: first, because it seems productive to bring together the primary limitations for discussion in a single paper; and second, because in some cases I disagree with their previous analyses by others..
Of the nine limiting conditions presented, the first seven are necessary for the operation of the "mutational drive" and successive genotypes of successive generations. The last two conditions are necessary for the effect of this drive to be visible in the phenotype, which is basic to the interpretation of genetic change in man.
The limiting conditions to be discussed
are:

3. The mutational event must be recurrent and, furthermore, the rate of back mutation must be so small as to be irrrelevant (0).
4. The mutation rate at the relevant locus or loci must be very large.
5. The population size must be large. 6. Polygenes are not relevant to this argu-
ment, unless the entire anatomical complex is itself selectively neutral. 7. There must be little or no hybridizing admixture. 8. The genetic structures involved must have high "penetrance." 9. The phenotype must have high heritability.
These conditions are obviously not all independent, and within the model developed by Sewall Wright (1931) and others they are presented mathematically as interdependent. I will discuss them independently merely for the sake of clarity.1
NEUTRALITY OF SELECTION
The first condition, the relaxation of natural selection, is the condition originally presented by Brace (1963). Under most

1. Natural selection must be inconsequential at the locus or loci under investigation.
2. There must be no pleiotropic effect involved with the locus or loci or, if such effect exists, all the phenotypic structures involved must be selectively neutral.

1 It should also be noted that this list of conditions is far from exhaustive. Various biochemical caveats should also be considered. The "degeneracy" of the DNA code, the distinction between regulatory and structural genes, and the redundancy of isozymic systems are a few examples of molecular subversions to the operation of the Probable Mutation Effect.

29

30

Byles

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

circumstances the effect of natural selection would be sufficient to obviate the effect of the kind of mutational drive proposed by Brace. It is the case that selection and mutation (recurrent) will reach some equilibrium value of the mutant gene (q); but if the wild-type gene has any palpable selective advantage the frequency value of q remains very small. Therefore, it is clear that for Brace's mutation effect to operate, natural selection must not be operating on the relevant phenotype.
PLEIOTROPY
This second condition has stirred up the most debate about the Probable Mutation Effect. Nonetheless, the fact remains that to the extent that pleiotropic structures exist, Sewall Wright's original point (1964) is valid: The Probable Mutation Effect can only operate when all of the phenotypic effects of an allele (alleles) are neutral in terms of natural selection and, furthermore, meet the other limiting criteria of this principle. This, it seems to me, is the general case and is operative regardless of the relative ubiquity of pleiotropic genes. If Wright is correct in stating that all genes have pleiotropic effects to some extent, then this is the special extreme case of the rule. Should someone prove that universal pleiotropy does not exist--and, rhetoric aside, no one has--this would not negate the general condition which must be met for any allele. Essentially then, for the Probable Mutation Effect to be operative, either pleiotropy must not be a consideration or all of the phenotypic effects of mutational events at a given locus or loci must be selectively neutral.
Wolpoff (1969), Brace (1963), and others have argued that pleiotropy is also a limiting condition of natural selection, and of course to some extent this is true. It is perhaps relevant to point out that this limiting condition of natural selection has long been recognized. However, the effects

of pleiotropy upon natural selection are somewhat different from those same effects upon mutational drive. This is the case largely because selection operates directly upon the phenotype and only indirectly upon the genotype, while with mutational events the opposite is the case. Therefore, the results are conceptually as well as statistically different.
The main point to be made, however, is that the above argument is essentially irrelevant. One does not escape the fact that pleiotropy is a limiting condition on mutational drive by arguing that it is also a limitation on natural selection, nor is the argument particularly relevant to the debate over the relative ubiquity of pleiotropy.
MUTATIONAL RECUEEENCY
My statement of the third condition is in direct conflict with the analysis given by Wolpoff (1969). He argues that recurrent mutation is not the kind of mutation which is most relevant to the analysis of the Probable Mutation Effect (PME). I take exception to his analysis on two points: first, I disagree with his thesis that frame-shift mutations are necessarily nonrecurrent (any more than point mutations are necessarily recurrent); and second, I argue that nonrecurrent mutation is impossible as an explanatory component in the formulation of the Probable Mutation Effect, whether it be frame-shift mutation or point mutation.
Wolpoff (1969) states that the arithmetic used to establish estimates for the equilibrium between forward and back mutation is irrelevant to the PME because it is directed at point mutations. He argues that it is frame-shift mutation which is involved as perhaps the primary mover in the PME. He makes this argument because it seems less likely that this kind of mutation could be as readily reversible as point mutations are often known to be. In this

Vol. 19, No. 1

Probable Mutation Effect

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

way the P M E escapes the difficulties pre- gument is his suggestion that the mutations

sented by the attainment of equilibrium usually associated with recurrent mutations. This argument is unconvincing. First,

which produce the P M E are in effect nonrecurrent. This is a clear case of "out of the frying pan and into the fire." While

while frame-shift mutations are probably recurrent mutations will form an equilibless prone to back mutation than point rium and therefore raise difficulties with mutations, they are also less likely to oc- the P M E , nonrecurrent mutations have a

cur in the first place. Second, the P M E very low probability of remaining in the model requires accrual of mutational events, gene pool a t all, making Brace's formula-

and the same argument which Wolpoff tion nearly impossible. Numerous workers presents to mediate the contribution of have discussed the fate of nonrecurrent

back mutation also applies to the fre- mutations at length, and the clear result quency of identical, or even similar, for- is that the odds against a recurrent muta-

ward mutations necessary for the accrual process to operate. Furthermore, while it is true that given a single deletion the odds against precise replacement of the same

tion being retained in the gene pool forany significant number of generations are very high. The probability that a single mutant gene will be lost, with no selective pressure,

nucleotide are great, given point replace- after n generations, can be calculated as

ments are subject to similar reversion probabilities.
The important aspect of frame-shifts,

Li (1955) has done (seeTable 1) where ln TABLE l

however, is t h a t they are considerably PROBABILITIES THAT A MUTANT GENE Wnx BE

more drastic in their effect upon the meta-

LAST AFTER n GENERATIONS

bolic product of an area of the cistron than are point mutations. A point mutation theoretically only affects the single amino acid of which it is a component; that is, a point mutation will only alter the meaning of a single codon. A frame-shift, on the other hand, alters the nature of an entire protein structure in that all of the codons involved in the frame-shift will code
for a different amino acid, assuming that they code for any amino acid at all in their

Generation n
~ 2 ^ 5 y is l\
o3
127 Limit

in
03679 0.5315 o6879 0.7319 o 7905 0.8873 ?·?!H
O.969o
0.9847 1.0000

1-- in
0.6321 0.4685 0.3741 0.3121 0.2681 0.2351 0.2095 0.1127 0.0589 0.0302 0.0153 0.0000

new form. This implies that while frame-

shift mutations may well be as common in the abstract as are point mutations, they are likely to produce major changes in the anatomical or chemical structure involved and therefore are often lethal, consequently seldom appearing as part of the gene pool of a population. Since Brace's formulation depends upon the gradual collection of relatively minor changes in the genotype, the frame-shift mutation is an unlikely candidate for a major role in his argument.
Most serious, however, in Wolpoff's ar-

is equal to the probability that a nonrecurrent mutation will be lost. Wolpoff has not isolated a kind of mutation which has been ignored by the workers in population genetics; he has merely pinpointed the one least likely to have any long-term effect on the gene pool.
Therefore, we are left with recurrent mutation as the basis for the PME. As numerous workers have pointed out, most recurrent mutations have been observed to

32

Byles

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

retain the potential for back mutation, a mutation which transforms the mutant form back into the wild type of gene. Given these principles, it is clear that at some point the proportion of the population containing the mutant gene will precisely equal the rate of forward mutation. When this point is reached, no further change in gene frequencies will occur. Of course this point can be denned as the condition in which the forward mutation rate multiplied by the wild-type gene frequency is equal to the back mutation rate multiplied by the mutant gene frequency. It turns out that this equilibrium point can be denned in terms of the mutation rates alone:

in

P

=

m -f-

v

or q ==· m

where p is the equilibrium value of the wild type, q is the equilibrium value of the mutant form, v is equal to the back mutation rate, and m is equal to the forward mutation rate (Falconer, 1967).
From this we can see that the value finally achieved by q, that is to say the proportion of the "new" mutant genes, increases as the size of the back mutation rate decreases and, furthermore, the value of q will become one only when the value of v is zero. Thus, the power of the PME depends upon a low value for v, which is precisely the meaning of limiting condition number three.

MUTATION RATE
It is notoriously difficult to estimate the average rates of mutation for our own species. Various estimates exist, the majority of them based upon examination of the occurrence of homozygotes for lethal genes, as opposed to that expected on the basis of Hardy-Weinberg probabilities alone. Although the values vary, most of them are roughly equivalent and exceedingly small. Lerner (1968), for example, estimates this mutation rate at approximately 100 muta-

tions per million gametes. Obviously a mutation rate this small, even given a complete absence of back mutation, would result in a very small change in a given gene pool, even given large numbers of generations. This has long been considered one of the major stumbling blocks to the PME. It needs to be pointed out, however, that we are not here concerned with lethal mutations, rather with what Dobzhansky (1970) calls sublethal, or perhaps, semilethal mutations. Mukai (1964) has conducted some rather elegant experiments which are designed to allow alleles which result from mutation to collect by not allowing them to segregate in the homozygous form. By means of this experimental design he produces mutation rates in Drosophila which are considerably larger than those estimated on the basis of lethal genes in the usual sense. His estimates of mutation rate are on the order of 0.1411 per chromosome per generation. This estimate is concerned particularly with the mutation rate in polygenic structures and as such should prove interesting to the proponents of the PME. In order for the PME to be effective, very high mutation rates are clearly necessary. (See Condition 6, "Polygenes," for further discussion of the significance of polygenetic inheritance to the PME).
POPULATION SIZE
The limiting condition of population size is not nearly as straightforward as the others mentioned in this paper. This is the case simply because the condition of population size is dependent upon the condition of mutation rate. Three major considerations are relevant here. First, in a small population the occurrence of a mutation has a greater effect upon the value of the wildtype gene frequency than in a larger population. On the other hand, a second consideration is that in small populations fewer mutational events take place in a

Vol. 19, No. 1

Probable Mutation Effect

33

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

given generation than in large ones. Third, and most important, the probability that the mutant gene will be lost purely by chance increases as the size of the population decreases. This last variable is also true of large populations which are genetically subdivided. In other words, as the size of the reproductive group decreases the probability that mutant genes will be eliminated by chance alone becomes larger. Therefore, in such small populations a higher mutation rate is necessary to produce the results which Brace assigned to the PME.
POLYGENES Natural selection operates upon phenotypic structures and only indirectly through these structures does it affect the genotype. Therefore, in order for selection to be relaxed upon polygenes, it must be relaxed in terms of the total metabolic structure to which individual polygenes contribute.
GENETIC ISOLATION Implicit in the assumptions of the PME is the condition that the population involved must be isolated from significant admixture from other genetically dissimilar groups. Migration, or gene flow, is a very powerful principle in that the changes in gene frequency which result from admixture can be dramatic and extremely rapid, especially in comparison to the relatively slow change caused by mutation. If the investigator is dealing with a population which is undergoing contact with genetically dissimilar neighbors, the effect of mutation is inevitably so minor as to be indetectable. Therefore, to argue that mutation is the cause of change in the population's genetic structure, one must also of necessity argue that this population is not undergoing a process of hybridization.
COMMENT
The conditions outlined above are necessary for the operation of the PME upon

the gene pool of a given population. However, the effects of the PME are usually used to interpret the succession of phenotypes in a given time period and location. Therefore, other limiting conditions must be added. These are the conditions which would enable the investigator to observe the results of this effect in the phenotypes of a given population.
The preceding conditions are necessary for the operation of the PME in a given population. The remaining two, however, are necessary in order for the phenotypic effects of this process to be observable. In order for this effect to be valuable in the interpretation of fossil populations, conditions have to be met whereby the change in gene frequencies are visible to the investigator.
PENETSANCE
In order for the investigator to use a principle of mutational drive on a particular characteristic, he must also argue that the genes involved are regularly and predictably expressed. This point is clear to everyone, and is included for the sake of completeness.
HERITABILITY
The problem of heritability underlies most of the interpretation of the fossil record which exists in the literature. In order to interpret the reduction of phenotypic characteristics in a population over time as the result of the collection of minor mutations, it is necessary to argue that the morphological structures involved are highly heritable. If this is not the case, then an interpretation of reduction as is exemplified by the PME is meaningless. We know that all anatomical structures are the result of the interaction of the genotype with the environment. The same is also true for populations. D. S. Falconer (1967) expressed it with the formula: Vg + Ve = Vp, or in other words, the Variance within the phenotype is the result of the additive relation-

34

Byles

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

ship of the Variance in the environment and the Variance in the genotype. The question becomes then: Which is larger, the Vg or the Fe? Clearly the PME will only be detectable under conditions in which the Vg is predominant.
This condition is of great significance in the interpretation of the fossil record. With those characteristics in which the phenotype is the object of the evolutionary force (say in the case of natural selection), this heritability can often be relatively small without rendering interpretation useless, but when dealing with causation which operates directly upon the genotype (PME), the extent of the heritability is of absolute importance. Perhaps the best way to approach this problem is to estimate the heritability of homologous structures in contemporary populations. For many anatomical structures this has been done. Brace (1967) and others seem to be primarily interested in the facial skeleton, and direct heritability estimates for these structures are only available for a few populations.
It is also the case that the contribution to the phenotypic variation of genotypic variation will increase with the relaxation of selection. One of the effects of selection relaxation is that the variance of the values of a given characteristic will increase. This increase in variability is a predictable effect of the conditions established for the Probable Mutation Effect and should be

observable in those populations in which the PME is hypothesized to be operating to change phenotypic patterns.
DISCUSSION
Presented here are the nine limiting conditions which seem to me of primary importance in assessing the value of the Probable Mutation Effect for the analysis of evolutionary change. I have intentionally made no attempt to demonstrate the algebraic logic in the conditions above, in the hopes that what is sacrificed in terms of mathematical rigor will result in greater intelligibility of the general concepts involved in discussion of the PME.
In some ways, the use of the term Probable Mutation Effect is misleading in that this effect is not the primary or most common result of the mutational process.However, this phrase is current, and even though "mutational drive" or some other expression would be more appropriate, the attempt to communicate might suffer were the more common nomenclature not used.
Finally, it seems important to point out that these conditions do not make the PME a theoretical impossibility. Although the convergence of these conditions are unlikely at any given time, they are not impossible. As Wolpoff (1969) has pointed out, it is not the theoretical existence of a PME which is at issue, rather it is theconditions under which such an effect could produce palpable results.

REFERENCES

BRACE, C. L. 1963.Structural reduction in evolution. Amer. Natur. 97:39-49. . 1967. The stages of human evolution.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. DOBZHANSKY, T. 1970. Genetics of the evolu-
tionary process. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.
FALCONER, D. S. 1967. Quantitative genetics. The Ronald Press, New York.
LERNER, I. MICHAEL. 1968. Heredity, evolution and society. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco.
Li, C. C. 1955. Population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

MUKAI, T. 1964.The genetic structure of natural populations of Drosophila Melanogaster: I. Spontaneous mutation rate of polygenes controlling viability. Genetics 50:1-19.
WOLPOFF, M. H. 1969. The effect of mutations under conditions of reduced selection. Soc.Biol. 16:11-23.
WRIGHT, SEWALL. 1931. Evolution in mendelian populations. Genetics 16:97-159. . 1964. Pleiotropy in the evolution of structural reduction and of dominance. Amer. Natur. 98:65-69.

