Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Intellectual performance, race, and socioeconomic status
Paul L. Nichols & V. Elving Anderson
To cite this article: Paul L. Nichols & V. Elving Anderson (1973) Intellectual performance, race, and socioeconomic status, Social Biology, 20:4, 367-374, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988068 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988068
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 14
View related articles Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Intellectual Performance, Race, and Socioeconomic Status

I\
N

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Paul L. Nichols and V. Elving Anderson
Perinatal Research Branch, National Institute of NeurologicalDiseases and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; and Dight Institute for Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota

In studies that have compared whites and Negroes on tests of intellectual performance, the Negroes have nearly always scored lower than the whites. In the widely cited study of 1,800 Negro school children from five southeastern states, Kennedy, Van de Reit, and White (1963) found a mean IQ on the 1960 Stanford-Binet of 80.7 (S.D. 12.4).
The debate concerning the extent to which such group differences in performance are the result of environmental differences (whether prenatal or postnatal) or genetic differences in potential is by no means new (see Peterson, 1923), and interest in the subject has been maintained by recent articles favoring both genetic (Jensen, 1969) and environmental (e.g., Scarr-Salapatek, 1971) hypotheses.
Since many of the environmental and cultural variables that are thought to affect performance are not distributed equally among the white and Negro populations (Gottesman, 1968), it is difficult to make meaningful comparisons. Meehl (1969) has argued that matching for some of these "nuisance variables," besides being impractical, may result in the systematic unmatching for some other variables or in the generation of quite unrepresentative subsamples.

The matching problem is even more complex since membership in different socioeconomic groups may itself be partly the result of genetic differences. The high heritability, or proportion of variance due to genetic factors, found for intelligence in most populations studied (Jensen, 1969) together with a high degree of positive assortative mating has led Burt (1961) and others to suggest that in a society that gives most members an opportunity to rise (or drop) in social class based on their ability, one's socioeconomic status as an adult is partly the indirect result of genetically influenced intelligence. Thus, matching for social class may result in controlling for both environmental and genetic factors.
Among children, unfavorable environmental conditions, such as may be expected in families having low socioeconomic ratings, do lead to lower mean IQ's. Studies both of foster children (e.g., Skodak and Skeels, 1949) and of identical twins raised apart (e.g., Newman, Freeman, and Holzinger, 1937) have shown a relationship between environmental ratings and IQ, suggesting a direct effect of social and cultural conditions on the measured IQ's of children.
The Collaborative Perinatal Project, de-

367

368

Nichols and Anderson

Social Biology

scribed in detail by Berendes (1966) and by Niswander and Gordon (1972), is a longitudinal study conducted by the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke. The population was selected from women registering for prenatal care in 12 university medical centers. Most of the women were clinic patients; 45% were white, 47% Negro, and the rest a variety of other ethnic groups, mostly Puerto Rican. Race was identified on the basis of the mother's report, and no attempt was made to assess the amount of racial mixture in the children. Interdisciplinary project personnel followed the women extensively during pregnancy and delivery and

examined the children periodically through age eight years. Each child has been assigned a socioeconomic index score based on parental occupation, education, and income data obtained during a prenatal interview (Myrianthopoulos and French, 1968).
The subjects for the present investigation were two large geographic samples of children from this longitudinal study. The distribution of scores on the socioeconomic index differed significantly between the two samples, but within the samples, the scores of the whites and Negroes were nearly identical (Figure 1). The lower socioeconomic sample was composed of children of mothers who registered for prenatal care at

.25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

BALTIMORE and
PHILADELPHIA

.00 20 30 40 50 60 70 80

('ow)

SOCIOECONOMIC INDEX

FIG. 1.--Distribution of socioeconomic index scores by geographic sample and race.

90 (high)

Vol. 20, No. 4

Intellectual Performance

369

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia and and 12% of the Negroes had professional

Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. or technical jobs. Nearly 10% of the whites

The parents of the Negro children (90% but only about 2% of the Negro fathers

of the sample) and white children (10%) were enrolled in college or graduate schools;

had socioeconomic index scores that were one-half of the Negroes and 35% of the

similar to but slightly higher than scores whites were semiskilled or unskilled labor-

of heads of households aged 15 to 44, based ers.

on 1960 census data, in the total United States Negro population (see Myrianthopoulos and French, 1968). The mean score, on a scale of 0-95, was approximately 40 for both whites and Negroes. The median annual family income, based on data obtained during prenatal interviews between 1959 and 1965, was about $3,400. The average maternal education was just over ten years for the Negroes and nine and one-half years for the whites. The father was absent from the home in about 10% of the white families but in nearly 25% of the Negro families. The proportion of fathers who were professionals or college students was under 5%. Approximately 60% of the whites and 70% of the Negroes were semiskilled or unskilled laborers.

In both samples, the patients' charges for prenatal and obstetrical care were based on their ability to pay. The Baltimore and Philadelphia hospitals are located near the center of the cities, while the Boston hospital is near the suburb of Brookline.
Each child in the study was given two individually administered IQ tests, the Stanford-Binet (short form L-M) at age four and the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (four verbal and three performance tests) at age seven. To maintain high scoring accuracy, all examinations were edited by a second examiner and again as they were received in the Perinatal Research Branch in Bethesda. To help insure comparable techniques of test administration and scoring among examiners at dif-

The higher socioeconomic sample consisted of children of mothers who registered for prenatal care at Boston Lying-in Hospital, where the parents of the white children (90% of the sample) and Negro children (10%) had socioeconomic index scores distributed similarly to the scores of heads of households aged 15 to 44 in the total United States white population. The mean score was 60 for both whites and Negroes. The median family income was somewhat higher among the Negroes: $5,500 vs. $5,000 per year for the white families. Both the white and Negro mothers had completed an average of nearly twelve

ferent study centers and to assess testretest reliability, quality control trials were held regularly, in which randomly selected children were retested after three month intervals by an examiner from one of the other eleven hospitals involved in the Collaborative Study. The original examiner observed the second test and scored it independently. A total of 140 four-year-olds and 371 seven-year-olds from the twelve study centers were retested. For both the four- and seven-year exams, test-retest correlations were approximately 0.84, while concurrent interscorer correlations were 0.98.

years of education. The father was absent The distribution of scores on the fourfrom the home in about 3 % of the white year exam is presented by sample, race, families and 7% of the Negro families. The and three socioeconomic intervals in Table occupational status of the fathers was 1. The percentage of cases within the three higher than in the Baltimore-Philadelphia, socioeconomic intervals reflected the differsample. Approximately 16% of the whites ence in the composition of the two samples.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

370

Nichols and Anderson

Social Biology

Nq

Oq

NNNooQ

O ON

O«

I«O

O M

vO H N O N d *f O

Is

H N N N Tf VO IO H

HNNH

«>- O 1 M

OVN OVOONOfOlj

;eqoq*ovDM oq o

a

§·
-Q

·;;:::
ON ON ON

s
o
·o
: fi
n

Vol. 20, No. 4

Intellectual Performance

371

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

For example, inthe Boston sample, 54% had socioeconomic index scores between 60 and 95,while in the Baltimore-Philadelphia sample, only 14% of the scores were in this interval.
When the IQ's of the large "representative" groups (i.e., whites from Boston and Negroes from Baltimore and Philadelphia) are compared, the mean difference (15.4 points) isabout one standard deviation, not unlike that found inscores of other such studies (Shuey, 1966). However, within the geographic samples, where Negroes and whites having more similar socioeconomic characteristics can be compared, the average difference on this test was 6.0 points in Boston and 4.2 points in the Baltimore-Philadelphia sample. The IQ distributions are shown graphically in the left side of Figure2.
Within each sample, the Negro-white difference averaged about 3--4 points among children inthe first two socioeconomic intervals and approximately 7-8 points among children with socioeconomic index scores between 60 and 95. The greater relationship between the IQ ofchildren and the socioeconomic status of parents among whites was also observed by Scarr-Salapatek (1971). This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that whites have had a greater opportunity tochange insocial status on the basis of their individual abilities, including IQ. Therefore, the socioeconomic index would be correlated with parents' IQ to a greater extent among whites than among Negroes, and a corresponding effect upon children's IQ (like that observed here) would be expected.
The observation that Negro-white differences are relatively small between samples having comparable socioeconomic distributions indicates that the larger differences frequently discussed must be interpreted with caution. However, the observation by itself does not permit a distinction among

n
(Q
C
r* I--I
3a
HS

a

poo o^*-j\qvq\q

QO

l-IcocrJcdcoTfco*-! NON

.-H CSl CO rH

OS O -H

odfO *-* ^ "*O
NOH

Q rt OJ vO OJ »H >O ^

^^

^-*-«(VI^-^HOI"HO H W M

CM' «d t-I TJ-* (sj t ^ m* rt* o od ^

«-· cs c>) ^H

«o ^ i-t

Tf vq oo Tt N N H ^ ( s r>»

»-ico«O<N^-ro^Oi-i 0^-<ro

HNNN

O; O i-l

f-H O (N *-H

O O rH

O ^-TJ-V) vo t o oo r*
o;cocqinoqc>^'-^ ^ ^ . NHHOvOVlod CO H H

^H ON O *O *** *--* t^ CM vO 00CT*l/^ CM ^ ^ \ O O

o»

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

.3t> .25.20.15.10 .05 i.00
£.35 +

BOSTON

BALTIMORE and
PHILADELPHIA

BALTIMORE and
PHILADELPHIA

50 60 70 BO 90 100 110 120 130 140 ISO 160

50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 20, No. 4

Intellectual Performance

373

genetic, environmental, or combined explanations. The following indirect evidence suggests that in the Negro samples, environmental components form a major part of the socioeconomic effect on IQ. A study of Collaborative Study data from all twelve study centers (Nichols, 1970) showed that the sib-sib correlation for the four-year IQ was significantly lower among Negroes than among whites. The simplest interpretation appeared to be that the heritability of IQ, which depends on the population and associated environmental conditions, was relatively low in the Negro sample. The theory that differences in performance among socioeconomic groups are partly genetically determined assumes a high heritability of intelligence. Therefore, a lower heritability of intelligence in the Negro sample is consistent with a smaller genetic and larger environmental component of the socioeconomic effect on IQ.
White or Negro children within any socioeconomic interval from the Boston sample had IQ's that averaged approximately eight points higher than children of the same race and socioeconomic level from the Baltimore-Philadelphia sample (Table 1). A small part of this difference between samples may have arisen from the three broad socioeconomic categories used. For example, within the 60-95 interval, the mean socioeconomic index score in Boston was about 75, compared to 68 in the Baltimore-Philadelphia sample. The remainder of the sample difference may be the result of more subtle cultural influences than can be measured by the index. This possibility could also help to account for the remaining race effect.
The distribution of scores on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children given at age seven is shown on the right side of Figure 2, and Table 2 presents the distribu-

tions of the verbal, performance, and full scale IQ's. The mean scores for all groups were slightly lower on the WISC than on the Stanford-Binet, due in part to the lower ceiling on the WISC. The samples at seven years were smaller, since results from these tests are still being processed, so the data have not been separated into the three socioeconomic intervals. The Negro-white differences were slightly less at age seven than at age four: approximately four points within each sample. This result is consistent with studies (Shuey, 1966, Kennedy, 1969) that indicated stability in Negro children's IQ's, and supports the conclusion that earlier findings (e.g., Kennedy et al., 1963) of a negative relationship between age and IQ in Negro children were due to artifacts of sampling.
Other comparisons can be made using the percentage distributions in Tables 1 and 2. For example, among four-year-olds in the Baltimore-Philadelphia sample, the proportion with IQ's below 70, the usual criterion for mental retardation, was 4% among the whites and 6% among the Negroes. Of the four-year-olds in the Boston sample, only 1% of the children of either race were retarded (Table 1). Similar results were found for the children at age seven: 2% of the white children and 4% of the Negro children from Baltimore and Philadelphia were retarded. Again, only 1% of the children of either race from Boston were retarded (Table 2).
In the sample of Kennedy et al. (1963), 11% of the five- to seven-year-old Negro children examined had IQ's below 70. However, it should be remembered that their sample was drawn from a different geographic area. Perhaps a more practical definition of retardation should consider the distribution of scores in the particular sample. For example, on both the Stanford-

FIG. 2.--Distribution of IQ's at age 4 and age 7 by geographic sample and race.

374

Nichols and Anderson

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Binet and the Wechsler, an IQ of 70 was approximately 2.4 standard deviations below the mean of the Boston sample, but only about 1.7 standard deviations below the mean of the Baltimore-Philadelphia sample. And in Kennedy's sample, an IQ of 70 was only nine-tenths of one standard deviation below the population mean of 80.7.
In the present study, racial differences in intellectual performance in samples of young white and Negro children whose parents had similar socioeconomic scores, lived in the same city and had gone to the same hospitals for prenatal care were much smaller than often reported. The fact that differences were minimized by comparing samples of children with similar socioeconomic scores suggests that socioeconomic

factors are largely responsible for the usu-
ally reported Negro-white differences in
intellectual performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Collaborative Study, supported by the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, has the following participants: Boston Lying-in Hospital; Brown University; Charity Hospital, New Orleans; Children's Hospital of Buffalo; Children's Hospital of Philadelphia; Children's Hospital Medical Center, Boston; Columbia University; Johns Hopkins University; Medical College of Virginia; New York Medical College; Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia; University of Minnesota; University of Oregon; University of Tennessee; Yale University; and the Perinatal Research Branch, NINDS.
We thank Drs. Sarah H. Broman, Irving I. Gottesman, Sheldon C. Reed, James F. Crow, Ntinos C. Myrianthopoulos, Gordon Allen and David Rosenthal for critically reviewing earlier versions of this manuscript.

REFERENCES

BERENDES, H. W. 1966. The structure and scope of the Collaborative Project on Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, and Other Neurological and Sensory Disorders of Infancy and Childhood. In S. S. Chipman, A. M. Lilienfeld, B. G. Greenberg, and J. F. Donnelly (eds.), Research methodology and needs in perinatal studies. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
BURT, C. 1961. Intelligence and social mobility. Brit. J. Statist. Psychol. 14:3-24.
GOTTESMAN, I. I. 1968. Biogenetics of race and class. In M. Deutsch, I. Katz, and A. R. Jensen (eds.), Social class, race and psychological development. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York.
JENSEN, A. R. 1969.How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement? Harvard Educ. Rev. 39:1-123.
KENNEDY, W. A. 1969. A follow-up normative study of Negro intelligence and achievement. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev. 34. No. 2.
KENNEDY, W. A., V. VAN DE REIT, and J. C.
WHITE, JR. 1963. A normative sample of intelligence and achievement of Negro elementary school children in the Southeastern United States. Monogr. Soc.Res. Child Dev.28, No.6. MEEHL, P. E. 1969. Nuisance variables and the ex post facto design. Rep. Res. Lab. Dept. Psychiat. Univ. Minn. No. PR-96-4. Minneapolis, Minn.

MYRIANTHOPOTOOS, N. C., and K. S. FRENCH.
1968. An application of the U.S. Bureau of the Census socioeconomic index to a large diversified patient population. Soc. Sci. and Med. 2: 283-299.
NEWMAN, H. H., F. N. FREEMAN, and K. J.
HOLZINGER. 1937. Twins: A study of heredity and environment. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
NICHOLS, P. L. 1970.The effects of heredity and environment on intelligence test performance in 4 and 7 year old white and Negro sibling pairs. Doctoral dissertation filed with the University of Minnesota libraries.
NISWANDER, K. R., and M. GORDON. 1972. The
women and their pregnancies. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
PETERSON, J. 1923. The comparative abilities of white and Negro children. Comp. Psychol. Monogr. 5:1-141.
SCARR-SALAPATEK, S. 1971.Race, social class and IQ. Science 174:1285-1295.
SHUEY, A. M. 1966. The testing of Negro intelligence. 2nd edition. Social Science Press, New York.
SKODAK, M., and H. M. SKEELS. 1949. A final
follow-up study of one hundred adopted children. J. Genet. Psychol. 75:85-125.

