Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Government support of genetic services
Philip Reilly
To cite this article: Philip Reilly (1978) Government support of genetic services, Social Biology, 25:1, 23-32, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988315 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988315
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Government Support of Genetic Services

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Philip Reilly
School ofMedicine YaleUniversity New Haven,Connecticut
ABSTRACT: The 1976 enactment of the National Sickle Cell Anemia, Cooley's Anemia, TaySachs, and Genetic Disease Act may mark the emergence of a national policy on mass genetic screening. The law includes provisions intended to protect persons who are tested for genetic traits in screening programs operated with government funds. Two key features are (1) guaranteed access to competent genetic counseling and (2) strict confidentiality of test results. Because genetic screening will be conducted through state public health departments, I surveyed the states to determine how they were currently providing access to genetic counseling and protection of genetic data. The responses indicated that (1) there is an extreme heterogeneity of counseling services, and (2) that most states have not developed programs to safeguard genetic data.

The enactment in 1976 of the National Sickle Cell Anemia, Cooley's Anemia, Tay-Sachs, and Genetic Disease Act (Public Law 94-278; hereinafter, the National Genetic Disease Act) was a milestone in government support of services intended to reduce suffering caused by genetic disorders. Until then, most Congressional interest had been provoked by lobbyists working to gain special attention for a single disease. For example, shortly after the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act (Public Law 92-248) became law in 1972, Congressmen of Mediterranean heritage guided the National Cooley's Anemia Control Act (Public Law 92-414) into existence. In 1975 federal lawmakers gave special attention to persons with Huntington's chorea and hemophilia.

partment of Health, Education, and Welfare is authorized to make grants and enter into contracts "for projects to establish and operate voluntary genetic testing and counseling programs" primarily in conjunction with existing health programs (especially those supported by Title V of the Social Security Act, designed to aid maternal and child health). Further, the Secretary is directed to "carry out . . . a program to develop information and educational materials relating to genetic diseases" and to disseminate such information as widely as possible. Although the law authorized expenditures of $90,000,000 over three years for testing, counseling, and education, so far only $4,000,000 has been appropriated. Guidelines for spending this money should be complete in the spring of 1978.

The primary purpose of the National Genetic Disease Act is to "establish a national program to provide for basic and applied research, research training, testing, counseling, and information and education programs with respect to genetic disease . . . ." The Secretary of the De-

The second major aim of the law is to support projects for: (1) basic and applied research into genetic disease; (2) developing programs for the training of genetic counselors and other health professionals; (3) developing programs to educate physicians, health professionals, and the public

23

24

Reilly

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

about genetic disorders and the methods netic disorder or to be carriers of a genetic

available to diagnose, control, counsel, condition that could have a deleterious ef-

and treat them; and (4) developing coun- fect on their children--reminds us that for

seling and testing and other programs for fifteen years controversy has surrounded

the diagnosis, control, and treatment of the proper role of the state in the provision

genetic diseases. Projects concerned with of genetic services to the people. The

sickle cell anemia and Cooley's anemia, major purpose of this article is to compare

which were initiated under other federal the manner in which public genetic ser-

laws, have a priority claim on funding. vices are being delivered to the principles

The balance of the law, of special rele- now embraced by federal and some state

vance to this article, describes the re- laws which purport to guide that delivery. quirements that must be met by a party First, however, the evolution of these

who wishes to use federal money to pro- principles should be put in perspective.

vide genetic services. The National Ge-

netic Disease Act requires that participation by any individual in any program shall be "wholly voluntary." Further, each

GENETIC SCREENING LEGISLATION: A BRIEF HISTORY

grant or contract applicant must promise The era of high-quality low-cost mass

that he will "directly supervise" the pro- genetic screening began soon after the de-

gram for which he is funded, that he will velopment of a bacterial inhibition assay

"provide strict confidentiality of all test for phenylketonuria (Guthrie, 1961). Less

results, medical records, and other infor- than two years later Massachusetts be-

mation regarding testing diagnosis, coun- came the first state to require that the

seling, or treatment of any person," and PKU test be performed on all newborns so

that he will provide for "community rep- that affected infants might be placed

resentation" (where appropriate) in the promptly on dietary therapy. Within five

development and operation of voluntary years forty-two states enacted similar

genetic testing and counseling programs. laws. Although there is considerable vari-

Where community-wide testing and coun- ation in these laws, most simply require

seling is to be offered, the supervisor must that the attending physician make sure

consider the needs of "high risk" popula- that a blood sample is taken from the in-

tion groups, especially those entering their fant and sent to the responsible labora-

"child-producing years." Finally, he must tory. Few PKU laws require that parents

provide counseling "to persons found to be informed about the tests, that genetic

have a genetic disease and to persons counseling services be offered to parents of

found to carry a gene or chromosome affected infants, that the screening records

which may cause a deleterious effect in be kept confidential, or that children with

their offspring."

phenylketonuria be guaranteed competent

The care with which the architects of care. This situation reflects the haste with the National Genetic Disease Act enu- which the laws were written. In fact, merated fundamental principles to which many lawmakers were not even aware grant and contract applicants must that phenylketonuria was a genetic disease adhere--voluntary participation in testing (Swazey, 1971).

programs, strict confidentiality of medical During the mid-sixties minor political

data, community representation, and the controversy did swirl around PKU laws.

guarantee of genetic counseling for per- However, it was largely limited to argu-

sons discovered to be affected with a ge- ments, not altogether unpersuasive, that

Vol. 25, No. 1

Genetic Services

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

lawmakers should not delineate the diagnostic approach to any disorder. For example, Bessman (1966) argued that a low phenylalanine diet could be dangerous for infants with transient hyperphenylalanemia, (or persistent mild elevation of blood phenylalanine) rather than classical PKU. Because false positives outnumber true positives by about 19 to 1 (Committee for the Study of Inborn Errors of Metabolism, 1975), this objection was quite valid.
As a recent study by the National Research Council Committee for the Study of Inborn Errors of Metabolism (1975) makes clear, there are still serious weaknesses in the manner in which PKU screening is conducted in the United States. The rapid unreflective process by which mandatory PKU screening laws were passed contributed to the deficiencies that have persisted for more than a decade. To this day, adequate counseling and medical services for families with PKU infants remain unavailable in some states, and little attention has yet been devoted to the need for protecting screening data against misuse (Riskin and Reilly, 1977).
The rapid rise of sickle cell anemia from medical obscurity to a "politically prominent" disease fostered the second round of genetic screening laws. Dr. Robert Scott (1970) was among the first to sharply criticize the low level of private donations and tax dollars allocated to basic research into a disease that afflicted 50,000 Americans. Dr. Scott made a strong plea that genetic screening and counseling should be provided to the Black population. An editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association (1970) also made a strong pitch for community-based sickle cell screening programs. In 1971 President Nixon, heading into an election campaign, urged more funding for sickle cell research in his annual health message (Culliton, 1972) and drew unprecedented public in-

terest to the disorder. A few months later Massachusetts became the first of thirteen states to write mandatory sickle cell anemia screening laws during 1971 and 1972. Like the phenylketonuria laws, the sickle cell statutes were enacted rapidly and with little reflection. However, unlike PKU testing, the benefits of sickle cell screening did not sustain poorly drafted legislation.
The object of the sickle cell anemia laws was not to identify and to treat prophylactically persons burdened with serious disease; it was to alert healthy individuals to a possible risk they faced in childbearing. One or both of two statutory approaches was adopted: (1) admission to public schools was made contingent on submission to a test for sickle cell trait; (2) application for a marriage license was accepted only if both parties had been tested (Reilly, 1973).
Even before the wave of sickle cell screening legislation had subsided, the laws were attacked. Although some critics aimed at technical deficiencies in testing methods, most argued that failure to provide high quality genetic counseling and careful protection of screening data could lead to substantial harm to persons who carried the gene for sickle cell anemia (Pearson and O'Brien, 1972; Bowman, 1973). Fortunately, some of the most detailed criticisms of ill-considered sickle cell screening were offered in hearings on a proposed federal law (U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, Subcommittee on Health, 1972).
Thus, the enactment of the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act was highly significant for two reasons: (1) For the first time substantial funding ($80,000,000) was authorized, even though much less was actually spent, to develop comprehensive genetic services, including screening, counseling, and public education. (2) Guidelines were included to reduce the risk of stigmatization in genetic

26

Reilly

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

screening. Of these guidelines, the most or educating the public about genetic dis-

important were voluntariness, strict con- orders. Cost considerations probably con-

fidentiality of test resluts, community trolled the decision not to guarantee the

representation in the provision of genetic delivery of comprehensive genetic services

services, and guarantee of genetic counsel- by statute.

ing to persons found to have sickle cell In contrast, Maryland, troubled by the

trait. The federal law closely followed delicate ethical and social issues involved

guidelines that had been advocated by in delivering genetic services, created a a multidisciplinary group of concerned Commission on Hereditary Disorders in

physicians, ethicists, and lay persons 1974. In creating the Commission, the

(Lappe et al., 1972).

Maryland legislature chose six guiding

The federal law altered the operation of principles that are even more far-reaching

mandatory state screening laws. Federal than those in federal laws: (1) public con-

funds would go only to states that em- sultation before the adoption of screening

braced the principle of voluntariness and regulation, (2) consideration of the ethical,

met other requirements. Yet, despite the social, and economic effects of proposed

emergence of a set of screening principles, programs, (3) informed consent by all in-

disturbing evidence of harm suffered by dividuals tested, (4) voluntariness in par-

persons found to carry the sickle cell gene ticipation (5) guarantee of counseling ser-

(including self-stigmatization, disruption vices where needed, and (6) availability of

of marriage, higher insurance costs, and unambiguous test results to the person

discrimination in hiring) continued to ac- screened and a guarantee of strict

cumulate (Sinnette and Smith, 1972). Dur- confidentiality (Report of the Maryland

ing the winter of 1972-73 several Black Commission on Hereditary Disorders,

physicians, notably Dr. James Bowman, 1974, unpublished). If these requirements

led the attack to expose discrimination by are seriously followed, screening for

insurance companies and industry. To- phenylketonuria and similar disorders

day, although the mandatory laws have could become considerably more expen-

been repealed, the threat of discrimination sive.

against sickle cell carriers has not yet Since the enactment of the laws in New

abated (Bowman, 1976).

York (1976) and Maryland (1976), several

In the past few years lawmakers have states have considered genetic screening

again focused on screening newborns, this bills. In 1977, Washington rejected the

time for a host of inborn errors of metabo- "Maryland model" because it was too

lism. The laws of New York and Mary- costly. California has seen the most activ-

land illustrate two different approaches to ity. In the spring of 1977 the State Senate

implementing such programs. In 1974, Select Committee on Genetic Disease au-

well after the sickle cell anemia con- thored four pieces of legislation which em-

troversy, New York amended its phenyl- body the spirit of the Maryland approach

ketonuria law to expand the scope of test- (Victoria Jee, personal communication,

ing. Infants are now also tested for 1977).

galactosemia, homocystinuria, branched But most public health departments are

chain ketonuria, histidinemia, adenosine expanding neonatal screening to cover deaminase deficiency, and sickle cell other disorders without seeking explicit

anemia (New York, 1976). The law still legislative approval. While this approach makes no explicit provision for genetic secures important new screening tests at

counseling, confidentiality of test results, minimal costs, it is, for some states, only a

Vol. 25, No. 1

Genetic Services

27

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

temporary solution. In many states, however, phenylketonuria screening laws are so broadly worded, mandating testing for PKU and "other causes of mental retardation," that special laws are not necessary for expanding the scope of screening.
CURRENT GOVERNMENT SUPPORT OF
GENETIC SERVICES
During the past five years federal support of mass genetic screening has rapidly expanded. Federal dollars are flowing mainly to support screening intended to identify adolescent and adult carriers of several common autosomal recessive disorders. Although some federal support has been given to the highly successful TaySachs programs, more explicit support was provided to test persons for the gene that determines Cooley's anemia and especially to identify carriers of sickle cell anemia. Between July 1, 1973 and June 30, 1975 at least 442,000 persons were screened for the sickle cell gene; about 29,500 persons were provided with genetic counseling, and as many as 2,000,000 people were provided with some information pertaining to sickle cell disease through the twenty-five sickle cell screening and education clinics funded under federal law (Third Annual Report of the Administration of the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act, July 1, 1974-June 30, 1975, 1976). Presumably all such clinics operate pursuant to federal guidelines.
Although it is possible that the federal government could move to exert great influence over the conduct of neonatal screening programs, presumably through significant expansion of the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment Program (EPSDT), such action is not likely. The performance record of EPSDT, which was created by amendment to the Social Security Act in 1967, is

not encouraging (Folz, 1975). Only a small fraction of eligible children have been screened for the vision, hearing, and dental problems on which the program is focused (Folz and Brown, 1975). But some states have used EPSDT funds to help support PKU or sickle cell screening programs. With the principle of federal involvement in delivery of genetic services established, the possibility of future activity cannot be foreclosed.
The states continue to focus their attention on mass neonatal screening. In February, 1975,1 surveyed their departments of public health to determine if PKU programs had expanded. The results indicated that at least nine states were screening infants for disorders other than phenylketonuria (Reilly, 1975). Responses to other questions in the survey indicated that public health officials generally favored the expansion of screening efforts. In November, 1976, I again polled the states, this time to determine whether screening programs were continuing to expand and to learn what genetic counseling services were available to parents of affected children identified by screening. I eventually obtained written answers from forty-four states. Thus, the following compilation excludes six unresponding states (Alabama, California, Kansas, New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Tennessee) and the District of Columbia.
There have been considerable developments during the past two years. The number of states screening for galactosemia has risen from six to at least sixteen. At least nine states now screen for histidinemia; eleven, for homocystinuria; twelve, for maple syrup urine disease; and ten, for tyrosinimia. At least eleven states screen some newborns for sickle sell anemia, and eight of these also test for betathalassemia. (Reilly, 1977).
The most important development has been the rapid introduction of screening

28

Reilly

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

for congenital hypothyroidism based on to mandatory programs and advocated

low-cost radioimmunoassay for thyroxine confidentiality of genetic information (em-

(T-4) levels. In the past two years, twelve phasis added).

states have begun to screen for this disor- Although the Committee offered an ex-

der, four more were hoping to begin in cellent overview of mass genetic screening

1977, and at least two others are consider- and a thorough survey of state PKU regu-

ing such programs. The speed with which lations, it did not publish information on

mass screening for hypothyroidism has the availability of other genetic services.

caught on since pioneering efforts in The operation and impact of private Tay-

Pittsburgh (Klein, et al. 1974) and Quebec Sachs screening programs have been care-

(Dussault, etal. 1975) is impressive. Given fully evaluated (Childs et al., 1976), but

that about one in every 7,000 newborns there has been no systematic study of pub-

may be affected, the case for mass screen- lic state-supported screening programs. In

ing to detect neonatal hypothyroidism and an effort to discover whether the state

to prevent retarded development is quite neonatal screening complied with the

compelling. For example, in Oregon principles embraced by the National Ge-

(which also screens blood samples for netic Diseases Act and by the National

Alaska, Idaho, and Montana), eighteen af- Research Council Committee, I asked the

fected children have been identified and various states about (1) the availability of

treated in eighteen months (Dr. Rhesa genetic counseling services to parents of

Penn, personal communication, 1976). infants affected with phenylketonuria or

The most thorough consideration of how to deliver genetic services on a large scale was made by the National Research Council Committee for the Study of In-

other genetic diseases, and (2) the measures being taken to guarantee the strict confidentiality of test results gathered by genetic screening.

born Errors of Metabolism which pub- More specifically, to learn about genetic

lished a detailed study and extensive rec- counseling, I asked (1) whether the state

ommendations in 1975. It gave cautious offered any counseling services to parents

approval to genetic screening "as an ap- of children with phenylketonuria and the

propriate form of medical care" when cer- nature of those services if they existed, and

tain criteria are met. These include evi- (2) whether the state directly employed

dence of public benefit and acceptance and persons known as "genetic counselors."

evidence that benefits outweigh costs, that The results (Table 1) indicate that thirty-

public education can be carried out, that five of the forty-four states responding

the technology is satisfactory, and that provide some kind of genetic counseling to

"resourcesexist to deal with counseling, parents of infants with phenylketonuria.

follow-up and other consequences of The nature of these services is extremely

testing" (emphasis added). Further, the heterogeneous. The two most common

Committee urged that an investigative sources are personnel working at medical

pretest should show, among other things, schools within the state (11) and state-

that costs are acceptable, education is ef- operated clinics (9).

fective, informed consent is feasible, and Seventeen states claimed that they emthat "qualified and effective counselors are ployed one or more "genetic counselors." available in sufficient number and ade- There was much variation in the descripquate provision for effective services has tion of such persons. For example, Maine been made." Among several "legal rec- has retained fifteen pediatricians dispersed ommendations," the Committee objected throughout the state to provide primary

Vol. 25, No. 1

Genetic Services

29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
STATE SUPPORT OF GENETIC COUNSELING SERVICES*

States

Is There an Active State Program for Counseling
Families with PKU?

Does the State Employ Any "Genetic Counselors"?

Alaska Arizona Arkansas Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Jersey New Mexico New York
North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Dakota Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

Yes No No No No State pays one-half salary of a medical geneticist Yes No Yes One social worker for beta-thalassemia
No No Yes No Yes Several persons with Master's degrees Yes No Yes One cytogeneticist, one pediatrician Yes Some in Crippled Children's Services No No Yes Five counselors to be employed next year Yes Public health nurses
Yes Not explained Yes Fifteen physicians on retainer Yes No Yes Yes Yes Six counties employ sickle cell counselors Yes Two Ph.D. geneticists No No
Yes Sickle cell counselors No No
Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes At least eleven counselors distributed around the
state Yes Ten sickle cell counselors No No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes No No No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes One nurse Yes No No No Yes One genetic social worker Yes No

* Six states (Alabama, California, Kansas, New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Tennessee) and the District of Columbia did not respond to the questionnaire.

diagnosis and counseling; Connecticut employs one social worker to counsel families burdened with beta-thalassemia; and Arkansas pays one-half the salary of a geneticist at the University of Arkansas Medical School. Although most states only pay for the services of one or two individuals, several (Kentucky, New York, North Carolina, Michigan, and Rhode Is-

land) seem, like Maine, to have retained an adequate number and distribution of genetic counselors. Although the responses were often vague, the answers make it clear that no consensus on the best way to counsel families burdened with phenylketonuria or other disorders has yet evolved.
The response to inquiries pertaining to

30

Reilly

Social Biology

the protection of data obtained by genetic testing (Table 2) was not encouraging. The questionnaire asked (1) whether data were stored and, if so, (2) whether they were provided with any special protection to guarantee confidentiality. Twenty-seven states claimed that they do maintain some

kind of genetic registry; sixteen do not store records; and one did not reply to this question. For the vast majority, record keeping only applies to PKU test results; eight states have files on sickle cell screening, and at least one, New York, keeps a chromosome registry. The general practice

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
STATE PROTECTION OF GENETIC SCREENING DATA*

State

Does the Department of Public Health Store the Results of Mass Genetic Screening in Data Files?

What Special Precautions Are Taken to Protect the Confidentiality of Genetic Data?t

Alaska Arizona Arkansas Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts
Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina
North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Dakota Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

: :

No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes No Yes
Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
No No answer
Yes Yes No Yes No No Yes No Yes Yes No Yes No

N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. Locked files None None Asserted, but not explained None Locked files Did not answer Asserted, but not explained N.A. Patient consent required for release of sickle cell data Locked files None N.A. Coded; storage by hospital record number, not patient name Locked files None N.A. N.A. N.A. Statutory guarantee on confidentiality Asserted, but not explained None None Statutory protection; results coded Statutory protection of sickle cell; results coded in some counties N.A. No answer None Locked files N.A. Asserted, but not explained N.A. N.A. Asserted, but not explained N.A. Did not answer Protection asserted for sickle cell, not PKU N.A. Locked files N.A.

* Six states (Alabama, California, Kansas, New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Tennessee) and the District of Columbia did not respond to the questionnaire.
t N.A. = not applicable.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 1

Genetic Services

31

is to store PKU test results in a single location for a period varying from two to five years and then to destroy them.
Seventeen of the twenty-seven states claimed to take some special precaution to protect genetic testing data; for example, nine states store their data in "locked files." Only three states (Massachusetts, New York, and North Carolina) acknowledged use of a coding system to guarantee the anonymity of the screenee. Generally, efforts to protect the confidentiality of sickle cell data seemed somewhat more significant than those for PKU data. While it is clear from the responses that some effort is made to restrict access to genetic records, only a few states indicated that they had given special consideration to this problem. On the basis of the responses to my questionnaire I concluded that the quality of neonatal screening programs in the United States is not matched by development of systems sufficient to guarantee access to genetic counseling or to protect the confidentiality of genetic data.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Mass neonatal screening to identify and to treat infants burdened with genetic or congenital disorders is rapidly becoming established as a valid public health enterprise in the United States. Problems generated by programs to identify carriers of the gene for sickle cell hemoglobin strongly indicate the need to provide access to genetic counseling and to protect genetic data collected pursuant to screening. So long as the various states, rather

than the federal government, retain control of neonatal screening, physicians and other interested persons should seriously consider passage of a comprehensive law that embraces principles like those enumerated in the Maryland law, the National Genetic Disease Act and the report of the Committee for the Study of Inborn Errors of Metabolism (1975).
Specifically, I suggest:
1. Access (at reasonable cost) to competent genetic counselors should be guaranteed to parents of infants with genetic diseases who are identified through a state screening program.
2. Explicit measures should be taken to protect the confidentiality of screening data. States might follow the lead of Kansas (1975) and Iowa (1976) where unwarranted disclosure of sickle cell test results is a criminal misdemeanor. In addition, the law might provide for civil damages against the state or its employees for injuries flowing from disclosure.
3. Explicit measures should be taken to protect persons who carry the gene for or who are burdened with a disorder from "genetic discrimination." In North Carolina (1975), carriers of the gene for sickle cell hemoglobin or hemoglobin C are protected from employment discrimination by statute. Maryland law (1976) directs the Attorney General to investigate such events. Such a law may have only token force, but it may also stimulate appropriate educational efforts.
We must remain vigilant lest the benefits inherent in mass genetic screening be outweighed by harm caused by abuse of data derived from such programs.

REFERENCES

BESSMAN, S. 1966. Legislation and advances in medical knowledge. J. Pediat. 69:334-337.
BOWMAN, J. E. 1973. Sickle cell--a survey of legislative problems and economic effects. In C. Sinette and J. Smith (eds.), Legislative and socioeconomic aspects of sickle cell disease. Harlem

Hospital Center-Columbia University, New York.
. 1976. Genetic screening programs and public policy. Presented at the W. E. B. Dubois Conference on the Health of Black Populations, Atlanta, December 15, 1976.

32

Reilly

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

CHILDS, B., L. GORDIS, M. KABACK, et al. 1976. Maryland Commission on Hereditary Disorders.

Tay-Sachs screening: Social and psychologicalim- 1974. Report. Unpublished.

pact. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 28:550-558.

NATIONAL SICKLE CELL ANEMIA ACT ADMINIS-

COMMITTEE FOR THESTUDY OFINBORN ERRORS OF TRATION. 1976. Third annual report, July 1,

METABOLISM. 1975. Genetic screening: Programs, 1974-June 30, 1975. Available from the Public

principles and research. National Academy of Sci- Health Services, Washington, D.C.

ences, Washington, D. C.

New York. 1976. New York Public Health Law

CULLITON, B. 1972. Sickle cell anemia: The route § 2500-a (McKinney's Supp. 1976).

from obscurity to prominence. Science 178:138. North Carolina. 1975.North Carolina General

DUSSAULT, J. H., P. COULOMBE, C. LABERGE, et al.
1975. Preliminary report on a mass screeningprogram for neonatal hypothyroidism. J. Pediat. 86:670-674. EDITORIAL. 1970. Sickle cell anemia. J. Amer.Med. Assoc. 214:749.

Statutes 95-28.1 (Cum. Supp. 1975).
PEARSON, H. A., and R. T. O'BRIEN. 1972. Sickle
cell testing programs. J. Pediat. 81:1201-1204. REILLY, P. R. 1975.Recent developments in state
supported genetic screening. Amer. J.Hum. Genet. 27:691-693.

FOLZ, A. M. 1975. The development of ambiguous federal policy: Early and periodic screening, diagnosis and treatment (EPSDT). Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 53(1):35-64.

. 1973. Sickle cell anemia legislation. J. Legal Med. 1(4):39-48.
. 1977. Mass neonatal screening programsin 1977. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 29:301-303.

FOLZ, A. M., and D. BROWN. 1975. State response RISKIN, L. L., and P. R. REILLY. 1977. Remedies

to federal policy: Children, EPSDT, and the for improper disclosure of genetic data. Rutgers-

Medicaid muddle. Med. Care 13(8):630-642.

Camden L. J. 8:480-506.

GUTHRIE, R. 1961. Blood screening for phenyl- SCOTT, R. B. 1970. Health care priority and sickle

ketonuria. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 178:863.

cell anemia. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 214:731-734.

Iowa. 1976. Iowa Code Ann. § 141.6 (Supp. 1976). SINNETTE, C., and J. SMITH, (eds.) 1973. LegislaKansas. 1975. Kansas Statutes Ann. §65-1, 105, and tive andsocioeconomic aspects of sickle cell dis-

106 (Supp. 1975).

ease. Harlem Hospital Center-Columbia Univer-

KLEIN, A. H., A. V. AGUSTIN, and T. P. FOLEY. sity, New York.

1974. Successful laboratory screening for congeni- SWAZEY, J. 1971. Phenylketonuria: Acase study in

tal hypothyroidism. Lancet 2:97-79.

biomedical legislation. J. Urban Law 48:883:931.

LAPPE, M., J. M. GUSTAFSON, R. ROBLIN, et al., U.S. CONGRESS, SENATE COMMITTEE ON LABOR
1972. Ethical and social issues in screening for AND PUBLIC WELFARE, SUBCOMMITTEE ON genetic disease. NewEng. J. Med. 286:1129- HEALTH. 1972. Hearings on theNational Sickle

1132. Cell Anemia Prevention Act, S.2676, 92nd Cong.,

Maryland. 1976.Maryland Ann. Code, Article 43, 1st Sess. November 11 and 12, 1971. Government

Sections 814-821 (Cum. Supp. 1976).

Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

