Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Another look at mortality crossovers
Charles B. Nam
To cite this article: Charles B. Nam (1995) Another look at mortality crossovers, Social Biology, 42:1-2, 133-142, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1995.9988893 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1995.9988893
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 8 View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

Another Look at Mortality Crossovers

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Charles B. Nam
Centerfor the Study of Population Florida State University Tallahassee, Florida 32312

ABSTRACT: Considerable debate still ensues on whether or not the so-called "mortality crossover," the intersection of age curves of mortality at the older ages, is artifactual or real. One school of thought argues that it is a function of misreporting of ages, greater for one population than another. The other school of thought counters that it persists apart from age misreporting and is due to selective frailty processes as age increases. An historical review of the debate is reported, after which an attempt at a balanced conclusion is offered.

Demographers and other scientists continue to be intrigued by the puzzling phenomenon of the intersection of age curves of mortality at older ages for different populations, or what has come to be known as "mortality crossovers." Few accounts of this phenomenon refer to the history of its observation and competing explanations. I shall attempt to provide some details about its evolution and current status as well as propose some generalizations about an integrated explanation.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The life cycle of mortality risks is quite well known to students of population analysis. Risks of death are highest in the minutes and hours shortly after birth, then become progressively lower until the early teen ages, and subsequently increase at older ages to a high point at the end of life span (Figure 1). The general shape of the resulting age curve of mortality varies very little among populations. As nations go through stages of development, mortality risks are lowered at all ages, but the shape of the curve is essentially re-

tained. However, the slopes of the curves in adulthood do vary such that the curves for different populations can sometimes be seen to cross each other (typically at some age of majority). Such a "mortality crossover" appears for blacks and whites in the United States (Figure 2).
Two major hypotheses have been offered to explain the crossover phenomenon. The first relates to inaccuracies in data reporting, and the second relates to selectivity in frailty of populations over the life cycle.
Although substantial attention has been given this phenomenon recently, it has a fairly long history. Early in this century, as vital statistics and population censuses became more detailed, especially at the older ages, observation of mortality crossovers were reported more frequently.
Raymond Pearl, observing the phenomenon in 1922, initially expressed reservation about its realness but later found it to be not only comprehensible but consistent with his emerging theory of the lifetime chances of death (Pearl, 1922, p. 23). An improved level of living, he surmised, "down through the

133

134
Ap« ipftcKk dtotfi rot« p « 1000(m )
500
100

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

80
FIG. 1.--Models of age-specific death rates for each sex corresponding to three different values of expectation of life at birth (logarithmic scale). Source:United Nations, 1963, Population Bulletin of the UnitedNations, No. 6-1962, p. 52, United Nations, New York.

centuries has saved for a time the lives of ever more and more babies and young people who formerly could not withstand the unfavorable conditions

they met, and died in consequence rather promptly. But just because this process tends to preserve the weaklings, who were speedily eliminated

Vol. 42,No. 1-2
-1.01

Brief Reports

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

-2.5-
"S
i
CD
Qoen
-4.0-

D White · Black

45-54

55-64

65-74

75-84

85+

Age
FIG. 2.--Death rates byage and race, forpersons 45 and over: United States, 1987 (logarithmic scale). Source: National Center forHealth Statistics, 1990, VitalStatistics of the UnitedStates, 1987, Vol. II, Mortality, Part A,Table 1-4, Public Health Service, Washington, D.C.

136

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

under the rigorous action of unmitigated natural selection, there appear now in the higher age groups of the population many weaker individuals than formerly ever got there." This is the first recorded instance of the argument that mortality crossovers can be real and, when they occur, can be explained by a process of mortality selectivity.
In subsequent decades, not much attention was paid to Pearl's observation and explanation. In fact, there were frequent instances (as indicated below) when the discovery of a crossover was dispelled with an assumption of errors in the data at older ages.
Nevertheless, from time to time, scholars resorted to Pearl's perspective in accounting for crossovers. Sibley (1930) cautiously attributed blackwhite crossovers in Tennessee to selective effects. Spiegelman (1948) found a crossover in age-specific mortality rates of Jews and non-Jews in Canada, and also alluded to similar findings for Jews and non-Jews in Berlin and in New York City. In these cases, Jews had much lower mortality rates at young ages and had higher mortality rates at older ages than non-Jews. The crossovers in these cases actually took place at young adult ages. Spiegelman attributed this pattern to detrimental behaviors of Jews, especially dietary ones.
To dispel the notion that mortality crossovers occur only when populations being compared are found in the same geographic location, Myers (1964) noted the overlapping mortality curves for the United States and the Soviet Union. This finding suggested that the crossover was a function of the differences in the nature of two mor-

tality curves, but that crossovers could be observed for pairs of populations wherever they might appear geographically.
Myers and Bayo (1965) resorted to U.S. Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance program data to measure age-specific mortality. Those data used documentary proof of age and, therefore, countered the argument that misreporting was the explanation. But their calculations of mortality rates for blacks and whites in the United States based on that information still revealed a mortality crossover.
Spiegelman (1967) elaborated the Myers and Bayo analysis and concluded that doubt was cast on an explanation of crossover founded on erroneous data. But Spiegelman suggested that more work was needed to test the hypothesis of selectivity in vigor of different populations.
In 1968, Nam surveyed these earlier accounts and sought to examine the crossover mystery more extensively. One approach was to utilize adjusted population counts by age, sex, and race for 1950 and 1960 prepared by Siegel (1967), and to recalculate age-specific mortality rates for whites and blacks in the United States (Thornton and Nam, 1968). It was found that, after adjustment, the crossover remained, although the age at crossover moved slightly upward. The selective process producing the crossover was advanced as a combination of biological and social selectivity. A challenge went out to others to elaborate the explanation.
This challenge was not picked up in ensuing years. Authors of research that subsequently reported the crossover phenomenon tended to fall back on an explanation of erroneous data. For ex-

Vol. 42, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

ample, Kitagawa and Häuser (1973), who undertook a massive study of socioeconomic differentials in mortality in the United States, adjusted their data for age misreporting and census undercounts and still found a mortality crossover for whites and nonwhites. But they were hesitant to reject the data error hypothesis because, as they wrote, "their adjustments could not be complete." Schoen (1976) reported "good reason to believe that nonwhite death rates at the high ages are substantially understated and actually exceed white rates at least through the low 80's." Rosenwaike (1979) found that the crossover persisted after he adjusted the data using the method of extinct generations, and he concluded, "Investigation is needed that will utilize previously unexploited data to corroborate age statements given on the death records if we are to attempt to determine whether the crossing of the mortality curves for whites and nonwhites at the very old ages is a real phenomenon resulting from some type of selection in survival patterns . . . or is an artifact of faulty data."
Nam and Ockay (1977), and later Nam et al. (1978) used Causeof Death Life Tables for National Populations by Preston et al. (1972) to examine systematically the existence of crossovers for a large number of paired national populations at different dates, and to see what relationships there were between certain causes of death and the presence of crossover. They found that (a) crossovers occurred in about one-third of all possible pairs of age curves of mortality for countries represented in Preston et al. (1972), and (6) differences in the trend of cardiovascular disease at the older ages

was the principal medical cause determinant of whether or not a crossover took place.
There was a clear necessity to elaborate the selectivity hypothesis by specifying the mechanisms involved which was then carried out by Mantón and his colleagues. Articles by Mantón et al. (1979) and Vaupel et al. (1979) highlighted the heterogeneity of frailty in populations and timing of the selection mechanisms. The selection model offered starts from an assumption of initial distributions of longevity characteristics and postulates that if one population is subjected to a harsher environment and hence a greater force of mortality in the early and middle ages, then a smaller and more highly selected proportion of that population is likely to survive beyond those ages (Mantón and Stallard, 1984). The survivors represent a subgroup of the starting population who are constitutionally endowed for longer survival, where constitutional endowment is not restricted to genetic determinants of longevity but is taken to include the prenatal environment as well as a variety of life experiences and exposures that may influence heterogeneity in longevity. Weiss (1990) expounded the theoretical foundation of this formulation, with attention to biological processes.
The intuitive appeal of this model has not yet convinced proponents of the data error hypothesis that differential misreporting, especially of age, is not the reason for mortality crossovers. Coale and Kisker (1986,1990) demonstrate the greater level of age misreporting in the census and of underregistration of deaths for blacks than whites at the older ages. They continue

138

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

to argue that these errors can account for mortality crossovers.
Kestenbaum (1992) has challenged that conclusion. By basing his calculations on age-specific mortality for the extreme aged population on the Social Security Administration's Master Beneficiary Record, with certain types of questionable records eliminated, he was able to determine that the race crossover persists when these more accurate data are used.
Elo and Preston (1993), on the other hand, used different indirect approaches to measuring the quality of mortality and population data for African-Americans in the period 193090. They made data adjustments using intercensal cohort comparison and extinct generation estimates techniques. These adjustments revealed substantial reporting errors in the data. Nonetheless, the crossover did not go away. Subsequently, they used variable -r procedures to discover the level of mortality in a North model life table that was consistent with AfricanAmerican death rates above age 50. They found that the implied age pattern of mortality was inconsistent with a crossover pattern. However, their procedure involves some untested assumptions, and they do not submit data for the white population to the same rigorous procedures. In short, the Elo-Preston effort measures well the nature of erroneous mortality rates for blacks but does not go far enough to dispel the appearance of racial crossovers in mortality.
One other pertinent analysis relates to China. Coale and Li (1991) have shown that, with the exception of one province in China, the effect of age misreporting in that country is minimal

and, consequently, mortality rates for most of the provinces can be calculated with a high degree of reliability. We, therefore, have compared the age curves of mortality for several provinces of China for which the data are regarded as exceptionally sound. (It should be noted that 85 and over was the oldest age category reported in the data.) We found that, in a few of the provincial comparisons, there is an appearance of crossover at the end of the age curve; in all of the comparisons, convergence of the curves occurs. Figure 3 displays the comparison for men of Beijing and Jilin provinces. This finding suggests that a selective process is at work even in areas where data are largely free of reporting errors.
SUMMARY OF WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT MORTALITY CROSSOVERS
Studies of the mortality crossover phenomenon to date lead us to the following generalizations:
1. Crossovers are observed to occur in a substantial percentage of cases where age-specific mortality curves of two populations are compared. However, crossovers do not occur invariably when age-specific curves of mortality are compared (Nam et al., 1978).
2. Crossovers for pairs of populations occur typically when the populations are significantly different with regard to social and health characteristics associated with varying mortality risks (Spiegelman, 1948; Thornton and Nam, 1968).
3. Crossovers are found to exist in all parts of the world, at different time periods, and for different types of populations. They are common to both

Vol. 42, No. 1-2
-1.01

Brief Reports

139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

-2.5-
CC
CD Q
-4.0-

50-54

55-59

I 60-64

65-69

70-74

75-79

80-84

85+

Age
FIG. 3.--Death rates by age, for males 50 and over: Beijing and Jilin Provinces, China, 1981 (logarithmic scale). Source: Population Policy and Vital Statistics in China, 1991 Table 8, I.D.E. Statistical Data Series No. 56. Institute of Developing Economies, Tokyo, March, 1991. (Courtesy of Ansley J. Coale)

140

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

sexes and are seen when either agespecific mortality rates or life table functions are compared. They can also be observed when either period or cohort data are used (Nam et al., 1968). In fact, they have been observed in a study (Munn, 1955) of fruitflies, who are not notorious for misreporting their ages, suggesting that mortality crossovers are not only a human phenomenon.
4. The ages at which mortality crossovers occur vary among comparisons and tend to rise to older ages for comparisons of particular populations over time (Mantón and Stallard, 1984).
5. Mortality crossovers are special cases of convergence of age-specific mortality rates. Any attempt to explain crossovers must, therefore, explain convergence as well as crossover. In fact, where crossovers do not occur, convergence may still be seen and, in such cases, similar explanations are required (Nam et al., 1978; Mantón and Stallard, 1984).
6. Because misreporting of age is common for older persons and for disadvantaged populations, it stands to reason that at least part of the convergence and crossover process is due to differential misreporting of age on death records and in censuses (Coale and Kisker, 1986). However, convergences and crossovers are still observed when accurate data are used or biased data are corrected for age misreporting (Kestenbaum, 1992).
7. A corollary explanation for convergences and crossovers is a selective process in which the more frail among populations at each age are more likely to die than the more robust. As a consequence, populations become more alike in frailty distributions as they age

and, at some point in the age range, the selective process may result in the population which had relatively more robust people at younger ages ending up with relatively more frail people at older ages (Pearl, 1922; Thornton and Nam, 1968; Mantón and Stallard, 1979).
8. Since the mortality curves that are being compared are both rising with age, but one is rising more rapidly than the other, it is of interest to know if that difference is associated with particular medical causes of death. It has been shown that, for a wide array of comparisons, the general cause category for which variation is significantly related to the disparity in upward slopes of the mortality curve is cardiovascular disease (Nam et al., 1978).
9. The mortality convergence and crossover process is a dynamic one. As socioeconomic characteristics of two populations become more alike, as frailty conditions of those populations become more alike, and as the quality of demographic data collected for the populations become more alike, mortality convergence and crossover will decline and eventually disappear. To the extent that those equalities are not obtained, mortality convergence will probably continue, and mortality crossover will probably occur at some age, however late.
FURTHER STUDY
The saga of the "mortality crossover" is by no means complete. Some of the "mystery" has been removed, but much remains to be learned about the mechanisms that are operating to alter the age curves of mortality in dif-

Vol. 42, No.1-2

Brief Reports

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

ferent populations in ways that make vascular diseases are critically involved

them more or less like the others. in the crossover process and because

Because crossovers are conse- the earlier morbidity conditions they

quences of different age-specific mor- reflect may help to specify the frailty

tality curves that are converging, we heterogeneity.

should focus our investigations on the Age misreporting andheterogeneity

set of conditions contributing to this of frailty are notcompeting explana-

convergence (orthe lack of it).

tions for the observance of crossing

Researchers have devoted consider- or converging age curves of mortality.

able effort tospecifying the patternof Rather, they seem to be complemen-

age misreporting that may be involved, tary explainers which should be inte-

without consensus astoits relative im- grated with measures of socioeconomic

portance for convergence orcrossover. composition and cause-of-death distri-

Increasing attention has also been butions into a fuller model for explain-

given to heterogeneity of frailty asa ing the phenomenon we have come to

force that changes apopulation's death know as"mortality crossovers." More

hazard asit ages, but itsrelative impact appropriately, theagenda in this area

on convergence or crossover has not should now move to thedevelopment

been determined. We now need to join of models embracing all of thesefac-

those two variables with two other tors to enable usto better understand

variables--socioeconomic composition the differing courses of older age-

and cause-of-death distribution. We specific mortality fordifferent popula-

are reminded that crossovers do not tions, with the consequence that we

occur when populations are not mark- will then understand convergence and

edly different socioeconomically. So- crossover asa result.

cial influences may operate through

frailty conditions, but some component of such influences also takes

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

place in other forms (Markides and Revision ofapaper presented atthe anMindel, 1987). Cause-of-death pat- nual meeting of the Southern Demographic

terns are crucial to understanding Association, New Orleans, LA, 1993.1 am

whether crossovers do or do not occur, both because ofthefindingthat cardio-

grateful to Carl Schmertmann for helpful suggestions and statistical advice and to Chingfa Wu forresearch assistance.

REFERENCES

COALE, A. J., and E. E. KISKER. 1986. Mortality
crossovers: Reality or bad data? Pop. Stud. 40:389-401.
_____. 1990. Defects in data on old-age mortality inthe United States: New proceduresfor calculating mortality schedules andlife tables at thehighest ages. Asian Pacif. Pop. Forum 4(1):1-31.
COALE, A. J., andS. Li. 1991. The effects of age misreporting in China on thecalculation of mortality rates at very high ages. Demography 28:293-301.

ELO, I. T., and S. H. PRESTON. 1993. Quality of data for estimating African-American mortality, 1930-1990. Ms.
KESTENBAUM, E. 1992. A description of the extreme aged population based on improved Medicare enrollment data. Demography 29:565-580.
KITAGAWA, E., and P. M. HAUSER. 1973. Differ-
ential mortality in theUnited States: A study in socioeconomic epidemiology. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge.
MANTON, K. G., S. S. POSS, and S. WING. 1979.

142

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

The black-white crossover: Investigation PEARL, R. 1922. Thebiology ofdeath. J. B. Lip-

from theperspective of the components of

pincott, Philadelphia.

aging. Gerontologist 19:291-300.

ROSENWAIKE, I. 1979. A new evaluation of

MANTON, K. G., and E. STALLARD. 1984. Recent

United States census data on the extreme

trends in mortality analysis. Academic Press,

aged. Demography 16:279-288.

Orlando.

SCHOEN, R. 1976. Measuring mortality trends

MARKIDES, K. S., and C. H. MINDEL. 1987. Ag-

and differentials. Soc.Biol. 23:235-243.

ing and ethnicity. Sage, Newbury Park.

SIBLEY, E. 1930.Differential mortality in Ten-

MUNN, M. G. 1955. An inquiry into relativesur-

nessee. Fisk Univ. Press, Nashville.

vival of starved and unstarved Drosophila SIEGEL, J. S. 1967. Completeness ofcoverage of

Melanogaster. Unpublished Master's thesis,

the nonwhite population in the 1960 census

University of Pittsburgh.

and current estimates, and some implica-

MYERS, R. J. 1964. Analysis of mortality in the tions. Proceedings ofthe Conference on So-

Soviet Union according to 1958-59 life ta-

cial Statistics and theCity, Boston, Massa-

bles. Trans. Soc. Actuar. 16:308-317.

chusetts.

MYERS, R. J., and F. BAYO. 1965. Mortality of SPIEGELMAN, M. 1948. The longevity of Jewsin

workers entitled to old-age benefits under

Canada, 1940-1942. Pop. Stud. 2:292-304.

OASDI. Trans. Soc. Actuar. 17:417-431. _____. 1967. Why do these mortality curves

NAM, C. B., and K. A. OCKAY. 1977. Factors

cross? NewYork Statist. 18:6.

contributing to the mortality crossover pat- THORNTON, R. G., and C. B. NAM. 1968. The

tern: Effects of development level, overall

lower mortality rates of nonwhites atthe

mortality level, andcauses of death. Paper

older ages: An enigma indemographic anal-

presented at the General Conference of the ysis. Res. Rep. Soc.Sci. 11(1):1-8.

International Union for the Scientific Study VAUPEL, J. W., K. G. MANTON, and E. STAL-

of Population, Mexico City.

LARD. 1979.The impact of heterogeneity in

NAM, C. B., N. L. WEATHERBY, and K. A.

individual frailty on the dynamics of mortal-

OCKAY. 1978. Causes of death which contrib-

ity. Demography 16:439-454.

ute to the mortality crossover effect. Soc. WEISS, K. M. 1990. The biodemography of vari-

Biol. 25:306-314.

ations inhuman frailty. Demography 27:185-

206.

