Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
On genetics and criminal behavior
J. P. Scott
To cite this article: J. P. Scott (1987) On genetics and criminal behavior, Social Biology, 34:3-4, 256-265, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1987.9988682 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1987.9988682
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

Review Essay: On Genetics and Criminal Behavior

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

J. P. Scott

Department of Psychology Bowling Green State University Bowling Green, Ohio

CRIME AND HUMAN NATURE: By J. Q.
Wilson and R. J. Herrnstein. Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1985.
Anyone who studies the history of science soon comes to the conclusion that it is largely a history of mistakes. At first glance, it seems illogical that the search for truth should involve such an amazing amount of error, but this paradox is easily resolved by the realization that scientific truth is never absolute. Consequently, succeeding generations of scientists establish closer and closer approximations and in so doing demonstrate the errors of their predecessors. An obvious example is Newtonian physics, which served for the truth for three centuries, only to be replaced by the concepts of modern physics.
The second reason for the prevalence of error is that every so often a scientist comes up with a totally erroneous concept which provides a simple and attractive explanation of a set of phenomena. If the scientist is a persuasive writer, the idea may obtain wide credence, until it is demonstrated to be false. Such was the Lamarckian theory of evolution, which still captures the imagination of an occasional unwary or unprincipled scientist, as it did in the notorious case of Lysenko. The histories of this and numerous other examples lead to the conclu-

sion that nothing dies harder than a bad idea.
Thus, the concept of Human Nature seems to be an attractive and reasonable one that could be the basis of scientific inquiry. Expressed as the question "What are human beings like?", it can lead to an exploration of the likenesses and differences between humans and other animals. These explorations lead to the realization that the measurement of human behavior involves an enormous number of major and minor dimensions that are not reducible to one simple formula. And the fact that other organisms also vary in multiple dimensions does not make the task any simpler.
The enormous complexity of the results of comparative science leads one to question the simplistic concept of "Nature," and I propose that, however obvious and attractive it may be, the concept is an erroneous one. In short "Nature" is one of those bad ideas that seem immortal.
What is the matter with the concept? First, it is a singular and collective noun, implying the existence of a single entity or quality. Second, as the term is commonly used, it is assumed that this entity or quality isfixedand invariant. Third, it is assumed that "Nature" is inherent; i.e., determined by heredity. All three

256

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

Review Essay

257

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

of these assumptions are erroneous. other science, but genetics as we know it

Nature in the broad sense refers to all today.

phenomena, both living and nonliving, Genes do not function as individual

and cannot be a single entity. Genetics is entities but always operate as parts of

the science of variation, and one of the genetic systems. Within such systems

most general findings of this science is they function cooperatively and interac-

that every quality of living organisms is tively to produce organization on higher

subject to greater or lesser degrees of levels. Each gene affects many aspects

genetic variation. Therefore, there can of such organization (i.e., is pleio-

be no fixed and invariant quality. Fi- tropic). Therefore, each characteristic is

nally, genetic processes involve only one affected by many genes. The interac-

sort of the many systems and conditions tions between such genes are almost uni-

that interact to produce the various phe- versally nonadditive, i.e., each combi-

nomena exhibited by organisms. Genet- nation produces a unique effect not

ics is a determinant only in the sense that numerically related to those of other

it determines that there shall be varia- combinations. Consequently, in the vast

tion. majority of cases, gene combinations

"Nature" and the related concept of rather than single gene replacements are the "Natural" have a long history dating the principal basis of variation.

back at least to the Romans, as Lucre- Further, genes never act in a vacuum,

tius' poem "De Rerum Natura" bears but always interact with other living and

witness. It is also involved in a long list nonliving systems to produce variation

of errors such as Rousseau's concept of in organization. For example, the com-

the "Natural Man," unspoiled by civili- bination of genes present in a fertilized

zation. Even the followers of Darwin human egg must interact first with the

have been misled by his use of the term cytoplasm of the egg and the accompa-

"Natural Selection," assuming that this nying cytoplasmic genes contributed by

is a monolithic directive force instead of the mother, next with the physiological

a miscellaneous collection of variable systems of the mother's body which are

factors and conditions that modify the relatively well controlled by homeosta-

phenomenon of differential survival. In sis but still subject to variation produced

short, "Nature" is a bad idea.

by her behavior and by environmental

accidents, and then with the actions of a

whole host of other variable living and

PRINCIPLES OF BEHAVIOR GENETICS

nonliving systems that the resulting infant may encounter after birth, and especially the cultural systems into which

The modern approach to the problem of what people are like is Behavior Genetics, which asks the general question of what effects genetic variation has upon what people and other animals (and a few plants) do. Anyone dealing with this field must know genetics, not the genetics of the past which was as full of errors and misconceptions as any

it is born (Scott, 1968). This is not a matter of simply calculating how much variation can be attributed to heredity and how much to environment. Such heritability figures (another of those persistent bad ideas) are only meaningful with respect to a particular genetic population living in a particular environment. Since both genetics and environment are sub-

258

Review Essay

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

ject to change, a heritability figure is further limited to a particular time period.
Finally, in the case of any characteristic involving behavior, an enormous amount of variation is added by the process of behavioral adaptation. The amount of variation is of course specific to a particular genetic population, a particular set of living conditions and a particular kind of behavior. In a genetic experiment with the behavior of dogs (Scott and Fuller, 1965), in which we deliberately attempted to reduce variation in living conditions and to maximize genetic variation by using contrasting breeds, we still found that variation attributable to behavioral adaptation averaged at least 60 per cent of the total. Because these figures apply only to a particular situation, the most important results were those that related to the relative amounts of variation in different kinds of characteristics. Briefly put, the most important variation occurred in motivational and emotional characteristics.
BEHAVIOR GENETICS OF CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR
General Principles.--On the ground of the general finding that genetic variation may affect every characteristic of an organism, one can predict that there should be some effect of such variation upon behavior defined as criminal. It is a researchable hypothesis, albeit one fraught with extreme difficulty.
Because it is behavior, we should expect that it would be the outcome of genetic variation interacting with a great variety of other variable intrinsic and extrinsic processes including behavioral adaptation. And because it is human we must deal with the important effects of

cultural variation, both within and among human societies.
We must use good conceptual tools. No scientific inquiry is better than the concepts it employs. Therefore, we must abandon the concepts of "human nature" and its corollaries, "criminal nature" and "criminality," and substitute the concepts of modern genetics and behavior genetics, the most important of which I have outlined above. To these I might add the finding that the results of genetic variation are not deterministic but probabilistic. The researchable question in respect to criminal behavior is then: Why is one individual more likely to commit a crime than another? And if we are to present a convincing case that genetic variation has an effect on criminal behavior we must show how it operates, i.e., how gene combinations interact with other systems to produce a final result. Furthermore, if we know the pathways through which hereditary variation operates, this should give us clues as to how these pathways may be diverted or modified in the course of development. Is it based on some irreversible change in the nervous system, or is it a matter of variation in emotional responses that are readily modified by training? From what we know of the physiological basis of genetic variation in behavior we would anticipate that there might be several pathways affected by genetic variation.
Finally, from the viewpoint of practical applications, there is the question: How important are the effects of genetic variation on criminal behavior? As noted above, this is a question for which there is no general answer. Our heritability figures for the behavioral differences in dogs ranged from zero to 66 per cent, depending on what was measured.

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

ReviewEssay

259

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

We would expect a similar but lower range of variation in human populations.
Since experimentation is virtually impossible with human subjects except in relatively superficial and harmless aspects of behavior, we are limited to certain techniques: description, including both qualitative and quantitative aspects, correlations or the study of associations, and the technique I consider most valid and direct, the study of how criminal behavior develops. This last involves longitudinal studies over extensive time periods, but it should give valid answers as to why one person commits a crime and another does not in a particular cultural milieu.
ON INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH INVOLVING BEHAVIOR GENETICS
The most exciting and important fields of scientific research today either cut across the conventional disciplinary boundaries or lie within unclaimedfields between them. Research in criminal behavior is no exception. Ideally it should involve researchers from cultural anthropology, law, political science, sociology, social psychology and, at least to some extent, economics. If the hereditary aspect of criminal behavior is to be investigated, a behavioral geneticist should be added to the group.
Obviously, such a research team would be difficult to assemble, expensive to fund, and especially difficult to integrate. The alternative is for one or a limited number of researchers to attempt cross-disciplinary research. If they do so, they must become thoroughly familiar with and sophisticated in the other disciplines involved. Other-

wise, they are likely to commit naive errors of judgment that denigrate whatever authentic ideas and data they may contribute.
Crime and Human Nature.--Wilson and Herrnstein's (1985) book bearing this title is a serious attempt at interdisciplinary research in the literature relating to criminal behavior. Wilson is a political scientist and Herrnstein a social psychologist. Both are professors at Harvard, and they appear to be reasonably sophisticated in fields of social science other than their own.
Such is not the case with respect to genetics. For example, these authors were greatly impressed with William Sheldon's concept of the somatotype, an idea that has little or nothing to do with genetics. It is based on the idea of measuring populations in terms of comparing them to ideal types, as did the early naturalists. As soon as biologists began to numerically measure variation, they found it was continuous, not falling into discrete types. Sheldon's research was centered around the hypothesis, a common one among the older medical anatomists, that variation in structure determines variation in behavior.
Statistical tests of the Sheldonian typology turned out to be negative. Howells (1952) did a factor analysis of human physical measurements. If Sheldon's concept had held up, there should have appeared three factors corresponding to his three somatotypes. Howells indeed found three factors: (1) presence or absence of fat, (2) bottomheaviness vs. top-heaviness, and (3) heavy trunk and face with light limbs vs. narrow trunk and face and heavy limbs. None of these corresponded to Sheldon's somatotypes.

260

ReviewEssay

SocialBiology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Further, if one examines Sheldon's alleged evidence for a connection between physique and behavior, one finds that it was based on impressionistic studies and case histories. We made an experimental test of this association in a breeding experiment with dogs, which showed large amounts of variation in both physique and behavior. When we did a factorial analysis, we came out with one factor related to physical size, with nothing associated with behavior (Scott and Fuller, 1965). In short, physique has no relationships to behavior other than the obvious ones, such as the fact that the short-legged dachshund cannot run as fast as the long-legged greyhound, and so on.
Sheldon's work is relative to criminal behavior in that he and coworkers made a somatotype study of delinquent youths who were being treated in the Hayden Goodwill School in Boston. The principal finding was that these boys tended to be high in mesomorphy (having a stocky, muscular build). In a thirty-year follow-up study of these same youths, Sheldon's coworkers remarked that all groups of males, including college students, tend to rate high on mesomorphy (Hartl et al., 1982). In short, there was no control population. Sheldon developed an intriguing and logically consistent scheme of description but based on a defective concept. Physique may have something to do with crime (in Dicken's day, thieves apparently used small children to enter nouses through narrow windows), but one suspects that its effects depend on a great variety of individual circumstances.
Among humans, the easiest genetic factor that can be worked with is that of sex. This is an exception to the rule, that typology is involved. Humans in the vast majority of cases fall into two easily rec-

ognizable types, male and female, albeit with an enormous amount of variation within the sexes and considerable overlap in most measurable characteristics. Wilson and Herrnstein cite the well known facts, that the frequency of comparable crimes in males in our culture is on the order of five to seven times as great as that in females. But the authors conclude that the differences are likely to be largely cultural, disregarding the evidence of sex differences in aggression in animals where culture should be a minor factor (Scott, 1975).
In the few mammalian species that have been studied experimentally, it is now becoming clear that both sexes fight, but under different motivational conditions, and often with different behavioral patterns. Further, there is now good evidence in mice that the Ychromosome, found only in males, has some effect on variation in fighting propensities in males (Maxson et al., 1979).
This brings us to the case of the XYY condition, a rare chromosomal anomaly in humans which has been alleged to be more frequent in criminals than in normal populations. Some of the best data came from Scotland, where the observed frequency of the condition is about 1in 700 in newborn males, or 0.14 per cent (Jacobs et al., 1971). They obtained karyotypes from 2,538 males in penal institutions and "approved schools," which are institutions for children having various sorts of disciplinary problems. They found one XYY male among 909 prisoners unselected for height and 2 out of 510 among prisoners over 178cm. tall. Since one of the effects of the XYY condition is increased height, this was a biased sample. Among 1,119 boys in the approved schools, they found 4 of the XYY karyo-

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

ReviewEssay

261

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

types, as opposed to 1.57 that would be expected.
These figures obviously fall within the range of normal variability, and the authors concluded that none of their criminal populations were significantly different from the general population. But even if one takes these figures as they stand (7 out of the whole institutionalized population instead of the expected 3.5) and assumes that the institutionalized rate of XYY males is roughly twice as great as the normal, Kessler (1975) has calculated that there were still 99.73 per cent of the XYY males in Scotland that were not institutionalized. If it has an effect on criminal behavior, it affects less than 1per cent of the persons carrying it. This is not a strong effect of genetics; if there is any, it might work in other ways than a tendency toward violence.
XYY males are both unusually tall and somewhat subnormal in intelligence; that is, they are easily recognizable and not very smart, both of which characteristics should lead to a greater probability of getting caught if they commit misdeeds. Which is not often.
What then is a criminal? It is a person who gets caught (in our culture, convicted) of an act defined as wrong by the culture. In my personal experience of our culture, I have never known a boy who did not at some point commit some unlawful acts--destruction of property, theft, malicious mischief, traffic violations, etc. Many of them are never caught, and if caught, are treated differentially. If a boy is apprehended by a police officer, he is likely to be let off with a warning if he belongs to a "good family" (i.e., an affluent and influential one) and treated more severely if he comes from a poor family. Consequently, any available figures on the incidence of crime are

likely to be biased. Moreover, unlike the case in Denmark, records are likely to be kept in a very sloppy fashion, differing from place to place.
In our culture a person apprehended and convicted of a serious crime is statistically likely to be: (1) a male, (2) between the ages of 16 and 25, (3) from a disorganized family background, (4) poor, and finally, (5) unemployed. In any individual case, the person may show none, one, or several of these characteristics. It is obvious that none of these directly involves heredity except that of sex. Age involves biological and developmental changes as well as cultural influences, but the other three are products of the culture. Further, it is often demonstrated that there are subcultural differences in our society with respect to the frequency of deviant behavior. Childrearing practices and parental control, probably the more important deterrents to crime, vary with socioeconomic status.
THE SYSTEMS CONCEPT
The easiest way to integrate these general findings is through the concept of polysystemic organization. Living phenomena are organized in a set of nested systems and subsystems. Entities within each system interact with twoway causation. Also, systems as wholes may act as entities composing systems on higher levels of organization. These also interact reciprocally. Furthermore, there may be two-way interaction between levels of organization. Thus, in using the systems concept, one must assume that every living phenomenon is related to every other, and the task is to discover which of these relationships are important. One cannot assume one-way causation, or that phenomena are unrelated (Scott, 1975).

262

Review Essay

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Physiological Systems
Genetic Systems

Organismic Systems

defined by cuftui

Physiological ·^Organization V

,

Social Organization:,

Geneti'cr ., . . -- Variation

Anatomical --OOnrrggaannii·zzaa.ttii·oonn

·

^X-y*··D,B

,. ehavi

o

. r.

Criminal/^. i~
BehaviOrN^"

Poverty, Unemployment,

^v^PPhhyyssiioollogical' Function

may limit reproduction

Family Organization'

FIG. 1.--Criminal behavior is affected by all levels of polysystemic organization, even by ecosystems (not shown on the diagram). Note that effects proceed in both directions, often reciprocally.

From this viewpoint, crime isa phe- Also, thediagram is astatic one. Be-

nomenon that occurs within humanso- havior isnotinborn; itdevelops through

cial systems that inturn areparts of par- higher levels of organization than the

ticular cultures. It is behavior, which genetic one, and asit does so it is mo-

means that itcanonly be committed by dified (again interactively) by systems

organisms, or groups of organisms, in on higher levels.

this case belonging to thespecies Homo Wilson and Herrnstein have not writ-

sapiens.Figure 1isa rough diagramil- ten a badbook; they have produced

lustrating how the variables associated what might have been agood onewereit

with criminal behavior maybe relatedto not held in bondage by a badidea.The

each other.

authors have reviewed a large amount

This diagram emphasizes the impor- of scientific literature and have at-

tant effects of culture, first in defining tempted to becritical and objective,but

what criminal behavior is and then af- their bad idea causes them to omit most

fecting social organization within it to of the relevant literature ongeneticsand

produce poverty, unemployment,and behavior genetics, andto useuncriti-

family disorganization. Reciprocally, cally asubset of bad ideas related to the

criminal behavior may determine the concept of "Nature."

nature of social groups and modify the For example, they seem not tohave

culture asa whole.

heard ofthegenetic concept ofpopula-

Genetic systems are illustrated as if tions, defined as a group ofinterbreed-

they show one-way causation, but even ing individuals, which has replaced the

here there may be long-range feedback useless concept ofrace. Wilson and Her-

from thehigher levels of culture and so- rnstein correctly point out that it is ab-

cial organization, astheculture encour- surd toclassify individuals as belonging

ages or discourages reproduction in to agroup onthebasis ofskin color,but

those individuals whoshow criminal be- then goontoreview the literature based

havior.

on just that erroneous concept, a con-

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

Review Essay

263

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

cept whose only validity lies in the cultural effects that it produces. To their credit, they do come up with a constructive suggestion (p. 484) for useful research:
What is wanted is a prospective, longitudinal study of black and white children growing up in a big city, a study that attends closely to constitutional factors; early family and school experiences; the ways in which young people come into contact with peers, the labor market, and the criminal justice system; and the development of a set of values and an orientation towards the larger society. No such research has ever been done.
Their preoccupation with "Nature" leads them down other conceptual blind alleys as well. Among these is the concept of "constitution," being the way in which an individual is constituted, or put together. From the viewpoint of scientific analysis, this is no more than saying that there is a group of unknown factors. Into this class, Wilson and Herrnstein throw a group of traits that have little in common except that there is some evidence of genetic variation--physique, intelligence, and temperament (the last of which should join the long list of bad ideas). Originating with the Greek philosophers who imagined four types of temperaments and later adopted by Pavlov, who tried to fit his dogs into this scheme, it turns out to be useless when one attempts to measure genetic variation in emotional and motivational traits.
But the worst effect of the pursuit of a bad idea is that it leads the authors to overlook the obvious. If they had started with the concept of populations, they would have realized that the human species today forms one vast interbreeding population having certain universal traits, the most important of which are language and the related tendency, without which language would

be useless, to live in social groups and to organize these on the basis both of unspoken behavior and of language. That is, all humans have the tendency, unique in the animal world, to produce cultural organization based on language.
From this viewpoint, crime is the creation of culture, being defined by it. The same behavior may be considered a crime in one human society and greatly admired in another. As recently as the nineteenth century, a cowboy in the western part of the United States could be hanged for horse stealing, while the same activity directed toward the livestock of another tribe was considered highly meritorious among the Plains Indians. Consequently, the major variables in defining the frequency of crime should be cultural. Wilson and Herrnstein's preoccupation with the concept of Nature led them to neglect the obvious, i.e. , the homicide rate in the United States is the highest among the developed countries of the world. Instead they tried to find communalities among cultures. It is obvious that humans of whatever culture have the capacity to injure or steal, but it does not take a book of some 600 pages to establish this.
Wilson and Herrnstein assume, somewhat cavalierly, that there is no difference in crime in socialistic and capitalistic countries, implying that economic systems have no effect. In so doing, they discard basic psychological theory related to the production of prosocial behavior. Teachers in nursery schools long ago discovered that the best way to control the undesirable behavior that they observed in infants was not to punish it, but rather to stimulate friendly and constructive behavior. This they called the "positive method." From the viewpoint of psychological theory, they were getting the children to form habits of constructive and peaceful

264

Review Essay

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

behavior. A fact not always appreciated by psychologists, and originally discovered by Pavlov, is that one can form a habit of not doing something simply by not doing it.
Extending this idea to the adult economic world, any economic system that provides full employment in reasonably well-paid, constructive, and socially respected occupations should have lower crime rates (Scott, 1977). And so it is, in either the semisocialistic country of Denmark or the capitalistic one of Japan, the latter of whose low crime rates the authors find mysterious. Incidentally, the result of reducing environmentally produced variation should be to augment and increase the relative amount produced by genetic variation.
On "the positive side, the book includes extensive reviews of the literature relating to crime and social organization--families, schools, economics, and unemployment. Surprisingly there is little reference to the effects of political organization and, as I pointed out above, very little attention to the enormous effects of culture. Here again "Nature" as an integrating concept has the effect of putting the authors into blinders and so causing them to neglect other more useful concepts. In their last chapter, the authors seem to abandon "Nature" and conclude that the most important factor affecting rates of criminality is variation in family organization.
In spite of this conclusion and the weakness of much of the evidence, no one should conclude that genetic variation has nothing to do with behavior defined as criminal. The biggest sort of variation is that between species; only humans have language to define crime. Other species may show behavior that we may label killing or stealing, but

none of them label it. Then there are the sex differences, compounded and usually augmented by cultural norms, but nevertheless huge. As we are beginning to understand from studies in other species, sex differences may be based not only on differences in size and physique, but on the neural organization of behavior. Finally, there should be variations within the sexes that will modify the probability of behavior occurring within a particular cultural milieu. As I pointed out, and as the authors appreciate, such differences are not innate (i.e., they are not "Nature"); they develop throughout lifetimes in interaction with a great number of other variables, including the cultural ones.
CONCLUSION
In answer to the three basic questions raised at the beginning of this paper, Wilson and Herrnstein come up with the following answers:
1. Is there variation in criminal behavior attributable to genetic variation? Their best evidence is that:
A. There are large differences in crime rates between males and females.
B. There is a correlation between early onset of delinquency and high rate of offending.
Genetically induced sex differences correlated with cultural norms is valid evidence for the likelihood of genetic variation; early onset is not. Nowhere is there specific evidence relating genetic variation to specific kinds of crime in a particular cultural milieu.
2. What are the pathways through which genetic differences produce their effects? In the case of sex differences, the presence or absence of the male hormone with its effects on stature, physical strength, kinds of aggressiveness, etcetera, is an obvious pathway. But this still

Vol. 34, No. 3-4

ReviewEssay

265

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

begs the question of why some boys be- as the Danish data show (Mednick et

come criminals and some do not. The al., 1984), confirming what we would

answer may lie in variable responses to expect on theoretical grounds; but its

the hormone and independent variation importance is still in doubt. Since Den-

in other characteristics. Wilson and mark is a particularly orderly country

Herrnstein suggest variation in "consti- and since some of the social factors asso-

tution," meaning especially the differ- ciated with crime are relatively well con-

ences in physique, the evidence for trolled, one would expect that the rela-

whose effects is particularly weak, and tive amount of genetic variation would

in intelligence tests, the argument being be larger than in some other cultures.

that because high heritability figures can be obtained from IQ scores the proportion of variance due to heredity should affect criminal behavior. The argument is a weak one, particularly since the differences are not very great (six points or so on the IQ scale on the average), and there are so many alternative explanations. The physiological links between genetic variation and variation in criminal behavior are still to be established.

What effect will the book have? Beguiled by the Nature-Nurture dichotomy (another bad idea), social scientists in our culture tend to swing in alternate generations from an underemphasis to an overemphasis of the importance of genetic variation as it affects social behavior. As this book attests, there is a reviving interest in the effects of biological processes upon behavior. Hopefully, some young behavioral geneticist will

3. How importantisgenetic variation? take advantage of the trend and do some Taking the sex (gender) differences in soundly based investigations of criminal

certain classes of crime, particularly those involving violence, there is every reason to believe that genetic variation in this sense is important. Genetic evidence for within-sex variation is there,

behavior. Hopefully, also, they will not follow the will-of-the-wisp of "Nature," but instead make use of the tools of modern genetics and the systems concept.

REFERENCES

HARTL, E. M., E. P. MONNELLY, and R. D.
ELDERKIN. 1982. Physique and delinquent behavior: A thirty-year follow-up of William H. Sheldon's Varieties of delinquent youth. Academic Press, New York. HOWELLS, W. W. 1952. A factorial study of constitutional type. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 10:91-118.
JACOBS, P. A., W. H. PRICE, S. RICHMOND, and
R. A. W. RATCLIFF. 1971. Chromosome surveys of penal institutions and approved schools. J. Med. Genet. 8:49-58. KESSLER, S. 1975. Extra chromosomes and criminality, p. 65-73. In R. R. Fieve, D. Rosenthal, and H. Brill (eds.), Genetic research in psychiatry. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore.
MAXSON, S. C., B. E. GINSBURG, and A. TRAT-
TNER. 1979. Interaction of Y-chromosomal and autosomal gene(s) in the development

of intermale aggression in mice. Behav. Genet. 9:219-226.
MEDNICK, S. A., W. F. GABRIELLI, and B.
HUTCHINGS. 1984. Genetic influences in criminal convictions: Evidence from an adoption cohort. Science 224:891-894. SCOTT, J. P. 1968. Early experience and the organization of behavior. Brooks-Cole, Belmont, CA.
. 1975. Aggression. 2nd ed. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
. 1977. Agonistic behavior: Function and dysfunction in social conflict. J. Soc. Iss. 33:9-21.
SCOTT, J. P., and J. L. FULLER. 1965. Genetics
and the social behavior of the dog. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
WILSON, J. Q., and R. J. HERRNSTEIN. 1985.
Crime and human nature. Simon and Schuster, New York.

