Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Preface: Genetics and the human encounter with alcohol
Gerald E. McClearn
To cite this article: Gerald E. McClearn (1985) Preface: Genetics and the human encounter with alcohol, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 143-145, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988604 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988604
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

Preface: Genetics and the Human Encounter with Alcohol

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Gerald E. McClearn
College of Human Development, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania

Humankind has consumed alcohol for a long, long time, and for a long, long time has speculated about the relationship between alcohol and heredity. The issues have included both the questions of whether heredity influences responses to alcohol and whether alcohol consumption influences the heredity of the consumer. These issues have concerned the man in the street as well as the philosopher; they have been discussed from the pulpit, in legislative corridors, in school-rooms, and in taverns. They constituted a major concern of the social reform movements of the early part of this century, and they have motivated and guided societal attempts to prohibit or regulate the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Obviously, the cogency of any discussion about alcohol and heredity depends upon the state of knowledge in the areas of genetics and of alcohol studies separately. In each of these areas, the last two or three decades have seen remark-
This issue is based upon the proceedings of the Genetics and the Human Encounter with Alcohol conference that was held at Union College, Schenectady, New York, on July 6 and 7, 1984. The conference was sponsored by an anonymous donor through Union College and the Society for the Study of Social Biology.

able advances. The relatively small number of scholars who have been concerned with the interface thus enjoy a situation in which their area of knowledge isflourishing,and in which the two parental domains are constantly providing new advances in theory, in substantive knowledge, and in methodology as bountiful grist for their interdisciplinary mill.
It was timely for Union College, with support from an anonymous donor, to arrange a meeting to review the state of knowledge concerning genetics and alcohol. The meeting, and these proceedings arising therefrom, provide exciting views of some of the most salient current foci of interest.
Several characteristics may be noted of the work presented here. First, the historical concern with the effect of alcohol on the hereditary material--alcohol as a mutagen in contemporary terms--is no longer topical. All of the research concerns the role of genes in determining some pharmacological, neurochemical, behavioral, or pathological response to alcohol. Second, it will be seen that both human beings and animals have been featured in the research. Third, it should be noted that alcoholism is the specific target of study in only

143

144

McCleam

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

a few cases. Thus, expressed in the cur- The validation or invalidation of these

rent idiom, animal models are fre- models can only come from their long-

quently used, and, in both animal and term application, and the ultimate ver-

human research, partial models are em- dict will undoubtedly vary depending

ployed.

upon the feature modeled. Enzyme ki-

The issue of "models" in alcohol re- netics or neuronal responses to alcohol

search has been the subject of consider- might be modeled more effectively

able and continuing discussion, with than, for example, the effects of stressof

opinions being expressed that question interindividual competition on alcohol

whether animal research can illuminate consumption. But this is just a personal

the human condition of alcoholism, and guess, and the complexities of mouse or

whether research that deals with only a rat social behavior and the possible rela-

segment of the totality of alcoholism can tionship of the behavior to alcohol use

be informative about the whole.

should not be underrated or arbitrarily

These considerations prompt some dismissed as irrelevant to the human commentary on the logic of the use of condition.

models in addressing problems of hu- It is difficult to conceive that all ani-

man alcohol use, alcohol abuse, and al- mal model alcohol research will be to-

coholism.

tally irrelevant to alcoholism. Granted

First, we may consider whether so this, the question is simply how much

human a problem as alcoholism can be and which of the research will be rele-

explicated in any degree by observations vant. Only time, and the attempt, will

on nonhuman animals. In general, an tell. But in this regard, alcohol model re-

animal model is employed whenever the search is no different than any other. If

"real thing" is inaccessible to measure- we knew in advance, the research would

ment or manipulation. The inaccessibil- be unnecessary.

ity may be due to economic or ethical Another issue in alcoholism model-

considerations that preclude observa- ing is that of comprehensiveness: To

tions on human subjects (such as those what extent can the measures used in a

requiring liver or brain biopsy, for ex- particular study be regarded as charac-

ample). Whether any particular animal teristic of alcoholism? Can quantity/

model will be useful cannot be deter- frequency consumption measures, or

mined in advance. Usefulness will de- DUI arrests, or marital strife due to al-

pend upon the extent to which the fea- cohol abuse, or entry in a psychiatric

ture or features of alcoholism under register be used, separately or collec-

study are part of the determinant sys- tively, to capture the essence of alcoholtems that we as humans share with other1 ism? The question is exacerbated in ani-

primates, other mammals, other verte- mal models, of course. How are

brates. As a rule of thumb, we might ex- withdrawal convulsions, alcohol con-

pect that the more apt models would be sumption in a two-bottle choice situa-

those involving our closer phyletic rela- tion, or roto-rod performance or "sleep-

tives. But only a limited amount of re- time" after an intraperitoneal dose of

search can afford great ape or monkey alcohol explanatory of alcoholism?

participants. Are the favored rodents These questions relate to the fundasufficiently like us to be informative? mental considerations of operational

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Preface

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

definitions and validity. In general, the regarded in some disciplines as a last and

concept of validity is invoked whenever feeble resort when experimental meth-

we measure one thing as a substitute (or, ods could not be applied, arises as a

to use another currently fashionable method of choice for addressing many

term, a "marker") for another, which is of these issues. The robust correlational

the "real thing." Thus, the measured methods of multiple regression, factor

variable is a model in the sense discussed analysis, component analysis, discrimi-

above, and the present question resolves itself into one of the correlation between the marker and the validity criterion.
From the point of view of operational definitions, the issue of validity is

nant analysis, causal modeling, and other multivariate techniques can be expected to feature more and more prominently in alcohol research. Examples of these approaches are to be found in this volume.

skirted, because the marker is defined as Basically, these considerations call

the real thing. Convulsions in mice for a fresh view of variability. The vari-

while suspended by the tails after alco- ance that defines the error term in the

hol withdrawal is dependence, if so traditional i-test or analysis of variance,

defined by the researcher. The opera- and which, therefore, is desired to be as

tional definition is particularly useful, small as possible, is the sine qua non for

perhaps even necessary, when the real correlational studies. It is, furthermore,

thing is but obscurely perceived or the essential raw material of the geneti-

delineated--as is the case, many would argue, with alcoholism. The critical point is that though the logical rules of operational definitions make each different definition the equal of any other, no better and no worse, it must be appreciated that the range of generalization of results is correspondingly narrow. Learning about dependence defined by one operation tells nothing,a priori, about dependence defined by another operation.
An appreciation of the "real thing" emerges only from studies that permit comparison of more than one definition. Thus, from considerations both of validity and of operational philosophy, together with substantive appreciation of the complexity of the determinant systems of alcoholism and other alcoholrelated problems, there is seen to be a need for multiple measures and for study of the relationships among them. The hoary correlation coefficient, long

cist. Not only is the pursuit of knowledge concerning the genetic origins of individuality in alcohol-related phenomena of basic importance, it is also the case that genetic methods provide any investigator of these phenomena with powerful tools for elucidating the matter of interest. Parent-offspring, sibling, twin, and adoption designs have provided such tools in human research, and the new molecular genetic techniques offer great promise in the very near future. In animal research, inbred strains provide stable, repeatable genetic constitutions and selective breeding allows the deliberate tailoring of an alcohol-related trait to specification. The increased research power provided by these techniques of genetic control is becoming ever more apparent. In the following pages are some of the best examplars of applications of these techniques. They promise much for the future of alcohol research.

