Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Automobile accidents and birthdays: An attempted extension of the "death dip" hypothesis
Phillip R. Kunz & Carla Williams
To cite this article: Phillip R. Kunz & Carla Williams (1983) Automobile accidents and birthdays: An attempted extension of the "death dip" hypothesis, Social Biology, 30:1, 106-108, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988521 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988521
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Automobile Accidents and Birthdays: An Attempted Extension of the "Death Dip" Hypothesis

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Phillip R. Kunz and Carla Williams
Department of Sociology Brigham Young University Provo, Utah

ABSTRACT: Although recent studies have found a relationship between one's birthday and such events as suicide, mortality, and accidents, this study of automobile accident reports in one of the Mountain states found no relationship between the drivers' birthdays and the accidents. The expected increase in automobile accidents following birthdays did not occur, even though other variables were carefully controlled.

Several studies have found a relation- postpone death to witness a birthday be-

ship between the birthday and death cause of its importance or significance to

date. Fischer and Olin (1972) argued them.

that people put off death to correspond Kunz and Summers argued from

with what they termed "emotionally- Durkheim's (1980) premise that this

invested deadlines" which are specific "death dip" should hold for people who

and important to the person. They de- were not public notables. Durkheim's

scribed those cases where former Presi- premise states:

dents of the United States died on the Fourth of July, America's birthday. One has to be careful of selected cases, however, unless the selection process is ran-

There can be no society which does not feel the need of upholding and reaffirming at regular intervals the collective sentiments and collective ideas which

dom for the universe being studied. The studies of Hilgard (1953) and Hilgard and Newman, (1961) describing death patterns where a child died on the death date of a parent may be a post-hoc ex-

make its unity and personality. Now this moral remaking cannot be achieved except by means of reunions, assemblies, and meetings where the individuals, being closely united to one another, reaffirm in common their common senti-

planation using cases that fit.
Using better methodology, Phillips and Feldman (1973) found a "death dip" or a reduction in the expected num-

ments; hence come (religious and political) ceremonies. . . .
An individual, in his turn, if he is strongly attached to the society of which he is a member, feels that he is morally

ber of deaths just prior to Yom Kippur in cities of high Jewish population. Another study done by Phillips (1972) found a similar "death dip" for famous

held to participating in its sorrows and joys; not to be interested in them would be equivalent to breaking the bonds uniting him to the group. . . . "

people such as royalty, persons listed in Using a random sample of deaths Who Was Who, Four Hundred Notable from a metropolitan area of 753,000 Americans, and Aristocracy of the people, Kunz and Summers (1980) exWorld, 1967.The "death dip" finding is amined the times of death separated explained by the rationale that people into quarters of the year following the

106

Vol. 30, No. 1

Brief Reports

107

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

birthday. A death was classified as in were printed, and the three cases listed

Quarter One if it occurred in the first last per page were used for the study if

three months following the last birthday all pertinent information was listed. Ac-

anniversary, in Quarter Two if in the cidents were listed in order of occur-

fourth through sixth months, and so on. rence for each county, and the cases

Their data showed that almost half of were systematically obtained. However,

the people died in the first quarter after within the time and locality frame, the

their birthday whereas fewer than ten sample was random. A total of 2,093

per cent died in the quarter before the cases were used in the study.

birthday--irrespective of cause of Variables for which data were availa-

death. This death pattern even obtained ble included the date of the accident,

for accidental death and suicide. Kunz birth date of the driver, number of vehi-

and Summers did not find such a pattern cles involved, driver alcohol, type of ac-

for homicide victims nor Korean war ca- cident, severity of accident, road sur-

sualties; rather, in these latter two cate- face, light conditions, weather, roadway

gories, nearly twenty-five per cent died character, and contributing circum-

in each quarter, as would be predicted stances.

by chance.

The quarter in which the accident oc-

Examining a different aspect of this curred was determined by the day of the

type of research, Phillips (1972) found driver's birthday and counting the first

an increase in motor vehicle fatalities three months as Quarter One, the sec-

following well-publicized suicides. He ond three months as Quarter Two, and

suggests that these increases are in fact soon.

"concealed suicides" which he explains

in terms of a theory of suggestion. Whatever the theory, one can argue that man

RESULTS

apparently can modify the "accidental" Examination of the data indicates

properties of death and in this case of an that the accidents included in this sam-

auto accident.

ple do not follow the predicted pattern:

We argue, then, that since there is an 25 per cent of the accidents fell in the

apparent relationship between birth- first quarter, 25 in the second, 27 in the

days and date of death, including death third, and 23 in the fourth quarter. Ob-

by accidents, there should be a relation- viously there was no significant differ-

ship between birthdays and automobile ence in automobile accidents by quar-

accidents, whether the latter result in ters following drivers' birthdays. One of

deaths or not.

the problems with these data is that we

were able to examine the data for only

one driver rather than for both, and it is MATERIALS AND METHODS possible that the driver at fault would be

Data were obtained from the High- the one for whom the pattern ought to way Accident Reports file for 1979 for hold while the other driver or drivers inone of the Mountain States. This com- volved could be compared to the homiputerized file permitted selection of ac- cide and war victims reported by Kunz, cident reports from urbanized counties in that they may not have contributed to along the heavily populated Wasatch the accident.

Front area of Utah and for rural coun- We attempted to take this problem

ties as well. Data for relevant variables into account by examining the data for

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

108

Kunz

Social Biology

those accidents with only one vehiclein- analysis that our hypothesis is not sup-

volved. This produced noreal change in ported bythedata andmethods that we

the finding already reported of no in- used. Inasmuch as the pattern of in-

crease in accidents after a driver's birth- creased deaths following birthdays ob-

day. tained for accidental deaths, one might

In anattempt to force thepattern for ask more about accidents in general.

automobile accidents into the predicted Which kinds of accidents and under

pattern, we controlled all of our varia- what conditions do and do not fit the

bles, considering only those accidents pattern described earlier? It is possible

which took place with good driving con- that automobile fatalities may fit the

ditions of every type such as dry road- pattern, while minor automobile acci-

ways, clear weather, good visibility and dents may not. Perhaps there are so

so on. Nonetheless, the rather evenpat- many contributing factors when acci-

tern across quarters did not change. dents involving automobiles are in-

Consideration of other variables such as volved that our analysis technique did

the number of vehicles involved and the not sort out these factors in enough de-

type of accident--a collision with an- tail to establish the pattern. It mayalso

other vehicle, with a fixed object, a be possible that our data represented a

train, or running off of the roadway, biased sample of the population.

etc.--also did not lend support to our We suggest further study of a rela-

hypothesis. A check on roadway condi- tionship between birthdays and acci-

tions, light conditions, andweather con- dents in general to establish the validity

ditions also failed to change the re- and reliability of the other studies done

ported finding.

so far in this area of research.

We must conclude on the basis of the

REFERENCES

BALTES, M. M. 1977-78. On the relationship between yearly events and time of death: Random or systematic distribution? Omega 3:165-177.
CERBUS, B. 1970. Seasonal variation in some mental health statistics: suicides, homicides, psychiatric admissions, and institutional placement of theretarded. J. Clin. Psychol. 26:61-63.
DURKHEIM, E. 1961. The elementary forms of religious life, p. 475-476. Collier Books, New York.
FISCHER, H. K., and B. M. OLIN. 1972. Psy-
chogenic determination of time of illness or death by anniversary reactions and emotional deadlines. Psychometrics 32:170173.
HILGARD, J. R. 1953. Anniversary reactions in parents precipitated by children. Psychiatry 16:73-80.
HILGARD, J. R. and M. F. NEWMAN. 1961. Evi-
dence for functional genesis in mental illness. J. Nerv. Men. Disord. 132:3.

KUNZ, P. R. 1977.And a time to die. Mountainwest.3:36.
KUNZ, P. R. and J. SUMMERS. 1979-80. A time to die: a study of the relationship of birthdays andtime of death. Omega 10:281-289.
PHILLIPS, D. 1972. Deathday and birthday: An unexpected connection, p. 64-65. In J. M. Tanur (ed.), Statistics: A guide to theunknown. Holden-Dong, San Francisco.
PHILLIPS, D. P. and K. A. FELDMAN. 1973. A
dip in deaths before ceremonial occasions: Some new relationships between social integration and mortality. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 38:678-696.
ROSENZWEIG, S. 1970. The day of Freud's death: A thirtieth anniversary note. J. Psychol. 74:101-117.
SUCHMAN, E. A. 1968. The "hang-loose" ethic and the spirit of drug use. J. Hlth. Soc. Behav. 9:146-155.
WEISS, E. 1958. The clinical significance of the anniversary reaction. Gen. Practit. 17:117119.

