Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The devolution of evolution
Robert L. Carneiro
To cite this article: Robert L. Carneiro (1972) The devolution of evolution, Social Biology, 19:3, 248-258, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987992 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987992
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 13 View related articles Citing articles: 7 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

The Devolution of Evolution

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Robert L. Carneiro
American Museum of Natural History New York, New York

The thesis of this paper is a simple one. It is that the first rigorous formulation of the concept of evolution, made just over a century ago, was the most useful one we have ever had. Since then there has been a denaturing of this original definition and a proliferation of new ones, so that today the concept is confused and imprecise. In this paper I would like to trace the history of this attenuation and to show the harmful effects it has produced. But before doing so, it is necessary to present a brief account of how evolution received its first formal definition.

The term evolution was first used in biology by the Swiss naturalist Charles Bonnet in his Considérations sur les Corps Organisés, published in 1762 (Miall, 1912, p. 289-290). In the embryological controversy then raging, Bonnet was on the side of the preformationists, and he applied the term evolution to the supposed unfolding of the human embryo from a tiny but perfectly formed "homunculus." Thus, Bonnet's use of "evolution" reflected the old view that all the mature characteristics of an organism were contained in it in minute form from its beginnings.

The word itself comes from the Latin evolûtio, from e-, "out of," and volütus, "rolled." Literally, it meant "unrolled" and was applied especially to books. Roman books were written on parchment and rolled on wooden rods. As it was being read, the manuscript unrolled or "evolved" (McCabe, 1921, p. 2-3). The earliest notion of evolution as the successive unfolding of inherent properties thus directly reflected the etymology of the word. This metaphysical view of evolution prevailed during the eighteenth century, survived into the nineteenth century, and has even found occasional expression in the twentieth century.1
1 In the mid-1850's the American theologian William G. T. Shedd wrote: "the progressive ad-

Quite possibly because of this associa-
tion with the doctrine of preformation,
Lamarck made no use of the term evolu-
tion in his famous work Philosophie Zoolo-
gique (1809), in which he first advanced
the theory of the transmutation of species.
The first formal elucidation of the con-
cept of evolution is commonly thought to
vance and unfolding which is to be seen all along the line of a development, is simply the expansion . . . of that which from the instant of its creation has existed in a more invisible and metaphysical form" (1857, p. 27). And as late as the 1920's, C. Lloyd Morgan stated: "For what is evolution? As the word, properly understood, implies, it is the unfolding of that which is enfolded; the rendering explicit of that which is hitherto implicit. . . . In the beginning the end was enfolded; but only through unfolding do we learn what was, from first to last, the nature of this enfolded end" (1923, p. 111).

248

Vol. 19, No. 3

Devolution of Evolution

249

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

have been made by Charles Darwin; but this belief is incorrect. Darwin did not even use the term evolution in the first five editions of The Origin of Species.2 Not until the last edition of the book, published in 1872, did he employ the term, and then he used it only half a dozen times with no attempt to define it.3 Indeed, nowhere, as far as I can find, did Darwin actually contribute to the formal characterization of evolution as a general process. Even with regard to its biological meaning he seems to have gone no further than to speak of evolution as "descent with modification" (Darwin, 1859 [1967 ed.], p. 340, 443, 4S6).
The man who gave the world the first precise, rigorous, and systematic concept of evolution was Herbert Spencer. Spencer's view of evolution differed substantially from preceding ones. In the first place, he did not see evolution as simply the unfolding of pre-existing structures through the action of immanent forces. Rather, he thought of it as involving the interplay of both internal and external factors. He held this view, moreover, even before he began to work out the detailed characteristics of evolution. Thus, as early as 1850 in Social Statics, his first book, he remarked that "civilization no longer appears to be a regular unfolding after a specific plan; but seems rather a development of man's latent capabilities under the action of favourable circumstances . . . ." (1851, p. 415). And years later, in Principles of Sociology, he
2 The last word of the first edition, however, is "evolved."
3 The word evolution occurs on pages 201, 202, and 424 of the sixth edition of The Origin (1872). In view of the fact that Darwin's name is today universally associated with the rise of "evolution," it is very curious that neither Ernst Mayr, in his introduction to the facsimile reprint of the first edition of The Origin,nor Morse Peckham, in the introduction to his variorum text of all the editions of The Origin should have found Darwin's early failure to use the term of sufficient interest even to mention.

wrote: "Evolution is commonly conceived
to imply in everything an intrinsic ten-
dency to become something higher. This is
an erroneous conception of it. In all cases
it is determined by the co-operation of
inner and outer factors" (1890a, p. 93).
Spencer's first serious concern with the
attributes of evolution began in 1851 when
he was asked to review W. B. Carpenter's
Principles of Physiology. As he later wrote:
In the course of such perusal as was needed to give an account of its contents, I came across von Baer's formula expressing the course of development through which every plant and animal passes--the change from homogeneity to heterogeneity... . this phrase of von Baer expressing the law of individual development, awakened my attention to the fact that the law which holds of the ascending stages of each individual organism is also the law which holds of the ascending grades of organisms of all kinds (1926, I, p. 384-385).
Then, in a series of papers which ap-
peared in the early and mid 1850's,
Spencer successively recognized other at-
tributes of evolution, including, for exam-
ple, increased definiteness and integration
(1926,1, p . 501). Not until 1862, however,
did he bring these various characteristics
together and combine them into a single
formal definition. This he did in his book
First Principles, where he defined evolution
as "a change from an indefinite, incoherent
homogeneity, to a definite, coherent heter-
ogeneity; through continuous differentia-
tions and integrations" (1863, p. 216).
Much of First Principles was devoted to
expounding and illustrating evolution among all orders of phenomena.4 Because
4 First Principles went through six editions, and still remains perhaps the fullest and most penetrating analysis of the concept of evolution in existence. It should be noted, however, that in later editions of the work Spencer altered the definition of the term to read: "Evolution is an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of motion; during which the matter passes from an indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a definite coherent heterogeneity; and during which the retained motion undergoes a parallel transformation"

250

Carneîro

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

it had no serious rival, and because it had been worked out with great fullness and precision, Spencer's concept of evolution preempted the field. And for a time almost all scientists understood evolution to mean essentially a change in the direction of increasing complexity.
In his Introduction to the revised edition of Evolution: The Modern Synthesis, Julian Huxley has claimed that "thinkers have been able to provide general definitions of evolution more satisfactory than those of earlier evolutionary philosophers like Herbert Spencer . . ." (1964, p. 33). I would dispute this assertion. Instead of increased clarification, what later writers have often brought us has been increased confusion. This has occurred, not only in biology, but also in my own field of cultural anthropology. Thus, in 1957 Joseph Birdsell wrote: "there is no agreement upon a proper definition of cultural evolution" (1957, p. 396). And referring to papers written during the year of the Darwin Centennial, Julian Steward remarked: "The essential meaning of cultural evolution has by no means been clarified, and some of the views expressed in the present symposium are so disparate that they are hardly in conflict" (1960, p. 170).
Ironically, Julian Huxley himself has contributed to this confusion. And even more ironically, he has recently sought a way out of it by readopting a conception of evolution that is unmistakably Spencerian! But we are getting ahead of our story. Let us first go back to Spencer and resume tracing the history of his concept of evolution.
It is important to note that Spencer did not make evolution coextensive with organic evolution. As he once wrote, "I did
(1912, p. 367). I must say that I find this revised definition less elegant and less useful than the original one.

not . . . introduce it [the term evolution]
in the place of 'epigénesis,' or any word of
specially biological application, but as a
word fit for expressing the process of evo-
lution throughout its entire range, inor-
ganic and organic," and, he might have
added, superorganic (1908, II, p. 329n).
Nor did Spencer regard evolution as
equivalent to progress, as is sometimes
alleged. He noted, in fact, that " 'progress'
has an anthropocentric meaning, and . . .
there needed a word free from that" (1908,
II, p. 329n).
Despite his emphasis on evolution,
Spencer also recognized and had a good
deal to say about the opposite process,
which he called "dissolution," or, as we would say today, "devolution."5 He made
it quite clear that evolution was neither
inevitable nor irrevocable. Thus, for exam-
ple, he wrote:
. . . the process of Evolution is not necessary, but depends on conditions; and . . . the prevalence of it in the Universe around, is consequent on the prevalence of these conditions; the frequent occurrence of Dissolution snowing us that where the conditions are not maintained, the reverse process is quite as readily gone through. Bearing in mind this truth, we shall be prepared to find that the progress of a social organism towards more heterogeneous and more definite structures of a certain type, continues only as long as the actions which produce these effects continue in play. We shall expect that if these actions cease, the progressing transformation will cease (1890&, p. 574-S7S).
Altogether, we find expressed in Spen-
cer's First Principles a concept of evolution
which is explicit, systematic, comprehen-
sive, and unequivocal. However, not long
after the appearance of First Principles,
the warping and attenuation of this con-
5 Who first coined the term devolution I do not know. Probably it has been invented independently a number of times, since it is such an obvious and useful coinage. The earliest use of "devolution" that I have come across was by Edward Grant Conklin in 1923 (1923, p. 283).

Vol. 19, No. 3

Devolution of Evolution

251

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

cept began. Among biologists especially, a notion of evolution emerged that greatly relaxed the specifications required of change in order to qualify as evolutionary. Darwin himself, as we have seen, thought of evolution as merely "descent with modification" (1859 [1967 ed.], p. 340, 443, 456), a view which, taken literally, includes any change a species might undergo, including changes leading to its extinction!
In the decades that followed, we can observe a continued thinning out of the concept of evolution, as evidenced by the following definitions or characterizations of the process.
Late in the nineteenth century, St. George Mivart wrote, "The word 'evolution' is now generally used to denote that process by which the universe in general, and our world with its inhabitants in particular, are supposed to have grown to be such as now they are" (1889, p. 500). And four decades later Edward Grant Conklin stated that "evolution means only the transformation of an earlier into a later stage according to natural laws" (1928, p. 64). About the same time Henry Edward Crampton stated, "Evolution is the word employed for the regular changes in nature" (1934, p. 15). And David Starr Jordan observed that "By evolution, as the word is now used, we mean the universal process of orderly change . . . . Moreover, as this process occurs throughout all that we know, evolution becomes another name for nature" (1928, p. 1). And finally, Julian Huxley remarked in 1956 that "the whole of phenomenal reality is a single process which properly may be called evolution" (1956, p. 3).
We must now ask: What is the effect of a concept of evolution which is so allembracing? The effect, I think, is entirely detrimental. As a term comes to mean more and more, it means less and less. And finally, having come to mean everything--

"nature" or "the whole of phenomenal reality"--it means nothing. A scientific concept which has no specifiable properties except universality, which cannot be distinguished from anything else, and which includes changes as disparate and opposite as one can name, is, in my opinion, totally useless.
The next question we need to ask is how a concept of evolution so different from Spencer's could have arisen among biologists. The anomaly can, I think, be explained as follows.
Until 1859 almost everyone, biologists included, believed in the fixity of species. Then, with the publication of The Origin of Species, two things became apparent simultaneously. The first was that species were not fixed, but had changed. The second was that the direction of this change had been largely toward increased complexity.
However, this increase in complexity was evident only when one surveyed major portions of the history of nature. To the workaday biologist, concerned with limited changes in a few species over a relatively narrow segment of time, the overall direction of change was by no means so evident. And the mere fact that the species he was studying had changed at all was actually of greater immediate significance to him than the ultimate direction of this change.
Now, the simple fact of change in living species, for so long denied and now so convincingly affirmed, required a name. Darwin had refrained from naming it. He had spoken of "descent with modification," but this would not do as a label. A convenient single term was needed in order to highlight, to epitomize, and to dignify this change. A scant three years after the publication of The Origin of Species Spencer had formally introduced the term evolution into scientific discourse. And while he carefully defined it to mean something less.

252

Carneiro

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

than the totality of change and made it a vigorously evolutionary discipline, by

apply to a good deal more than the realm the late 1890's a reaction had set in which

of biology, still, the term did include many led eventually to an almost complete rejec-

of the changes in organic life to which tion of evolutionism. Nor was this simply

Darwin had called attention. Furthermore, a therapeutic purging of the errors of early

no other term was so available or con- evolutionism, as is sometimes alleged. It

venient as evolution. Finally, Spencer him- was a thoroughgoing repudiation of the

self had written a whole work, The philosophy and objectives of evolutionism.

Principles of Biology (1864--67), in which How else can we explain the assertion by

he dealt extensively with organic evolution. Berthold Laufer that "The theory of cul-

Small wonder then that biologists were tural evolution [is] to my mind the most

quick in seizing upon "evolution" and inane, sterile, and pernicious theory ever

making the term their own.

conceived in the history of science . . ."

And so it came to pass that from applying to change proceeding in the direction of increased definiteness, coherence, differentiation, and integration--in short, the direction of increased complexity--"evolu-

(1918, p. 90), or the assurance by Edward Sapir that "evolutionism as an interpretative principle of culture is merely a passing phase in the history of thought. . . " (1920, p. 378)?

tion" soon came to mean whatever change a biologist might find a given species to have undergone. Biologists had thus successfully appropriated the term.

But while eradicated from most of the academic scene in the United States, cultural evolutionism did manage to survive at one institution--Yale University. It sur-

In time, this bold act of appropriation vived there, though, in the attenuated form

was forgotten, and biologists came to given to it by biologists. Just what effect

regard themselves as the original and this straitened form of evolution had on

therefore the rightful custodians of the the work carried on under its banner is a

concept of evolution. Moreover, scientists question I would now like to discuss.

in other fields soon began to regard them in the same way. I t was not long then before a nonbiologist who wanted to toil in the vineyards of evolution might feel a certain uneasiness over what he imagined to be an act of trespass. This has been true of anthropologists, according to William W. Howells, who wrote:

Evolutionism was kept alive at Yale by three academic generations represented by William Graham Sumner, Albert G. Keller, and George P. Murdock. Sumner, the first man to teach a course in social science in America, was, in his early years, strongly influenced by the views of Herbert Spencer. But as his own evolutionism developed, it

Evidently because of a feeling that the came to have more of a Darwinian cast,

biologists are the proprietors of the word with adaptation receiving much greater

and that it means biological "descent with emphasis than increasing complexity. Thus,

modifications" . . . anthropologists have always seemed a little shamefaced about using

in Folkways, Sumner wrote:

it . . . (1960, p. 1601).

There is no development of the mores along

An additional reason for this reluctance

any lines of logical or other sequence. The mores shift in an endless readjustment of

to use the term stemmed from the fact that the modes of behavior, effort, and thinking,

for nearly half a century cultural anthropology was not on speaking terms with

so as to reach the greatest advantage under the conditions (1906, p. 476).

evolution. While anthropology began life as Sumner's student and successor, Albert

Vol. 19, No. 3

Devolution of Evolution

253

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

G. Keller, was even more Darwinian and
less Spencerian. Indeed, he was openly
hostile to Spencer. For example, after
quoting Spencer's definition of evolution
Keller wrote:
Who can refute this? Yet who can use it? It is doubtless true, yet the working scientist, impatient to be getting forward, will ask: "If true, what of it? To what end?" This formula, in comparison with the Darwinian factors [of variation, transmission, selection, and adaptation] helps in no way toward scientific discovery; it is not the cloud by day, nor yet the fire by night. Rather it is like the vault of an overcast sky; it covers all things, but nobody can get his direction from it and fare forth (1931, p. 14).
This passage is puzzling in a number of respects. In the first place, Keller somehow seems to think of Spencer's concept of evolution as all-encompassing. This is precisely what it is not. As we have seen, only those changes which manifested a specific direction were evolutionary for Spencer. If anything is the vault of an overcast sky, covering all things, it is a concept of evolution which includes all manner of changes. And such a concept was more nearly Darwinian than Spencerian.
Another point to be made here is that in criticizing Spencer, Keller tended to confuse the process of evolution with its mechanisms. Spencer's formula focused on the nature of the changes that were to be considered evolutionary. Darwin, on the other hand, enumerated those factors through which evolution, in the organic realm, had taken place. The two approaches are thus not antagonistic, but complementary. One can entertain a Spencerian view of evolution, whether cultural or biological, and still see it operating through variation, selection, adaptation, and factors of this sort.
Keller's student and successor in turn, George P. Murdock, accepted his teacher's concept of evolution with little or no mod-

ification. In his major work, Social Structure, published in 1949, Murdock remarked that since in social organization "as elsewhere in culture, change is an adaptive process, we feel no hesitation in employing the term 'evolution' which is used for processes of orderly adaptive change in other sciences" (1949, p. 184).
Ten years later Murdock returned to the subject in an article entitled "Evolution in Social Organization." Here he begins by examining the concept of evolution as held by contemporary biologists, seeking, he tells us, a "biological prototype" for the concept of evolution in culture (19S9, p. 143). He seeks such a prototype because the prevailing concept of evolution in anthropology, he thinks, "represents a serious distortion of . . . its fundamental biological meaning" (1959, p. 131). Thus, Murdock makes it crystal clear that he regards biologists as the keepers of evolution to whom anthropologists must turn for a proper understanding of the concept.
After a brief survey of present-day organic evolutionism, Murdock summarizes his findings by listing what he believes to be the four "most outstanding general characteristics of evolution as it is envisioned by the biologist" (1959, p. 129). Each of the four is worth examining, but here I will consider only Characteristic No. 2, which Murdock expresses as follows: ". . . evolution consists of real events, not of abstractions from events, so that evolutionary development is historical in the strictest and most literal sense" (1959, p. 129). This assertion brings to mind a famous footnote in his book Social Structure in which Murdock stated that "The only cultural processes are historical. The author cannot accept the contention of [Leslie] White that evolution is a separate cultural process" (1949, p. 116n).
Now, what can we say of these assertions? In one sense, of course, Murdock is

254

Carneiro

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

right. The external world does not consist of separate evolutionary and historical processes. (And, incidentally, White never contended that it did.6) But in another sense Murdock is wrong. Let us see why.
We have noted that in his Social Structure Murdock defined evolution as "orderly adaptive change." In the article "Evolution in Social Organization" a decade later he repeats this:
If the term evolution is to have a legitimate place in the technical vocabulary of anthropology, it must designate, like its biological prototype, not some nebulous conceptual abstraction, but a very concrete process of orderly adaptive change . . . (1959, p. 143).
It is perfectly clear, then, that Murdock can properly call evolutionary only those changes which are, in fact, orderly and adaptive. All other changes--random, disruptive, disorderly, nonadaptive, or maladaptive--he cannot call evolutionary. Yet the "real history" that Murdock insists on clinging to is full of disruptive and disorderly changes. What then is he to do with such changes as he pursues his brand of cultural evolutionism? If he sticks to his precepts, he must set them aside. But as soon as he does so and deals only with those changes that are orderly and adaptive, then, despite all his disclaimers, he has abstracted. He has selected from the totality of history those events, and only those events, which manifest specified properties. Thus, in spite of himself, he has torn the fabric of reality. This, of course, I see not as a crime, but as ordinary scientific procedure. What Murdock would be forced to regard as an embarrassment, I would regard as merely a necessity, and a beneficent one at that.
Murdock is not always consistent, how-
6 As a matter of fact, White had written explicitly: "Our categories [history, evolutionism, and functionalism] refer not to differences in the real events themselves, but to conceptual contexts to which we may refer the real events as we please" (1945, p. 231).

ever, in what he holds evolution to be, and his inconsistency lands him in further difficulties. For example, he concluded an article entitled "How Culture Changes" by stating, "However halting or harsh it may appear to participants, culture change is always adaptive . . ." (1956, p. 260). At other times, he takes an entirely different tack, forgetting adaptation altogether, and following the lead of biologists considers all of culture change as evolutionary. Thus, in "Evolution in Social Organization," he wrote: "The group of processes usually designated collectively as those of culture change . . . corresponds closely in practically every respect to the processes of organic change known to the biologist as evolution" (1959, p. 131). Yet, seeming to fear that this usage might be thought idiosyncratic, he added: "Anthropologists . . . have not hesitated on occasion to use 'cultural evolution' in a sense synonymous with culture change" (1959, p. 131).
Let me now try to summarize Murdock's varied concepts of cultural evolution. In one place or another he has held that:
1. Cultural evolution consists of only those changes that are orderly and adaptive.
2. Cultural evolution consists of the totality of changes in culture, since biologists regard as evolution the totality of changes in nature.
3. Cultural evolution consists of all changes in culture because all such changes are adaptive.
It is quite evident that these three propositions are contradictory. Not all can be entertained at once. And indeed, I would argue that not one of them can be successfully defended. Let us discuss them in turn, beginning with Proposition No. 3, namely, that culture change is always adaptive.
I doubt that Murdock would seriously want to defend this position if formally challenged. For if all changes are adaptive, then adaptation becomes a universal cate-

Vol. 19, No. 3

Devolution of Evolution

255

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

gory, and therefore meaningless. The significance of adaptation comes precisely from there being an opposite category of Kowadaptation. But as soon as we eliminate nonadaptation and subsume all change under adaptation, we are surrounded with difficulties. Natural selection ceases to have any material to work on, and evolution grinds to a halt. Moreover, I doubt that Murdock would find support from any of his biological preceptors on this point. Thus, Proposition No. 3 falls to the ground.
Next, let us look at Proposition No. 2 which states that evolution consists of all historical events, not merely those having some specifiable property, such as adaptiveness or increased complexity. The strictures I raised earlier, and repeated a moment ago, about the uselessness of universal categories apply here too, and I need not repeat them. It is true that on this point Murdock could probably count on the support of a good many biologists. Yet, in defending an inherently weak position, numbers mean little.
Finally, let us look at Proposition No. 1 which asserts that evolution consists of orderly adaptive change. As often as he departs from this view, Murdock always seems to return to it. Thus, after the passage I quoted earlier in which he says that evolution encompasses all change, Murdock quickly adds that social evolution "is adaptive, producing cultural adjustments to the geographical environment and to the other basic conditions of life" (1959, p. 131). If I can presume to judge among his various concepts, I would say that this is the one he would finally fix upon if forced to come to rest on one position. Nevertheless, if we try to follow Murdock as he attempts to exemplify this view of cultural evolution, we are led along a tortuous path. Toward the end of his article "Evolution in Social Organization" Murdock says:

The acute reader will doubtless have noted that, up to this point, I have not actually dealt with evolution. . . . Nevertheless, in view of my insistence that the term evolution can only be properly applied to concrete historical sequences of change, it behooves me to present one actual case before I conclude. I shall choose the Nkundo tribe of the great Mongo nation of the central Belgian Congo . . . (19S9, p. 141).
Then, over the next three pages, Murdock proceeds to describe what he later assures us is "a very concrete process of orderly adaptive change . . ." (1959, p. 143). What he actually describes, though, is merely the transition of a society from a matrilocal, matrilineal, and avunculocal form to one that is patrilineal and patrilocal, with some remnants of avunculocal residence. Nowhere in his description of this change does Murdock show, or even suggest, in what way the change has been adaptive. In fact, while describing Nkundo culture change, he seems to forget about adaptation altogether! Thus, it would appear that if this is evolution at all, it is evolution only in the weak sense of any kind of culture change. If it is more than this, then Murdock has failed to demonstrate it.
Still, suppose Murdock had stuck to his dictum that change has to be adaptive to be evolutionary. And suppose further that he had demonstrated that Nkundo culture change was indeed adaptive. What are we then to say about the general utility of this view of cultural evolution? In my opinion, to regard cultural evolution as no more than adaptive culture change still involves us in difficulties. In order to help make clear what these difficulties are, I would like to refer to certain events in the history of the Amahuaca Indians of the Peruvian montaña, among whom I once did field work.
During the nineteenth century the Amahuaca were subject to raids by stronger neighboring tribes like the Conibo and Piro

256

Carneiro

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

and to exploitation of their territory by rubber gatherers. In seeking to protect themselves against these incursions, the Amahuaca had two choices. One was to collect their numbers and to stand and fight. The other was to divide their numbers and to try to avoid their enemies. They appear to have done the latter, reducing the size of their settlements and moving them at frequent intervals. Thus, they attempted to cope with the threat of attack by means of dispersion and evasion rather than by open confrontation. But in taking this course the Amahuaca had inevitably to simplify their social, political, and ceremonial organization, and today they lack even headmen and shamans and engage in ceremonialism only occasionally.
Nevertheless, while reduced in numbers and simplified in social structure, the Amahuaca did survive. Had they chosen to remain in larger, more permanent settlements and to stand and fight, they might have been exterminated. The change they underwent was thus clearly adaptive. However, since it rendered their society less definite, less integrated, and less complex, it was also a change in the direction of "devolution."
Now, if along with Murdock we regard adaptation as the touchstone of evolution, we are forced to say that the change undergone by the Amahuaca, despite the simplification it entailed, was evolutionary. Devolution, then, becomes a species of evolution. But if evolution is to include increased complexity and at the same time increased simplification, then we have a word containing its own opposite. Such paradoxes are, I think, a sure sign that the concepts underlying them stand in need of reexamina tion.
We can argue the point in another way. If adaptation is to be the soul and substance of evolution, then why have two

terms? Why not simply drop the more general term and retain only the more specific? To continue to use both words as ostensibly different but implicitly the same, can only compound the confusion.
Thus far in this paper I have treated biologists as the undifferentiated enemy. Now, however, I must confess that I have found allies among them too. Some few biologists seem always to have held the belief that evolution was more than just change, or even adaptive change. They continued to feel that the principal attribute of evolution was change in the direction of increasing complexity. Indeed, in speaking of adaptation, Darwin himself said at one point, "This improvement inevitably leads to the gradual advancement of the organisation of the greater number of living beings throughout the world" (1872, p. 97). And C. Lloyd Morgan expressed the opinion that "what from our point of view is essential to the idea of evolution is upward passage by progressive steps . . . along definite, recognisable lines of advance, with continuity of progress from lower to higher" (1928, p. 343).
At this point let us return to Julian Huxley who over the years has wrestled with the concept of evolution in a most illuminating way. We have seen that Huxley has at times made evolution synonymous with "the whole of phenomenal reality." However, in the last chapter of Evolution: The Modern Synthesis, Huxley admitted that in the vast totality that for him constituted evolution he could discern certain major trends. Not all changes conform to these trends, to be sure, but they nevertheless constitute the most striking features of evolution. These trends include greater control of the environment by living organisms and greater independence from it (1942, p. SS9-S62). These are capabilities which rest squarely on the structural elabo-

Vol. 19, No. 3

Devolution of Evolution

257

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

ration, that is, on the increase in complexity, of the life forms involved.7 These trends, Huxley feels, deserve a label, and he proposes to call them "evolutionary progress."
If we equate Spencerian and Huxleyan terminology, we see that what Spencer thought of as the entirety of change, Huxley calls evolution, and what Spencer called evolution, Huxley would call evolutionary progress. Now, what do we gain by this new usage? In my opinion, nothing. It is awkward and unnecessary. In fact, it is a step backward, since it reintroduces into scientific terminology the notion of progress, which has always had a subjective ring, and which, in my opinion, we were well rid of. If the kernel and core of evolution is again to be recognized as being changes in the direction of increasing complexity, then why not simply readopt the original Spencerian meaning of the term?
As a matter of fact, in recent years Huxley has virtually done just that. Thus, on the occasion of the Darwin Centennial he defined evolution as "a one-way process, irreversible in time, producing apparent novelties and greater variety, and leading to higher degrees of organization." "Higher," he added, means "more differentiated, more complex, but at the same time more integrated" (1960, p. 44). This could hardly be more Spencerian!
And more recently, Huxley has continued to argue along these lines. Thus, in 1962 he wrote:
It is obvious to common sense that some organisms are higher than others--that a dog is higher than his fleas, or a fish higher than
7 As Dobzhansky has observed, "it is not just a love of complexity which makes evolution produce ever more intricately organized living bodies. Although there is no strict relationship between the two things, more complex organization by and large gives a greater autonomy of the organism from the environment" (19SS, p. 371).

a jellyfish--but it is hard to define just what we mean by this. On the other hand, a proper definition is clearly important for general biological theory, because what appear to common sense as the obviously higher types of organisms came later in the evolutionary process than the obviously lower types: mammals came later than reptiles; reptiles later than fish; vertebrates later than invertebrates; bees and ants later than cockroaches; flowering later than flowerless plants. The whole question is thus linked with the problem of direction in evolution in general, and with the idea of evolutionary advance or progress in particular (1962, p. 163)
Nor is Huxley an isolated figure in this
apparent reawakening to the value of Spen-
cerian evolution. Here and there among
contemporary biologists definitions of evo-
lution can be found which incorporate the
core of Spencer's notion of the concept. To
cite but one example, in the volume entitled
Evolution in the Modern Biology Series,
Jay M. Savage, Professor of Biology at
the University of Southern California, char-
acterizes evolution as "development of an
entity in the course of time through a
gradual sequence of changes from a simple
to a more complex state" (1963, p. 4).
So perhaps all is not lost! We may yet
return to a concept of evolution more
logical, more rigorous, and more fruitful
than many of the ones now current. Yet,
there is still reason to be pessimistic. In-
ferior definitions of evolution continue to
flourish and even to proliferate. And, as
Simpson has noted, "There is . . . a sort of
Gresham's Law for words; redefine them as
we will, their worst or most extreme mean-
ing is almost certain to remain current and
to tend to drive out the meaning we might
prefer" (n.d., p. 268).
Nonetheless, natural selection operates
on scientific concepts just as it does on
animals and plants. Selection may be less
severe, though, so that unfit definitions
may survive longer than unfit species. But

258

Carneiro

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

in the end, we may reasonably expect the me if the scientific conception of evolution fittest concepts to supplant the lessfit.And that remains in command of the field turns when that day comes, it would notsurprise out to be the first one ever proposed.

REFERENCES

Birdsell, JOSEPH B. 1957.Onmethods of evolu- Henry Holt and Company, New York.

tionary biology and anthropology. Part II. _____. 1928. Mind in evolution, p. 340-354. In

Anthropology. Amer. Sci. 45:393-400.

Frances Mason (ed.), Creation by evolution.

CONKLIN, EDWARD GRANT. 1923. Heredity and The Macmillan Company, New York.

environment in the development of men. Prince- MURDOCK, GEORGE P. 1949.Social structure. The

ton Univ. Press, Princeton.

Macmillan Company, New York.

_____. 1928. Embryology and evolution, p. 62-80. _____. 1956. Howculture changes, p. 247-260.

In Frances Mason (ed.), Creation by evolution. In Harry L. Shapiro (ed.), Man, culture,and

The Macmillan Company, New York.

society. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

CRAMPTON, HENRY EDWARD. 1934. The coming _____. 1959.Evolution in social organization,

and evolution of life. The University Society, p. 126-143. In Evolution and anthropology: A

New York.

centennial appraisal. The Anthropological So-

DARWIN, CHARLES. 1872. The origin of species. ciety of Washington, Washington, D.C.

6th ed.John Murray, London.

PECKHAM, MORSE. 1959. The origin of species by

_____. 1967.Onthe origin of species. (Facsimile Charles Darwin; A variorum text. Univ. of

of 1sted., 1859). Intro. Ernst Mayr. Atheneum, Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.

New York.

SAPIR, EDWARD. 1920. Review of Robert H.Lowie,

DOBZHANSKY, THEODOSIUS. 1955. Evolution, ge- Primitive society. TheFreeman 1:377-379.

netics, and man.John Wiley &Sons, Inc., New SAVAGE, JAY M. 1963.Evolution. Modern biology

York.

series. Holt, Rinehart, andWinston, New York.

HOWELLS, W. W. 1960.Review of Sol Tax (ed.), SHEDD, WILLIAM G. T. 1857. Lectures upon the

Evolution after Darwin, Vol. 2: Theevolution philosophy of history. W.F. Draper, Andover,

of man: Mind, culture and society. Science Mass.

131:1601-1602.

SIMPSON, GEORGE GAYLORD. n.d. The major fea-

HUXLEY, JULIAN. 1942. Evolution: The modern tures of evolution. Clarion book. Simon and

synthesis. Harper &Brothers, New York.

Schuster, New York.

_____. 1956. Evolution, cultural and biological, SPENCER, HERBERT. 1851. Social statics. John

p. 3-25. In William L. Thomas (ed.), Current Chapman, London.

anthropology. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. _____. 1863. First principles. 1st ed. Williams

_____. 1960. At random, a television preview, and Norgate, London.

p. 41-65. In Sol Tax and Charles Callendar _____. 1864-1867. The principles of biology. 2

(eds.), Evolution after Darwin, Vol.3: Issuesin vols. D. Appleton and Company, New York.

evolution. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. _____. 1890a. The principles of sociology. Vol. 1.

_____. 1962. Higher and lower organisation in 3rd ed. D.Appleton and Company, New York.

evolution. J. Roy. Coll. Surg. Edinburgh 7:163- _____. 18906. First principles. 4th ed.D. Apple-

179. ton and Company, New York.

_____. 1964. Evolution: The modern synthesis. _____. 1908. The filiation of ideas, p. 304-365.

Rev. ed. George Allen & Unwin, London.

In David Duncan, Life and letters of Herbert

JORDAN, DAVID STARR. 1928. Evolution--Its mean- Spencer, Vol. 2. D. Appleton and Company,

ing, p. 1-12. In Frances Mason (ed.), Creation New York.

by evolution. The Macmillan Company, New _____. 1912. First principles. 6th ed. D. Apple-

York.

ton and Company, New York.

KELLER, ALBERT G. 1931. Societal evolution. Rev. _____. 1926.An autobiography. 2 vols. Watts&

ed. TheMacmillan Company, New York.

Co., London.

LAUFER, BERTHOLD. 1918. Review of Robert H. STEWARD, JULIAN H. 1960. Evolutionary princi-

Lowie, Culture and ethnology. Amer. Anthrop. ples and social types, p. 169-186. In Sol Tax

20:87-91.

(ed.), Evolution after Darwin, Vol. 2: The

MCCABE, JOSEPH. 1921. The ABC of evolution.
G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York.

Evolution of man. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

MIALL, L. C. 1912. The early naturalists; Their SUMNER, WILLIAM GRAHAM. 1906. Folkways.

lives and works (1530-1789). Macmillan and Ginn and Company, Boston.

Company, Ltd., London.

WHITE, LESLIE A. 1945. History, evolutionism

Mivart, ST.GEORGE. 1889. On truth ; Asystematic and functionalism: Three types of interpreta-

inquiry. Kegan Paul, Trench &Co., London.

tion of culture. Southwest. J. Anthrop 1:221-

MORGAN, C. LLOYD. 1923. Emergent evolution. 248.

