Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
How does childbearing affect fertility motivations and desires?
Warren B. Miller & David J. Pasta
To cite this article: Warren B. Miller & David J. Pasta (1995) How does childbearing affect fertility motivations and desires?, Social Biology, 42:3-4, 185-198, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1995.9988900 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1995.9988900
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 24
View related articles
Citing articles: 10 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

How Does Childbearing Affect Fertility Motivations and Desires?
Warren B. Miller and David J. Pasta

kj y

mtmm
j

y

Transnational Family Research Institute; and DMA Corporation, 355 West Olive Avenue, Suite 207, Sunnyvale, California94086

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

ABSTRACT: In this study we assume that fertility decisions are made one birth at a time and use longitudinal data collected from 401 married couples over a two-year period to explore how having a child affects two types of fertility motivation and three types of fertility desires. Using a series of five constrained multiple regression analyses, we tested the effects of two childbearing variables on these five types of motivation and desires in the context of a large set of control variables also hypothesized to affect fertility motivation and desires. The results demonstrate that the childbearing variables have a substantial effect in all five regression models. Specific findings indicate that childbearing stimulates greater positive motivation for childbearing and an increase in the number of children desired. Although this situation would appear to create a positive feedback loop in which each child born further increases the motivation and desire for children, the findings also suggest three different mechanisms whereby childbearing causes a counterbalancing regulation of that loop. These mechanisms include a negative motivation mechanism, a satiation mechanism, and a delay mechanism. The effect of these mechanisms on the termination of childbearing is considered in conjunction with a fourth mechanism, the achievement of desired family size.

Various theories of fertility decision-making have made different assumptions about the process underlying how people make childbearing decisions during the life course and, in particular, how they decide how many children they will have. The nature of the assumed process falls along a continuum. Thus, several micro-economists (Becker, 1960; Willis, 1973) have assumed a one-stage process in which couples decide before the initiation of childbearing how many children to have and subsequently stay more or less within the frame of that decision. Other theorists (Fawcett et al., 1972; Namboodiri, 1974) have posited a two-stage process, one in which normative factors determine the minimum number of children that couples have and psychological factors-- values, preferences, economic consid-

erations--determine the upper bounds of family size. Bulatao (1981) has gone further and suggested a multistage process in which various values and disvalues attached to children combine at different parities to create four identifiable stages. Finally, in what has variously been called conditional (McClelland, 1983), successive (Fawcett, 1983), or sequential (Namboodiri, 1983) decision-making, other theorists assume that people decide about each child one at a time.
If one assumes that only one initial decision is made about family size, then one is justified in limiting oneself to understanding the motivations and desires that affect that initial decision. On the other hand, if one assumes--as we do--that childbearing decisions are made one child at a time, then it is important to understand not only the

185

186

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

motivations and desires that affect each decision but also, given the likely impact of each new child on those motivations and desires, how those motivations and desires have been affected by each child's arrival. Moreover, because one of the questions inherent in the sequential decision approach is "how do people decide to stop having children?", understanding the changes in motivations and desires that occur with increases in parity will likely reveal how couples make that final decision about fertility termination.
Previous research that has explored sequential decision-making has utilized cross-sectional data almost exclusively (Hollerbach, 1983). In the study reported here, we examine the effect of having a first child and a second child on men's and women's fertility motivations and desires, utilizing longitudinal data. The data analysis will be guided by a previously developed and tested theoretical framework (Miller, 1992). When interpreting and integrating the findings in the final section, we will draw some tentative conclusions about the processes whereby people make the decision to terminate childbearing.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
FERTILITY MOTIVATIONS AND DESIRES
In our previous research, we have described and confirmed the importance of a psychological and behavioral sequence whereby fertility motivations and desires affect childbearing decisions, reproductive behavior, and, ultimately, fertility itself (Miller, 1994; Miller and Pasta, 1993, 1994).
The first or motivational step in the sequence occurs when childbearing

motivations, which are latent traits or dispositions to feel, think, and act in ways that affect childbearing, are activated by internal or situational factors into more or less conscious desires. These desires take three main forms: desires for a child (childbearing desires), desires for a particular number of children (child-number desires), and desires for when to have a child (childtiming desires). Each of these three desires represent the individual's own wishes.
The psychological/behavioral sequence continues when these desires are translated into their respective intentions. This step, during which the individual takes into consideration the perceived desires of his or her spouse, the perceived attitudes of family and close friends, and certain practical matters such as employment and income, represents the decision-making step in the sequence.
The next step is the action step, when intentions are implemented through various instrumental behaviors. In the reproductive domain, there are two major types of instrumental behavior: proceptive behavior (Miller, 1986a; Miller and Pasta, 1996), where the intention is to achieve conception, and contraceptive behavior (Miller, 19865), where the intention is to prevent it. Ultimately, it is the individual's practice of various proceptive or contraceptive behaviors that leads to the final step in the sequence, the occurrence or non-occurrence of conception.
The motivational step in this sequence--the activation of latent motivational dispositions into conscious desires--may be described in greater detail, on the basis of our earlier re-

Vol. 42, No. 3-4

Fertility Motivations

187

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

search. First, there appear to be two independent dimensions of childbearing motivation, one positive and the other negative. Second, each of these dimensions appears to play an important role in the activation of both childbearing and child-number desires, but not child-timing desires. Third, childtiming desires appear to result to a large degree from attitudes and beliefs about when having a child will fit best with the individual's expected future life course. Fourth and finally, both childbearing and childnumber desires appear to be important antecedents to child-timing desires.
Figure 1presents these relationships in a schematic form. It also depicts two additional, reciprocal relationships: that between positive and negative childbearing motivation and that between child-number and childbearing desires. We hypothesize that these reciprocal relationships exist, but we have not been able to examine them satisfactorily with the cross-sectional analytic methods used to date.
It is the motivational step in the psychological/behavioral sequence leading to fertility, represented by the two motivations and three desires shown in Figure 1, that is the primary focus of this paper. One reason for this focus is simply to explore how childbearing itself affects the motivational processes that underlie its occurrence. Does having a child strengthen or weaken the five factors shown in Figure 1 and, if so, does it affect them differentially, perhaps strengthening some and weakening others? The answers to these questions may have important implications for subsequent childbearing. A second reason for focusing on the motivational step in the

psychological/behavioral sequence is a developmental one that arises directly from this last point. Does the effect of childbearing on the five factors change across parity, i.e., with the arrival of each additional child? In particular, is there some sort of self-regulation of motivation that occurs as individuals move through their reproductive careers, having first one child, then two, then three, etc.? Alternatively, is the regulation imposed by external constraints, without childbearing having any diminishing effect, or perhaps even a progressively augmenting effect, on motivations and desires? It is these two sets of questions that the research reported here seeks to address.
HYPOTHESIZED EFFECTS
OF CHILDBEARING
There are reasons to believe that positive motivations for childbearing increase and negative motivations decrease with the birth of the first child and possibly the second. For example, an argument can be made on theoretical grounds that, given a partial biological basis for childbearing motivation (Miller, 1992), the arrival of a baby stimulates biological mechanisms that enhance bonding and positive responsiveness to the baby and that the latter spill over to strengthen motivation for another child. There is some empirical support for this contention as well. For example, Corter and Fleming (1990) cite a number of studies which show that first-time mothers show less maternal responsiveness to infants both behaviorally and autonomically than mothers with one or more previous children. In addition, some crosssectional survey studies (e.g., Fawcett, 1978) suggest that positive motivations

188

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Child-Number Desires

Positive Childbearing Motivation
II
Negative Childbearing Motivation

Child-Tuning Attitudes and Beliefs

Child-Timing Desires

Childbearing Desires
FIG. 1.--A schematic representation of the pathways through which five fertility motivations and desires are hypothesized to affect each other over time.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

are higher and negative motivations lower among parity-one women (i.e., those with one child) compared with parity-zero women (i.e, those with no children). Whether this observation also applies to parity-two women as compared to parity-one women is unknown.
There are three reasons to believe that child-number desires increase slightly with the birth of a child. First, as Figure 1 indicates, child-number desires are directly increased by increases in childbearing motivation. Second, where an unintended pregnancy occurs, bonding to the child and the rationalization of previous plans should lead to an upward adjustment in the number of children desired. Third, if the child that is born does not, in conjunction with any previous children, meet the gender desires of the parent, an increase in the number of children desired may result.

Childbearing desires should also increase with the birth of the first child, again as Figure 1 indicates, because of the direct positive influence of increases in childbearing motivation. In contrast to the relatively weak effect expected for child-number desires, evidence indicates that childbearing motivation should have a strong effect on childbearing desires (Miller, 1994). However, as the individual approaches his or her desired family size, childbearing desires (i.e., the desire for another child) should begin to fall toward zero. In other words, the effect of having a child on childbearing desires should become negative.
Child-timing desires should lengthen after each birth. Our previous research has shown that after marriage or the birth of the first child, the passage of time gradually decreases the length of time before a(nother) child is desired (Miller and Pasta, 1994). However,

Vol. 42, No. 3-4

Fertility Motivations

189

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

the conception and birth of a child should abruptly set the clock back, considerably increasing the length of time before the next child is desired.
There is one additional aspect of these hypotheses that requires discussion. Couples who are still pregnant when they come under study will almost certainly not manifest the same effect on their motivations and desires as those who have had a child. We anticipate finding a weaker effect on both types of childbearing motivations, on child-number desires, and on childbearing desires among pregnant couples compared with those who have completed the pregnancy and borne a child. The reason for hypothesizing this pattern is that bonding by the parent becomes progressively stronger across pregnancy and into the postpartum period. In the case of childtiming desires, being pregnant should not have a weaker effect; in fact, the reverse should occur. Because the difference between being pregnant and having had the child is, in effect, a time distinction, couples still experiencing a pregnancy should desire a slightly longer time before having a subsequent child compared with couples whose child has already been born.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLE AND DATA COLLECTION
The data analyzed in this paper were collected during a longitudinal research project concerned with childbearing motivation and its effects on fertility in 201 married couples with no children and 200 married couples with one child. All of these couples were liv-

ing in a largely urban and suburban county located in the San Francisco Bay Area. Sampling was conducted by telephone using a modified area probability technique.
Eligible couples included those who were currently married with zero or one child, in which both spouses spoke and read fluent English, neither spouse was sterilized, and the wife was not pregnant and was age 18 through 39. The average age of the husbands and wives was 31.6 and 29.6, respectively. Marital duration for the parity-zero couples was just over three years and for the parity-one couples was over four-and-one-half years. The average husband had 16.7 years of education; the average wife had 15.9 years. Couple income averaged $71,000.
Additional characteristics were the following: 7 per cent of the males, 13 per cent of the parity-zero females, and 35 per cent of the parity-one females were not currently employed; 25 per cent of the sample was Roman Catholic, 44 per cent was Protestant, and 21 per cent had no religion; and 81 per cent of the sample was white, 7 per cent Asian, 5 per cent Latin, and 2 per cent black. Further information about sampling and the social-demographic characteristics of the sample is available in other publications (Miller, 1992, 1994; Miller and Pasta, 1993).
The data used for this paper were collected during three structured interviews: an initial interview and two follow-up interviews 12 and 24 months later. Additional follow-up interviews at 42 and 60 months are in progress. At the initial interview each husband and wife was interviewed separately and privately, either at the principal investigator's research offices or in the

190

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

couple's own home. Several paperand-pencil self-report inventories were administered during the course of this two-hour interview. The two follow-up interviews contained similar substantive material but were conducted by telephone. For these interviews, the inventories were mailed to each respondent with a return envelope. Only 13 male respondents (3.2 per cent) and 11 female respondents (2.7 per cent) were lost to follow-up after the two years.

Child-Timing Desires measure, respondents who wanted a(nother) child were asked how soon they wanted to have it. The parity-zero respondents' mean response was about 21 months, and the parity-one respondents' mean response was about 18 months. All three of these measures have been demonstrated to have satisfactory reliability and construct validity (Miller, 1994; Miller and Pasta, 1993, 1994, 1995).

VARIABLE MEASUREMENT

ControlVariables.--Obviously, there are many factors present at the begin-

FertilityMotivations and Desires. -- ning of an interval, and many others

The Childbearing Questionnaire was that occur during it that could affect

administered at each of the three in- one or more of the components of the

terviews, using a form only slightly motivational framework shown in Fig-

modified from previous research ure 1. In order to avoid overestimating

(Miller, 1981). It provides two general the effect of childbearing itself on the

and uncorrelated measures of motiva- five fertility motivations and desires in

tion: Positive Childbearing Motivation the framework, we decided to include

(PCM) and Negative Childbearing as many of these additional factors as

Motivation (NCM). PCM is based on possible as control variables in our

27 items and NCM is based on 20 analyses.

items. Both measures have been dem- To this end and based on our previ-

onstrated to have satisfactory reliabil- ous work (Miller, 1992, 1994; Miller

ity and construct validity (Miller, and Pasta, 1993, 1994), we identified

1996).

three categories of variables for use as

All three of the desires variables are controls. The first category included

based on questions asked of all respon- personal background characteristics of

dents during each of the three struc- our respondents, such as age, educa-

tured interviews. For the Childbearing tion, religion, and occupation. The

Desires measure, respondents were second included characteristics of our

asked how definitely they wanted to respondents' spouses, parents, and

have a(nother) child and how much friends, in particular the childbearing

they wanted to have a(nother) child. motivations, desires, and attitudes of

Responses to these two questions were these significant others. The third cate-

combined to form a composite vari- gory included changes experienced by

able. For the Child-Number Desires our respondents during the two-year

measure, respondents were asked to interval of the study, changes which

indicate the total number of children or might be expected to alter their fertility

how big a family they wanted. The motivations and desires. We included

mean response was 2.48 children, and such changes as the development of a

the median was 2 children. For the serious illness, especially in the wife,

Vol. 42, No. 3-4

Fertility Motivations

191

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

the occurrence of serious marital difficulties, a change in employment status, and a significant change in couple income.
Space limitations preclude a full discussion of these variables and their measurement. However, further information about them is contained in a longer version of this paper which is available from the first author upon request.
Childbearing Variables. --Two childbearing variables were generated by asking respondents whether any pregnancies had occurred during the twoyear follow-up interval and if so what the outcome was. We also asked about adoptions (one couple adopted) and loss of child custody following divorce (two parity-one respondents gave up a child to their spouse). One childbearing variable, which was dichotomous, was called Currently Pregnant (high score = yes); seventy-four respondents reported that they or their wives were pregnant at the time of the second follow-up interview. The other variable was called Increase in Parity and reflected any change in parity from the initial to the second follow-up interview. These changes did not include current pregnancies but did include the adoption and the losses of child custody. Two respondents had decreased by 1 child, 510 had not changed, 262 had increased by 1 child, and 4 had increased by 2 children.
DATA ANALYSIS
For the purposes of data analysis, the sample was divided into four groups according to sex and original parity: parity-zero males (M/0) and females (F/0) and parity-one males (M/l) and females (F/l). This division al-

lowed a test for sex, parity, and sexby-parity effects of all the predictor variables. Using PROC REG (SAS Institute, Inc., 1990), we tested five regression models, one for each of the two motivation variables and the three desires variables.
The identical procedure was followed with all five regressions. Each of the motivation and desires variables measured at the second follow-up interview (Time 2) was regressed on: (1) the corresponding motivation or desires variable measured at the initial interview (Time 0); (2) all the motivation and desires variables hypothesized in our theoretical framework (see Figure 1) as antecedent to the dependent variable in question, including both Time 0 and Time 2 versions of the antecedent variables; (3) all the control variables described in the previous section; and (4) the two childbearing variables of primary interest, Currently Pregnant and Increase in Parity.
Including the Time 0 variable corresponding to the Time 2 dependent variable meant that any effects of the childbearing variables on the latter were independent of (controlled for) the respondents' initial scores on the corresponding variable. Including the motivation and desires variables antecedent to the dependent variable in our theoretical framework meant that any effects of the childbearing variables on the dependent variable were separate from their effects on the other framework variables. Including the control variables reduced the chance of misspecifying the relationship between childbearing during the two-year interval and the five dependent variables.
In order to test for group differences, we constrained all predictors to

192

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

have equal parameters across all four groups. If relaxing a particular constrained parameter in one group significantly improved model fit, then we allowed it to be free in that group. If relaxing a parameter in two groups improved fit, then we freed both but we constrained them equal to each other unless not doing so further improved model fit. Because of the exploratory nature of this study, any parameter that was nonsignificant in one or more groups as a result of these steps was dropped from the model in those groups. If all parameters were nonsignificant for a given variable, that variable was dropped from the model entirely.
Once we had completed the analyses as described, we removed all of the control variables from each of the five models and reestimated each one. This step produced only a small reduction (5 per cent on average) in the full models' R2's and little change in the effects of the childbearing variables. Because of this robustness in the childbearing variables' effects, subsequent discussion focuses exclusively on the simpler, reestimated models.
RESULTS
Selected features of the five constrained regression models that resulted from the data analytic procedures described above are reported in Table 1. In order to conserve space, we report only the observed effects of the two childbearing variables on the dependent variable in each of the five models, together with summary statistics for each model. In addition to the Time 0 equivalent of the Time 2 dependent variable and the two child-

bearing variables, each model contained the following additional predictors: Model 1, Negative Childbearing Motivation--Time 2; Model 2, Positive Childbearing Motivation--Time 2; Model 3, Childbearing Desires--Time 2; Model4, Positive Childbearing Motivation--Time 2, Negative Childbearing Motivation--Time 2, and ChildNumber Desires--Time 2; and Model 5, Two Child-Timing Attitude Indices --Time 0 (Miller and Pasta, 1994), Childbearing Desires--Time 0 and Time 2, and Child-Number Desires-- Time 2.
EFFECTS OF AN INCREASE IN PARITY
An increase in parity has the expected effects in four of the five models, with two qualifications. Having a child during the two-year interval under study increased positive childbearing motivation, decreased negative childbearing motivation, increased the number of children desired, and lengthened the period of time before which the next child was desired. In the positive childbearing motivation and child-number desires models, the effect is equal across sex and parity groups. In the negative childbearing motivation model, one qualification is that the effect occurs only among parity-zero respondents. In the childtiming model, the other qualification is that there is no significant effect in the parity-zero men. However, this latter effect would have been significant had we used a one-tailed test for significance, a reasonable procedure given that the effect was in the direction of our initial hypothesis. In the fifth model, an increase in parity has one unexpected effect on childbearing desires: having a child during the two

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
SELECTED RESULTS FOR THE FOUR SEX-BY-PARITY GROUPS FROM FIVE SIMULTANEOUS EQUATION, CONSTRAINED REGRESSION MODELS

MODEL NUMBER AND DEPENDENT VARIABLE

M/0

F/0

M/l

F/l

Independent Variables
1. Positive Childbearing Motivation Currently Pregnant Increase in Parity Summary Statistics:

t r Beta Value*

I

r

Beta

Value"

t r Beta Value"

I r Beta Value'

0.019 0.060 2.356 0.119 0.060 2.356 0.013 0.060

0.232 0.133 5.125 0.249 0.133 5.125 0.131 0.133

N=770 R2 =0.528

DF = 7 F Value = 121.90

2.356 0.052 0.060 5.125 0.247 0.133
p = < 0.001

2.356 5.125

2. Negative Childbearing Motivation Currently Pregnant Increase in Parity Summary Statistics:

0.035

-0.050

-0.056

-0.219 -0.204 -5.046 -0.281 -0.204 -5.046 -0.096

N=770 K2 = 0.380

DF=6 FVaIue = 78.06

0.079 -0.080 p= <0.001

3. Child-Number Desires Currently Pregnant Increase in Parity Summary Statistics:

-0.013 0.195 0.200 N=755

-0.024 7.354 0.241
R2 = 0.491

-0.024 0.200 7.354 0.188 0.200
DF = 7 F Value = 102.92

0.010 7.354 0.251 0.200
p = < 0.001

7.354

4. Childbearing Desires

Currently Pregnant

-0.108 -0.130 -4.237 -0.120 -0.130 -4.237 -0.142 -0.401 -12.245 -0.207 -0.401 -12.245

Increase in Parity

0.098

0.151

-0.320 -0.618 -17.933 -0.188 -0.618 -17.933

Summary Statistics:

7V=778 R} =0.641

DF = 14 F Value = 97.41

p = < 0.001

5. Child-Timing Desires Currently Pregnant Increase in Parity Summary Statistics:

0.228 0.150 -0.039
JV=741

5.168 0.195 0.101
K2 = 0.593

0.150 5.168 0.165 0.150 0.263 5.338 0.295 0.231
DF=15 FValue = 70.39

5.168 0.276 5.337 0.276
p = < 0.001

0.246 0.231

4.738 5.337

NOTE: Betas were constrained to be equal across groups for each childbearing variable unless relaxing the constraint improved model fit, p < 0.05. Childbearing variables that were not significant in a group were dropped from the model in that group and are represented in the table in that group only by a correlation coefficient (r).
"A «value a 1.973 = two-tailed p ==0.05, 22.602 = two-tailed p £0.01.

g
t
2

194

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

years makes no difference to the parity-zero respondents with respect to their childbearing desires. However, as expected, it strongly reduces those desires for the parity-one respondents. There are no sex differences in this pattern.
EFFECTS OF BEING PREGNANT
AT TIME 2
Being pregnant at the end of the two-year interval also has the expected effects in four of the five models, again with some qualifications. A current pregnancy increases positive childbearing motivation but less so than actually having a child during the interval. A current pregnancy has no significant effect on negative childbearing motivation or the number of children desired. Although we expected some effect in these two models, these findings are consistent with the original hypothesis that being pregnant would have a weaker effect than actually having a child.
For child-timing desires, being currently pregnant lengthens the period of time before another child is desired in all four groups, but somewhat more so among parity-one women. This effect is generally comparable to the effect of an increase in parity, although greater among parity-zero men and parity-one women, and smaller among parity-zero women and parity-one men.
Again, the childbearing desires model provides some unexpected results in the parity-zero groups. Being currently pregnant reduces the desire for a(nother) child in both parity groups, much more so among those who already have a child. Unexpectedly, this effect is greater than that of an increase in parity among the two parity-zero groups, where a parity in-

crease has no effect. However, as expected, it is smaller than the effect of an increase in parity among the parityone groups, where a parity increase has a very large effect.
DISCUSSION
We initially posed two questions about the effect of childbearing on the motivational step in the psychological/ behavioral sequence leading to fertility, represented by the variables and pathways schematized in Figure 1. First, we asked whether and in what way childbearing strengthened or weakened the five motivations and desires in our framework. The results presented above clearly show that getting pregnant and having a child during a two-year interval have important effects on all five of them, at least in the predominantly European-American, middle-class sample examined in this research. Four of the five effects are very much in line with initial hypotheses, with only the absence of a positive effect on childbearing desires among both parity-zero groups countering expectations. Further, while there are certainly a number of other factors that might produce such effects, many of them have been included in the analyses as control variables, and the results indicate that the childbearing variables consistently are by far the most influential.
The second question we posed was whether there was some sort of selfregulation of the motivational step as individuals move through their reproductive careers. Although we have only examined the effect of having a first or second pregnancy/child in this study, because our sample's mean and median desired family size are 2.5 and

Vol. 42, No. 3-4

Fertility Motivations

195

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

2.0 children respectively, our results reflect changes in the effects of childbearing as couples begin to reach their desired family size. Keeping in mind the importance of caution when generalizing from a single sample, it seems reasonable, therefore, to draw some preliminary conclusions about the question of self-regulation and to make tentative extrapolations to what might occur at higher parities.
The positive effect of childbearing in both parity groups on positive childbearing motivation and the number of children desired, as evidenced by Models 1 and 3, suggests that childbearing promotes additional childbearing. In this light, our second question may be rephrased as follows: If each child born strengthens positive motivation and increases the number of children desired, what counteracts or constrains this positive feedback loop between the motivational antecedents of childbearing and childbearing itself? The answer may be found in Models 2, 4, and 5, which suggest three distinct mechanisms whereby childbearing has a negative effect on motivation and desires and thereby a controlling or modulating effect on the positive feedback loop.
The first mechanism involves negative childbearing motivation, which is reduced with the arrival of the first child but unchanged by the arrival of the second. If these findings represent a trend across parity, then it is reasonable to expect that the arrival of a third or fourth child will actually increase negative motivation. While the data analyses presented here make such a reversal of the effect of childbearing somewhat more speculative than the next two mechanisms, it seems quite plausible that the arrival of each addi-

tional child after the first increasingly raises the salience of the problems associated with further childbearing even while it simultaneously strengthens positive motivation.
The second mechanism involves childbearing desires. Here, the arrival of the first child has no effect, and the arrival of the second child has a large negative effect. The latter effect is separate from the moderate positive effect that child-number desires has on childbearing desires, an effect which, as would be expected, is considerably stronger among respondents with one child (results not shown). These findings suggest that some respondents' capacity to desire another child begins to become satiated after the birth of a second child, regardless of the number of children they want. Full satiation may act simply to turn off a "switch" in childbearing desires among those who experience it. While there are likely to be a number of psychosocial factors that contribute to such satiation, it is quite possible that there are also biological factors that play a role either alone or in interaction with the psychosocial factors. It should be emphasized that this satiation mechanism is separate from the previously described negative motivation mechanism because we have controlled for Time-2 negative childbearing motivation in the analysis of childbearing desires.
The third mechanism involves childtiming desires and is essentially a mechanism based on delay. As hypothesized, having a child lengthens the time before another child is desired. Furthermore, this effect is separate from the opposite effects that childnumber desires and childbearing desires at Time 2 exert on child-timing desires. This overall pattern indicates

196

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

that it is the arrival of each child per se that lengthens the time before any additional child is desired. Again, we note that because of the controls in our analysis, this mechanism is entirely separate from the two previously discussed mechanisms.
There is another obvious mechanism whereby people make the decision to terminate further childbearing, namely by achieving the number of children they desire. However, research has generally not indicated that the child-number desires mechanism is as important as many people assume. For example, Westoff et al. (1958) found that the number of children desired by 145 wives at the beginning of their marriages accounted for only about 7 per cent of the variance in their total fertility twenty years later. Westoff (1981) also reports that the preferences for number of children of 121 parity-zero wives studied by Coombs (1979) accounted for only about 11 per cent of the variance in their fertility fifteen years later. Bongaarts (1984) has argued that a variety of unplanned events can act to frustrate individuals' ability to actualize their original family size desires. These events and other developments during childbearing careers almost certainly act to weaken the predictive value of original childnumber desires.
The results reported in this paper shed further light on this fourth mechanism for regulating the positive effects of childbearing on motivation and desires. They suggest first, that childbearing itself should be included among the factors that tend to attenuate the predictive strength of child-number desires and second, that the action of both the satiation and delay mecha-

nisms described here, and very probably of the negative motivation mechanism, are independent of the number of children desired. This second point implies that there are specific individual (including biological), dyadic, lifecourse, and cultural factors that trigger these mechanisms without regard to family-size preferences or desires that are in place before childbearing begins.
There is an important time issue that bears on the interpretation of results in this study. Because the follow-up period is only two years and none of the respondents were pregnant at the initial interview, the effect of childbearing is limited to babies who vary in age from just born to fifteen months old. The observed effects of childbearing could change with a longer follow-up period, and that question will be addressed once the five-year follow-up interview has been conducted. However, in the present study that question can also be addressed by comparing the effects of being pregnant at the two-year follow-up with the effects of already having had a child at that time. The two childbearing variables (Currently Pregnant and Increase in Parity) provide two points on a hypothetical time curve of effect. By extrapolating from the curve fitted to these two points, we can conjecture about how the effects of childbearing change over time.
In the models of positive childbearing motivation, negative childbearing motivation, and child-number desires, the evidence indicates that where there is an effect of childbearing, it increases with time. In other words, the effect of an increase in parity is stronger than the effect of being currently pregnant. Extrapolating this curve suggests that the childbearing effect does not de-

Vol. 42, No. 3-4

Fertility Motivations

197

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

crease with time, at least not during the fifteen months covered by this study.
In the model of childbearing desires, the evidence indicates not only a different pattern but one that varies by parity. Among parity-zero respondents, the effect of being currently pregnant is strong, and the effect of an increase in parity is nonsignificant. This finding suggests that pregnancy temporarily satiates the respondent's capacity to desire another child but that some time shortly after the child is born this satiation effect is lost and the "switch" of childbearing desires is turned back on. Among parity-one respondents, the effect of being currently pregnant, while larger than it is for parity-zero respondents, is smaller than that of an increase in parity among parity-one respondents. In other words, the satiation effect of pregnancy is even greater than it is for parity-zero respondents and does not decline after the birth of the second child. In fact, the "switch" of childbearing desires not only remains off after the second child's arrival but appears to be turned further off and/or turned off in more respondents. Again, it should be noted that, given the presence of the child-number desires variable in the prediction equation, these patterns would appear to be largely independent of desired family size.
In the model of child-timing desires, the evidence does not suggest any clear temporal pattern that can be derived from the different effects of being pregnant and having a parity increase. Because the effect of child-timing desires at Time 0 on those at Time 2 is small (results not shown; beta = 0.083 in all groups), it appears that both being pregnant and having a baby essen-

tially set the clock back to zero with respect to desiring the timing of the next child. However, the absence of any clear pattern suggests that the slope of the time curve of effect across pregnancy and the first year or so of the new child's life is, if one exists, too gradual to be identified by means of the two time points used in this study.
An interesting finding in all five models is the virtual absence of sex differences in the effects of the two childbearing variables. Only in the child-timing desires model are there differences, and even there they are relatively minor. This almost uniform similarity of the sexes suggests that the observed effects of childbearing on fertility motivations and desires may involve psychological processes that are relatively little influenced by gender roles. However, it will be important to determine whether this pattern also occurs in a less middle-class sample.
Future work on this topic will be devoted to three areas. First, we will examine factors affecting the satiation of childbearing desires by comparing those who manifest it with those who do not. Second, we will examine the time course of childbearing's effect on fertility motivation and desires by obtaining additional measurement points along the curve. Third, we will conduct similar analyses to those reported here with the large group of respondents in this study who have had a second child by the second (24-month) follow-up interview, examining the effect of having or not having a third child by the final (60-month) follow-up. The goal of all these additional analyses will be to explore further the three psychological mechanisms that we have suggested help govern the decision to terminate

198

Miller and Pasta

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

fertility and to further examine the relative importance of the fourth mechanism, the achievement of desired family size.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Support for this research was provided by Grant HD23900 from the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development.

REFERENCES

BULATAO, R. A. 1981. Values and disvalues of children in successive childbearing decisions. Demography 18:1-25.
BECKER, G. S. 1960. An economic analysis of fertility, p. 209-231. In Demographic and economic changes in developed countries. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ.
BONGAARTS, J. 1984. Building a family: Unplanned events. Stud. Fam. Plan. 15:14-19.
COOMBS, L. 1979. Reproductive goals and achieved fertility: A fifteen-year perspective. Demography 16:523-534.
CORTER, C. M., and A. S. FLEMING. 1990. Ma-
ternal responsiveness in humans: Emotional, cognitive, and biological factors, p. 83-136. In P. J. B. Slater, J. S. Rosenblatt, and C. Beer (eds.), Advances in the study of behavior Vol. 19. Academic Press, New York.
FAWCETT, J. T. 1978. The value and cost of the first child, p. 244-265. In W. B. Miller and L. F. Newman (eds.), The first child and family formation. Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill, NC. . 1983. Perceptions of the value of children: Satisfactions and costs. In R. A. Bulatao and R. D. Lee (eds.), p. 429-457. Determinants of fertility in developing countries Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York.
FAWCETT, J. T., S. ALBORES, and F. ARNOLD.
1972. The value of children among ethic groups in Hawaii: Exploratory measurements, p. 234-259. In J. T. Fawcett (ed.), The satisfactions and costs of children: Theories, concepts, methods. East-West Center, Honolulu.
HOLLERBACH, P. E. 1983. Fertility decisionmaking processes: A critical essay, p. 340379. In R. A. Bulatao and R. D. Lee (eds.), Determinants of fertility in developing countries, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York.
MCCLELLAND, G. H. 1983.Family-size desires as measures of demand, p. 288-343. In R. A. Bulatao and R. D. Lee (eds.), Determinants of fertility in developing countries, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York.
MILLER, W. B. 1981. The psychology of reproduction. National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA.

. 1986a. Proception: An important fertility behavior. Demography 23:579-594.
. 19866. Why some women fail to use their contraceptive method: A psychological investigation. Fam. Plan. Alternat. 18:27-32.
. 1992. Personality traits and developmental experiences as antecedents of childbearing motivation. Demography 29:265-285.
. 1994. Childbearing motivations, desires, and intentions: A theoretical framework. Genet. Soc. Gen. Psychol. Monographs 120:223-258.
. 1995. Childbearing motivation and its measurement. J. Biosoc. Sci. 27:473-487.
MILLER, W. B., and D. J. PASTA. 1993. Motiva-
tional and non-motivational determinants of child-number desires. Pop. Environ. 15:113138.
. 1994. The psychology of child timing: A measurement instrument and a model. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 24:218-250.
. 1995. Behavioral intentions: Which ones predict reproductive behavior in married couples? J. Applied Soc. Psychol. 25:530555.
. 1996. Patterns of proceptive behavior in husbands and wives. Submitted for publication. NAMBOODIRI, N. K. 1974. Which couples at given parities expect to have additional births? An exercise in discriminant analysis. Demography 11:45-56.
. 1983. Sequential fertility decision making and the life course, p. 444-472. In R. A. Bulatao and R. D. Lee (eds.), Determinants of fertility in developing countries, Vol. 2. Academic Press, New York.
SAS INSTITUTE, INC. 1990. SAS/STAT user's guide: Version 6, fourth edition. SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC.
WESTOFF, C. F., P. C. SAGI, and E. L. KELLY.
1958. Fertility through twenty years of marriage: A study in predictive possibilities. Amer. Soc. Rev. 23:549-556.
WILLIS, R. J. 1973. A new approach to the eco-
nomic theory of fertility behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 81:514-569.

