Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
To cite this article: (1991) Book notes, Social Biology, 38:3-4, 289-292, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1991.9988798 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1991.9988798
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

CLINICAL TEXTBOOK OF ADDICTIVE DIS-
ORDERS: Edited by Richard J. Frances and Sheldon I. Miller. Guilford Press, New York, 1991. 540 pages. $50, hardbound.
With new data on diagnostic issues, treatment outcome, and the interrelationship between biological and psychosocial issues, the last decade has witnessed significant progress toward an understanding of addictions.
This book introduces the reader to the field, offers in-depth discussion of specific addictions and populations, covers diagnostic instruments, and examines the family dynamics of alcoholism as well as the neurochemical effects of alcohol.
The twenty-two chapters are divided into six parts: (1) Overview and Historical Context; (2) Psychoactive Substance Disorders; (3) Diagnostic Instruments; (4) Emerging Treatment Issues for Special Populations; (5) Treatment Selection and Modalities; and (6) Treatment Implications of New Alcohol Research Findings.
By bringing the reader up" to date with the latest advances in the field and the range of treatment choices they engender, the volume is an authoritative and convenient source of information on addictive disorders, their diagnosis, and treatment.
THE FATE OF BORDERLINE PATIENTS.
SUCCESSFUL OUTCOME AND PSYCHI-
ATRIC PRACTICE: By Michael H.

Stone. Guilford Press, New York, 1990. 357 pages. $40, hardbound.
This book marks the culmination of the intensive, long-term follow-up of some 502 patients hospitalized at a state psychiatric institute over a 14year period. The importance of this unique book, the only volume to describe borderline patients over a long period of time, lies in its potential to enhance the prognostic capabilities of clinicians who treat psychiatric patients, especially those exhibiting borderline personality disorders.
The focus is on the fate of persons in an intermediate range of emotional handicap. Seeking to discover what becomes of borderline patients as they get older, the book analyzes the follow-up data, establishes correlations between key causal factors and patient outcome, and presents case studies which include pertinent data of the life course of parents and siblings as well as the patient.
The utility of such information is clear. There are numerous situations whose outcome can be predicted, unless successful treatment occurs. For example, a female borderline personality disorder patient with major affective disorder and alcohol abuse has a five-year survival rate just over 50%, unless her alcoholism is brought under control. Of equal interest are the unexpected positive follow-ups where patients have become productive members of society.

289

290

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

The author, Michael H. Stone, M.D., is Professor of Clinical Psychiatry at Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, Research Director at Middletown Psychiatric Center, and Lecturer at the New York State Psychiatric Institute.
AUTISM. NATURE, DIAGNOSIS, AND
TREATMENT: Edited by Geraldine Dawson. Guilford Press, New York, 1989. 417 pages. $45, hardbound.
This volume is a particularly useful review of recent advances in autism research. As more information has been gained on cognitive and social deficits in autism, and their interrelationship, a new surge of interest has been developing in the neurobiological correlates of these deficits. This focus is well represented by the chapters contributed to this volume.
The seventeen chapters are divided into sections: Social, Cognitive, and Language Development of Individuals with Autism; Neurobiological Issues in Autism: Research and Theory; and New Directions in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Individuals with Autism.
The many questions raised by the studies form a basis for new insights and hold out the promise for identifying new subgroups of autisms with the hope for new treatment techniques. They also foreshadow a new synthesis of our knowledge.
Geraldine Dawson is a Professor in the Psychology Department and the Child Development and Mental Retardation Center, University of Washington, Seattle. Contributors are from the United States, Australia, Canada, and Great Britain.

ECOLOGICAL ECONOMICS. THE SCIENCE
AND MANAGEMENT OF SUSTAINABIL-
ITY: Edited by Robert Costanza. Columbia University Press, New York, 1991. 525 pages. $50, hardbound.
Ecological economics is a new transdisciplinary approach to understanding and managing the ecology and economics of our world for sustainability, on local, regional, and global scales. The previous isolation of these two fields has led to economic and environmental policies that are mutually destructive rather than reenforcing in the long term.
Ecological Economics brings these two discliplines together in thirty-two chapters covering the basic world view of ecological economics: accounting, modeling, and analysis of ecological economic systems; necessary institution changes; and case studies.
Part I focuses on defining the basic worldview of ecological economics, the historical precedents, and discussions of the root causes of the problems facing humanity; insights into sustainability discounting and valuation; and ways to deal with the uncertainty inherent in ecological economic systems.
Part II focuses on accounting, modeling, and analysis of ecological economic systems. Methods for incorporating natural capital and services into national income accounting are given along with modeling systems for regional analysis. An analysis of resource scarcity rounds out this segment.
Part III explores institutional changes necessary to achieve sustainability and presents case studies of ecological economics in the United States and China, the Baltic Sea region, agro-

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Book Notes

291

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

industrial ecosystems, Brazil, and the management of moist tropical forests.
Robert Costanza is Professor at the University of Maryland Center for Environmental and Estuarine Studies, Coastal and Environmental Policy Program.
THE TRIUMPH OF THE EMBRYO: By
Lewis Wolpert. Oxford University Press, New York, 1991. 211 pages. $22.95, hardbound.
Every one of us began as a single cell, a fertilized egg. We are accustomed to this idea, and yet it continues to induce in us a sense of awe. How can this single cell give rise to the complete forms that make up the adult? How does one cell give rise to millions of cells, many of very different specialized functions, in just the right proportions? How do they come to be organized into complete structures such as limbs, faces, hearts, or brains? How. is it that the patterns are so stable and repeatable generation after generation? Where in the egg is all this information encoded or embedded?
In The Triumph of the Embryo, Wolpert offers the non-specialist reader insights into this most fundamental and important biological question. His writing draws examples from studies on the development of many animal species. We encounter the conveniently transparent sea-urchin embryo, the zebra-striped mouse, newts and birds, and a fruit-fly whose confused developmental program causes it to grow a leg out of its head.
The narrative takes us from the earliest history of the field to the forefront of embryology: the way genes control development, how cells know their po-

sition in the embryo, and the exciting discovery of homeobox genes which have been highly conserved over millions of years of evolution. Professor Wolpert introduces us to the development of the brain, the processes of regeneration, growth, and ageing, and he looks at cancer as an aberration from the normal controls on development. Finally, we encounter evolution, which has achieved so much by "tinkering" with the developmental program.
Lewis Wolpert is Professor of Biology as Applied to Medicine at University College, London. He was trained as an engineer before beginning his research on the mechanical properties of cells. This work led him to his life-long fascination with the embryo. His thesis is that the process of development is governed by a few inherently simple and elegant rules, universal rules that play a fundamental part in all our lives.
This brief and elegant exposition of the process of development from the embryo belongs in the library of specialist and non-specialist alike as a source of inspiration and pleasure.
THE SCENTED APE. THE BIOLOGY AND
CULTURE OF HUMAN ODOUR. By D.
Michael Stoddart. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991. 286 pages, hardcover.
The human race is often at odds with its own sense of smell; much time and effort is spent removing natural body odor and replacing it with the sexual attractant odors of plants and animals. Both men and women appear to have a need to smell of something-- anything other than of people. Yet the fact remains that we are the ape most

292

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

richly endowed with scent-producing glands.
This book examines the sense of smell in humans, comparing it with the known functions of the sense of smell in other animals. It reviews the evolution of communication by chemicals from primitive organisms, in which sexual reproduction first arose, through to the most advanced animals in which there is a well-forged internal chain of nerves and hormones linking the nose to the testes and ovaries.
In many non-human mammals, sexual physiology and behavior is facilitated by odorous cues, and there are claims for a similar facilitation in humans. The place of odors and scents in aesthetics and in psychoanalysis serves to illustrate the strength of the link between the nose and the emotional center of the brain. Perfumes and incense are seen as cultural acquisitions, with origins firmly rooted in biological phenomena which had a functional significance at one time in our evolutionary past.
The book concludes with the devel-

opment of an argument which suggests that our olfactory enigmas arise from a process of olfactory desensitization which occurred at a time when mankind's ancestors were forsaking the forests and evolving a new, gregarious lifestyle on the open plains. We are unique among gregarious animals in retaining the unclear family, and olfactory desensitization is one of a suite of anatomical and physiological adaptations which serve to strengthen the essential bond between male and female upon which the nuclear family depends.
Summaries to the more technical chapters and the provision of a glossary of technical terms render the whole thesis readily accessible to readers lacking a zoological or biological background.
Michael Stoddart holds the Chair of Zoology in the University of Tasmania. The Scented Ape arose out of his interest in man as an animal, and in the value of the discipline of comparative zoology to help unravel puzzles in human biology.

