Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
To cite this article: (1995) Book notes, Social Biology, 42:3-4, 276-278, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1995.9988908 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1995.9988908
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

THE EVOLUTION OF THEODOSIUS DOB-
ZHANSKY: By Mark B. Adams, Editor. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1994. 249 pages. $35. Hardcover.
This volume offers an intellectual biography of one of the most important biologists and social thinkers of the twentieth century and also illuminates the development of evolutionary studies in Russia and in the West. Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900-1975), a creator of the "evolutionary synthesis" and the author of its first modern statement, Geneticsand the Origin of Species (1937), founded modern Western population genetics and wrote many popular books on such topics as human evolution, race and racism, equality, and human destiny.
In this, the first book devoted to an analysis of the historical, scientific, and cultural dimensions of Dobzhansky's life and thought, an international group of historians, biologists, and philosophers addresses the full span of his career in Russia and the United States.
Beginning with the reminiscences of his daughter, Sophia Dobzhansky Coe, these essays cover Dobzhansky's Russian roots (Nikolai L. Krementsov, Daniel A. Alexandrov, Mikhail B. Konashev), the Morgan Lab (Garland E. Allen, William B. Provine, Robert E. Kohler, Richard M. Burian), his scientific legacy (Scott F. Gilbert, Bruce Wallace, Charles E. Taylor), and his social, political, philosophical, and religious thought (Costas B. Krimbas, John Beatty, Diane B. Paul, Michael Ruse).

j

tmn mimm

·

ft«31tl

.

%m J

f

j

Mark B. Adams, Associate Professor in the Department of History and Sociology of Science at the University

of Pennsylvania, has published widely

on the history of population genetics

and Russian biology.

THE MAKING OF A SOCIAL DISEASE.
TUBERCULOSIS IN NINETEENTH-
CENTURY FRANCE: By David S. Barnes. University of California Press Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1995. 305 pages. Hardcover.
Tuberculosis, the leading cause of death throughout the nineteenth century and a continuing killer in less developed countries, has made a comeback in the United States and Europe over the last decade. This resurgence is forcing society to confront, once again, some very old questions. What facilitates the spread of the disease and how can it best be controlled? How and why do we assign meanings--especially moral meanings--to deadly diseases?
The Making of a Social Disease, the first English-language study of both popular and scientific responses to tuberculosis in nineteenth-century France, provides not only an examination of its subject but also historical perspective on the current threat to public health. David Barnes chronicles France's struggle to manage tuberculosis medically and to develop effective public health policy.
He includes details of official campaigns against alcoholism, slum housing, and spitting and gives a vivid account of the changing perceptions of tuberculosis, which ranged from the

276

Vol. 42, No. 3-4

Book Notes

277

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

romantic early idea that consumptive women were possessed of heightened sensibility to the harsh later view that TB was a national scourge spread by the poor.
By 1900, Barnes notes, the war against tuberculosis had developed into a war against the unsanitary habits of the working class. He argues that this conceptual shift owed more to the power structures of nineteenth-century society than to medical science. Based on extensive research in archival literary, political, and medical sources, The Making of a Social Disease demonstrates how, during the nineteenth century, tuberculosis metamorphosed into a social disease. Then, as now, reactions to the disease reflected the contradictions of the society in which it occurred.
David S. Barnes is Assistant Professor in the Graduate Institute of the Liberal Arts at Emory University.
THE TEMPTATIONS OF EVOLUTIONARY
ETHICS: By Paul Lawrence Farber. University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1994. 210 pages. Hardcover.
Evolutionary theory tells us about our biological past. Can it also guide us to a moral future? Paul Farber examines a century-old philosophical hope held by numerous biologists, anthropologists, psychologists, and social thinkers--that universal ethical and social imperatives are built into human nature and can be discovered through the study of evolutionary theory.
Many philosophers have expressed great skepticism about evolutionary ethics, which G. E. Moore dismissed as

"the naturalistic fallacy" of trying to derive "ought" from "is." As other foundations of ethics have crumbled in our ever more secularized and relativistic age, however, the belief that knowing our biological history can tell us what we are and should become has remained stubbornly alive.
The Temptations of Evolutionary Ethics explores the history and persistent appeal of this belief, focusing on three main upsurges of enthusiasm for evolutionary ethics. The first immediately followed the elaboration of the theory of evolution in the midnineteenth century. Charles Darwin and social theorist Herbert Spencer were among the early advocates of evolutionary ethics, although each responded in a dramatically different way. The second wave of interest, represented by the works of Julian Huxley and Charles Waddington, began in the tumultuous inter-war period and lasted until the early 1960's. The third developed recently as a result of sociobiology's claims of offering a biological basis for a theory of human culture.
Beside discussing the arguments of these prominent figures, Farber explores the work of many lesser-known writers, who in inventive ways reexamined the life sciences to find an underpinning for ethics. Unlike many writers about evolutionary ethics, Farber also considers the critical response it has elicited from philosophers, among them Henry Sidgwick, Thomas Hill Green, G. E. Moore, Josiah Royce, and John Dewey. Because these philosophers' devastating critiques have been largely ignored, the history of evolutionary ethics, Farber argues, is essentially one of continually repeated philosophical mistakes.

278

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Paul Lawrence Farber is Distinguished Professor of the History of Science at Oregon State University. He is the author and editor of several books, including, as coauthor, Biology: The Network of Life (1992).
THE DESCENT OF THE CHILD. HUMAN EVOLUTION FROM A NEW PERSPEC-
TIVE: By Elaine Morgan. Oxford University Press, New York, 1995. 197 pages. $19.95. Hardcover.
Why are human infants so much fatter than those of other primates? Why do they cry more persistently? In Darwinian terms, when the interests of parents and offspring come into conflictwho wins? Asking these questions forces us to realize that when thinking about our origins, we generally envisage the emergent Homo sapiens as an adult. Now, Elaine Morgan, author of the The Descent of the Child, stresses that the young of the species was present at every step of our evolutionary journey.
The Descent of the Child tells the story of the development of a human

child from the moment of insemination to puberty. In the process, Morgan develops a theory of the origins of human intelligence, arguing that our capacity for intelligence is a by-product of evolving babyhood.
Uniquely among primates, Homo sapiens are born with considerable struggle, emerge wholly helpless, and continue to be dependent for a long time afterwards. Only their eyes, faces, and vocal cords work. They don't know that they're not always going to be like that, Morgan posits, but, bent on survival, they try to manipulate their parents or other caregivers to do things that the babies can't do for themselves. These early struggles, according to Morgan, provide our formative intellectual activity. It is in infancy that we really learn to think and to question.
This readable account explores not only biological perspectives but social ones: the change in women's role, overpopulation, birth control, fertility problems, and the break-up of the nuclear family. You may not agree with all of Morgan's ideas but you will find them thought-provoking.

