Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Balance and Dissonance Theories of the Adoption and Diffusion of an Innovation Applied to the IUCD
Han Young Kim
To cite this article: Han Young Kim (1970) Balance and Dissonance Theories of the Adoption and Diffusion of an Innovation Applied to the IUCD, Social Biology, 17:1, 43-53, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1970.9987841 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1970.9987841
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

Balance and Dissonance Theories of the Adoption

and Diffusion of an Innovation Applied to the IUCD

s.

ri
J \
J

Han Young Kim
Department of Sociology University of Western Ontario London, Ontario

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

When an innovative item, idea, or practice recommended by established scientific communities is introduced into a given population, it is readily adopted by some but not by others, and adopters may or may not be instrumental in its further diffusion. The attempt to account for variation in adoption and diffusion of innovations has been a major concern of diffusion research which has been summarized by Katz (1963).
This paper is concerned with the applicability of "balance theory" as an explanatory device for the adoption and diffusion of an innovation, with specific reference to attitudinal and behavioral changes manifested in the use of contraceptive devices among female clients of public health clinics.
BALANCE THEORY
The basic postulate of balance theory is that there exists a need for the socialized human being to establish and maintain stable and consistent orientations toward the self, other person(s), and the non-person object, and this need motivates a wide range of behavior (Heider, 1946).
Since Heider's (1946) well known P-O-X model, balance theory has been formalized by Cartwright and Harary (1960) in terms

of "linear graph" theory. This has been
further restated by Davis into a number of
sociological and social psychological postu-
lates. The present formulation of the theory
of adoption and diffusion of an innovation
follows closely the definitions and postulates
set forth by Davis.
BASIC DEFINITIONS
1 Person, (P), is the individual whose adoption and diffusion of an innovative item is predicted by the theory.
2. Other(s), (0), is some additional individuals) or group(s) which is the source of social influence for P in reference to X, that is 0 represents "significant other(s)."
3. X is the innovative item. 4. These three components constitute the
cognitive system, i.e., P-O-X system. 5. The line P-X is P's orientation toward X
which varies in sign and numerical value. 6. The line P-0 is P's orientation toward 0
which varies in sign and numerical value. 7. The line O-X is P's perceived orientation
of 0 toward X which varies in sign and numerical value. 8. For analytical purposes, however, the lines are conceived only as either "positive" or "negative" in the present scheme. 9. The line P-0 is given as positive. 10. The P-O-X system is balanced when the product of the signs of its lines is positive. 11. The P-O-X system is unbalanced when

43

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

44 Kim Social Biology

the product of the signs of its lines is negative. 12. The P-O-X system is "positively balanced" when both P-X and 0-X are positive, given that P-0 is positive. 13. The P-O-X system is "negatively balanced" when both P-X and 0-X are negative, given that P-0 is positive. 14. The P-O-X system is "positively imbalanced" when P-X is positive, but 0-X is negative, given that P-0 is positive. 15. The P-O-X system is "negatively imbalanced" when P-X is negative, but 0-X is positive, given that P-0 is positive.
BASIC ASSUMPTIONS
1. Since a state of cognitive imbalance is tension-producing, people tend to reorganize their cognitive structures in the direction of achieving balance.
2. People tend to achieve balance in their cognitive structures by making as few attitudinal changes as possible.
3. People tend to behave in the direction which maintains, reinforces, or maximizes the existing state of cognitive balance.
4. Definition of situation, meaning stabilization of the cognitive system into a state of either "positive" or "negative" balance, is assumed to precede decisionmaking of whether or not to adopt X.
5. Decision-making and the behavior which follows the decision-making are "unbiased" manifestations of the state of the cognitive system immediately before the decision is made.

In an innovative situation, which is defined as the situation in which an individual, being aware of the existence of the innovative item, is faced with the decision to adopt or not to adopt the item, four types of cognitive systems as given in the definitional scheme may be assumed to exist; balanced either positively or negatively or unbalanced positively or negatively (see Fig. 1).
If definition of the situation is assumed to precede decision-making, a person in a state of either type of balance is in a position to make the decision either to adopt or not to adopt the innovative item more easily and with less delay than the person who is in a state of either type of imbalance. Further, if the assumption holds that an actor tends to act in the direction of maximizing balance, it follows that the person in a state of positive balance is more prone to adopt and favorably diffuse the innovative item to others than the person in negative balance, who is more prone to reject the item and unfavorably diffuse it.
INTERACTION HYPOTHESIS
What the balance theory in fact claims is that the relationship among the lines in the balance system is multiplicative rather than

Positive Balance P

Negative Balance P

X

Positive Imbalance P

Negative Imbalance P

X
FIG. 1--Four possible types of cognitive systems in an innovative situation

Vol. 17, No. 1

Balance and Dissonance Theories

45

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

additive.1 If this is true, one may anticipate an interaction effect jointly produced by P-X and 0-X (assuming P-0 is positive) on adoption and diffusion2 of an innovation which, according to the present formulation, can be predicted by the state of a given balance system. Further, if in fact there is an interaction effect, it will be no surprise that independent findings based on one variable at a time would yield inconsistent evidence, as a number of previous studies indicate.3
The probable nature of the interaction effect of P-X and O-X on adoption and diffusion of an innovation is not only suggested by balance theory, but also by previous empirical findings. For example, Coleman, Katz, and Menzel (1957), in their study of the diffusion of new drugs among physicians, found that early adopters were likely to be the most "integrated" onlywhen the innovative item required neither risk nor pervasiveness. Even though they were not specifically concerned with the cognitive system of the potential adopter, their findings suggest that the relationship between the influence of other(s) and the proneness to adopt an innovative item is contingent upon the nature of the item. It follows then that the verification of the interaction model in the present formulation would not only resolve some of the inconsistencies in diffusion research, but also test the tenability of the empirical implications of balance theory, by specifying the contingencies of a given relationship.4
1 See Definition 6 of the P-O-X equation in Davis, 1966.
2 Since the diffusion of the information concerning the innovative item itself is not the primary concern of this paper, the sequence of "adoption and diffusion" is purposefully so designated in contrast to the conventional usage "diffusion and adoption."
3 Previous studies point to the importance of both social influence and perceived attribute dimensions in diffusion process, but the simultaneous effect of these two dimensions have seldom been examined.
4 Statistically, there will be an interaction effect between X and Z (two independent variables) in their impact upon Y (the dependent variable), when: rvz 0; ryx.x1 > rvx; and ryx.x2 = 0. See Hyman, 1963,p. 242-329.

Based on the foregoing observations, the following set of propositions are set forth:
In an innovative situation, given that P-0 is positive:
1. If P-X is positive o) P is more prone to adopt X than when P-X is negative. b) Once having adopted X, P will be more prone to favorably diffuse X to other person(s) than will a person who has adopted X under the condition where P-X is negative.
2. If P-X is negative a) P is more prone to reject X than when P-X is positive. b) Once having rejected X, P will be more prone to unfavorably diffuse X to other person(s) than will a person who has rejected X under the condition where P-X is positive.
However, the propositions under Section 1 are "conditional" upon O-X as perceived by P, and the original relationshipsincrease when O-X is positive and decrease when O-X is negative.
The propositions under Section 2 are "conditional" upon O-X as perceived by P, and the original relationships increase when O-X is negative and decrease when O-X is positive.
DISSONANCE THEORY
Even though it is generally assumed that the adoption and diffusion of an innovative item takes place after definition of the situation, it is also acknowledged that the adoption and diffusion of an innovative item may take place prior to this. According to the theory of cognitive dissonance, given alternatives, no decision-making waits until the cognitive system is perfectly stabilized; hence the decision-making itself creates cognitive dissonance.
The crucial difference to Festinger (1964) is that conflict before the decision is more "impartial" and "objective," since there is no need for any justification of one's commitment to a given alternative. Once the decision is made, however, a person tends to "rationalize" his choice by changing his

46 Kim Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

attitudes in an attempt to reduce dissonance created by the decision-making.
Since the magnitude of dissonance is positively related to the magnitude of the pressure to reduce the dissonance (Festinger, 1964), it follows that if a person makes a decision in a state of imbalance, he will tend to rationalize the choice more than those who make the decision in a balanced cognitive state.
One plausible way of a person attempting to reduce the dissonance may be through diffusing his experiences or attitudes toward X to others (including the significant others), the "correctness" of his decision being reinforced when others adopt a corresponding attitude toward the innovative item.
Thus, if a person in the state of positive imbalance decides to adopt the innovative item, he will be likely to strive to achieve balance post-decisionally by changing O-X from negative to positive, in an attempt to stabilize his cognitive system in a direction favorable to his decision. The dissonance could also be eliminated by P's changing P-0 from positive to negative, rejecting O as a source of influence in respect to X. If he decides not to adopt the innovative item, he will tend to strive to achieve balance by changing P-X from positive to negative, post-decisionally.
If a person in the state of negative imbalance decides to adopt the innovative item, he will tend to achieve the balance after the adoption, by changing P-X from negative to positive. If he decides not to adopt the innovative item, he will be likely to change O-X from positive to negative post-decisionally, or he could change P-0 from positive to negative. Based on these observations, the following alternative propositions are set forth following dissonance theory.
Given that P-0 is positive and assuming that no dissonance is reduced by changing P-0 to negative:

1. In an innovative situation, if P decides to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive but P perceives that O-X is negative, or under the cognitive condition in which P-X is negative but P perceives that O-X is positive (imbalance), then P will display more proneness to favorably diffuse X than will a person who decides to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive (balance).
2. In an innovative situation, if P decides not to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive but P perceives that O-X is negative, or under the cognitive condition in which P-X is negative but P perceives that O-X is positive (imbalance), then P will display more proneness to unfavorably diffuse X than will a person who decides not to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is negative and P also perceives that O-X is negative (balance).
3. In an innovative situation, if P decides to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive but P perceives that O-X is negative, or that in which P-X is negative but P perceives that O-X is positive (imbalance), then P will tend to display more favorableness toward X by changing his attitude in a more positive direction as compared to a person who decides to adopt X under the condition in which P-X is positive and P also perceives that O-X is positive (balance).
4. In an innovative situation, if P decides not to adopt X under the cognitive condition in which P-X is positive but P perceives that O-X is negative, or that in which P-X is negative but P perceives that O-X is positive (imbalance), then P will tend to display less favorableness toward X by changing his attitude in a more negative direction as compared to a person who decides not to adopt X under the condition in which P-X is negative and P also perceives that O-X is negative (balance).5
5 The above are true only when the individual chooses to reduce dissonance by changes in O-Xor P-X. A person in "positive imbalance" whoachieves balance by changing P-0 from positive to negative after adoption of the item would not be expected to diffuse the item more than the person who chose the item while in a state of positive balance. The same is true of a person in "negative imbalance"who rejects the item and changes P-0 from positive to negative versus onewhorejects the item in a state of negative balance.

Vol. 17, No. 1

Balance and Dissonance Theories

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Thus, the theory of cognitive dissonance suggests somewhat different theoretical implications than conventional balance theory in predicting behavior taking place after the decision to adopt or reject the innovative item has been made.
Under balance theory, it has been proposed that P is most likely to favorably diffuse X under conditions of adopting X while having positive P-X, positive P-O, and positive O-X (positive balance). Under dissonance theory, P is thought most likely to diffuse X favorably under the condition of adopting X while having either positive P-X, positive P-O, and negative O-X (positive imbalance), or negative P-X, positive P-O, and positive O-X (negative imbalance).
Similarly, under balance theory, it has been proposed that P is most likely to unfavorably diffuse X, under the condition of rejecting X while having negative P-X, positive P-O, and negative O-X (negative balance). Under dissonance theory, P is thought most likely to negatively diffuse X, under the condition of rejecting X, while having either positive or negative imbalance as defined above.
METHODS
Since 1962, studies throughout the world have been directed toward determining the safety, effectiveness, and acceptability of the intrauterine contraceptive method. Even though the mode of action of the IUCD is not clearly understood, in 1965 the Committee on Human Reproduction of the American Medical Association strongly recommended the use of the IUCD as a contraceptive method.
The intrauterine device is characterized as an innovative item by its newness and its being advocated by the established scientific community for introduction in mass programs.6

DEFINITION OF CASES AND DATA COLLECTION
The cases of study consist of female clients, between the ages of 16 and 45, of three public health clinics in King County, Washington. Since family-planning centers were established in these three clinics, the first in February, 1965, a total of about 300 patients visited them for family-planning purposes as of the end of January, 1967. Of these, 206 patients adopted the IUCD, most of the remainder being refused the IUCD for medical reasons. The entire set of 206 IUCD adopters were used as the cases which represent the adopters. A comparable number of "potential" non-adopters were randomly selected from Public Health Department immunization records, as the comparison group.
The data were gathered through mailback questionnaires which had been sent to the addresses obtained from clinical records.
The percentage of the returns for adopters was 69.0% (79.8% with "non-deliverables" not included in the computation). The majority (94%) of the adopters had used the device more than two months at the time the questionnaires were filled out.
Two hundred and seventy-five questionnaires were sent out to "potential nonadopters." After a forty-day waiting period 166 questionnaires were returned, a percentage of 60.4% (66.9% if non-deliverables are excluded).7
6 It may be argued that oral contraceptive users (pill users) must also be considered as "innovators." However, by 1965, the mode of action of oral contraceptives had been well understood, and a number of products had already received clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Further, it was the opinion of the researchers that oral contraceptives had already received a rather widespread acceptance at the time of the research, and the acceptance of oral contraceptives was far less problematical than the acceptance of the IUCD by the potential adopters.
7 In order to check the possible sampling bias due to "non-returns," the early responses and the later responses were compared in terms of a number of background variables. The distributions of these variables did not differ significantly between early

48 Kim Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Out of 166 "potential non-adopters," 99 turned out to be those who from now on will be referred to as "non-adopters," or those who were aware of the availability of the IUCD but had decided not to adopt the device. Excluded from the non-adopter category were those who said that they intended to adopt the device (20 cases), those who had used the device in the past (23 cases), and those who belonged to the vasectomy or hysterectomy categories (17 cases).
Using the Smirnov chi-square test at 0.05 level, the two groups did not significantly differ in terms of transiency of residence, rural-urban background, age, actual number of children, or ideal number of children. However, the two groups differed significantly in terms of their husbands' occupations, family income, education, religion, and the contraceptive methods they had mainly been using (for adopters prior to using the IUCD). Among the non-adopters, as compared to the adopters, there were more husbands in blue-collar occupations, lower levels of income and education, a higher proportion of Catholics, and a lesser use of the more effective contraceptive methods. Ideally, it is desirable that the effects of the latter group of variables be controlled so that the two groups are comparable. However, it is assumed that what might be attributed to these variables will, in fact, be explained by the dimensions of a more abstract plane as attempted in the present formulation.8

is superior to the items it supersedes, (2) compatibility, the degree to which an innovation is consistent with existing values and past experiences of the adopters, (3) complexity, the degree to which an innovation is relatively difficult to understand and use, (4) diversibility, the degree to which an innovation may be tried on a limited basis, and (5) communicability, the degree to which the result of an innovation may be easily diffused to others. Katz (1964), on the other hand, proposes three basic criteria by which the attributes of an innovation, including innovative contraceptive methods, may be characterized: communicability, pervasiveness, and risk. Berelson (1964) emphasizes the "easy or hard to use" aspect of new contraceptive methods.
On the bases of these criteria set forth by various authors, and as the result of a pretest, the following eight dimensions of the intrauterine contraceptive were measured on four-point Likert-type scales by asking the following questions:
When you first heard about the intrauterine device did you think that use of the device would :
1. have bad side-effects in general. 2. be economical. 3. require little attention and effort on my
part. 4. be sure to prevent unwanted pregnancy. 5. be easy to have it removed if I wanted
to. 6. be annoying, unpleasant or painful to
me. 7. seem unnatural. 8. go against my moral beliefs.9

MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES
PERCEIVED ATTRIBUTES OF THE INTRAUTERINE CONTRACEPTIVE DEVICE (P-X)
Rogers (1962) isolates five important dimensions of an innovation: (1) relative advantage, the degree to which an innovation
and late returns in either the adopter or non-adopter groups.
8 The substantive interpretation of these differences is discussed in Kim, 1969.

9 In order to assure the internal consistency among the eight dimensions, each dimension was correlated with the average score of the eight dimensions, giving in Gamma (Goodman and Kruskal, 1963) the following results:

A-H --0.63 (Z = 2.83) B-H = 0.66 (Z = 2.72) C-H = 0.68 (Z = 3.12) D-H = 0.43 (Z = 1.S8) E-H = 0.65 (Z = 3.05) F-H = 0.72 (Z = 3.76)

A Side-effects dimension B Economy dimension C Attention-effort dimen-
sion D Effectiveness dimen-
sion E Reversibility dimen-
sion F Naturalness dimension

Vol. 17, No. 1

Balance and Dissonance Theories

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

The subjects were then asked to indicate how strongly they agreed or disagreed with each item by checking one of four alternatives: strongly disagreed, mildly disagreed, mildly agreed, and strongly agreed. The subjects were also asked how they think about the intrauterine device "now" in terms of the same dimensions.10

"SIGNIFICANT OTHERS" ATTITUDES TOWARD THE INTRAUTERINE DEVICES PERCEIVED BY THE RESPONDENTS ( O - X )
"Significant others" were identified by the respondents through the following question: "Whose opinions, in your case, are especially important in matters of birth control? Please circle two names whose opinions you consider most important." Five alternative choices were given: husband, mother, best friend, doctor, priest or rabbi, and others.
The respondents were further asked about how they thought each of the above feel about the use of the intrauterine contraceptive device through the following question: "Without really knowing what other people think, most of us sometimes have feelings about what others seem to think. Do you feel that the opinions of each of the following persons agree or disagree

G-H = 0.82 (Z = 4.89)

G Personal Morality dimension
H Average score of the above eight dimensions

All correlation coefficients are significant at the0.01 level except the "reversibility" dimension, which is significant at the 0.10level. Therefore, one may reasonably assume that these eight dimensions, in fact, belong to a single domain.

10Given that thesample was of public health clinic clients with presumably low income and education and that the questionnaires involve "recalls," a reliability check on responses was deemed specially important. As a reliability check, the self-reported "months of adoption" by adopters were correlated with the month of actual adoption recorded in the clinics. The Pearsonian correlation coefficient turned out to be 0.96, indicating rather high reliability in recalling. It must be also noted that more than90% of both adopters and non-adopters had at least some high-school education.

with your own opinions about the intrauterine device?" Four alternative responses were given: Strongly disagree, mildly disagree, mildly agree, and strongly agree. The "significant others" opinions toward the device were subsequently identified on the basis of responses to these two questions.
PRONENESS TO ADOPT THE INTRAUTERINE DEVICE
Four operational indicators were used in measuring the proneness to adopt the innovations: adoption vs. non-adoption; the time lapse between "first heard about the device" and "first adopted the device"; the time lapse between "first heard about the clinic" and "first visited the clinic" and sustained vs. non-sustained use of the device. It was assumed that, other things being equal, adoption vs. non-adoption was the most obvious indication of the proneness to adopt. Further, for adopter, it was assumed that the more "prone" an individual is to adopt the innovative item the earlier would she visit a clinic and adopt the device after she first knew of the availability of the device. I t was also assumed that if one is more "prone" to adopt the item, she is less likely to discontinue it once she adopts the item.
PRONENESS TO DIFFUSE THE INTRAUTERINE DEVICE
Five operational indicators were used: diffusion vs. non-diffusion, direction of diffusion, amount of diffusion, distance of diffusion, and temporal immediacy. Diffusion vs. non-diffusion was measured by asking a "yes or no" question: "Since you started using the intrauterine device, have you ever told other persons about your experience with the device?" For the direction of diffusion, the question read: "If you have told (or might sometime tell) anyone about the device, how have you (or would you) describe it?" Four alternative responses were given: very favorably, somewhat favorably, somewhat unfavorably, and very un-

50 Kim Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

favorably. For the amount of diffusion, the proneness to adopt and diffuse the device."

respondents were asked the number of per- Of eight indicators of proneness to adopt

sons they have told about their experiences and diffuse, only five--adoption vs. non-

with the device. Tomeasure the distance of adoption, sustained use of thedevice, direc-

diffusion, the respondents were presented tion of diffusion, extensiveness of diffusion,

with a cumulative distance scale (family, and temporal immediacy of diffusion--

close friends, friends who are notvery close, turned out to be significantly correlated

neighbors, strangers, and others) and were with P-X in theanticipated directions.

TABLE 1

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND PRONENESS T O ADOPT THE IUCD

Correlations

(Gamma)

Adoption vs. non-adoption

0.44*

Time lapse between "first heard" and

"first adopted" the device

-0.0S

Time lapse between "first heard" and

"first visited" theclinic

--0.31

Sustained useof the device

0.47*

* ? < 0.05.

However, it was also anticipated that nonsignificant relationships among the remaining indicators and P-X might conceal an interaction effect of P-X and O-X if the directions of the conditional relationships (partial relationships) happened to beopposite. Therefore, all marginal relationships, regardless of the magnitudes, among the eight indicators of proneness to adopt and P-X were partialled in terms of different conditions of O-X (Tables 3 and4) in order

TABLE 2

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND PRONENESS T ODIFFUSE THE IUCD

Direction of diffusion Amount of diffusion Extensiveness of diffusion Temporal immediacy of diffusion

Correlations (Gamma)
0.75* 0.14 0.40* 0.38*

to examine the existence of interaction effect.
The comparisons between Tables 1 and 2 (marginal relationships) and Tables 3 and 4 (partial relationships) show marked discrepancies--clear signs of interaction effects --in the predictive indicators of adoption vs. non-adoption, sustained use of the de-

* P < 0.05.

vice, and direction of diffusion. A small

number of interaction effects are noted for

asked to indicate to whom they had diffused amount and temporal immediacy of diffu-

their experiences with the device. For tem- sion, but none for theremaining indicators.

poral immediacy of diffusion, the respondents were asked to indicate how soon after adoption they first told someone about the device.
FINDINGS
BALANCE THEORY AND INTERACTION HYPOTHESES
In order to examine theinteraction effect of P-X and O-X, the dichotomized summary score of P-X was first cross-tabulated with every index of proneness to adopt and diffuse theitem. The cross-tabulated results were then subdivided under dichotomized conditions of O-X. Tables 1 and 2 indicate the marginal relationship between P-X and

11All scales in the present research consist of ordinal or nominal measurements. This consideration led tothe choice of Lambda and Gamma developed by Goodman and Kruskal as measures of association. The utility of these proportional reduction-in-error measures for nominal and ordinal data in comparison with conventional chi-square-based measures has been explicitly discussed by Costner (1965). Costner contends that these measures of association in sociological research aremore advantageous to use than chi-square-based measuresbecause they are "operationally interpretable" and have a norming function. The norming function of these measures seems vitally important when partial relationships are to be compared with the original relationship. The Lambda measure was reserved specifically to measure therelationship between nominal-ordinal ornominal-nominal scales, but whenever an implicit assumption of order could be meaningfully given toa given nominal scale, it was treated as "ordinal," and theGamma measure was used for the purpose of improving thepower of therelationship.

Vol. 17, No. 1

Balance andDissonance Theories

51

However, the theoretical assumptions and the patterns of original and partial relationships suggest that the propositions involving the time lapse between "first heard" and"first adopted" the device,the time lapse between "first heard" and "first visited" the clinic, and the extensivenessof diffusion turned out tobe untenable, probably not because of inadequate theoretical formulations but because of erroneous choice of indicators. These "unobtrusive" measures may not be valid indicators forproneness to adopt or diffuse inthis particular situation in the sense that there are innumerable incidental factors affecting these variables. From the general outcome of the analysis, however, one may conclude that P-X and O-X are in general independently related to proneness to adopt and further diffuse the innovative item. Further, P-X

ventional balance theory in predicting the proneness to diffuse after the decision to adopt or reject theinnovative item and in predicting attitudinal change after adoption.
Under balance theory, P is expected to be more likely to favorably diffuse X when X is adopted under a positively balanced
TABLE 4
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND PRONENESS T ODIFFUSE THE IUCD,
CONTROLLING FOR O--X

o-x

CATEGORY

Positive Negative

Direction of diffusion Amount of diffusion Extensiveness of diffusion... Temporal immediacy of dif-
fusion

0.84 0.17 0.33
0.39

0.42 0.15 0.34
0.29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN P-X AND PRONENESS TO ADOPT THE IUCD,
CONTROLLING FOR O-X

o-x

CATEGORY

Positive Negative

Adoption vs.non-adoption... Time lapse between "first
heard" and "first adopted" the device Time lapse between "first heard" and "first visited" the clinic Sustained use of the device..

0.51
--0.02
-0.53 0.66

0.14
-0.09
--0.29 0.03

and O-X are likely to "interact" in producing effects on theadoption and diffusion of the innovative item.
DISSONANCE THEORY AND ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES REGARDING THE POSTDECISIONAL DIFFUSION
It has been pointed out that the theory of cognitive dissonance suggests somewhat different theoretical implications from con-

TABLE 5

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN COGNITIVE CONDITION AT ADOPTION AND INDICES OF PRONENESS TO DIFFUSE

Direction of diffusion Amount of diffusion Extensiveness of diffusion Temporal immediacy of diffusion

Correlations (Gamma)
0.52* 0.02 -- 0.13 --0.17

*P <0.05.

cognitive condition, and we have found some evidence supporting this proposition. Under dissonance theory, however, this is thought to be so when P adopts X under either a positively ornegatively unbalanced cognitive condition. In order to test the "dissonance" proposition, each indicator of proneness to diffuse was cross-tabulated with cognitive conditions at adoption (balance-imbalance dichotomy). Table 5 summarizes these correlations. The proposition concerning non-adopters was not tested due to the lack ofrelevant data.

52 Kim Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Table 5 shows that only one of the four indicators (direction of diffusion) is significantly related to the cognitive condition at the time of adoption. However, the direction of the relationship is opposite to the direction predicted on the basis of dissonance theory, further adding to the evidence for the tenability of balance implications. The remaining correlations show that there are no significant relationships between the rest of the indicators of proneness to diffuse
TABLE 6
COGNITIVE CONDITION AT ADOPTION AND POST-DECISIONAL CHANGE IN THE PERCEPTION OF THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE IUCD AMONG ADOPTERS

Cognitive Condition

Positive No Negative Change Change Change

Balance. .. 69 18 13 Imbalance... . . 24 6 8

Total

93 24 21

Gamma = 0-11, P > 0.05

Total
100 38 138

and cognitive conditions of adoption. These evidences suggest that the theoretical implications based on dissonance theory regarding post-decisional diffusion as set forth in the present paper are not empirically tenable.
The difference between balance and dissonance implications can be further tested by measuring post-decisional attitude change toward X. If the magnitude of dissonance is positively related to the magnitude of the pressure to reduce the dissonance, as assumed by dissonance theory, one may anticipate that P is most likely to show favorable attitudinal change toward X when he has adopted X under an imbalanced cognitive condition, or unfavorable change when he hasrejected Xunder an imbalanced condition.
In order to examine the difference, the cognitive condition at adoption is correlated

with the post-decisional change in the perception of the attributes of the IUCD among adopters (again, the proposition concerning non-adopters was not tested due to the lack of relevant data). To measure this post-decisional attitude change, a discrepancy score was computed based on the mean of the item scores of P-X prior to adoption and the mean after adoption. The discrepancy score was then reassigned to "negative change," "no change," and "positive change." Table 6 shows the cross-tabulated result.
This result shows a slight indication of relationship (not significant at the 0.05 level) between the two variables, but the direction is again opposite to what was anticipated using dissonance theory. These findings suggest the implications of dissonance theory regarding the adopters' post-decisional diffusion and post-decisional change in perception of the item are not tenable, while the predictive power of conventional balance theory seems strengthened in comparison.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The applicability of balance theory as an explanatory device for the adoption and diffusion of an innovation has been examined. The formulation proposes that the adoption and diffusion of an innovation by an individual depends not only on his perception of the attributes of the innovative item, but also upon the perception of his "significant others" opinion toward the item, the focus of this study being on the anticipated interaction effect of these two factors. Based on dissonance theory, an alternative set of propositions in reference to post-decisional behavior was also set forth and their tenability examined in comparison with propositions derived from conventional balance theory. The existence of an interaction effect of P-X and O-X on proneness to adopt and

Vol. 17, No. 1

Balance and Dissonance Theories

53

diffuse an innovative item is, in general, supported by the findings as are the implications for post-decisional behavior derived from conventional balance theory as opposed to those based on dissonance theory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is indebted to William R. Catton, Jr., and Herbert L. Costner of the University of Washington for their help in formulating this research and their valuable comments on the paper.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BERELSON, BERNARD. 1964. On family planning
communication. Demography 1:94-105.
CARTWRIGHT, CORWIN, and FRANK HARARY. 1960.
Structural balance; A generalization of Heider's theory. In Dorwin Cartwright and Alvin Zander (eds.), Group dynamics. Harper Row, New York.
COLEMAN, JAMES S., ELIHU KATZ, and HERBERT
MENZEL. 1957.The diffusion of an innovation among physicians. Sociometry 20:235-270.
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN REPRODUCTION. 1965. The
control of fertility. J. Amer. Med. Assoc, 194: 462-470.
COSTNER, HERBERT L. 1965. Criteria for measures of
association. Amer. Sociol. Rev.30:341.
GOODMAN, LEO A., and WILLIAM H. KRUSKAL. 1963.
Measures of association for cross classifications. J. Amer. Statist.Rev.

HEIDER, F. 1946. Attitudes and cognitive organization. J. Psychol, 21:107-112.
HYMAN, HERBERT. 1963.Survey design and analysis. The Free Press of Glencoe, Ill.
KATZ, ELIHU. 1966. Diffusion research and family planning. Paper read at the Annual Meeting of the American Sociological Association, Miami Beach.
KATZ, E., M. L. LEVIN, and H. HAMILTON. 1963.
Traditions of research on the diffusion of innovation. Amer. Sociol. Rev.28:237-252. KIM, HAN YOUNG. 1969. Perceived attributes, adoption, and changes in attitude toward the IUD. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America, Atlantic City. ROGERS, E. M. 1962. Diffusion of innovations. The Free Press of Glencoe, Ill.

