Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Message from the president of the society for the study of social biology--social biology: Whence and Whither
John L. Fuller
To cite this article: John L. Fuller (1983) Message from the president of the society for the study of social biology--social biology: Whence and Whither, Social Biology, 30:1, 112-114, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988523 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988523
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Message from the President of the Society for the Study of Social Biology--
Social Biology: Whence and Whither

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

John L. Fuller

The Society for the Study of Social the benefits of new technologies have

Biology is a lineal descendant of the not been shared equally.

American Eugenics Society. The On the positive side are advances in

change of name in 1973 was approved the treatment and care of those who are

almost unanimously by the member- not well-born. Physical rehabilitation

ship, mainly because the wordeugenics and special education are more widely

had acquired a negative image that was available. Many retardates and mentally

harming the society. The eugenics ill who a few years ago would have been

movement was accused of social and hidden away in dismal institutions now

ethnic bias, and a degree of naivete" in live in environments that offer varied ac-

the biological and behavioral sciences. tivities, change of scene, and opportuni-

There may have been justification for ties to work for economic gain. Others

some of this criticism, but such leaders are still in limbo. We know how to ame-

of the movement as Frederic Osborn liorate the effects of some genetic disor-

wrote (1972):

ders by special diets or hormonal treat-

ments. Surgery can correct some

The eugenic patterns are being brought about not by fallible authoritarian controls, of doubtful merit, but by wholly voluntary unselfconscious, time-tested evolutionary processes which have

developmental defects. These advances are welcome, but to be well-born is better. And there are limits to medical and psychological intervention. The eco-

brought man to his present condition. . . . nomic and psychic costs of not being

Osborn may have been overly optimistic, but he advocated a doctrine of free choice guided by sound social policies and universal education.

well-born fall most heavily on the individual and the family, but they are shared by society as a whole, albeit somewhat unwillingly.

It may be useful at this time to con- The approach of the American Eusider our roots in the idea of eugenics. genics Society to physical and psychoThe word literally means well-produced logical betterment was mainly through or well-born,and none should disagree genetics. A statement drafted by a spewith this objective. We would be happy cial committee of the Board of Directors if all children were born and reared so as shows this clearly (Allen et al., 1961).

to become happy, self-reliant, cooperative adults. In spite of what we consider

The American Eugenics Society is composed largely of scientists from a number

to be social progress, such a Utopia evades us. Technological and social changes over the past few decades have had both positive and negative influences on the quality of life. Certainly

of current disciplines. Their common interest is to promote the advancement, discussion, and dissemination of scientific knowledge of human genetics as it relates to the welfare and improvement of individuals and populations.

112

Vol. 30, No. 1

Fuller

113

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

The emphasis of this report is clearly on pia, and even implies doubts as to what

genetic selection, but it is not to be exer- Utopia should be. The early eugenics

cised by mandate. Instead the report movement was at times ideological; to-

proposes "institutional arrangements day's social biology is pragmatic.

. . .which would result in a tendency for Pragmatism does not mean that so-

individuals to have more or fewer chil- cial biologists should simply study their

dren in proportion to their success in human subjects and report their results

their particular environment . . . the in professional journals and symposia.

result would be. . . a genetic diversifica- The results of such studies may often

tion in the process of adapting to the di- suggest remedial action by govern-

verse elements of our society."

ments, private institutions, and individ-

When the name of the society was uals/Evaluation of the results of such re-

changed in 1973 the statement of pur- medial programs is not a simple task,

pose omitted mention of a eugenic pro- but it is important. In complex systems it

gram. Instead the objective of the orga- is impossible to predict all the effects of

nization was defined as furtherance of a new procedure, and it may be very dif-

communication among the scientific dis- ficult to evaluate the costs and benefits.

ciplines that are relevant to the trends of Unfortunately human social biologists

human evolution. These disciplines are cannot conduct formal experiments with

primarily biological, medical and social. a limited number of controlled varia-

Evolution was not defined in the state- bles, and subjects whose genetics and

ment, but I assume that it embraced both genetic and cultural changes that contribute to the well-being of our species. At present the front cover of Social Biology carries this message: Tofurther knowledge of (he biologicaland sociocultural forces affecting human popula-

prior experiences are either similar or differ on known dimensions. However, as pragmatists, evaluation is essential. The rate of social change is probably greater today than at any time in history, and this makes the task especially difficult.

tionsand their evolution. R. H. Osborne Nevertheless, the members of SSSB

tells me that these are the words of the must perform the function of monitor-

late L. C. Dunn.

ing the effects of social, economic, and

There is an important difference be- biological forces on the quality of hu-

tween the 1961 and the 1973 statements man life. Few other groups are as well

of purpose. The earlier one advocates qualified with expertise in a wide range

support of programs of social action that would induce individuals to plan rationally for parenthood. Dunn's statement emphasizes the study of dynamic interactions among genetic and environmental factors, but does not specify the means through which the social order might be improved. This omission does not, in my opinion, imply lack of interest in the application of scientific knowledge to human welfare. It does indicate restraint in prescribing the way to Uto-

of scientific disciplines including anthropology, ethology, demography, genetics, psychology, and sociology. Its concerns are international and intercultural. At a time when social policies in many parts of the world are political issues, information from a pragmatic, nonideological group of scientists can be important. As a society, SSSB must remain unpolitical, but members can exert influence for policies that will help children to be well-born and well-

114

Messagefrom the President

SocialBiology

nurtured. In addition to educating each mine policy. The society's best years are other we should strive to educate the still ahead if its members have the desire public, especially that part who deter- to make them so.

REFERENCES
ALLEN, G., D. KIRK, S. P. SCOTT, H. L. SHAPIRO, and B. WALLACE. 1961. Statement of
the eugenic position. Eugen. Quart. 8:181184.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

