Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Quantitative approaches to detect the fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition
Sulaiman M. Bah
To cite this article: Sulaiman M. Bah (1995) Quantitative approaches to detect the fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition, Social Biology, 42:1-2, 143-148, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1995.9988894 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1995.9988894
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

Quantitative Approaches to Detect the Fourth Stage of the Epidemiologic Transition

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

Sulaiman M. Bah
Population Studies Program Department of Sociology University of Zimbabwe Harare, Zimbabwe

ABSTRACT: Widely diverse quantitative measures have been used to study the onset of the different stages of the epidemiologic transition, including the fourth stage. This report suggests additional methods for detecting the fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition that are more parsimonious than those previously used. While these methods are not new, they have potential for application in this area of research. An example of one of these methods is illustrated, using Canadian data.

In the late 1980's works started appearing about the existence of the fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition (Olshansky and Ault, 1986; Rogers and Hackenberg, 1987). Hitherto, it was thought that mortality transitions in developed countries reached only the third stage. While the two formulations of the fourth stage were slightly different, the views have been reconciled and applied to Canadian data with successful results (Bah and Fernando, 1991). As theoretical descriptions of the fourth stage have been different, the quantitative methods used to detect their onset have also been different. This report aims to propose quantitative approaches which can be used to detect the onset of the fourth stage and to monitor its progress.
THE FOURTH STAGE OF THE EPIDEMIOLOGIC TRANSITION
The original formulations of the fourth stage were those of Olshansky

and Ault (1986) and Rogers and Hackenberg (1987). Olshansky and Ault (1986, p. 360) give the general characteristics of the fourth stage as including the following:
(1) rapidly declining death rates that are concentrated mostly at advanced ages and which occur at nearly the same pace for males and females; (2) the age pattern of mortality by cause remains largely the same as in the third stage but the age distribution of deaths for degenerative causes are shifted progressively toward older ages; and (3) relatively rapid improvements in survival being concentrated among the population in advanced ages.
They remark (p. 361) that the major characteristic that distinguishes the fourth stage from the third is the unexpected shift in the age pattern of mortality by degenerative causes for the population in advanced ages. In short,
In this fourth stage, the major degenerative causes of death that prevailed during the third stage remain with us as the major killer, but the risks of dying from

143

144

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

these diseases are distributed to older ages.
They attribute the source of this change to a combination of factors including shift in the age structure toward older ages, advances in medical technology, provision of health-care programs for the elderly and reductions in risk factors at the population level.
The description of the fourth stage by Rogers and Hackenberg (1987) is more substantive. They focus on the different propositions in Omran's theory. One of Omran's propositions is concerned with the existence of mortality differentials among several population subgroups. For example, it is proposed that the epidemiologic transition favors females over males, the young over the old and, in the United States, whites over nonwhites. Another proposition of Omran's theory is that infectious diseases will decline but will not be entirely eradicated. Rogers and Hackenberg (1987) provide evidence with data from the United States to show that these propositions have changed. They agree with Olshansky and Ault that the leading causes in this stage are still due to degenerative and man-made diseases, but disagree with them in identifying the source of this change.
Rogers and Hackenberg argue that the major source of this change is the increasing influence of individual behaviors and new lifestyles on mortality. This influence may either be positive, in areas where measures of health promotion are effective, or negative, in areas where potentially destructive lifestyle practices are widespread. On the negative side, individual behaviors and destructive lifestyle practices in-

clude sexual orientations and social pathologies like accidents, suicides, homicides, excessive drinking, and smoking. Even though Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is an infectious disease, Rogers and Hackenberg consider it a disease belonging to the fourth stage because of its direct relation to an individual's behavior and lifestyle. They argue that the root cause of these destructive lifestyle practices is "hybris"--an excessive self confidence, a belief that one cannot suffer and that one is invincible. Hence, they refer to this fourth stage as the "hybristic stage."
Upon analyzing the Canadian epidemiologic transition, Bah and Rajulton (1991) argue that these two formulations of the fourth stage are not exclusive of each other. Rather, they reflect different aspects of this new stage of mortality which is characterized by an interplay between the agecause patterns of mortality, microlevel determinants such as individual behavior and social lifestyles, and macro-level determinants such as health care and health promotion programs. In other words, while we see the rise of certain causes of death which are primarily determined by potentially destructive individual behaviors and lifestyles and of others which are products of man-made environments, their effects are largely being mitigated.
This mitigation is being achieved mainly through the advances in medical technology which help to concentrate deaths at the very old ages and through health promotion programs. The health promotion programs help reduce preventable deaths and morbidity primarily through modifications

Vol. 42, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

of individual behaviors and lifestyles and, in addition, they affect all ages, not necessarily the oldest ages. The resulting effect is the lowering of mortality for all ages, but with individuals in the old ages apparently gaining more in terms of added years of life achieved.
REVIEW OF METHODS USED
In order to determine the status of the epidemiologic transition, age patterns of mortality and causes of death structures need to be analyzed. Different combinations of methods are available for doing so. Starting with prefourth stage studies on epidemiologic transition, one takes the case of the detailed work of Nagnur and Nagrodski (1990) on the Canadian epidemiologic transition. In their study, they made use of the following quantitative measures: crude death rates, age standardized rates, infant mortality rates, life expectancies, survival probabilities, entropy (H), potential years of life lost (PYLL), and multiple decrement and cause-deleted life tables. From the cause-deleted life tables they also computed "H" and PYLL values. The analyses of Nagnur and Nagrodski show without doubt that Canadian mortality had gone through the various stages of the epidemiologic transition and had already entered the third stage by the 1950's.
In studies on the fourth stage, one notes that in the work of Olshansky and Ault (1986) the following quantitative measures were used: temporary life expectancy, decomposition of life expectancy, and median ages at death. In the work of Rogers and Hackenberg (1987), in accordance with their formulation, the incidence of AIDS was

used. In addition, they also used agestandardized death rates for specific degenerative diseases.
In the work of Bah and Fernando (1992), the fourth stage had been described as a synthesis of the two existing descriptions, one of which emphasizes mortality in the young and adult ages and the other emphasizes mortality in the older ages. This modification required that the age pattern of mortality at young and middle ages be considered in addition to patterns at old age. For this reason, the eightparameter model of Heligman and Pollard (1980) was used. It was chosen for its ability to reflect changes in young, middle-age, and old-age patterns of mortality simultaneously. In addition, the shift in age patterns of mortality were studied using survival curves and median ages at death. The cause of death structure was studied using simple percentage distribution of deaths by cause and age-cause-specific death rates and measures from cause-deleted life tables.
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL METHODS
This report does not seek to replace the other quantitative methods that have been used to investigate the epidemiologic transition. Rather, it seeks to propose more compact methods which are less arbitrary. Three methods are proposed for this undertaking: first, for the study of the trend in oldage patterns of mortality; second, for the study of the trend in causes of death from degenerative diseases; and third, for the study of the impact of cause-of-death structure on old-age patterns of mortality.

146

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

TRENDS IN OLD-AGE PATTERNS OF MORTALITY

A parsimonious way of studying trends in mortality is using the parametric approach. By representing the trends by a few parameters, it is possible to capture the rate of change in the trends as well as changes in the age pattern of mortality. One such model is the four-parameter "adaptive" model proposed by Ewbank et al. (1983). The model is given as:

Yx = a + fiT(l,,; x, X) where

(1)

(T^
; x,W = 2x and

for p > 0.5 (2)

T(p; x,X) = 2À forp 0.5.
(3)
The parameters a, ß, x, and X have been interpreted as follows: a gives the level of mortality; ß reflects the relationship of mortality below a pivotal age (around 50) to that above it; x reflects changes in age pattern of mortality at the youngest ages; and Xreflects the changes in age patterns of mortality at the oldest ages. The special interest in this case is in the parameter X, and to some extent ß. Increase in survivorship in old age is reflected by decrease in X.
TRENDS IN CAUSE-OF-DEATH RATES FOR DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
Again, the parametric approach can be used to study trends in causes of death. One convenient tool is the

cause-specific extension of Brass logit model (Chackiel, 1990). In the Brass logit model, an equation is given which relates any life table to a standard life table. The equation is given as: logit (q(x)) = a + ß logit (q*(x)) where q(x) = 1 - l(x) is the life table probability of dying before age x in any population; q*(x) is the life table probability of dying before age x in the standard population; logit (q(x)) is defined as logit (q(x)) = 0.5 * In (q(x)/(l -q(x)); and a and ß are estimable parameters which can be used to study trends in mortality.
In the cause-specific version, the q(x) values would now be replaced by q'(x) values for any cause of death i. The difficulty encountered is in the choice of the required standard rates. It would be necessary to find standards for the specific causes since the "general standard" of the Brass logit model would not be suitable in this causespecific extension.
ESTIMATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF
DEGENERATIVE CAUSE-OF-DEATH
STRUCTURE ON OLD-AGE PATTERNS
OF MORTALITY
In order to describe the influence of cause-of-death structure on age patterns of mortality, the method employed is to related two measurable quantities, one reflecting causes of death and the other reflecting age patterns of mortality. According to Preston (1976), the two quantities which can conveniently do this and which are also mathematically related are the life table death rate or its equivalent measure, log(lx+,,/!,), and the agestandardized cause-specific death rate for cause i, ASCDR'. Using Preston's logic, at least two regression models

Vol. 42, No. 1-2

Brief Reports

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

are needed for the establishment of the influence of causes of death in determining age patterns of mortality. First is a bivariate regression model relating survivorship and crude death rates, given as:
,) = A* +nBx.ASCDR (4)
where ASCDR is the age-standardized crude death rate. Second is a multivariate model relating survivorship to cause-of-death rates, given as:

= A*x+ where

(5)

(6)
and ASCDR' is the age-standardized death rate for cause i (Preston, 1976).
According to Preston, the second model would not improve upon the first if the age patterns of mortality variation were the same from cause to cause, i.e.,
Bl = B2x=B3x= . . . B ¡ \ ( 7 )
or if causes of death were always found in linear combination with one another. In short, if cause-of-death structure were not important, then the extension of the bivariate model to the multivariate one might not make any difference.

ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
Using Canadian male data from 1961 to 1981, the model of Ewbank et al. was fitted, and the results obtained are given in Table 1.
The results reveal an interesting pattern. The monotonie increase in a values show that mortality levels have been declining uniformly over the two

decades since 1961. The increase in ß values from 1961 to 1976 shows that mortality below the pivotal age was improving faster than above that age. This finding is confirmed again by the x values which show increase over the period 1961-76. This increase means that there was steady gain in survivorship in the youngest ages. Over the period 1961-71, the X, values show decrease which means increase in survivorship in old age. The major gains in old age survivorship occurred over the short period 1967-71. Over the period 1976-76 the trend in old-age survivorship experienced a slight disadvantage. For the period 1976-81 there was a reversal in the declining trend of ß values and a stagnation in the Xvalues. Taken together, these values could mean that while old age mortality was gaining relative to adult mortality, this gain uniformly applied to all the old ages so that there is hardly any change in the slope (k values) in old age mortality. These trends in the parameters correspond to the observations of Bah and Rajulton (1991) on Canadian mortality. They observed (uniform) gains in male life expectancy for the older ages above 65 for the period 1976-81. Using other evidence, they concluded that Canadian mortality for males could have entered the fourth stage during the period 1976-81.
The observation on old age mortality gives only one side of the picture. In order to make more definitive statements about the onset of the fourth stage, one first needs to study the trends in degenerative diseases to see if they are shifting to the older ages. This shift (if present) could be detected by decrease in ß, values (from the causespecific extension of the Brass logit

148

Brief Reports

Social Biology

TABLE 1
FITTING THE MODEL OFEWBANK ET AL.,CANADIAN MALES, 1961-1981

1961... 1966... 1971. 1976. . 1981...

YEA»

a
0.957 0.974 0.999 1.045 1.139

PÁRAMETE« VALUES

ßX

1.679 1.734 1.762 1.871 1.854

-0.607 -0.470 -0.340 -0.207 -0.156

À
-0.204 -0.263 -0.333 -0.320 -0.319

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

model) for degenerative disease 1 dur- seeks to show that they hold potential

ing the transition period. Second, using for application in this area of research.

the bivariate and multivariate regres- One example has been illustrated in

sion models above, one can try to es- the report. FortheBrass method to be

timate the impact the degenerative applicable, time series cause-of-death

disease mortality might have hadon data should be collected and, from

old age pattern of mortality. Lack of them, age-cause-specific death rates

Canadian cause-of-death data pre- should be computed which would then

vents one from testing these additional be converted to probabilities. For the

propositions.

Preston method to be applicable, the

time series cause-of-death data would

need to be adequately regrouped

CONCLUSIONS

through standardization.

This report has suggested additional

methods for detecting theonset of the

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition. The author does not claim orig-

This article was written while the author holds a Population Council post-doctoral

inality for these methods, but rather fellowship at the University of Zimbabwe.

REFERENCES

BAH, S., and R. FERNANDO. 1991. Has Canadian OMRAN, A. 1971. The epidemiological transi-

mortality entered thefourth stage of the ep- tion. Milbank Mem. Quart. 49:509-538.

idemiologic transition? Canad. Stud. Popu. _____. 1977.Epidemiologie transition in the

18(2):18-41.

United States: Thehealth factor in popula-

CHACKIEL, J. 1990. Studies in causes of death in

tion change. Pop. Bull. 32(2):3-42.

Latin America: The current situation and fu- _____. 1982. Epidemiologie transition. In Inter-

ture perspectives. In J. Vallin etal., Measure-

national encyclopedia of population, Vol. 1.

ment and analysis of mortality: New Ap- Free Press, New York.

proaches. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

PRESTON, S. 1972. Influence of cause of death

NAGNUR, D., and M. NAGRODSKI. 1990. Epide-

structure on age patterns of mortality. In

miologic transition in the context of demo-

Population Dynamics. Academic Press, New

graphic change. The evolution of Canadian

York.

mortality patterns. Canad. Stud. Pop. 17: _____. 1976. Mortality patterns innational pop-

1-24. ulations, with special reference to recorded

OLSHANSKY, S. JAY, and A. BRIAN AULT. 1986.

causes of death. Academic Press, New York.

The fourth stage of the epidemiologic tran- ROGERS, R., and R. HACKENBERG. 1987. Extend-

sition: Theageof delayed degenerativedis-

ing epidemiologic transition theory: A new

eases. Milbank Mem. Quart. 64:355-391.

stage. Soc. Biol. 34:234-243.

