Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
To cite this article: (1992) Book notes, Social Biology, 39:1-2, 177-180, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1992.9988814 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1992.9988814
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

Book Notes

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

DEPRESSION: THE EVOLUTION OF POW-
ERLESSNESS: By Paul Gilbert. The Guilford Press, New York, 1992. 561 pages. $40, hardbound.
Bringing the reader up to date on current research and theory,this volume presents an overview of the various psychological approaches to understanding and treating depression. Part I explores the major distinctions among all types of depression, including discussion of seasonal affective disorder, postnatal depression, and depression in children. A chapter on epidemiology covers issues of prevalence, relapse, long-term outcome, and chronic depression. In addition, the relationship between depression and the personality disorders is examined in detail.
Part II offers an overview of evolution theory and its particular relevance to depression. Special attention is given to the social nature of the disorder expressed in submissive behavior, sense of inferiority, helplessness and weakness, shame, guilt, anger, resentment, and envy. Gilbert's evolutionary approach offers a coherent account of how these aspects of depressive functioning relate to two basic human concerns--social power and belonging.
Part III covers the major theories of depression, including psychoanalytic, object relations, attachment, psychological, cognitive, behavioral, and social. Theories are compared and contrasted, high-lighting controversies,

weaknesses, and strengths, and demonstrating where cross-fertilization of ideas might be beneficial. The final chapter outlines why simple theories of etiology are inadequate, and explores the cultural and social relationships that elicit many forms of depression.
Illuminating the complex interplay of cognition, behavior, and biology in depression, this volume is a valuable resource for researchers and practitioners in the fields of psychology, psychiatry, and other mental health sciences.
Paul Gilbert is Head of Adult Mental Health in the Department of Psychology, Pastures Hospital, Darby, United Kingdom.
GENETIC ISSUES IN PSYCHOSOCIAL EPI-
DEMIOLOGY: By Ming T. Tsuang, Kenneth S. Kendler, and Michael J. Lyons (eds.). Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ, 1992. 280 pages. $45, cloth.
To what extent is mental illness inherited? The question is of compelling interest to patients, their families, clinicians, and society. This volume critically surveys current understanding of the hereditary component of psychiatric disorders. It analyzes the methodological strengths and weaknesses of the techniques--both from traditional epidemiology and from new work in statistics and molecular genetics--used to determine the genetic component of these disorders. Ethical issues and the complexity of the relationships among

177

178

Book Notes

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

genetically determined factors, social influences, and developmental variables are stressed throughout.
Ming T. Tsuang, M.D., is a professor of psychiatry and epidemiology at Harvard University. Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D., is a professor of psychiatry and human genetics at the Medical College of Virginia. Michael J. Lyons, Ph.D., is an assistant professor of psychology at Boston University and visiting assistant professor of psychology at Harvard University.
PORTRAIT OF DIVORCE: ADJUSTMENT TO
MARITAL BREAKDOWN: By Gay C.
Kitson with William M. Holmes. The Guilford Press, New York, 1992. 438 pages. $40, hardbound.
Despite the increase of research on divorce, relatively little is known about such topics as how men adjust to divorce compared to women, how blacks adjust compared to whites, and what divorce adjustment looks like over time. Filling a gap in the literature, Portrait of Divorce presents a detailed report on the causes and consequences of divorce. The book covers the period of estrangement through the divorce process and on to 4 years after the couples separated. The work is based on the integration of original data with over 50 years of prior research. In addition, it contrasts divorcing people with a comparable sample of people who remain in intact marriages.
The book opens with a discussion of today's changing attitudes about marriage and the resulting mixed view of divorce. A new model of divorce adjustment--one that integrates the pathology and crisis models of adjust-

ment and includes elements of loss and change--is outlined. The four sources of study data used for the book are described, as are the ways in which such key elements as subjective distress, attachment, self-esteem, and illness contacts were measured. To address the issue of comparability of the married samples, background characteristics of the suburban, reconciled, and marital transition samples are examined. Also, "risk factors" that have been thought to predispose those who divorce are explored.
Subsequent chapters cover the processes of the relationship estrangement that occurs within marriage, and various "causes" of divorce including legal definitions, psychological correlates, and marital complaints. The effect of divorce on physical and mental health and the implications of age and other life events on the ability to adjust are described. Other topics include economic factors, social support systems, and life after divorce. Analyses are presented that illustrate what factors are associated with better and worse adjustment to divorce for blacks and whites, and men and women, both cross-sectionally and longitudinally.
This volume will be useful to clinicians who work with the divorced, and also may serve as a classroom text for students.
Gay C. Kitson is an Associate Professor in the Department of Sociology and a Senior Fellow in the Institute for Life-Span Development and Gerontology at the University of Akron in Ohio and also an Adjunct Associate Professor of Sociology in the Department of Psychiatry at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. William M. Holmes is Director of the

Vol. 39, No. 1-2

Book Notes

179

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Statistical Analysis Center for Massachusetts.
HUMAN SUGGESTIBILITY: ADVANCES IN THEORY, RESEARCH, AND APPLICA-
TION: By John Schumaker (ed.). Routledge, Chapman & Hall, New York, 1991. 372 pages. $45, cloth.
This volume comprises original works from an internationally known group of scholars in psychology and related fields, including Ernest R. Hilgard, Hans J. Eysenck, Albert Ellis, Michael J. Apter, Elizabeth Loftus, and David Spiegel. The essays are arranged in four sections devoted to the nature of suggestibility, theoretical perspectives, research, and application/implications.
While any discussion of suggestibility must overlap with the topic of hypnosis, the volume also deals with suggestibility in relation to mental illness, advertising, education, self-deception, forensics, political persuasion, and the biological aspects of the suggestion process.
Schumaker has provided an introduction which discusses suggestibility in broad terms and makes the volumes suitable for the layperson as well as specialists in a wide variety of fields.
John F. Schumaker is a clinical psychologist and lecturer in psychology at the University of Newcastle, Australia.
AIDS IN AFRICA: ITS PRESENT AND FUTURE IMPACT: By Tony Barnett and Piers Blaikie. The Guilford Press, New York, 1992. 193 pages. $18.95, paper.
Terrifying in its potential and devastating in its impact, AIDS is now

widespread in a number of African countries. Estimates suggest that as many as five and a half million people on the continent are currently carrying the virus. Already weakened by drought, poverty, civil war, and debt, the AIDS epidemic may well be among the most severe problems Africans have faced. Tony Barnett and Piers Blaikie, who have studied the impact of AIDS in Uganda, present a compelling analysis of human cost of this dread disease in Africa.
Demonstrating the potential impact of AIDS for the continent, the authors discuss the social long-term economic consequences of the disease. They describe how both infected individuals and their relatives cope, and delineate the economic and human plight of those left widowed and orphaned in an already fragile economy. They show how the epidemic may not only result in the deaths of the millions of people infected with AIDS, but may also engender further starvation and economic collapse as it kills farmers and skilled administrators alike. The authors also consider how forced migrations and refugees, so long a feature of the continent, may be hastening the spread of AIDS, exacerbating a particularly vicious cycle of debility and death.
Although the book focuses on Africa, its implications are significant for readers everywhere. Its description of the epidemic's heterosexual spread should forever dispel the erroneous perception of AIDS as a "homosexual illness" and should sound an alarm in North America and Europe where AIDS is now one of the five main causes of infant and childhood mortality.

180

Book Notes

Social Biology

Both co-authors work at the School leading"center in the UK for teaching of Development Studies, University of and research in development issues. East Anglia at Norwich, which is the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

