Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Genetics: Successes and Prospects
Nikolai P. Dubinin
To cite this article: Nikolai P. Dubinin (1971) Genetics: Successes and Prospects, Social Biology, 18:3, 311-314, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987935 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987935
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

Brief Reports

S

l'jki N
·»t:a>.t

>.''.äs? 'S

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Genetics: Successes and Prospects*
Nikolai P. Dubinin
CorrespondingMember of the USSR Academy ofSciences Moscow, USSR

Hereditary information is stored in the molecules of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) found in the cell nucleus. Formerly it was thought that their physical and chemical properties were stable and that in some way or other they were excluded from the processes of metabolism taking place in the cell and the organism. This proved to be wrong. The molecules of DNA take an active part in metabolism and in the course of the vital activity of the organism suffer many injuries due to both internal and external factors.
Persistent lesions in the structure of the DNA molecules of embryonic cells lead to mutations--changes of some hereditary characteristics in the new organism. It would seem that as the molecules are constantly being injured, mutations should also constantly arise and each new organ-
*Courtesy of the Pravda-Novosti Press Agency of Moscow.
Recipient of the Lenin Prize for a series of works developing the chromosome theory of heredity and mutation theory.

ism should have a large number of characteristics distinguishing it from its parents. In reality, however, in the course of the metabolism which is constantly proceeding in the cell, enzymes obliterate the main part of the lesions of the DNA molecules. Only a few lesions, very rare ones, persist.
How does the enzyme process that "repairs" the injured DNA molecules work?
The work of the "gap-repair" system, for instance, has been well studied. The DNA molecules represent a double spiral in form. Along it, the enzyme, endonuclease, continuously moves "checking," as it were, the correctness of the structure. Meeting with a lesion, the enzyme "cuts" the strand twice, before and after the lesion. In place of the cut-out section in one of the strands a gap appears which is subsequently widened by other enzymes --exonucleases. After that, a third enzyme, polymerase, begins to work. It builds up the gap according to the model of an analogous section in the neighboring strand of the molecule. Finally, a fourth enzyme,

311

312

Brief Reports

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

ligase, restores the connection between the newly built-up section and the basic strand of the DNA.
Up to the present we know three main genetic phenomena ensuring hereditary variability: mutation of genes, structural changes of the chromosomes, and crossing over. Researchers are trying hard to understand their essence. An analysis of the work of the enzyme "repair" systems helps us to reveal new aspects of the processes taking place here.
Crossing over, for instance, is the exchange of homologous--equal in location and "duties"--sections of the genetic material between the chromosomes of one and the same couple. In order to effect this exchange, corresponding sections have to be cut out of the chromosomes. What cuts the two strands in the DNA molecule? It appears that this role is performed by the same enzymes, the endonucleases.
Recently, L. S. Nemtseva, a researcher at the Institute of General Genetics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, completed an investigation of a peculiar phenomenon appearing in the cell under the influence of radioactive radiation. After irradiation, one of the chromosomes in a couple may become ring-shaped and fitted onto an ordinary rod-shaped chromosome. Analysis of possible positions of the ring, its fitting patterns, showed that these could be classified into 12 types. Precisely such types should appear if a DNA molecule is cut into pieces during crossing over. Thus, L. S. Nemtseva's work really proved, for the first time, the possibility of gaps existing during exchange of sections of chromosomes.
After it had been established that mutation of genes means changes in the structure of a small section of the DNA molecule, theorists were confronted by a new problem. The DNA molecule consists

of two strands. The action of radiation or chemical mutagens causes a lesion in the structure of only one of them. At the same time, a change in the hereditary characters of the organism under investigation is explained by changes in both strands, corresponding to each other. How is the lesion conveyed to the intact strand?
In 1965 I suggested that this phenomenon be called "resonance mutagenesis." The hypothesis is based on the specific features of the work of the enzyme repair system. Endonuclease, which controls the structure of the DNA molecule for some reason or other, takes the section with the lesion as a model and cuts a gap in the opposite section of the normal strand. Its subsequent repair leads to both strands being changed.
The elaboration of problems connected with the "repair" of injuries to the DNA is closely connected with the knowledge of the nature of cancer and the search for ways of curing this disease. There are numerous forms of malignant tumors. One of them is a skin affection known as xeroderma. It appeared that in people suffering from this disease the intracellular system of enzyme "repair" is sharply suppressed. Exposure to sunshine or ultraviolet rays causes changes in one of the nucleotides contained in the DNA. For the overwhelming majority of people such an injury is not dangerous; the enzymes rapidly do away with it. But in some individuals one of the important enzymes has been lost through heredity. In them, the lesion of the genetical foundation of the cell persists, grows into a mutation, and leads to a malignant growth. Fuller knowledge of the mechanism of the origin of the disease will, undoubtedly, lead to the discovery of ways of combatting it.
Until recently a mutation was thought to be the direct result of the reaction of a

Vol. 18, No. 3

Brief Reports

313

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

quantum of radiation energy or a chemical mutagen with a molecule of DNA. The mechanism of action of the mutagen, however, turned out to be more complicated. In the beginning, there appears a potential change which in some conditions may be wiped out by the action of enzymes and in others becomes a mutation. This mechanism is being carefully studied at the Institute of General Genetics of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
At the last World Congress on Genetics, held in Tokyo in 1968, I read a paper on "Classification of Potential Changes." In it I noted, in particular, that these changes may persist in the molecule for hours, and even weeks or months. In experirhents with storage of seeds of plants preliminarily treated with mutagenous alkylating agents, a wave dependence of the number of mutations on the length of life of the potential changes was established. A comprehensive study of this phenomenon was made at the Institute by L. G. Dubinina and K. P. Garina. It was also found that in some cases potential changes may persist for many cellular generations, being fixed with each new synthesis of the DNA molecule. This research was carried out with the help of radioactive isotopes by A. P. Akifyev and his staff at the Institute. They have opened up a new field, so far still absolutely new to geneticists.
To obtain guided mutations is the cherished dream of all geneticists. For instance, the ideal, the dream of agriculturists is a heavy-producing wheat, regularly yielding four tons of grain an acre, resistant to disease, cold, and dry winds, with a high albumin content and a number of other characteristics. With all its outstanding achievements, modern selection has not yet produced such a variety. We know, however, that every character of an organism is determined by genes. If we

could change them purposefully, it would not be difficult to make up a combination which would yield the desired variety of wheat. And not only wheat. All other problems connected with selection of plants, animals, and microorganisms would be solved.
But the nearer we come to an understanding of the essence of mutations, the more facets and interrelations we come up against. Having learned to guide the work of the regenerating systems, we came into possession of a new means of purposefully influencing mutation processes. This, however, is not yet sufficient for a solution of all our problems. The DNA molecule itself presents serious obstacles to man in the way of guided development of required properties in the progeny of domestic animals and plants. A gene has, on the average, a thousand nucleotides. But there are only four qualitatively different nucleotides: guanine, cytosine, adenine, and thymine. Each of these is included more than once in any gene, the properties of which depend chiefly on the sequence of nucleotides. If we obtain a mutagen, even one capable of specifically entering into a reaction with a certain nucleotide, it will all the same affect the gene. This is the chemical aspect of the question.
But at the same time we know that many mutagens can act specifically, that is, cause quite definite mutations and corresponding changes of certain characters of an organism. Indisputable data of this kind has been collected and generalized by I. A. Rapoport, a worker at the Institute of Chemical Physics of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Hence, there exist some other, possibly biological, levels of the structure of the gene which allow it to react specifically to mutagens.
Besides the problem of guided mutagenesis, scientists working in the field of

314

Brief Reports

Social Biology-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

molecular genetics today are confronted by two other fundamental problems: chemical synthesis of the gene and isolation of separate "living" genes from the cell.
The Indian scientist H. Khorana at the University of Wisconsin has reported that he succeeded in synthetizing one "short" gene, consisting of only 77 nucleotides, from a yeast cell. Another group of American researchers, headed by the well-known geneticist Jonathan Beckwith, succeeded in isolating a separate gene of bacteria. Their results were published in November, 1969. The research was carried out with bacteria. But I think that a qualitative leap is possible here to the organisms of higher forms, up to man. The practical possibilities resulting from this would be truly fantastic. For instance, it would be possible to treat patients suffering from hereditary ailments by isolating the corresponding gene from the cell and replacing it with a healthy one. Analogously,

substitution of a desired gene for an undesirable one could bring about an absolute transformation in plant and animal breeding.
It must not be forgotten, however, that mastery of all the above-mentioned methods of interference with the hereditary nature of living organisms puts a double-edged weapon into the hands of man. It can be used both to benefit and to harm mankind. This refers primarily to the possibility of creating new pathogenic genes in viruses and bacteria. Therefore, scientists must make all the more greater efforts to ensure that their achievements are only used for the good of man. Soviet geneticists see their general aim in promoting jointly with plant growers and animal breeders the successes of horticulture, animal husbandry, and the microbiological industry in order to provide doctors with a new, powerful weapon in the struggle for the health of man.

