Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
In memoriam: Theodosius Dobzhansky 1900­1975
Francisco J. Ayala & Timothy Prout
To cite this article: Francisco J. Ayala & Timothy Prout (1976) In memoriam: Theodosius Dobzhansky 1900­1975 , Social Biology, 23:2, 101-107, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988215 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988215
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Theodosius Dobzhansky
1900--1975

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Theodosius Dobzhansky

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

In Memoriam

Theodosius Dobzhansky

1900-1975

Theodosius Dobzhansky died near the end of his seventy-sixth year on December 18, 197S, in Davis, California. Dobzhansky was one of the most influential scientists of the twentieth century; he also was one of the most prolific. His first scientific publication appeared on 1918 when Dobzhansky was eighteen years old, a short paper describing a new species of beetle. At the time of his death, he had published nearly six hundred works, including more than a dozen books, and there were several manuscripts in press or at various stages of preparation.
Dobzhansky's most significant contribution to science doubtlessly was the modern synthesis of evolutionary theory accomplished in Genetics and the Origin of Species, first published in 1937--a book that may be considered the twentiethcentury counterpart of Darwin's The Origin of Species (1859). The title of Dobzhansky's book suggests its theme: the role of genetics in explaining the origin of species, a synthesis of genetic knowledge and Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection.

lcal framework. Second, he extended the integration of genetics with Darwinism much beyond the range of issues treated by the mathematicians into critical evolutionary issues--such as the process of speciation--not subject to mathematical treatment. Moreover, Dobzhansky's book was written- in prose understandable to all biologists.
Thus, the modern theory of evolution was born in 1937 with the publication of Genetics and the Origin of Species. Other authors would in the 1940-Vand later contribute major advances to the modern theory of evolution, for example, by propounding the implications of the theory in systematics, paleontology, or in plant evolution. Dobzhansky updated his synthesis of the theory of evolution in the second (1941) and third (1951) editions oiGenetics and the Origin of Species and inGenetics of the Evolutionary Process(1970), a book that he considered the fourth edition of the earlier book, but that had changed too much to serve under the same title. Much of the empirical work that made possible the synthesis advanced in these works was

By the early 1930's, the work of R. A. Fisher, Sewall Wright, J. B. S. Haldane, and S. S. Chetverikov (virtually unknown outside the USSR) had provided a theoretical framework accounting for the process of evolution, particularly natural selection, in genetic terms. This work had a limited impact on the biology of the time for various reasons: It was formulated for the most part in difficult mathematical language; it was almost exclusively theoretical without empirical corroboration, i.e., it showed how evolution could occur but not that it had occurred according to the theory; and it was limited in scope. Dobzhansky completed the integration of Darwinism and Mendelism in two ways. First, he gathered the empirical evidence that corroborated the mathematic-theoret-

done by Dobzhansky himself.
Darwin, near the end of The Origin of Species, wrote, "Much light will be thrown [by his theory] on the origin of man"; in The Descent of Man (1871) Darwin showed mankind as the outcome of biological evolution and thus kin to all life. Likewise, Dobzhansky extended the synthesis of Mendelism and Darwinism to the understanding of human nature in Mankind Evolving (1962), a book that some think as important as Genetics and the Origin of Species.
Mankind Evolving remains an unsurpassed synthesis of genetics, evolutionary theory, anthropology, and sociology. Dobzhansky expounded that human nature has two dimensions, the biological which mankind shares with the rest of life and

103

104

Ayala and Prout

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

the cultural which is exclusive to man. logical distinctiveness is not, however, a

These two dimensions result from two in- basis for inequality. Equality--as in

terconnected processes, biological evolu- equality in law and equality of opportuni-

tion and cultural evolution:

ty--"pertains to the rights and the sacred-

The thesis to be set forth in the present book is that man has both a nature and a "history." Human evolution has two components, the biological or organic, and the cultural or superorganic. These components are neither mutually exclusive nor independent, but interrelated and interdependent. Human evolution cannot be understood as a purely biological process, nor can it be adequately described as a history of culture. It is the interaction of biology and culture. There exists a feedback between biological and cultural processes (Mankind Evolving, p. 18). Two principal topics of Mankind Evolv-

ness of life of every human being" (loc. cit.). Dobzhansky pointed out that equality in law and equality of opportunity is the best strategy to maximize the benefits of human biological diversity:
Denial of equality of opportunity stultifies the genetic diversity with which mankind became equipped in the course of its evolutionary development. Inequality conceals and stifles some people's abilities and dissembles the lack of abilities in others. Conversely, equality permits an optimal utilization of the wealth of the gene pool of the human species (Mankind Evolving, p. 285).

ing are the interrelated concepts of human Dobzhansky had little patience with ra-

diversity and race. Dobzhansky's first cial prejudice or social injustice and casti-

major publication dealing with these top- gated those who pretended to base them

ics was Heredity, Race, and Society on what he called the "bogus 'science* of

(1946), written in collaboration with L. C. race prejudice."

Dunn, which was translated into many Dobzhansky's lasting interest in the rel-

languages and sold more than one million evance of biology, and particularly evolu-

copies. These two topics are also the main tionary theory, to human affairs is evident

subject of Dobzhansky's last published in the scores of articles that he wrote on

book Genetic Diversity and Human the subject and in the titles of some of his

Equality (1973).

books: Heredity, Race, and Society

Dobzhansky set forth that the individ- (1946), Evolution, Genetics, and Man

ual is not the embodiment of some ideal (19SS), The Biological Basis of Human

type, but rather a unique and unrepeat- Freedom (1956), Radiation, Genes, and

able realization in the field of quasi-infi- Man (19S9, with B. Wallace), Mankind

nite possible genetic combinations.

Evolving (1962), Heredity and the Nature

He was one of the first clearly to see and of Man (1964), The Biology of Ultimate

to force the general recognition that racial Concern (1967), and Genetic Diversity and

boundaries are arbitrary and, further- Human Equality (1973).

more, that the immense variation within Dobzhansky was not only a great syn-

races, however they are designated, natu- thesizer, and perhaps the greatest theorist

rally leads to the precept that individuals of evolution in the twentieth century, he

should be judged by what they are rather was also an eminent and extremely pro-

than by the race to which they belong. ductive experimentalist. He may be con-

Dobzhansky considered human diver- sidered the founder of experimental popu-

sity a fact belonging to the realm of ob- lation genetics. During half a century of

servable natural phenomena: "People are intensive research and publication, he

innately, genetically, and therefore irre- made fundamental empirical contribu-

mediably diverse and unlike" (Genetic Di- tions to virtually every major problem of

versity and Human Equality, p. 4). Bio- population genetics.

Vol. 23, No. 2

Theodosius Dobzhansky 1900-1975

105

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Although they were overshadowed by biology from the University of Kiev in

his contributions to population genetics, 1921, and from 1921 to 1924 taught zool-

Dobzhansky made many contributions to ogy at the Polytechnic Institute. From

other areas of genetics and to other fields, 1924 to 1927, he was a lecturer in genetics

such as systematics. For example, using at the University of Leningrad.

translocations, he demonstrated in 1929 In 1927, Dobzhansky obtained a fellow-

that the linear arrangement of genes based ship from the International Education

on linkage relationships corresponds to a Board (Rockefeller Foundation) and ar-

linear arrangement of genes in chromo- rived in New York on December 27 to

somes; and he constructed the first sophis- work with Thomas Hunt Morgan at Co-

ticated cytological map of gene location in lumbia University. In the summer of 1928,

the II and III chromosomes. He did some Dobzhansky followed Morgan to the

of the pioneer work showing that cross- California Institute of Technology where

over activity was not evenly distributed he was appointed Assistant Professor of

along the chromosome. He was among the Genetics in 1929 and Professor of Genetics

first to show that sex-determining genes in 1936. Dobzhansky returned to New

are distributed over the entire Drosophila York in 1940 as Professor of Zoology at

genome. He conducted the first systematic Columbia University, where he remained

study of pleiotropy and made many con- until 1962 when he became Professor at

tributions to developmental genetics.

the Rockefeller Institute (renamed Rocke-

Dobzhansky's success as an experimentalist depended on a wise combination of field and laboratory research, his keenness in working always at the utmost level of genetic resolution possible at any given time, his ability to exploit the possibilities of any new apparatus or experimental de-

feller University in 1965), also in New York City. On July 1, 1970, Dobzhansky became emeritus at Rockefeller University, and in September, 1971, he moved to the Department of Genetics at the University of California, Davis, where he was Adjunct Professor until his death.

sign, and his incisive choice of appropriate On August 8, 1924, Dobzhansky mar-

organisms (for example, Coccinellidae in ried Natalia (Natasha) Sivertzev, a geneti-

the 1920's, Drosophila pseudoobscura and cist in her own right, who at the time was

its relatives since the 1930's, the D. willis- working with the famous Russian biologist

toni group of species since the 1940's). I. I. Schmalhausen in Kiev. Natasha was

Evolutionary biology is a field with im- Dobzhansky's faithful companion and oc-

plications reaching far into other realms of casional scientific collaborator until her

knowledge. Particularly during the last death on February 22, 1969. The Dob-

two decades of his life, Dobzhansky sys- zhanskys had only one child, Sophie, who

tematically investigated many philosoph- is married to Michael D. Coe, Professor of

ical problems relevant to, or emerging Anthropology at Yale University.

from, evolutionary theory.

In a routine medical check-up on June

Theodosius Dobzhansky was born on 1, 1968, it was discovered that Dob-

January 25, 1900, in Nemirov in the zhansky suffered from chronic lymphatic

Ukraine, the only son of Sophia Voinarsky leukemia, the least malignant form of leu-

and Grigory Dobrzhansky. In 1910 the kemia. He was given the prognosis of "a

family moved to the outskirts of Kiev, few months to a few years" to live. The

where Dobzhansky lived through the progress of the leukemia over the follow-

tumultuous years of the Bolshevik revolu- ing seven years was unexpectedly slow,

tion and World War I. He graduated in and even more surprising to his physi-

106

Ayala and Prout

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

cians, it had little if any noticeable effect on Dobzhansky's energy and work habits. However, the disease took a noticeable turn for the worse in the summer of 1975. In mid-November he began chemotherapy, but was not hospitalized and continued work as usual. He was convinced that the end of his life was near and dreaded that he might become unable to work and to care for himself. Mercifully, this never came to pass. He died of heart failure on the morning of December 18, 1975. The previous day, Dobzhansky had been working in the laboratory.
Dobzhansky was a world traveler and an accomplished linguist able to speak six languages fluently and to read several more. His interests covered a broad spectrum of human activities, including the plastic arts, music, history, Russian literature, cultural anthropology, philosophy, religion, and, of course, science. He was a good naturalist and never lacked time for a hike whether in the California Sierras, in the New England forests, or in the Amazonian jungles. He loved horseback riding, but practiced no other sports. Throughout his academic career, Dobzhansky avoided administrative posts and participated minimally in committee activities. He alleged, perhaps correctly, that he had neither temperament nor ability for management. Most certainly, he preferred to dedicate his working time to research and writing rather than to administration.
Dobzhansky's most obvious personality traits perhaps were magnanimity and expansiveness. He recognized and generously praised the achievements of other scientists; he admired the intellect of his colleagues, even when admiration was alloyed with disagreement. He made many long-lasting friendships, usually started by professional interactions. Many of Dobzhansky's friends were scientists younger than himself, who either had worked in

his laboratory as students, postdoctoral researchers, or visitors, or who had met him on his trips. Throughout his academic career, Dobzhansky had about thirty graduate students and an even greater number of postdoctoral students. He liked to be called "Doby" by his friends, including young scientists or students. To young biologists, he freely gave his time and encouragement. He had many friends abroad and was largely responsible for the establishment or development of genetics and evolutionary biology in various countries, notably Brazil, Chile, and Egypt. He was conspicuously affectionate and loyal toward his friends; he expected affection and loyalty in return. Dobzhansky's exuberant personality was manifest not only in his friendships but also in his antipathies, which he was neither able, nor often willing, to hide.
Dobzhansky was a religious man, although he apparently rejected fundamental beliefs of traditional religion, such as the existence of a personal God and of life beyond physical death. His religiosity was grounded on the belief that there is meaning in the universe. He saw that meaning in the fact that evolution has produced the stupendous diversity of the living world and has in fact progressed from primitive forms of life to mankind. Dobzhansky held that in man biological evolution has transcended itself into the realm of selfawareness and culture. He believed that somehow mankind would eventually evolve into higher levels of harmony and creativity. He was a metaphysical optimist.
Dobzhansky received many honors and awards. He was president of several professional organizations, including the Genetics Society of America (1941), the American Society of Naturalists (1950), the Society for the Study of Evolution (1951), the American Society of Zoologists (1963), the American Teilhard de Chardin

Vol. 23, No. 2

Theodosius Dobzhansky 1900-1975

107

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Association (1969) and the Behavior Genetics Association (1973). He was Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Society for the Study of Social Biology from 1969 until his death. He was an elected member of the National Academy of Sciences, the Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Philosophical Society, and of many foreign academies, such as the Royal Society of London, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences, the Brazilian Academy of Sciences, the Academia Leopoldina, and the Academia Nazionale dei Lincei.
More than twenty honorary degrees were bestowed upon Dobzhansky by many institutions: abroad, the universities of Sao Paulo in Brazil (1943), Munster in Germany (1958), Montreal in Canada (19S8), Sydney in Australia (1960), Oxford in England (1964), Louvain in Belgium (196S), Padua in Italy; and in the United States, Chicago (1959), Columbia (1964), Michigan (1966), Syracuse (1967), Berkeley (1968), and Northwestern (1968).

He received the Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal (1946) and the Kimber Genetics Award (1958) from the National Academy of Sciences, the Darwin Medal from the Academia Leopoldina (1959), the Anisfield-Wolf Award (1963), the Pierre Lecomte du Nouy Award (1963), the Addison Emery Verrill Medal from Yale University (1966), the Gold Medal Award for Distinguished Achievement in Science from the American Museum of Natural History (1969), and the Benjamin Franklin Medal from the Franklin Institute (1973). One award that understandably he much prized was the National Medal of Science which he received from President Lyndon Johnson in January, 1964, although--as Doby was quick to point out--it was President John F. Kennedy who had chosen him for the award.
FRANCISCO J. AYALA
TIMOTHY PROUT
Department of Genetics University of California Davis, California

