Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Family type, family resources, and fertility among Iranian peasant women
Akbar Aghajanian
To cite this article: Akbar Aghajanian (1978) Family type, family resources, and fertility among Iranian peasant women, Social Biology, 25:3, 205-209, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988339 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988339
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Family Type, Family Resources, and Fertility Among Iranian Peasant Women

! lî rl v.Ts Jl J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Akbar Aghajanian*
Department of Sociology Pahlavi University Shiraz, Iran
ABSTRACT: The relationship between family type and fertility among Iranian peasant women is examined through multiple classification analysis. It is shown that peasant women living in extended families have a significantly lower level of fertility than do those living in nuclear families. The hypothesis that part of this lower fertility is due to population pressure on the limited resources of the household is tested, and it is noted that women in extended families with three or more "non-nuclear" members have the lowest level of fertility.

Although it has long been assumed that the extended-family system encourages high fertility, the empirical evidence is limited and inconsistent. In fact, there has been little systematic study of the relationship between family type and fertility (Namboodiri, 1972). Studies done in developing countries are not comparable methodologically and have produced inconsistent findings.
One of the important issues in testing hypotheses about family type and fertility is the level of analysis. Thus, it is necessary to distinguish two important points: (1) At the individual level, the question is whether women living in extended families experience higher fertility than women living in nuclear families. (2) The answer to this question does not have any implication for the question of the relationship between family system and fertility at the aggregate level in comparing societies or sectors of a society. Taking note of this important issue, the present study seeks to determine (1) the extent of fertility differ-
* Present address: Department of Sociology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27706

enees between Iranian peasant women living in extended families and those living in nuclear families and (2) the mechanism involved in the relationship between family type and fertility.
The major discussions of the relationship between family type and fertility are those of Lorimer (1954) and Davis (1955). While their basic theses are similar, Davis emphasizes the idea that the structure of the extended family is conducive to early marriage and high fertility. Economic solidarity, he argues, permits people to marry earlier than they could if they had to support themselves. Furthermore, young married couples are encouraged to have many children to strengthen the family line and to improve their own status in the family. The achievement of high fertility is facilitated as a couple shares the burden of support and childrearing with others in the household.
The main element within the extended family system is the subordination of the nuclear family to the larger kinship structure, a subordination expressed in terms of all family affairs including childbearing.

205

206

Aghajanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

However, the question can be raised of pected that the fertility of peasant women

whether the subordination of the nuclear living in extended households should be

family always leads to high fertility or lower than that of women living in nuclear

whether the fertility level is dictated by the families.

needs and circumstances of the family. It seems more plausible to assume that the

MATERIALS AND METHODS

extended family has a structure flexible enough to repress or to encourage fertility based on the demographic and economic circumstances of the household.

The data used in this study were collected in the summer of 1974 from a SO per cent sample (N = SOS) of all once-married women, age 1S-S0, living with their hus-

Among other factors, family resources bands in 25 Iranian villages in a rural area

are a fundamental determinant of fertility in Fars Ostan, a southern province of

(Beaver, 1975). Within peasant com- Iran. The villages differ in size, ranging

munities, the key resource, the one mak- from 70 to 500 people. However, they are

ing life possible, is land. Hence, the limita- culturally and religiously homogeneous.

tion of land has an important repressing As they are located in clusters of five to six

effect on fertility (Slicher Van Bath, 1969; villages, they share such amenities as a

Friedlander, 1969; Easterlin, 1971). Ac- health clinic, primary school, and public

cordingly, if mortality, and particularly services. The rural area is about 200 km.

child mortality, has decreased in a peasant from Shiraz, the capital city of Fars Pro-

community and the resources (land) of the vince.

families are not expanded simultaneously, Data were gathered by personal interfamilies, and extended families in particu- view. Questions about household charac-

lar, are faced with population pressure. teristics were asked of the husband; fertil-

The peasant family may respond to such ity data were collected from the wife.

population pressure by encouraging mi- Among other questions, the husband was

gration to the city by some members of the asked to list the name and the relation to

family, probably the young males. Such a the head of the household of all persons

response not only relieves population living in his household whether or not he

pressure, but it may also expand family was the head of household. Based on this

resources, since the migrants may transfer information, the families were divided

some resources from the city back to the into those consisting of husband, wife, and

rural extended family. On the other hand, their unmarried children and families hav-

the peasant family may respond to popula- ing any other member in addition to the

tion pressure by discouraging fertility. The husband, wife, and their unmarried chil-

fact is, the families have to respond to the dren. The latter were considered extended

pressure, but the type of response varies families. Table 1 shows the classification

depending on the advantages and disad- of the families based on this criterion for

vantages of the alternative responses for a sample villages and for census data from

particular family (Davis, 1963). Where the all rural areas of Iran. The result of

availability of urban jobs for migrants and classification by type of household for the

commuters is limited and where land is sample villages is comparable with the

also limited in the rural areas of the census data.

present-day developing countries (Simon, 1974), it is more advantagous for the extended family to discourage fertility than to encourage migration. Thus, it is ex-

The basic statistical technique used here is multiple classification analysis (MCA). This technique is an extension of dummy variable regression analysis where the

Vol. 25, No. 3

Iranian Peasant Women

207

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE i

It is obvious that in addition to family

PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILIES BY
HOUSEHOLD COMPOSITION IN THE SAMPLE VILLAGES AND IN ALL RURAL AREAS OFIRAN
====:^^^^=^==^^==

type other variables would affect the fertil¡ tJy behavior of the women. Among these variables are age of marriage a n d educa-
tion. Since fewwomen were literate, we

Household composition

sample villages

AL^TÎ excluded the wife's education from the Iran* analysis. However, husband's literacy is

Husband, wife, and unmarried children

an important variable which is controlled 82.4% 84.9% i n further analysis of the data. Table 3

Husband, wife, and

shows the result of MCA procedure in de-

married children or other relatives

17.6

SOURCE: Iran Statistics Center, 1966.

15.1

fteerrtmiliintyinog°ftpheeaseaffnetctwoofmfeanm,ilcJyonttyrpoe.l.l.ionng

the
for

- . ..

..

age, age of marriage of woman, and edu-

explanatory variables may represent cation ofhusband. The results donotdifmembership inclasses rather than numer- f e r m u c h f r o m ihe findings in Table 2. ical values (Andrews, et al., 1967). MCA T h e Peasant women living in extended

obtains for every subclass of every inde- families have borne 5.3 children, while pendent variable a coefficient indicating St h o s e l i v i n i n n u c l e a r f a m i l i e s h a v e b o r n e its influence on the dependent variable 6-°children. Thus, peasant women living after the effects of other variables are con- i n n u c l e a r families have a significantly

trolled

higher level offertility, other things being

equal.

Earlier inthis paper itwashypothesized

that the extended family maybepro- or

Table 2shows theeffect offamily type anti-natalist depending ontheavailability

on fertility for all women in thesample of resources and thetype of response to

TABLE 2

EFFECTS OF FAMILY TYPE ONTHE NUMBER OF CHILDREN EVER BORN TOALL WOMEN AND TO FARM WOMEN: SAMPLE VILLAGES, IRAN*

ALL WOMEN

FARM WOMEN

FAMILY TYPE

NO.

Gross Effect

Net Effectt

No.

Gross Effect

Net Effectt

Nuclear Extended
Total no Grand mean

416 89
SOS

0.23 -1.10
... 5.65

0.23 -0.40
...

301 78
449

0.41 -1.20
5.93

0.20 -0.70

* Effects are shown as deviations from the grand mean. All effects, gross and net, are statistically significant at the 0,01 level. t Net of age of woman.

villages and for those living in farm population pressure. If the peasant family

households. It is clear that women living is notrelieved from population pressure

in nuclear families have borne more chil- through the migration ofsome membersof

dren than have women living in extended thefamily, such asyoung males, and the

families. When ageis controlled, the dif- expansion of resources islimited, the only

ference between the two groups is reduced alternative istorepress thefertility of the

significantly. However, the repressing ef- couples in the household. Given the lim-

fect ofthe extended family onthefertility itation of the available data, we attempted

level of women is strong.

totest this hypothesis by using thesize of

208

Aghajanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
EFFECTS OF FAMILY TYPE ON NUMBER OF

calculated the effect of t h e number of "nonnuclear" members in the household

CHILDRESAMPVLEERVIL^GE°S F C N * W 0 M E N :

Gross

=
Net

FamilyType

No.

Effect

Effectt

gS;¿g

Total no

449

Grand mean

_?1o ... 5.93

-0 62 ...

o n t h efertility level of t h e P e a s a n t women. T h e results of the M C A show the highest level of fertility for women in nuclear faml.l.i.es and, t.,he ,lowest l, evel, fe or women in
e x t e n d e d households. It is clear that an addition of three or more relatives to the family reduces the mean number of chil-

* Effects are shown asdeviations from the grand mean. All effects, gross and net, are statistically significant at the0.01 level.
t Net of age and age of marriage of woman and education of
husband.
the landholding of the household as a proxy for the resources available to the family. After standardizing for the size of the landholding, we used the number of relatives (anybody besides the husband, wife, and their unmarried children) in household as the measure of population
sure
Table 4 presents the mean size of

UHIr

Cp

n "

CPVVCP1r

UhUoIrUn

bv "?

d

au

bo

uml

i -

t

o nn ne

p rhilH UU1U.

Onp Une

extra nonnuclear member in the household

is associated with a reduction of 0.65 children ever born. Thus, the larger thenumber of nonnuclear members in the family and thesmaller thesize of the landholding of the household, the lower the fertility level of the woman in the household,

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION Previous studies of the relationship be-

TABLE 4
MEAN NUMBER OF PERSONS IN THE HOUSEHOLD BY FAMILY TYPE AND SIZE OF THE LANDHOLDING OF
THE HOUSEHOLD^FARM FAMILIES, SAMPLE

tween family type and fertility have not

b e e n conclusive. While various meth-

odological issues have been discussed in

^ ^ tQ ^ i n c o n s i s t e n t

findingS)

l e s s &t_

IN HECTARES
5-9 10 and over All sizes

FAM.LVTVPE

Nuclear

Extended

5.50 6.72 6.58 8.04 7.19 8.84 5.87 7.44

household by family type and size of the landholding. In general, extended families have 1.6 members more than nuclear families. Furthermore, the mean household size is significantly larger for extended households than for nuclear households at all size classes of landholding. That is,the same size land must support a larger number of persons in thecase of extended families. To reduce this pressure, the extended family should discourage thefertility level of the couples in the household.
Data presented in Table 5 confirm the above conclusion. After adjusting forthe size of landholding of the household, we

tention has been paid to the theoretical expectation that the extended family should in all situations lead to high fertility. This study questions that premise. While the structural features of the extended family may often lead to early marriage and high fertility, they also seem flexible enough to be capable of repressing fertility if necessary. In fact, whether the extended family encourages or discourages fertility depends on the demographic and economic circumstances of the household. If the family is not faced with population pressure andcan expand its resources, the extended family encourages higher fertility. This hasbeen the situation in peasant communities of the past, as described by Boserup (1965). However, for the agricultural societies of contemporary developing countries, economic resources, particularly land, are limited, and the rate of population growth is high. Hence, popula-

Vol. 25, No.3

Iranian Peasant Women

209

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 5
EFFECTS OF THE NUMBER OF NONNUCLEAR RELATIVES ON THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN EVER BORN: FARM FAMILIES, SAMPLE VILLAGES, IRAN*

Family Type
Nuclear
Extended with one relative

No.
363
42

Gross Effect
0.20
-1.20

Gross Effectt
0.03
-0.60

Extended withtwo relatives

21

-1.S0

-0.61

Extended with three or more relatives
Total no Grand mean

23 449

--0.20 S.93

--0.91

* Effects are shown as deviations from the grand mean. All net effects are statistically significant at the 0.01 level. t Net of age and age of marriage of women, level of education of husband and size of the landholding of the households.

tion pressure andlimitation of land are trolled. Furthermore, after adjusting for

important intervening variables in the re- the size of the landholding of the house-

lationship between family type and fertil- hold andcontrolling for other variables,

ity level. The higher the number of non- we find that the number of children ever

nuclear members of the family and the born to the women decreases asthe num-

fewer the resources of the family, the ber of thenonnuclear members ofthe fam-

lower the level offertility ofwomen in the ily increases. Thus, the lowest level of fer-

household.

tility isfound for peasant women living in

Data from Iranian peasant families pre- the household with the highest number of

sented in this study supported the above nonnuclear members.

hypothesis. Itwas observed that fertility is

significantly higher for Iranian peasant

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

women living in nuclear families thanfor

those living in extended families. This

The data used forthis study were collected as part of a research projectfinanciallysup-

finding did not change when the effect of ported byPahlavi Population Center, Pahlavi

sociodemographic variables was con-University, Shiraz, Iran.

REFERENCES

ANDREWS, F. M., J. M. MORGAN, and J. A.
SOAQUIST. 1967. Multiple classification analysis:A report on computer program for multiple regression using categorical predictors. Survey Research Center; Ann Arbor.
BEAVER, S. E. 1975. Demographic transition reinterpreted. Lexington Books, Lexington, Mass.
BOSERUP, E. 1965. Conditions of agricultural growth. Adline Press, Chicago.
DAVIS, K. 1955. Institutional patterns favoring high fertility in underdeveloped areas. Eugen. Quart. 2:345-366.
. 1963. The theory of change and response in modern demographic history. Pop. Index 29:345-369. EASTERLIN, R. A. 1971.Does population adjust to

environment. Amer. Econ. Rev. 61:399-407. FRIEDLANDER, D. 1969. Demographic response and
population change. Demography 6:359-381.
IRAN STATISTICS C E N T E R . 1966. National census of
population andhousing, November, 1966. Total country. Plan Organization, Iran Statistics Center,
Tehran. NAMBOODIRI, K. 1972. The integrative potential of a
fertility model: An analytical test. Pop. Stud. 26:464-485. SIMON, J. L. 1974.The effect of income on fertility. Monograph 19. Carolina Population Center, Chapel Hill.
SLICHER VAN BATH, B. H. 1969. Historical demography and the social and economic development of Netherlands. Daedalus 97:604-621.

