Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
A possible biologic effect of contraception on a balanced genetic polymorphism
Carlos Y. Valenzuela
To cite this article: Carlos Y. Valenzuela (1977) A possible biologic effect of contraception on a balanced genetic polymorphism, Social Biology, 24:1, 84-86, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1977.9988265 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988265
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36

Communications
A Possible Biologic Effect of Contraception on a Balanced Genetic Polymorphism

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Carlos Y. Valenzuela
Department of Cellular Biology and Genetics University of Chile Santiago, Chile

The possible biologic effect on human populations of widespread contraceptive usage has not been sufficiently studied. The difficulties in studying such a subject stem from the complexity of the social and cultural variables that interact with human reproduction as well as from the present ignorance of which evolutionary forces are really operating upon human populations.
The reduction of the mean progeny size of families and the resulting effect on selection has been studied by Spuhler (1963), Matsunaga (1966), and Cruz-Coke (1966). However, these authors have only focused their attention on the reduction of the mean and variance of the progeny number. But what will happen with genetic diseases associated with a reduction of fertility when all families have only one, two, or three children?
Contraception reduces the mean progeny number and its variance because it behaves as a "fixed social norm." The highly effective contraceptives used today allow a couple to determine how many children they will have, and this number nearly always is very small.
In human populations there are couples whose fertility is already reduced because one of its members suffers from a genetic disease or a disease with a large genetic component. This is true for schizophrenia and juvenile diabetes, and perhaps for all

of the genetic diseases whose onset starts in early and middle ages (Cavalli-Sforza and Bodmer, 1971). Of course, this situation also applies to sublethal genetic conditions, because if only a few individuals belonging to a sublethal genotype reach reproductive age, it is still possible to estimate the mean progeny number for that genotype.
It is difficult to predict from the selection coeficients published by different authors the future behavior of a genetic condition in a population where contraception is used by most couples. This situation is the outcome of several possibilities.
1. Selection coefficients, means, and variances of progeny numbers are dependent on how widely contraceptive methods are accepted by the population. Also, it is not possible to compare selection coefficients for a given genetic trait between two populations where the social norm with respect to the ideal number of children is drastically different. It is necessary to quantify the degree to which contraception operates and how firmly a particular social norm is established in each population.
2. The reproductive pattern of mankind exists within a generally permanent human couple. The fertility of one member of the couple is dependent on the

84

Vol. 24, No. 1

Communications

85

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

fertility of the other member. Therefore, it is understandable that the member with the lowest fertility will fix the total fertility of the couple. As contraception affects the reproduction of a couple as a whole, it is necessary to relate selection coefficients to the couple and not to individuals. I have defined such a situation as a block mating selection system (Valenzuela, 1973, 1974; Rothhammer et al. 1975).
3. Some contraceptive methods cannot be used by patients with metabolic genetic diseases due to medical contraindications, a situation which does not apply to normal people. Also, the improvements in medical treatments of such diseases introduces another factor difficult to analyze in this context. Moreover, countries have differences at present in the level which contraception and medical improvements have reached.
Obviously, the way in which contraception will affect the evolution of a genetic system depends upon the way by which such a system was previously maintained in that population. That is why the knowledge of the factors that maintain the system is very important and without it only a few extrapolations can be made.
In some underdeveloped countries where contraception is being introduced and changes in fertility patterns can be expected, sickle cell anemia represents an excellent opportunity to test the changes such a policy may give rise to.
I have chosen sickle cell anemia as an example because it seems that its balanced polymorphic condition is well established (Allison, 1954; Motulsky, 1964). It is assumed that hétérozygotes for this condi-

tions have a mean progeny number greater than that of two homozygotes. Furthermore, "normal" homozygotes have a mean progeny number greater than that of the sickle cell homozygotes.
If fertility of hétérozygotes becomes equal to the fertility of normal homozygotes and the total population has a mean progeny number over two, then the population is growing, but the sickle cell gene is being replaced by the normal gene. Therefore, the population susceptible to malaria will increase. It can then be theoretically postulated that over time contraception would increase the number of cases of malaria.
This new situation, a consequence of contraception, can be analyzed either for absolute numbers or for proportions of malaria cases. One also has to take into account the actual change of the mean progeny number of each genotype and the total mean progeny number so as to be able to predict the outcome of such a policy. From a social and epidemiological point of view, the absolute number as well the proportion of people affected by malaria are equally important. Fitness, as usually described (Li, 19S5; Jacquard, 1970; Crow and Kimura, 1970), does not give new insights about the ways in which new needs in public health treatment will develop. For example, the epidemiologist will be interested in knowing the absolute number of descendants of a given genotype so as to estimate new hospital needs.
I hope that this letter will encourage more attention to and concern for such an important subject.

REFERENCES

ALLISON, A. C. 1954. Protection afforded by sickle cell against subtertian malarial infection. Brit. Med. J., 1:290-294.
CAVALLI-SFORZA, L., and W. BODMER. 1971. The
genetics of human populations. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco.
CROW, J. F., and M. KIMURA. 1970. An introduc-

tion to population genetics theory. Harper & Row, New York.
CRUZ-COKE, R. 1966. Riesgos disgénicos por disminución de la progenie. Rev. Med. Chile 94:11.
JACQUARD, A. 1970. Structure génetiques des populations. Masson & Cie., Paris.

86

Communications

Social Biology

Li, C. C. 1955. Population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
MATSUNAGA, E. 1966. Possible genetic consequences of family planning. JAMA 198:119.
MOTULSKY, A. G. 1964. Hereditary red cell and malaria. Amer. J. Trop. Med. 13:147-155.
ROTHHAMMER et al. 1975. Selección natural en poblaciones humanas. Rev. Med. Chile 102:1, 44.

Spuhler, J. N. 1963. In W. J. Schull, Genetic selection in man. The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
VALENZUELA, Y. C. 1973. Selección en bloque matrimonial en una problación con cruzamiento al azar. Rev. Med. Chile 101:3, 103. . 1974 Thesis. Selección en bloque matrimonial. 5 modelos. Universidad de Chile.

Observations on the Artifact Hypothesis and Naylor's "Sequential Aspects of Spontaneous Abortion: Maternal Age, Parity, and Pregnancy Compensation Artifact"
William H. James
The Gallon Laboratory University College London, England

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

It is well established that rates of reproductive wastage increase with birth order and with maternal age. However, in regard to spontaneous abortion, the extent of these increases is not clear, prospective material showing far smaller increases than retrospective data (Taylor, 1970). The cause of these increases is not clear either. Logically, they could be due to either (1) a genuine effect, that is, a process in which the degree of risk in each individual woman mimics the overall rates, changing as she makes the transition from one birth order-maternal age category to the next (the genuine-effect hypothesis), or (2) an artifact introduced by the hypothesized higher fertility of wastage-prone women (the artifact hypothesis), or both.
There is little doubt that there is some truth in the first of these hypotheses, but it

is important to decide whether there is any in the second, because its falsity has been presupposed in discussion on (a) the biological parameters underlying demographic change, and (6) the consequences of confining reproduction within certain age and parity categories. For instance, in regard to (a), Sheps (1965) and Henry (1965) ignore the possibility of the artifact hypothesis; yet, if it were true, it would cast some doubt on their inferences on the duration of postpartum sterility and the variability of fecundability. As for (b), if the artifact hypothesis were true, one would entertain doubts about the conclusions of Nortman (1974) in regard to the expected decline in rates of reproductive casualty if childbearing were kept within certain age and parity categories.
After analyzing individual obstetric histories, I have suggested that there is strong

