Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Prenatal screening for neural tube defects: Perceptions of potential recipients
Selwynn B. Howard & Verle E. Headings
To cite this article: Selwynn B. Howard & Verle E. Headings (1991) Prenatal screening for neural tube defects: Perceptions of potential recipients, Social Biology, 38:3-4, 258-265, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1991.9988793 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1991.9988793
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

Prenatal Screening for Neural Tube Defects: Perceptions of Potential Recipients

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Selwynn B. Howard and Verle E. Headings
Division of Medical Genetics Department of Pediatrics and Child Health Howard University College of Medicine Washington, D.C.

ABSTRACT: The interpretation of prenatal screening and follow-up diagnostic testing for neural tube defects is relatively complex and presents unusual demands in terms of informed utilization by pregnant women. Such demands could impact differentially on individuals of different socioeconomic status or cultural values. Accordingly, a two-part questionnaire, interrupted by presentation of educational material on neural tube defects and prenatal screening, was presented to female sophomore medical students and to reproductive-age women whose children were served at Howard University Hospital. Student subjects favored prenatal testing, whereas clinic subjects were divided on testing both before and after reading the educational material. Both groups anticipated prenatal screening in future pregnancies, but clinic subjects were ambiguous about the need for diagnostic follow-up after the determination of high maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein. Clinic subjects were more hesitant than students to employ abortion as a means of intervention and did not distinguish between spina bifida and anencephaly in this regard.

Neural tube closure defects (NTD's) are among the most common and most disabling of congenital malformations. Incidence differs among some populations and clearly exhibits a distribution of occurrence within families congruent with multifactorial inheritance (Toriello, 1983). Maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) screening for NTD's is currently the most promising approach to preventing these disorders (Brock, 1982). However, the approach as a screening strategy is unprecedented in several respects in that it is offered to entire pregnancy populations, the level of the measured entity (MSAFP) is subject to several variables in addition to NTD's, and there is a high false positive rate (Brock, 1982; Macri, 1986).
These factors place an unusual demand on the pregnant woman as a po-

tential recipient of such screening since she is expected to accommodate to a relatively complex follow-up diagnostic protocol when the MSAFP is high, which occurs in 3-7 per cent of pregnancies. Furthermore, given that a considerable fraction (about 20 per cent) of pregnancies with NTD are not accompanied by elevated MSAFP and about 95 per cent of elevations are shown to be false positives upon diagnostic testing, there is substantial opportunity for confusion and anxiety by the recipient of the screening. Anxiety by pregnant women about the false positive elevations has been documented (Burton, 1985). Finally, the choice of intervention offered to parents when the prenatal diagnosis of an NTD is confirmed is either midtrimester abortion or to begin making special preparations for a disappoint-

258

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Neural Tube Defects

259

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

ing pregnancy outcome. There is presently no preventive or curative treatment in the traditional sense.
We postulated that this series of demands could impact differentially on individuals of different socioeconomic status and cultural values, in particular those variables which distinguish health professionals and their innercity clients. A number of educational brochures dealing with MSAFP screening have been designed for populations with relatively low literacy. However, literacy level alone is not likely to account for preferences people hold regarding MSAFP screening. We are unaware of studies which address potential differences in preferences about MSAFP screening between health care professionals and their inner-city clients. If such differences are identified, any correlated variables can then be sought with a view to ensuring that decisions which clients make about screening are based on perceptions which bear a reasoned relationship to their personal risk budgets (Fried, 1970).
The ethical requirement that all candidates for a service be offered equal opportunity to make informed decisions about that service can only be met if they are informed in a manner which is tailored to their perceptions (Fry, 1987). In order to do this, health professionals must understand how their own interpretations and preferences about a new diagnostic technology and intervention strategy may differ from that of their clients. Accordingly, this pilot study addressed the following objectives concerning reproductive-age women drawn from an inner-city African-American population of Washington, D.C., served by

Howard University Hospital as well as a sample of their future physicians, female sophomore medical students at Howard University College of Medicine: (1) to ascertain existing awareness in the two populations sampled about NTD's and prenatal screening for such disorders; (2) to test the hypothesis that written and pictorial information about NTD's enhances preferences for screening and/or intervention by abortion; (3) to identify how inner-city women and female medical students differ from one another in regard to interpretation and acceptance of prenatal screening for NTD's and abortion as an intervention; (4) to test the hypothesis that type of NTD influences preference about abortion as a method of intervention differently among the two groups of subjects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
RESEARCH SUBJECTS
Women in the reproductive age range who brought their children to the pediatric outpatient clinics at Howard University Hospital were serially invited to respond to a questionnaire while they waited for their clinic appointments. Those who agreed to participate were taken to a room adjacent to the clinic to assure privacy while subject and investigator read through the questionnaire together. This sampling design samples those females who are candidates for future MSAFP screening and who manifest interest in the health of their present and future children, given that they utilize the clinic services available for their children. An inescapable limitation of the sampling design is self-selection since

260

Howard and Headings

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

those persons who are relatively uninterested in the study may choose to decline to participate. Ninety-five per cent of this population sample identifies itself as African-American and is geographically located in census tracts of the inner city where mean household income is marginal.
During approximately the same time frame, the questionnaire was presented to female sophomore medical students at Howard University following the conclusion of a regularly scheduled class session. This sample of professionals proved to have the advantages of being similar to the clinic population sample in terms of mean age and number of previous pregnancies. They not only are of an age which makes them probable candidates for future MSAFP screening, but they will also during their clinical training be expected to offer MSAFP screening and interpret its significance for their patients.
QUESTIONNAIRE
A 17-item questionnaire was developed by the investigators. The first nine questions were followed by descriptive text and photographs of NTD's, a description of MSAFP screening and diagnostic tests for NTD's, and the choices available for intervention when an NTD is identified in the mid-trimester fetus. Eight questions followed the educational section. Nontechnical language was employed where possible and, when necessary, technical terms were defined.
The educational segment of the questionnaire was designed to assist informed decision-making about prenatal MSAFP screening and intervention for identified cases of NTD. Two of the

post-education questions were repeats of the pre-education questions. Responses to the two sets were tested for independence by the chi-square in order to identify whether there were "acute phase" effects of the new information on preference about MSAFP screening and abortion as a means of intervention for NTD's. The absence of such effects would be consistent with one of two hypotheses--either the content or format of the educational segment did not effectively communicate new information, or there were other variables which took precedence for the respondents concerning MSAFP screening and intervention in NTD's.
The questionnaire was informally pretested with a small sample of medical students to minimize ambiguity of vocabulary and grammatical constructions. When it was presented to the clinic subjects, one of the investigators read the questions to the subjects in order to minimize any limitations of poor reading skills and to provide an opportunity for clarification of questions. These two procedures should tailor the questionnaire to the level of exchange which commonly occurs between physician and patient. Incidentally, this is not assumed to be an optimum exchange. All statistical treatment of data employed the chi-square test. This study, including the questionnaire design, was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Howard University.
RESULTS
The two samples, clinic subjects and medical student subjects, were similar in mean age but differed in regard to education (Table 1). The clinic subjects were essentially uninformed

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Neural Tube Defects

261

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

about NTD's, whereas one-half of the yielded several significant conclusions

student sample reported knowing a fair (Tables 3 and 4). Neither clinic sub-

amount about NTD's (Table 2). De- jects nor student subjects changed

spite their knowledge of NTD's, two- their preferences on these twoissues as

thirds of the medical students knew a result of the information presented,

nothing about MSAFP screening; Students almost unanimously favored

about 90 per cent of clinic subjects prenatal testing, whereas the clinic

were in this category.

subjects reflected some measure of res-

Preferences about prenatal testing ervation, and this difference remained

and intervention by abortion for a de- essentially unchanged after the educa-

tected birth defect before and immedi- tional brochure (Table 3). Concerning

ately after education by brochure abortion as an intervention for NTD's,

Characteristics
Age Mean years Range Median years
Education Mean years
Number of pregnancies Mean Range
Subjects with history of elective abortion

TABLE 1
CHARACTERISTICS OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS
Clinic Subjects (31)
25.7±5.8 17-40 24
11.6
2.2 0-10
5

Student Subjects (33)
23.7±1.6 21-28 24
17.8
2.18 0-3 2

TABLE 2
AWARENESS OF NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS AND PRENATAL SCREENING"

Category of Awareness
NTD's Fair amount Very little Nothing

Clinic Subjects (31)
0 13 18

Student Subjects (33)
14 17 2

Screening Yes No

(Chi-square = 27.3, df=2, P < 0.0001)
4 11 27 22

(Chi-square = 3.8, d f = l , />>0.1)

"Chi-square tests for differences between clinic and student subjects concerning NTD's and screening are given in parentheses.

262

Howard and Headings

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

there was a substantially greater uncertainty than forprenatal testing in both samples, but more soin the clinic sample (Table 4). In terms of anticipated actions in future pregnancies, clinic and student subjects were similar in their choices toutilize screening (Table 5). However, clinic subjects were less persuaded than were student subjects about the need for diagnostic follow-up on positive MSAFP screen results. When projecting use of abortion for

NTD's in a future pregnancy, the clinic subjects did not distinguish significantly between spina bifida and anencephaly, whereas the student subjects more commonly preferred abortion for anencephaly than for spina bifida (Table 6).
Several conclusions can be drawn from this study which deserve further

TABLE 3
RESPONDENTS IN FAVOR OF A PRENATAL TEST WHICH ALLOWS A PHYSICIAN TO DISCOVER WHETHER A DEVELOPING BABY HAS A DEFECT"

No. OF DECISIONS BEFORE AND AFTER EDUCATION

DECISION CATEGORY
Clinic subjects Favor Do not favor Don't know

Before
(31) 21 4 6

After
(31) 23 5 3

Student subjects Favor Do not favor Don't know

(33)

(33)

32 32

00

11

(Chi-square =8.0, df=2, P< 0.02)

"Chi-square test for difference between clinic and student subjects after education about NTD's is given in parentheses.

TABLE 4
RESPONDENTS IN FAVOR OF TERMINATION OF A PREGNANCY WHEN SEVERE DEFORMITIES ACCOMPANY A NEURAL TUBE DEFECT"

No. OF DECISIONS BEFORE AND AFTER EDUCATION

DECISION CATEGORY
Clinic subjects Favor Do not favor Don't know

Before
(31) 9 6 16

After
(30) 10 7 13

Student subjects Favor Do not favor Don't know

(33)

(32)

24 26

00

96

(Chi-square = 16.6, df= 2, P< 0.0005)

"Chi-square test for difference between clinic and student subjects after education about NTD's is given in parentheses.

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Neural Tube Defects

263

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

TABLE 5
RESPONDENTS WHO WOULD UTILIZE SCREENING AND FOLLOW-UP TESTING IN FUTURE PREGNANCIES"

Decision Category

Yes No Don't Know

Screening Clinic subjects Student subjects
Follow-up testing Clinic subjects Student subjects

18 4

9

26 1 6

(Chi-square = 3.8, df=2, P>0.1)

20 2 9

31 0

2

(Chi-square = 8.0, df=2, P < 0.02)

"Chi-square tests for differences between clinic and student subjects concerning screening and follow-up testing are given in parentheses.

TABLE 6
RESPONDENTS WHO WOULD UTILIZE ABORTION FOR NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS"

Decision Category
Spina bifida Yes No Don't know
Anencephaly Yes No Don't know

Clinic Subjects
14 8 8
10 9 11

Student Subjects
14 5 14
25 1 7

"Chi-square tests for differences in preferences about abortion between spina bifida and anencephaly are chi-square= 1.2, df=2, P > 0.5 for clinic subjects and chi-square= 8.1, df-2, P < 0.02 for student subjects.

investigation and which could be of significance for the design of education prior to MSAFP screening as well as for the education of medical students about the perspectives of their innercity patients. Female medical students are more oriented than are clinic subjects drawn from an inner-city AfricanAmerican population of similar age.toward prenatal screening, follow-up diagnostic testing when a screen is positive, and use of abortion as a method of intervention in NTD's, with a higher frequency of use projected for anencephaly.

This distinction is made more significant by the fact that two-thirds of the students reported no awareness of MSAFP screening prior to their encounter with this questionnaire. Yet, both before and after reading the brochure, essentially all of them favored such screening. Clearly, the current intervention model for NTD's is more acceptable to students than it is to one group of clients they may serve. If young physicians and clinic subjects reading the same information written for lay-persons interpret its significance and acceptability differently,

264

Howard and Headings

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

then it should be noted that the physician may be at risk for either not making the information conceptually accessible to patients or, conversely, for assuming a directive role in decisions about intervention for NTD's.
The pattern of responses by clinic subjects present some indications for further investigation. The absence of an apparent effect of the educational information on preferences about screening, diagnostic follow-up testing, or intervention for anencephaly may reflect limitations of the educational material presented to the clinic subjects. This problem is being investigated in another study in regard to variables such as vocabulary level employed and time frame over which the educational process occurs. An important objective in the design of the educational material was to convey the necessity of follow-up diagnostic tests when the MSAFP screen is positive, given that the screen has a 95-per-cent false-positive rate. It is cause for some concern that whereas clinic subjects did not differ from medical students in preference about MSAFP screening, they less often would select follow-up testing for a positive screen.
The educational material included risk probabilities as well as pictures and text portraying distinctions in morbidity for anencephaly and spina bifida. This difference in morbidity did not elicit different preferences about pregnancy termination for clinic subjects as it did for medical students, suggesting that other factors more often influence preference among clinic subjects. Numerical probability statements about genetic risk are subject to being assessed incorrectly, and in part this is a function of educational level

achieved (Chase, 1986). Thus, the process of risk assessment itself may differ between the two groups of subjects in this study.
Another source of.discrepancies between clinic subjects and medical student subjects in preferences for screening, testing, and intervention may be different styles of reasoning about their personal risk budgets. It has been postulated that each individual approaches cost-laden decisions with reference to a personal risk budget (Fried, 1970). Thus, the discrepancies in preferences noted between the two categories of subjects could reflect differences in how short-term and longterm costs of a decision are estimated. Costs in this framework may span the spectrum of monetary, moral, social, psychological, and religious variables which are pertinent to the decision for the individual. It should be noted that clinic subjects had experienced threefold more elective abortions than had medical student subjects. This finding suggests that the less frequently stated preference by clinic subjects for intervention in anencephaly (Table 6) may not be a function of greater reservation about abortion per se. However, further study is required in order to understand to what extent the respective elements of a personal risk budget noted above influence preferences about screening and prenatal diagnosis for NTD's.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by a Summer Medical Student Research Fellowship from The March of Dimes to Selwynn Howard and from the Summer Student Research Program at Howard University College of Medicine.

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Neural Tube Defects

265

REFERENCES

BROCK, D. J. H. 1982. Effectiveness of prenatal screening. Birth Defects Original Article Series 18: No. 3A, 109-120.
BURTON, B. K., R. E. DILLARD, and E. N.
CLARK. 1985. The psychological impact of false positive elevations of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein. Amer. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 151:77-82.
CHASE, G. A., R. R. FADEN, N. A. HOLTZMAN,
A. J. CHWALOW, C. O. LEONARD, C. LOPES,
and K. QUAID. 1986. Assessment of risk by pregnant women: Implications for genetic counseling and education. Soc. Biol. 33:5764. FRIED, C. 1970. An anatomy of values. Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. FRY, S. T. 1987. The ethical dimensions of policy
for prenatal diagnostic technologies: The case of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein screening. Adv. Nurs. Sci. 9:44-55.
MACRI, J. N. 1986. Critical issues in prenatal maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein screening for genetic anomalies. Amer. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 155:240-246.
TORIELLO, H. V., and J. V. HIGGINS. 1983. Oc-
currence of neural tube defects among first-, second-, and third-degree relatives of probands: Results of a United States study. Amer. J. Med. Genet. 15:601-606.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

