Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Institute for scientific information recieves grant to "map" science
To cite this article: (1973) Institute for scientific information recieves grant to "map" science, Social Biology, 20:4, 473-473, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988078 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988078
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Communications
Institute for Scientific Information Receives Grant to "Map" Science

P Jr
\. hv*
·Mi
JJ

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

The Institute for Scientific Information has been awarded a research grant by the National Science Foundation to study ways of monitoring the level and nature of activity in scientific specialties for the purpose of gaining early insights into changes that will affect scientific trends. Such insights would be useful in planning science policy at the national level and research and development policy at the corporate level.
The grant was made by the Science Policy Research Program in the National Science Foundation Social Sciences Division.
ISI is a research and information-services organization, specializing in the development of methods for improving the utilization of scientific and technical information. The study will attempt to extend work done on citation networks to the point of developing predictive models that will provide early warnings of significant changes in the direction of science.
Underlying the study is the hypothesis, advanced by several researchers, that the growth and decay of scientific specialties is signalled by the appearance and disappearance of groups of related, highly-cited articles.
Using this hypothesis as a starting point, the study will use groups of highly-cited papers to define specialties and track their growth, decay, and scope on a year by year

basis, from 196S through 1971. The yearly status of the scientific specialties will be depicted graphically to provide, in composite, a "map" of the structure of science for the year.
The data for this part of the study will be generated by computer from the ISI Science Citation Index, which defines the citation links between scientific papers in all disciplines. The groups of papers will be identified not by the number of times the individual papers have been cited, but by the number of times pairs of papers have been cited by the same source.
From an analysis of the year-by-year changes in each specialty, the study team will develop spatial and probability models to try to predict the growth and decay of specialties, change of direction within the specialties, and changes in the relationship of the specialty to related areas of applied research. The models will be tested by comparing their outputs with citation data for the test years.
The study will be directed by Dr. Henry Small, ISI Research Associate, as principal investigator. He will be assisted by four outside consultants: Professor Belver Griffith of Drexel University, Professor Derek J. de Solla Price of Yale University, Professor Frank Carmone of Drexel University, and Dr. Joseph Kruskal of Bell Laboratories.

473

