Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The genetics of alcohol consumption in animals
John L. Fuller
To cite this article: John L. Fuller (1985) The genetics of alcohol consumption in animals, Social Biology, 32:3-4, 210-221, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1985.9988609 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1985.9988609
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:40

The Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

John L. Fuller
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York

ABSTRACT: This paper reviews animal studies of genetic differences in the consumption of alcohol. It deals with six areas: (1) field observations in nature; (2) selective breeding; (3) variation among inbred strains; (4) correlates of ethanol preference and avoidance; (5) consumption and sensitivity; and (6) a test of an ethanol intake control system. Because of space constraints it is selective rather than exhaustive. The results of experiments demonstrate that genes have a strong effect on alcohol consumption when animals are given a choice of liquids. Both preabsorptive and postabsorptive factors can modify intake. There are similarities in factors that affect alcohol consumption in animals and those believed to be operative in humans. Evidence for an ethanol intake control system is presented.

Research on the genetics of alcohol consumption in animals preceded the studies on sensitivity, tolerance, and dependence that will be discussed by other contributors to this volume. Although behavioral techniques are emphasized in studies of consumption, attention is also given to physiology, pharmacology, and biochemistry. The combination of behavioral and biological techniques provides insights into the basis of heritable differences in alcohol preference and aversion.
The specific genetic factors affecting alcohol consumption in rats and mice may not be identical with those in humans, but there are interesting parallels. Just as there are alcoholic and totally abstinent humans, there are mice that drink almost no plain water if 10per cent ethanol is available, and others who avoid alcohol at very low concentrations. Perhaps the most important application of studies in this area is the dem-

onstration that some of the models developed from animal studies are applicable to humans. A good example is the finding that both abstinent mouse strains and some abstinent human ethnic groups share a genetic deficiency in acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. A deficiency in this enzyme results in higher than normal level of acetaldehyde, a highly toxic substance produced during the metabolism of alcohol.
FIELD OBSERVATIONS
Humans and their laboratory surrogates, rats and mice, are not the only consumers of alcohol. Our New England poet, Robert Frost (1930), described the symptoms of inebriation in "The Cow in Apple Time." The cow's face is "flecked with pomace and she drools a cider syrup. . . . She bellows on a knoll against the sky. . . and the milk goes dry." The drunken cow and the

210

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

211

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

drunken cowherd react similarly to an cent for males and 1.37 per cent for fe-

overdose of alcohol.

males. Overall, AA rats were lighter

Alcohol consumption in the field has than ANA rats and consumed a much

been observed in a variety of animals: larger proportion of their calories from

birds, raccoons, pigs, goats, horses, ethanol. Erikkson suggested that AA

bears, and a variety of primates. Siegel rats ingest large quantities of alcohol be(1979) conducted field experiments with cause it is an efficient source of energy,

elephants and concluded that their response to encounters with alcohol is very similar to that of humans. If alcohol is available, elephants consume it in amounts sufficient to induce ataxia and aggression. It is clear that our species is not unique in its long history of contact

but calories may be less important than other factors that result from ethanol ingestion. Another interesting finding in the AA rats was a significantly higher intake of alcohol in females. It will be shown later that this sex difference is not found in all lines that have been studied.

with alcohol. Although such observa- Eriksson (1969£>) estimated the par-

tions are interesting, it is necessary to ent-offspring correlation of voluntary

use genetically standardized animals in alcohol consumption in a random sam-

laboratory settings if one desires to un- ple of 20 pairs of the AA line. His com-

derstand the basis for individual differ- putations were primarily based onmilli-

ences in coping with alcohol.

liters of alcohol consumedper day Ibody

weight in grams. There were interesting

GENETIC SELECTION FOR ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION

differences between the sexes. For parents x offspring (sexes combined), r = 0.40; p <0.01. For males x male

The selection program of Kalervo Eriksson at the Research Laboratories of the State Alcohol Monopoly in Helsinki will serve as a model to demonstrate that the level of alcohol consump-

offspring, r = 0.16,p < 0.05; and for females x female offspring, r = 0.36, p < 0.01.Thisfindingdemonstrates that there was still considerable genetic variance within the AA line.

tion is heritable. Two lines, the alcohol Another factor influencing alcohol

addicted (AA) and alcohol non- intake of these rats was habituation to

addicted (ANA), were clearly distin- the test situation. Over time most sub-

guishable after 16 generations of selec- jects increased their alcohol intake. In-

tion (Eriksson, 1969a, 1971). Separa- take was also influenced by addition of

tion of the lines was based on the con- saccharin or quinine to either the 10 per

sumption of alcohol by animals given a cent alcohol bottle or the water bottle.

choice between tap water and a 10 per Not surprisingly, alcohol preference and

cent solution of ethanol. Alcohol con- consumption increased when saccharin

sumption of AA males was 19 times that was added to 10 per cent alcohol, or

of ANA males; for females the ratio was when quinine was added to the water

slightly greater, 21:1. In the AA line bottle. Both the AA and ANA lines re-

males obtained 22.8 per cent and fe- acted similarly. However, there were

males 24.8per cent of their calories from quantitative differences between the

ethanol. In the ANA line the corre- two lines. "In genetically different

sponding caloric intakes were 1.39 per strains the difference in alcohol con-

212

Fuller

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

sumption persists even in a strongly mo- portance of genetic differences by treat-

tivated situation. . . . The alcohol solu- ing different strains identically.

tion remains repulsive to the non-drink-

er rats despite the improved taste of saccharin-alcohol, and the unpleasant

INBRED STRAIN VARIATIONS

taste of quinine-water" (Eriksson, An inbred strain is a population of ge-

1969a, p. 249).

netically identical individuals except for

Selection for ethanol consumption the sex chromosomes, XX for females

has also been successful with mice. An- and XY for males. Inbred strains of

derson and McClearn (1981) reported mice have played an important part in

on a program using the genetically het- research on the heritability and physio-

erogeneous HS/Ibg as a foundation pop- logical aspects of alcohol consumption.

ulation. Measures of the consumption of Large strain differences in alcohol con-

a 10 per cent alcohol solution were re- sumption have been found. These are

corded after a 24-hour deprivation of not the product of selection, but the

water. An index of consumption for an results of random fixation of a set of

individual was based on the ratio of the genes during a long history of brother-

amount of ethanol solution consumed sister matings. The outcome of a pro-

on the test day to the mean consumption gram of repetitive inbreeding is unpre-

of water on the two days prior to the dictable, but to the delight of

deprivation period. At the 14th genera- researchers it turns out that mice of

tion the mean scores were 0.38 for the some lines are heavy drinkers and others

low acceptance line and 1.19 for the high are teetotalers.

acceptance line. The mean score of nonselected control mice was 0.78. The clear separation of scores indicates that genes have an important role in determining alcohol intake in mice as well as in rats.

As an example, McClearn and Rodgers (1959) compared alcohol consumption in five inbred strains of mice given a choice of water or a 10 per cent alcohol solution for a 4-week period. C57BL/Crgl mice strongly preferred al-

Other investigators have employed cohol; the other four strains generally

selection to produce lines of experimen- abstained. In contrast with Eriksson's

tal animals that differ in their response rats, there were no significant sex differ-

to alcohol in respect to sensitivity, toler- ences in alcohol consumption. A second

ance, and dependency. The positive experiment (Rodgers and McClearn,

results of selection demonstrates that 1962) extended the preference studies to

there is a substantial genetic component a variety of alcohol concentrations from

to differences in response to alcohol. Al- 2.5 per cent to 15 per cent. C57BL mice

though the selection approach is valu- increased their preference progressively

able, it is also useful to compare alcohol over three weeks. C3H/2 mice started at

consumption in inbred strains. The ge- a low level, but showed a definite prefer-

netic uniformity within a strain is an ad- ence for 10 per cent alcohol by the end

vantage for many experiments. Thus, of the experiment. BALB/c and A/3

one can estimate the effects of environ- mice tended to avoid alcohol at all con-

ment by treating groups from an inbred centrations. Thus, among these four

strain differently and measure the im- strains was one with high initial prefer-

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

213

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

ence for alcohol, another that devel- tion, a low and relatively uniform

oped preference as it became familiar acceptance of alcohol concentrations of

with alcohol, and two that remained 8 per cent to 1 per cent, and a striking

avoiders.

preference for the lowest concentration.

Crosses were made between the The same six-solution procedure was

alcohol-preferring C57BL mice and used for four inbred strains: DBA/2J,

three water-preferring strains, C3H/2, C3HeB/J, A/J, and C57BL/6J, and the

A/2, and DBA/2 (McClearn and six possible Fl crosses between them.

Rodgers, 1961). All the Fl offspring This design is known as a half-diallel ex-

were intermediate to their parents in periment. The results are shown in Fig-

preference scores. A set of Mendelian ure 2. DBA's and their crosses con-

crosses between C57BL and A yielded sumed the least alcohol; C57BL's and

the following alcohol preference ratios: their hybrids were at the other end of the

A = 0.12; FlxA = 0.18; Fl = 0.31; distribution; and C3HeB's and A's were

F2 = 0.23; FlxB = 0.35; and B = 0.61. intermediate. An analysis of variance of

Alcohol preference and the proportion the consumption scores showed a highly

of C57BL genes were strongly correlat- significant effect of strain, but none for

ed in the hybrids. McClearn and Nichols sex. Computation of the general and

(1970) demonstrated that intraperito- specific combining effects in the hybrids

neal injection of alcohol to C57BL mice showed significance for both, but the

decreased their alcohol intake in pro-

portion to the size of the injection. They

concluded that differential intake in

their subjects was not based on taste or other features of ingestion, but on the

25 Multiple Choice Method

physiological effects of alcohol.

for Alcohol Preference

Alcohol preference in the studies re- i 20 viewed up to this point was measured by

giving subjects a choice between water and a single solution of ethanol, commonly 10 per cent. Fuller (1964) used a

15

C57BL/6 (1.93)

more complex method that simultaneously provided six concentrations of 0.5,

10

1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 per cent. Alcohol

scores were computed by a formula that S 5

can be found in the original paper. Fig-

ure 1shows the typical pattern of intake

in C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice. The relatively constant slope of the C57BL curve indicates that individuals consumed ap-

16 8 4 2

I O.5

(2.2) (1.9) (1.6) (1.3) (I.O) (0.7)

Alcohol Conctntration(Vol.4fc)ofid Score Valu«

proximately equal volumes from the FIG. 1.--Graphical representation of alcohol

four most concentrated solutions and scores for C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice. (From

consumed little of the two least concen-

Fuller, 1964, J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 57, p. 86. Copyright 1964 by the American Psychological

trated. The DBA/2 slope shows no con- Association. Reprinted with the permission of the

sumption of the most concentrated solu- publisher.)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

214

Fuller

Social Biology

specific effects were higher (Table 1).

TABLE1

This means that, although hybrid scores GENERAL ANDSPECIFIC COMBINING ABILITIES

always fell between those of the parent

FOR ALCOHOL SCORES OF HYBRID MICE

strains, thedegree of dominance for al-

cohol consumption depended on the Source of Variation

specific cross.

General combining effect

It would be interesting to know Special combining

df MS

F

3 0.507 10.04"

whether few or many genes are involved effect in differences in alcohol consumption Within groups

2 1.688 33.40» 90 0.051

among inbred strains ofmice. Fuller and Collins (1972) analyzed theoutcomeof

SOURCE: Adapted from Fuller, 1964, p. 87. ·p<0.0l.

a standard Mendelian experiment using

C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice with FI, F2,

and backcrosses. Figure 3 shows that a

two-factor model with partial domi- strains. By using recombinant inbred

nance for high consumption is superior strains from C57BL/6 x DBA/2 crosses

to aone-factor model inexplaining alco- it might bepossible to assign the genes

hol consumption in the F2 and back- regulating alcohol consumption to spe-

cross generations. This result suggests, cific chromosomes.

but does notprove, that only a fewloci There have been a number of herita-

are involved in the differential con- bility estimates ofalcohol preference us-

sumption of alcohol by these two ing inbred strains ofmice. Whitney etal.

50- " AxCSHtB

SOT 1 C57BL-Ç xDBA/2 1C57BL76xC3H«B

Mean percentage fluid intake from the six alcohol solutions. Groups ordered by rank onmean preference score.

0.5 1.0 2X>4JO 8 0 16.0 PERCENT ALCOHOL

C57BL/6J

FIG. 2.--Per cent of total fluid consumed from each of six concentrations of ethanol by four inbred strains andtheir hybrids. (From Fuller, 1964, J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 57, p. 87. Copyright 1964 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

215

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

· Observed 2.0
O Predict«-2 Factor
· Predicted - I Factor

1.2 0.3 0.4

P,(D/2) 8,

F,,F2

PïlB/6)

FIG. 3.--Observed scores for alcohol preference compared with predicted one-factor and twofactor models. (From Fuller and Collins, 1972, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sei. 197, p. 43. Copyright 1972 New York Academy of Sciences. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

(1970) used a standard set of Mendelian crosses from C57BL/1BÍ x JK/Bi, and C57BL/Crgl x DBA/2Crgl. For thefirst set of crosses heritability was 0.15; for the second, 0.35. The difference was attributed to the much greater gap between the preferences of C57BL and DBA mice. Heritabilities are characteristics of specific populations in particular environments. They are not constants for particular traits such as alcohol consumption.
HOW DO GENES AFFECT ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION?
Heritable differences in alcohol consumption have been demonstrated in rats and mice. These differences have either been established by selective breeding or discovered fortuitously among inbred strains that have been maintained for other purposes. Demonstrating differences in alcohol consumption is only

a first step. It is more important to investigate reasons for wide differences in consumption between selected lines such as Eriksson's AA and ANA rats, and between inbred mouse strains such as C57BL/6 and DBA/2. Are responses to the taste and odor of alcohol important? Are alcohol and its metabolic products more toxic in some strains than in others? Does environmental history have effects on later alcohol consumption, perhaps depending on genotype? Does alcohol produce euphoria in some genotypes and depression in others? We do not have all the answers, but progress has been made.
DBA's are well known to have weaker aldehyde-dehydrogenase activity than do alcohol-inhibibing C57BL's. The result is that there is more acetaldehyde in a DBA than in a C57BL that has inbibed the same amount of ethanol. A strong case has been made that the DBA's low consumption of ethanol is a result of conditioned taste aversion resulting from the toxicity of acetaldehyde. Based on this hypothesis Horowitz and Whitney (1975) predicted that aversion to a highly preferred saccharin solution could be produced in DBA's by pairing access to saccharin with an intraperitoneal injection of ethanol that would be converted to aldehyde and oxidized very slowly. They also predicted that the same procedure would not induce aversion to saccharin in C57BL's because they metabolize acetaldehyde so rapidly that the intraperitoneal alcohol injection would generate too little acetaldehyde to produce taste aversion. As predicted, DBA's (but not C57BL's) developed an aversion to normally highly preferred saccharin.
Olfactory and orosensory factors play an important role in human alcohol

216

Fuller

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

consumption. We do not ordinarily con- the heading of postabsorptive factors

sume 10 per cent ethanol in water, but they listed rate of ethanol metabolism,

choose from a variety of wines, beers, neural sensitivity, nutritional value, and

distilled liquors, and mixed drinks. It is caloric intake. C57BL/6J and DBA/2J

reasonable to assume that taste and mice were given choices, after moderate

odor are important factors in the human fluiddeprivation, between water and ei-

consumption of these products. Thus, it ther 2 per cent or 10 per cent ethanol.

is of interest to learn if differences in re- Blood alcohol levels were measured 15

sponse to flavor and odors are significant and 60 minutes after subjects were given

factors in the variability of alcohol con- access to the alcohol solutions. In

sumption among strains of animals.

DBA's levels of blood alcohol were so

Nachman et al. (1971) compared the effects of removal of the olfactory bulbs on alcohol consumption in low-preference BALB/c and high-preference C57BL mice. Alcohol aversion in BALB's was eliminated, but there was no effect on the alcohol intake of C57BL's. BALB's appear to reject alcohol without prior experience. To test the hypothesis that BALB's might be more responsive than C57BL's to sensory stimuli of several origins, both strains were tested for conditioned avoidance of alcohol, sucrose, and saccharin by

low that it was very unlikely that they could have had an appreciable physiological effect. C57BL's had significantly higher levels. When lithium injections were paired with access to 2 per cent ethanol or to 15 per cent sucrose, aversions to both substances were readily induced in DBA's. C57BL's learned to avoid sucrose, but continued to ingest 2 per cent ethanol from distilled water. The authors concluded that the regulation of ethanol intake is predominantly preabsorptive in DBA's and postabsorptive in C57BL's.

pairing drinking of these substances with an injection of lithium chloride. BALB's readily learned to avoid all three substances; C57BL's learned to avoid sucrose and saccharin, but not alcohol. The authors propose that, in C57BL's, postingestional factors, rather than taste or odor preference, play the major role in alcohol preference. In BALB's preabsorptive factors dominate. Results of this kind demonstrate that a number of genetic factors are involved in the regulation of alcohol consumption.

A quite different factor, social environment, has been claimed to affect alcohol consumption in the generally alcohol-rejecting DBA strain. Randall and Lester (1975a) housed weanling DBA mice with adult C57BL's for 7 weeks. Their alcohol consumption was twice as great as that of controls housed with DBA adults. Furthermore, weanling C57BL's housed with adult DBA's consumed less alcohol than did those housed with adults of their own strain. The evidence is rather meager, but it raises the possibility that, even in mice,

Belknap et al. (1977) used another approach to comparing postabsorptive and preabsorptive explanations of strain differences in alcohol intake. They investigated taste, odor, and mucosal irritation as preabsorptive factors. Under

social factors and early experience play some part in affecting alcohol consumption. In another experiment Randall and Lester (19756) made reciprocal ovum transfers between the same two strains. In early maturity the ovum-

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

217

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

transfer mice were provided with an alcohol-water choice. Mice developing from a cross-strain ovum transfer drank more alcohol and less water than those from intrastrain ovum transfers. The genetic and ontogenetic significance of these results is not clear, and it would be helpful to have confirmatory data.
CONSUMPTION AND SENSITIVITY
It is of interest to learn if alcohol consumption is linked with an animal's sensitivity to its soporific and sensory effects. Suitable subjects for such a study are the mice selected by McClearn and Kakihana (1981) for high and low sensitivity to alcohol as measured by the duration of loss of the righting reflex following intraperitoneal injection of a standard dose of ethanol. The two lines are designated as long sleep (LS) and short sleep (SS). Church et al. (1979) tested their alcohol preference by measuring over thirty days: a choice between water and a water solution of 3 per cent glucose and 0.16 per cent saccharin (GS); or a choice between water and GS plus 4 per cent ethanol (GS + E). In a second phase the mice were given a three-way choice from water, GS, and GS + E. Female mice, like Eriksson's rats, had a higher alcohol intake than males. Under both conditions more alcohol was consumed by SS (alcohol-insensitive) than by LS (alcoholsensitive) mice. Thus, selection for "short sleep time" also resulted in a higher preference for ethanol. It seems that the genetic bases of differences in ethanol consumption and in ethanol sensitivity overlap to an unknown degree.

THE ETHANOL INTAKE CONTROL SYSTEM
The experiments described in the preceding sections demonstrate that alcohol consumption in experimental animals is regulated differently in a variety of strains and their hybrids. Nevertheless, all individuals regulate to some degree. McClearn (1972) proposed an ethanol intake control system (EICS) in which a reference signal sets limits on the intake controller (Fig. 4). As a consequence of alcohol ingestion, an "imbibed signal" feeds back information on the status of the organism. As the imbibed signal meets the reference signal at a junction they are compared. Intake ceases when the two signals are equal. McClearn's model assumes that individual mice and individual humans differ in the setting of their reference signal, and that these differences are an important factor in their encounter with alcohol.
The accuracy of such an EICS has been tested with the long-sleep (LS) and short-sleep (SS) lines of mice selected by McClearn and Kakihana (1981). Twenty mice from each of the lines were given free choice between GS and GS + E, with E taking the values of 0,2, 4,8, or 16parts of ethanol (w/v) (Fuller, 1980). The solutions were isocaloric so that differences in consumption would be based on factors other than the energy they provided. Each subject was tested for 5 days with each of the five choices in a balanced order. Between test periods it received water for 2 days. Positions of the GS and GS + E dispensers were changed after the third test day. There was a striking decrease in fluid intake during the 2-day rest intervals. When GS and GS + E were present, the average daily consumption

218 Fuller

Signal junction

Reference signal

y\
W

Intake controller

Social Biology
Ethanol in system

Imbibed · Ignal
FIG. 4.--A schema for a closed loop feedback system for the regulation of alcohol intake. (From McClearn, 1972,inO.Forsander andK. Eriksson [eds.], Biological aspects of alcohol consumption, p. 114. Copyright 1972 The Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

0. GSE/T =0.66-0.19
0.2

O
H
1«?
I O

4 16
%E
FIG. 5.--Upper line (T): Mean combined intake of GS and GSE atdifferent concentrations of ethanol in GSE. Lower line: Change inpreference ratio (volume ofGSE/T) atvarying ethanol options. Note close fit of data points to calculated regression line. (From Fuller, 1980, in K. Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair, and K. Kiianmaa [eds.]. Animal models in alcohol research, p. 58. Copyright 1980 Academic Press, Inc. Reprinted with thepermission of the publisher.)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

Vol. 32, No. 3-4

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

219

of both fluids combined (T) was 14.98 g., about 68per cent of mean body weight. The mean daily consumption of water on weekends was 5.45 g., slightly over V3of the daily consumption of the test solutions. Clearly, during the test periods these mice ingested much more fluid than was required for maintenance. GS and GS + E were consumed for hedonic reasons as well as for physiological needs.
Figure 5 shows the values of T for each of the five options. Total consumption values for the 0 and 2 per cent options were reliably higher than for the 4 per cent, 8 per cent, and 16 per cent options. The preference ratios (GSE intake/Total intake) are also shown. Using a logarithmic scale there was a straight-line decline in ethanol preference as its concentration increased. Differences in the precision of regulation of consumption by sex and line are shown

in Figures 6 and 7. For females in both lines alcohol consumption at four concentrations was very close to lines plotted on the assumption of perfect regulation. Consumption by males deviated significantly from idealized perfect regulation when higher concentrations of ethanol (8 per cent and 16 per cent) were provided. Both LS and SS mice regulated ethanol intake reasonably well. McClearn's model worked under the conditions of this experiment. Figure 8 shows daily changes in ethanol intake for the samples as a whole during the 5-day exposures to each of the four alcohol concentrations. If regulation of intake at a particular concentration of ethanol was achieved immediately, the slope of its graph would be zero. The figure demonstrates that this result was obtained with the more dilute concentrations (2 per cent and 4 per cent) by the second test day. With 8 per cent and

SS · · GSE= 15.U-b." ln-E IS O- -O TÎSE = 12.6-4.5 I n ' E

lO.Or

SS · L SO

· GSE =8.2 - 2.3 In I E o G S E - 6 . 6 - 1 . 8 In ^E

%E
FIG. 6.--Mean daily intake of GSE by SS and LS females at four ethanol concentrations. Lines were calculated on the assumption of perfect regulation. (From Fuller, 1980, in K. Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair, and K. Kiianmaa [eds.], Animal models in alcohol research, p. 59. Copyright 1980 Academic Press, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

0.5
%E
FIG. 7.--Mean daily intake of GSE by SS and LSmales. Lines were calculated on the assumption of perfect regulation. (From Fuller, 1980, in K. Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair, and K. Kiianmaa [eds.], Animal models in alcohol research, p. 60. CopyrightAcademic Press, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

220

Fuller

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

1 2 345
Days
FIG. 8.--Per cent of total ethanol ingested (%I) during each day (D) of a 5-day test with ethanol concentrations of 2, 4, 8, and 16 parts per 100. The regression line for each concentration is identified by a numeral, and was calculated from the formula, %/ = a + bD. (From Fuller, 1980, in K. Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair, and K. Kiianmaa [eds.], Animal models in alcohol research, p. 61. Copyright 1980 Academic Press, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of the publisher.)

16 per cent ethanol there was a significanttendency in both lines to increase alcohol intake over the 5 test days. That regulation of consumption should be less effective with greater differences between the inputs is counter-intuitive. More research on the dynamics of EICS is needed.
SUMMARY
Selection for alcohol consumption in rats is highly effective. Inbred strains of

mice vary greatly in consumption of alcohol when given a choice of fluids. Mice selected for high or low sensitivity to alcohol also differ in alcohol consumption and regulation of intake. The heritability of alcohol consumption patterns has been calculated by parentoffspring correlations and crosses among inbred strains. The results of such computations are dependent on the populations tested and the methods employed. Strains of mice differ in the relative importance of preabsorptive

Vol. 32,No.3-4

Genetics of Alcohol Consumption in Animals

221

and postabortive factors in affecting al- hol. Thevariations in alcohol consumpcohol consumption. It seems likely that tion found in inbred strains andselected the distinctions between preabsorptive lines of experimental animals often and postabsorptive factors found in ani- seem to mirror individuaLdifferences in mals apply also to humans. Those ofus our own species. Research on the conwho work with animal models believe cept of an EICS in both animals and huthat there are common features in ro- mans will be needed aswe cope withthe dent and human encounters with alco- problem of alcoholism.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:40 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ANDERSON, S. M., and G. E. MCCLEARN. 1981.
Ethanol consumption: Selective breeding in mice. Behav. Genet. 11:291-301.
BELKNAP, J. K., N. D. BELKNAP, J. H. BERG,
and R. COLEMAN. 1977. Preabsorptive vs. postabsorptive control of ethanol intake in C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice. Behav. Genet. 7:413--425.
CHURCH, A. C., J. L. FULLER, and L. DANN.
1979. Alcohol intake in selected lines of mice: Importance of sex and genotype. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 93:242-246. ERIKKSON, K. 1969a. Factors affecting voluntary alcohol consumption in the albino rat. Ann. Zool. Fenn. 6:227-265.
. 1969b. The estimation of heritability for the selection of alcohol in the albino rat. Ann. Med. Exper. Biol. Fenn. 47:172-174.
. 1971. Rat strains specially selected for their voluntary alcohol consumption. Ann. Med. Exper. Biol. Fenn. 49:67-72. FROST, R. 1930. Thecow in apple time. In Collected poems of Robert Frost. Henry Holt, New York. FULLER, J. L. 1964. Measurement of alcohol preference in genetic experiments. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 57:85-88.
. 1980. Regulation of alcohol intake in long- and short-sleep mice, p. 57-62. In K. Eriksson, J. D. Sinclair and K. Kiianmaa (eds.), Animal models in alcohol research. Academic Press, New York.
FULLER, J. L., and R. L. COLLINS. 1972. Etha-
nol consumption and preference in mice: A genetic analysis. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 197:42-48.
HOROWITZ, G. P., and G. WHITNEY. 1975.
Alcohol-induced conditioned aversion: Genotypic specificity in mice (Musmusculus) J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 89:340-346. MCCLEARN, G. E. 1972.The genetics of alcohol preference, p. 113-119. In O. Forsander and K. Eriksson (eds.), Biological aspects of alcohol consumption (International Symposium on Biological Aspects of Alcohol

Consumption, Helsinki, September 1971). The Finnish Foundation forAlcohol Studies (Vol. 20), Helsinki.
MCCLEARN, G.E., and R. KAKIHANA. 1981.
Selective breeding for ethanol sensitivity: Short-sleep and long-sleep mice, p. 147159. In G. E. McClearn, R. A. Deitrich, and V. G. Erwin (eds.), Development of animal models as pharmacogenetic tools (DHHS Publication No. (ADM) 81-1133). U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,D.C.
MCCLEARN, G. E., and D. NICHOLS. 1970. Ef-
fects of intraperitoneal injection of ethanol on ethanol ingestion of C57BL mice. Psychonom. Sci. 20:55-56.
MCCLEARN, G. E., and D. A. RODGERS. 1959.
Differences in alcohol preference amonginbred strains of mice. Quart. J. Stud. Alc. 20:691-695.
. 1961. Genetic factors in alcohol preference of laboratory mice. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 54:116-119.
NACHMAN, M., C. LARUE, and J. LEMAGNON.
1971. The role of olfactory and orosensory factors in the alcohol preference of inbred strains of mice. Physiol. Behav. 6:53-59.
RANDALL, C. L., and D. LESTER. 1975a. Social modification of alcohol consumption in inbred mice. Science 189:149-151. . 1975b. Alcohol selection by DBA and C57 mice arising from ovatransfers. Nature 255:147-148.
RODGERS, D. A., and G. E. MCCLEARN. 1962.
Mouse strain differences in preference for various concentrations of alcohol. Quart. J. Stud. Alc. 23:26-33. SIEGEL, R. K. 1979. Natural animal addictions: and ethological perspective, p. 29-60. In J. D. Keehn (ed.), Psychopathology in animals. Academic Press, New York.
WHITNEY, G., G. E. MCCLEARN, and J. C. DE-
FRIES. 1970.Heritability of alcohol preference in laboratory mice and rats. J. Hered. 81:165-169.

