Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
The seasonofbirth paradox
Joseph Lee Rodgers & J. Richard Udry
To cite this article: Joseph Lee Rodgers & J. Richard Udry (1988) The seasonofbirth paradox, Social Biology, 35:3-4, 171-185, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988700 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988700
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 9 View related articles Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

The Season-of-Birth Paradox

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Joseph Lee Rodgers and J. Richard Udry
Department of Psychology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma; and Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina

ABSTRACT: Vital statistics data show a remarkably consistent seasonality in U.S. birth patterns, with peaks in late summer and winter months, and a valley in the spring. An attitude survey of college students suggests that peaks in the actual birth distribution occur in unpopular months in which to give birth; the valley in the actual birth distribution occurs in popular months. This paradoxical finding is named the Season-of-Birth Paradox. Explanations to resolve the paradox include biological and psychological components. A psychological mechanism--named the Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis--is tested using NSFG data from the 1973-75 and 1979-81 cycles. Results suggest that women stop contracepting with the expectation that they will get pregnant almost immediately. When it takes several months on the average for a successful conception to occur, the actual birth distribution is shifted away from the preferred birth distribution. These results suggest that psychological as well as biological mechanisms underlie the consistent seasonality patterns in U.S. births.

There has been recent attention in using National Survey of Family

the demographic literature to seasonal- Growth data from Cycles II and III.

ity patterns in United States birth and

death data (e.g., Land and Cantor, 1983; Seiver, 1985). Explanatory

BIRTH SEASONALITY

models of the observed seasonality pat- Seasonality in human births has been

terns have been proposed for many noted repeatedly in studies of aggregate

years. Most of these have had biological birth patterns. U.S. data from the past

bases. The present research focuses on fifty years and even before have been re-

social and psychological processes to ex- markably consistent in showing a major

plain the seasonality in U.S. birth data. birth peak in the late summer (August-

First, the seasonality patterns in U.S. September) and a minor peak in the

birth data will be identified, and pre- winter (December-February). At least

vious explanations of those patterns will as remarkable, but less noted, is the

be reviewed. Following, two empirical depth of the birth valley in April that has

data sets will be presented, which, to- been consistently found also. Data sup-

gether, identify the Season-of-Birth porting this seasonality pattern are nu-

Paradox. Explanations to help resolve merous and include those coming from

the paradox will be proposed. We will Baltimore (Pasamanick et al., 1960), a

focus on a psychological explanation we county in Georgia (Warren and Tyler,

call the Misinformed Reproducer Hy- 1979), and U.S. Vital Statistics records

pothesis, which implies a formal for 1933-63 (Rosenberg, 1966). Shi-

decision-making model of fertility be- mura et al., (1981) used data from the

havior. Finally, we test this hypothesis northern United States and observed

171

172

Rodgers and Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

these patterns as far back as 1741. Seiver (1985) presented the most recent analysis of seasonality patterns in U.S. births. He studied U.S. Vital Statistics data from 1947 to 1976, for the U.S. as a whole, and for geographic subregions. In his introduction he calls the consistency in this pattern a "mystery" and a "puzzle."
Several possible explanations of the season-of-birth patterns have been proposed. Notable among those include the effect of weather and light patterns on biological processes (triggered, perhaps, by the pineal gland; Ehrenkranz, 1983), and the effect of heat and nutrition on fetal and infant mortality patterns (Pasamanick et al., 1979). Sociological explanations have focused on the aggregate correlation between SES and seasonality patterns (e.g., Warren and Tyler, 1979; Zelnick, 1969), with inconclusive results. Seiver (1985) proposed two explanations. He extended previous work investigating climatic effects, noting that differences between geographic subregions and slight changes in the seasonality patterns between 1947 and 1976 support the hypothesis that heat plays a role in the seasonality patterns. In particular, he invoked the onset of air conditioning in the 1950's and the differential use of air conditioning across subregions of the United States to successfully explain some of the patterns. He also used research showing seasonality in male hormone production to show a correspondence between hormone patterns and birth patterns.
All mechanistic explanations of birth seasonality have been biological (e.g., hormonal correlations, differential fetal mortality). Most explanations, though, have only given indirect evidence about the specific mechanisms causing the seasonality patterns (e.g., weather pat-

terns, SES levels). This paper will consider a direct social-psychological mechanism--seasonality in birth planning--to explain seasonality in U.S. births.
Udry and Morris (1967) considered that coital frequency might vary seasonally. They did find seasonality patterns among a small sample of women, but the coital patterns did not predict the national birth patterns. Otherwise, social and psychological mechanisms to help explain these birth patterns have seldom been considered in the demographic literature (but see Parkes, 1976). This finding is surprising, given the careful attention researchers have devoted to studying the way attitudes and preferences predict other types of fertility data (e.g., Ryder and Westoff, 1965; Westoff and Ryder, 1977). Or, perhaps it is not surprising, given the paradoxical nature of the relationship between seasonality preferences and seasonality patterns that we will now demonstrate.
THE SEASON-OF-BIRTH PARADOX
The Season-of-Birth Paradox is the name we have given to a result which is, at first consideration, quite surprising. The paradox is easily demonstrated by reference to two sets of empirical data.
Figure 1 shows the seasonality patterns from U.S. Vital Statistics data (National Center for Health Statistics, 1982), averaged across 1971-78. Two portrayals are shown, a typical histogram of the data, and a rose diagram (a circular histogram which more correctly models seasonality patterns, since the cyclical nature of the data is explicitly portrayed; Mardia, 1972). The pattern in these data is the same as that from Rosenberg (1966) and Seiver (1985),

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

Season-of-Birth Paradox

173

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

0JRN FEB MflR RPR MflY JUN JUl flUG SEP QCT NOV OEC
FIG. 1.--Average births by month in the United States across 1971-78, adjusted for length of month.

with a major peak in August and Sep- university. Subjects were first asked to

tember, a minor peak in December and consider their future life and to fill in a

February, and a valley in April and "predicted time line" that included im-

May.

portant events they expected in their

To assess preferences for birth sea- life. Ona 67-year time line (until 2050),

sons (for eventual comparison with the 83 per cent of the subjects included the

actual patterns), questionnaires were birth of a child as an important event.

administered to 235 unmarried under- Following, subjects were given another

graduates of both sexes at a Midwestern questionnaire with specific questions

174

Rodgers and Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

about marriage and birth plans and expectations. The questions relevant to this research were the following:
1. What do you think the best month in which to give birth to a child would be? Why?
2. What do you think the worst month in which to give birth to a child would be? Why?
In Figures 2 and 3, the histogram and rose diagram of responses to these questions are shown. The "best month" distribution was unimodal, with a peak in April and May. The "worst month" distribution was bimodal, with a peak in July-August and December-January.
The reasons that respondents gave for their choices were predictable. Fiftyfour per cent chose the best month based on a seasonal preference (usually for spring). Fourteen per cent chose their favorite month because of moderate weather. For the "worst month" choices, 62 per cent chose the month they did because the weather is too hot or too cold. An additional 13 per cent chose December as a month to avoid because of Christmas. While the external validity of these data is questionable (as in any college student sample), the choices and reasons for those choices are rational and are certainly ones that would occur to a population of couples making childbearing decisions. Later in this paper, we will present data from a national probability sample that support the external validity of the findings from this college student sample.
When the patterns in Figures 2 and 3 are combined with those from Figure 1, the Season-of-Birth Paradox is readily apparent. The most popular months in which to give birth correspond to the actual birth valley. The least popular months in which to give birth correspond to the actual birth peaks.

EXPLANATIONS OF THE SEASON-OF-BIRTH PARADOX
A number of possible explanations were proposed to resolve the inconsistency between the patterns in the actual and preferred distributions. These fall into three general categories:
1. The Bad Data Hypothesis; 2. The Biological Domination Hypothe-
sis; 3. The Misinformed Reproducer Hy-
pothesis.
The Bad Data Hypothesis suggests that the paradox is artifactual, that in fact preference and actual birth patterns do match. If one felt most couples actually planning births were systematically different in their preferences from college students, that in fact they held exactly the opposite preferences from the college students in our sample, that furthermore they preferred hot, cold, and Christmas months in which to give birth and desired to avoid spring, this hypothesis would be attractive. We reject such an argument on logical grounds. We will ultimately reject this argument on empirical grounds later in this paper.
The Biological Domination Hypothesis suggests that, regardless of couples' preferences and behaviors reflecting those preferences, biological processes not under volitional control cause the seasonality patterns in U.S. births. We will not argue with this hypothesis in any fundamental way. We assume that there are such biological bases (related to hormonal patterns, the pineal gland, weather patterns, fetal mortality patterns, etc.) underlying the seasonality in U.S. birth data. We do propose, however, that volitional fertility decisionmaking can act alongside such nonvolitional biological processes.
The Misinformed Reproducer Hy-

Vol. 35, No. 3-4
PERCENTAGE 28 H
26 24 22 20 18 16 U12 10 -

Season-of-Birth Paradox

175

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

6-

2-

JRN FEB MRR RPR MRY JUN JUL RUG SEP OCT NOV DEC MONTH
FIG. 2.--"Best month for birth" distribution.

pothesis is based on the assumption that some couples do not take into account the actual lag between the time they begin trying to get pregnant and the average time it takes for successful concep-

tion to occur, that in general they underestimate this lag. There is a decision-making process implied by this hypothesis that explains its assumptions and mechanisms. When couples marry,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

176
PERCENTHGE 30 -J
25 -
20 -
15 -
10 -
5-

Rodgers and Udry

Social Biology

JRN FEB MHR RPR HHT JUN JUL RUG SEP OCT NOV DEC MONTH
FIG. 3.--"Worst month for birth" distribution.

they often decide to postpone immediate childbearing, and to contracept. At some point, if they want a family, they stop contracepting.1 Such a decision
1Miller (1986) has developed a formal theoretical framework that defines such "procepting" behavior.

will be based on factors relevant to the decision makers, and we propose that the seasonality of birth is one such factor that some couples may choose to consider. If they do so, the pattern of seasonality with which they stop contracepting should contain information about their seasonality preferences.

Vol. 35,No. 3-4

Season-of-Birth Paradox

177

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

Our model proposes that many couples expect a pregnancy almost immediately, and that they stop contracepting with that expectation. This proposal suggests examination of the seasonal distribution with which couples stop contracepting. Specifically, if this distribution is lagged by ten months, it should approximately match their preference distribution. But pregnancy is not always attained immediately. If it takes several months, on the average, for a couple to conceive, then the distribution with which they stop contracepting will not match their preference distribution. Furthermore, the stopping contraception distribution, when lagged by thirteen or fourteen months, should approximately match the actual birth distribution.
There is some empirical support for the belief that lag to pregnancy may be considerably underestimated. Foreit and Foreit (1981) asked a sample of college students to estimate the probability that one unprotected coital act between a healthy 20-year-old male and a 19year-old female would result in a pregnancy. The median response was 0.50 (mean = 0.42), compared to an estimated actual value of 0.04 (e.g., Bongaarts, 1976). Over 80 per cent of this sample reported having engaged in sexual intercourse, so this was a sexually experienced (though not sexually educated) sample. Furthermore, Hendershot (1982) found that studies using clinically measured lag-to-pregnancy showed longer lags than those using retrospective reports. Underestimation may well be both a prospective and retrospective phenomenon.
This mistaken belief is exactly the mechanism used by the Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis to help resolve the Season-of-Birth Paradox. The predictions of the model that contraception

stopping will be related to seasonal birth preferences, with a longer-than-expected lag to pregnancy, will be tested using a national probability sample of women who gave birth between 1973 and 1981.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A TEST OF THE MISINFORMED
REPRODUCER HYPOTHESIS: THE DATA
AND THE METHOD
Data to test this hypothesis came from the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), Cycles II and III. The NSFG is a stratified, weighted probability sample of women aged 15-44 in the United States. The particular subjects of interest were 1,919 currently married women who gave birth during 1973-75 and 1,176 who gave birth during 197981 (total N = 3,095). For these women, contraceptive, birth planning, and pregnancy histories were available. The seasonality patterns for each relevant analysis were defined by observing the distribution of the event across months.
Two adjustments were made in the data. First, the raw data were weighted according to sampling rates, so that they may be considered representative of the general population of U.S. women. Second, the monthly data were adjusted for length of month. The monthly rates were computed by dividing the actual number of events during a month by the expected number, which was defined as the total births in the year multiplied by the ratio of days in the month to days in the year. This index is based on the annualized birth rate defined in Shryock et al. (1976, p. 277; also see Land and Cantor, 1983). Seiver (1985) used a similar measure, except that he computed a moving average across the 12-month period centered on the particular month, to eliminate trend contamina-

178

Rodgersand Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

tion. Since we had only six years of data (with a gap in the middle), we could not use such a moving average technique (nor was distortion due to trend as much of a concern as in his thirty years of continuous data).
The birth seasonality patterns in this overall data set were examined in a preliminary analysis to check the efficacy of the probability sample. The same general patterns were obtained, with some slight additional (and predictable) noise. As before, the peaks were in the late summer and winter months, and the valley was in the spring. This supports the external validity of the results we obtain from the NSFG data.
The NSFG questionnaire included three questions that were used to test the Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis. The first asked whether the respondent had been contracepting prior to getting pregnant. The second asked in what month she stopped contracepting. The third asked whether the reason she stopped contracepting was to get pregnant. Combining the information from these questions, we constructed distributions indicating monthly patterns with which women stopped contracepting, broken down by the purpose for which they stopped contracepting. A total of 1,271 women (792 from 1973-75, 479 from 1979-81) reported that they had stopped contracepting in a particular month for the purpose of getting pregnant. An additional 620 women (499 from 1973-75, 121 from 1979-81) reportedly stopped contracepting for a reason other than to get pregnant. Note that the remaining 1,204 women--39 per cent--from the original sample did not respond to one or more of the relevant questions and could not be used in these analyses. We presume that most of these nonresponses were from

women who accidentally became pregnant, and therefore never stopped contracepting prior to pregnancy, or who could not remember when they stopped.
For statistical analysis, we used the technique that Seiver (1985) described and applied to his data. This method uses dummy variable regression to test for monthly deviations from uniformity and for changes over time in those deviations. The technique involves constructing eleven dummy variables indicating whether an observation comes from a given month or not (the twelfth month is indicated by a pattern of all zeros). We also constructed an additional dummy variable, indicating whether the data came from the NSFG Cycle II or Cycle III data, to test for changes in the two cycles. When the period variable was multiplied by the eleven monthly dummy variables, eleven additional dummy variables were defined to test for changes across the two NSFG cycles in each monthly pattern (a test of a month by period interaction).
RESULTS
Figure 4 shows the seasonality with which women in the NSFG data set stopped contracepting for the purpose of getting pregnant. This pattern is averaged across the six years of data. The valley in this distribution is in FebruaryApril, with the major peak in June. In the yearly data, every one of the six years had its valley in February, March, or April, and five of the six years showed a peak in June. Thus, the patterns shown in Figure 4 are consistent by year across the time frame of the NSFG sample.
The dummy variable regression procedure described above was used to test

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

Season-of-Birth Paradox

179

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

1.3
.7-
J FMfiMJJASOHD MONTH
FIG. 4.--Seasonally, stopping contraception to get pregnant, NSFG, 1973-75,79-81.
the reliability of these patterns. Thefirst test compared a 22 variable model with 11 monthly variables and 11 interaction variables to the 11 variable model including only the monthly variables. This test was nonsignificant, suggesting that the monthly patterns were not significantly different between the two NSFG cycles (i.e., variables reflecting changes in the patterns did not contribute significantly to predictability).
The second analysis--and the critical one for the test of our hypothesis-- involved testing each of the 11 monthly dummy variables as it contributed to the 11 variable model. The overall model showed significant stability ( F = 3 . 7 , p < 0.001). We note that the overall test of the dummy variable regression model is equivalent to the X-ll test that the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1965) developed to test for overall stable seasonally-
The coefficients and Mests from the regression to test the months separately are shown in Table 1. Net of the other

variables, the peak in June and the valley in February are significantly different from uniformity (p < 0.05), and the continuations of the February valley into March and April are marginally significant (p < 0.10).2 Thus, these particular peaks and valleys are not only visually striking, they are stable enough across the six years of the data to interpret statistically. This sample size is quite small compared to other seasonality studies (e.g., Seiver used 30 years of data in his analysis), resulting in low statistical power. For the patterns we observed to be statistically significant required considerable stability in the results. Other patterns in Figure 4 (e.g., the minor peaks in October and January) are not distinct enough to interpret as other than sampling fluctuations from uniformity.
We might note that, following Seiver (1985), we chose December as the "reference month" for our analysis. Strictly, then, the tests are tests of deviation from the December level, rather than from exact uniformity. Since December (at 1.03) was quite close to 1.0, this is not problematic. Each parameter coefficient gives a measure of deviation from the level for December (which is indicated by the constant). Thus, for example, the February level is --0.34from the December level, and the f-tests shows that this is a significant deviation from that level.
We also constructed and examined the distribution with which women
2Note that the tests discussed here and reported in Table 1 are two-tailed significance tests. In fact, the Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis makes explicit predictions about the direction of the effect in certain months. All effects are in the predicted direction, and the corresponding onetailed tests for February-April and for June are all significant at or below the 0.05 level.

180

Rodgers and Udry

Social Biology

TABLE 1
DUMMY VARIABLE REGRESSION TOTEST FOR SEASONALITYWITH WHICH WOMEN STOP CONTRACEPTING, NSFG DATA, 1973-75,1979-81"

Independent Variable

Parameter Estimate

Constant January February March April May June July August September October November December

1.03 0.14 -0.34 -0.24 -0.24 -0.07 0.27 0.10 -0.04 -0.02 0.08 -0.10 ...

"Overall R2 = 0.40,N = 72,F = 3.66, p < 0.0006. V < 0.05. 'p < 0.10.

t
11.20 1.11
-2.62 -1.86 -1.87 -0.54
2.07 0.73 -0.32 -0.15 0.65 -0.74 ...

2-Tailed Prob.
0.0001 0.27 0.01" 0.07c 0.07' 0.59 0.046 0.47 0.75 0.88 0.52 0.46 ...

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

stopped contracepting for reasons other than to get pregnant. There were no monthly patterns across the sixyears, and no months significantly deviated from uniformity. Thus, it appears that a different process is at work for women who stop contracepting to get pregnant than for those who stop for otherreasons. The months of February-April and June are not just extreme months in which to stop contracepting in general. Specifically, they are notable stop months for women trying to get pregnant.
We may use the monthly patternsof contraception cessation in FebruaryApril and June to test the Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis. February, March, andApril areunpopular months in which to stop contracepting. Under the assumptions ofour decision-making model, women stop contracepting assuming they will getpregnant almost immediately. Ten months from FebruaryApril are the winter months Decem-

ber-February. This isconsistent withthe results from the survey of collegestudents, who chose these months as especially unpopular ones (see Figure 3). June, ontheother hand, was a very popular month inwhich tostop contracepting. Ten months from June is April, which was theoverwhelming choiceof the college students as the preferred month inwhich togive birth (seeFigure 2). Thus, the pattern with which women in the general U.S. population stopcontracepting perfectly matches the preferences in the college student sample (given the assumptions of the decisionmaking model).
In addition to predicting when women stop contracepting, the Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis also predicts a longer lag to pregnancy than the expected one month. The effect of this lag should betomove the valley of the preference distribution (December-January) tothe valley of the actual birth distribution (April-May), and the

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

Season-of-Birth Paradox

181

peak of the preference distribution stopping contraception can expect to

(April-May) to the peak of the actual give birth. Afourteen month lagin the

distribution (August-September).

February-April valley predicts a birth

In theNSFG data, themean lag from valley inApril-June, which actually ob-

the time a woman stopped contracept- tains (see Figure 1). The June peak pre-

ing toget pregnant andasuccessful con- dicts anAugust birth peak, which also

ception was almost five months.How- obtains.

ever, the median was2.1 months, However, Lam and Miron (1986)

indicating a positively skewed distribu- noted that to resolve completely the

tion. This distribution isshown in Table Season-of-Birth Paradox, we need not

2. The lag-to-pregnancy distribution for women who stopped contraceptingfor reasons other than toget pregnant was nearly identical to this one.

only a mean, but also a medianand mode atfive months. The pattern inTable 2actually moves thedistribution less than five months and also causes a

If we consider only the mean lag to dampening of the peaks andvalleys.

pregnancy--without regard to the When the distribution with which

whole distribution shown inTable2-- women stop contracepting toget preg-

there isanapparent full resolution ofthe nant (Figure 4) is combined with the

Season-of-Birth Paradox. A five-month whole lag topregnancy distribution (Ta-

lag topregnancy added to anine-month ble 2) in a theoretical population of

gestation results inan average fourteen women, we get the distribution shownin

month waiting period before a woman Figure 5 asthepredicted pregnancy dis-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

TABLE2
DISTRIBUTION OFLAG-TO-PREGNANCY FOR WOMEN STOPPING CONTRACEPTION TO G E T PREGNANT, NSFG DATA, AVERAGE OFSIX YEARS IN CYCLES II AND III (N = 1,272)"

Pregnant by End ofh

PerCent Pregnant

Cumulative Per Cent

1st month (mean lag = 0.5)

2nd month (mean lag = 1.5) . . . .

3rd month ( . . . )

4th month

5th month

6th month

7th month

8th month

,

9th month

10th month

11th month

12th month

13th month (mean lag = 12.5)

Past 13th month

16.9 24.1
15.7
10.1
5.2 4.4 3.6 3.0 2.5 1.1 0.8 1.0 1.6
10.0

16.9 41.0 56.7 66.8 72.0 76.4 80.0 83.0 85.5 86.6 87.4 88.4 90.0 100.0

100.0

"Median = 2.1 months; mean = 4.7 months (computed assuming mean lag in last category was 18.5 months). bln this survey, women indicated the month they stopped contracepting toget pregnant and the month inwhich they did get pregnant. A woman indicating pregnancy inthe same month in which she stopped contracepting had a lag between 0 and 1month long. In computing the mean and median, we assumed a lag of 0.5 forthis category, 1.5 for thosewho got pregnant the month after they stopped, etc. Since women don't alwayshave exact knowledge ofwhen they get pregnant, we speculate that their reports may be based on their memory of how many times they menstruated after stopping contraception.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

182

Rodgers and Udry

Social Biology

tribution. With an additional ninemonth gestation, the birth distribution would show a valley in January-March, and a peak in May-August.3 Thus, the resolution of the paradox is not complete. The birth distribution predicted by the stopping contraception distribution is around two months short of matching the spring valley and summer peak in the actual birth distribution.

1.1 JFHflHJJASOHD
O N D J F H A H J J f l S birth

DISCUSSION
This paper was motivated by an interest in two research questions, one old and one new. What causes the remarkably stable seasonal trends in U.S. births? Why do the seasonal patterns of actual births so perfectly contradict the seasonal pattern of birth preferences? We proposed a simple decision-making model that can help answer both questions: Couples are rational fertility decision makers, but misinformed as to the lag they can expect between their attempts at pregnancy and their success. One prediction from this model is that women will stop contracepting with a pattern that predicts seasonal preferences. This was perfectly supported by the analyses reported in this paper, in which the seasonality with which women stopped contracepting in one

FIG. 5.--Predicted pregnancy and birth distribution, NSFG data, 1973-75,79-81.
sample perfectly matched the reported preferences in another.4
A second prediction of the model is that women stop contracepting in a pattern that will predict birth seasonality, but with a longer lag than they expect. This prediction was partially supported. When the actual (rather than expected) lag to pregnancy is taken into account, around half of the difference between the major peak and valley in the birth and preference distributions is resolved.
Despite this less than perfect resolution of the Season-of-Birth Paradox, for such a simple model to perform as well

3To construct this distribution, we simulated a population of 1,000 women in which we applied the empirical lag-to-pregnancy shown in Table 2 to the distribution with which women stopped contracepting to get pregnant shown in Figure 4, assuming a uniform 9-month gestation period. We note that the distribution in Figure 5 is not an empirical distribution, but rather shows in theory how the observed lag to pregnancy canmove the actual birth distribution away from the preferred distribution. In an actual population, the distribution for couples planning pregnancies would combine with that for nonplanners, which would dampen the peaks and valleys in Figure 5.

4Like the reviewers of this paper, we originally viewed the results of a small college student sample with considerable skepticism (which skepticism motivated the development of our Bad Data Hypothesis). We were quite encouraged, however, to discover that the NSFG data contain a pattern which matches that in the smaller sample. Furthermore, it was exactly the one predicted by our Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis. Nevertheless, we hasten to note that we have found no general data in which respondents explicitly indicated their monthly birth preferences. Thus, we are left with the logical argument that a small nonrepresentative sample's explicit preferences perfectly match a large representative sample's inferred preferences.

Vol. 35,No. 3-4

Season-of-Birth Paradox

183

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

as it did seems encouraging. Our results figures in the mid 70 per cent range were

suggest only that the Misinformed Re- "near the mark" (compared to 88.4 per

producer Hypothesis may not be able to cent in our sample; thus, his estimate

stand alone in resolving the paradox and suggests a longer lag than we found). He

in explaining the birth patterns. There also noted a longer lag-to-pregnancy

are several plausible explanations of than we found in a smaller and different

why the resolution was not complete. subset of the NSFG Cycle II data. His

First we return to the Bad Data Hy- mid 70 per cent estimate came from giv-

pothesis. The patterns in the NSFG data ing stronger weight to studies conducted

have successfully refuted criticism of the in clinical settings, which must be rather

select nature of the original college stu- more accurate than the retrospective

dent sample. Both the college student personal reports in the NSFG data.

sample and the national probability Thus, we are apparently being conserva-

sample strongly suggest that there do ex- tive when we state that the Misinformed

ist seasonal preferences for birth that Reproducer Hypothesis only partially

can affect behavior. However, we can explains the gap between the predicted

still question the reliability of the re- and actual birth distribution. We note

ported pregnancy histories. If the esti- that retrospective underreporting of the

mates based on retrospective reports of lag to pregnancy is quite consistent with

lag-to-pregnancy from these women the basic tenant of the hypothesis, that

who gave birth were consistent underes- couples expect to get pregnant sooner

timates, for example, the Misinformed than they actually do on the average. If

Reproducer Hypothesis might be en- the NSFG women are indeed underre-

tirely correct and able to stand alone. porting this lag, it may be because they

There are, in fact, strong arguments that the NSFG reports of lag-topregnancy may well be underestimates, for at least two reasons. First, since our sample contains only women who gave birth, it excludes women who tried to become pregnant but did not during the period covered by the survey. Including those from the NSFG survey who eventually became pregnant would increase

retrospectively revise the sequence of events to match this belief, in the same way that they prospectively misperceived the correct lag-to-pregnancy when they stopped contracepting. Thus, the Misinformed Reproducer Hypothesis may be even closer to providing both a full resolution of the paradox and an explanation of the seasonality patterns than our data suggest.

both the mean and median lag to preg- Nevertheless, we do not reject bio-

nancy, although the effect on the overall logical explanations, even while our

distribution of births is unknown. A sec- data support social-psychological mech-

ond and more relevant reason to sus- anisms. No matter how couples plan,

pect underreporting of the lag-to- certain biological processes will attenu-

pregnancy comes from a comparison to ate predictions based on those plans.

previous data on this issue. Hendershot Seasonality in fetal wastage or in gesta-

(1982) reviewed several studies looking tional length, for example, could alter

at pregnancy lag, and noted a range in the relationship between stopping con-

the per cent pregnant within twelve traception and ultimate births.

months from 43 per cent to 92 per cent. It is important to note that the MisinHowever, his analysis concluded that formed Reproducer Hypothesis only

184

Rodgers and Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

explains the behavior of couples who are model involving the decision to stop

planning their children and who stop contracepting may not have the ability

contracepting to get pregnant. Clearly, to predict the late winter peak in births.

this is less than the full population. We conclude by noting that our

These women accounted for slightly model has nothing tosay about women

over 40 per cent of the NSFG sample. If who get pregnant without having previ-

all other women were giving birth uni- ously used contraception, orabout con-

formly, patterns in 40percent of the traceptive failure, or about nonplan-

childbearing population could certainly ners. Certainly many births fall into

cause seasonal effects.

these categories. That the observed sea-

We also note that wehave not ac- sonality patterns are so consistent in the

counted for the miner birth peak inthe United States, yet different in other geo-

winter months (primarily in December graphical and cultural settings, suggests

and February). Two comments will help that mechanisms other than biological explain this apparent shortcoming. processes may be operating. The Misin-

First, Seiver (1985) noted a trend over formed Reproducer Hypothesis offers a the past thirty years suggesting this mi- plausible and empirically supported res-

nor peak is disappearing. Second, some olution of the Season-of-Birth Paradox previous analyses ofthe NSFG CycleII and of the consistent patterns found in

data (see Rodgers and Udry, 1985) are U.S. birth data.

suggestive that the late summer peak

may be primarily caused by births to

contraceptors, while the winter peak is primarily caused by births to noncontra-

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ceptors. Thus, increased contraceptive The authors express their appreciationto

usage between 1947and 1976might help explain the reduction in the winter peak observed by Seiver. In anycase, this finding suggests that a decision-making

Dee Ann Chase, Hong Chen, and Bridgett Perry for assistance with literature review and data collection; and to Jeff Kalan and Judy Kovenock who provided data analysis assistance.

REFERENCES

BONGAARTS, J. 1976. Intermediate fertility variables and marital fertility rates. Pop. Stud. 30:227-241.
EHRENKRANZ, J. R. 1983. A gland for all seasons. Nat. Hist. 6:18-23.
FOREIT, J. R., and K. G. FOREIT. 1981. Risk-
taking and contraceptive behavior among unmarried college students. Pop. Environ. 4:174-188. HENDERSHOT, G.E. 1982. Monthly patterns of marital relations and waiting times to conception. In Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, Social Science Section. LAM, D., and J. MIRON. 1986. Weather, fecundity, and the seasonality of births. Paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the Population Association of America, San Francisco, CA.

LAND, K. C , and D. CANTOR. 1983. ARIMA
models of seasonal variation in U.S. birth and death rates. Demography 20:541-568. MARDIA, K. V. 1972. Statistics of directional data. Academic Press, New York. MILLER, W. B. 1986. Proception: An important fertility behavior. Demography 23:579594.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS.
1982. Vital statistics ofthe U.S., 1978, Vol. 1. DHHS Pub. No. (PHS) 82-1100. Public Health Service. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. PARKES, A.S. 1976. Patterns of sexuality and reproduction. Academic Press, New York.
PASAMANICK, B., S. DiNitz, and H. KNOBLOCH.
1960. Socioeconomic and seasonal variations in birth rates. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 38:248-254.

Vol. 35,No. 3-4

Season-of-Birth Paradox

185

RODGERS, J. L., and J. R. UDRY. 1985. The
seasonality of birth and the seasonality of planning. Paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the Population Association of America, Boston, MA.
ROSENBERG, H.M. 1966.Seasonal variations in births. National Center forHealth Statistics, Series 21,9, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
RYDER, N. B., and C. F. WESTOFF. 1969. Rela-
tionship among intended, expected, desired, and ideal family size: United States, 1965. Population research. NICHD, Washington, D.C. SEIVER, D. A.1985. Trend andvariation in the seasonality of U.S. fertility. Demography 22:89-100.
SHIMURA, M., J. RICHTER, and T. MIURA. 1981.
Geographical and secular changes in the seasonal distributions of births. Soc. Sci. Med. 15:103-109.

SHRYOCK, H . S., J. S. SiEGEL, and E. G. STOCK-
WELL. 1976. The methods and materialsof demography. Academic Press, New York.
UDRY, J. R., and N. M. MORRIS. 1967. Season-
ality of coitus and seasonality of birth. Demography 4:673-679.
U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS. 1965. The X-11
Varient of the Census Method II Seasonal Adjustment Program. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,D.C.
WARREN, C. W., and C. W. TYLER. 1979. So-
cial status and season ofbirth: A study of a metropolitan area in the southeastern United States. Soc. Biol. 26:275-288.
WESTOFF, C. F., and N. B. RYDER. 1977. The
predictive validity of reproductive intentions. Demography 14:431-453.
ZELNICK, M. 1969. Socioeconomic and seasonal variations in births: A replication. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 47:159-165.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

