Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Child mortality, social status, and fertility in India: A note on Singh's paper
G. L. Dasvarma & K. Balasubramanian
To cite this article: G. L. Dasvarma & K. Balasubramanian (1976) Child mortality, social status, and fertility in India: A note on Singh's paper, Social Biology, 23:1, 90-91, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988208 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988208
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Communications
Child Mortality, Social Status, and Fertility in India: A Note on Singh's Paper

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

G. L. Dasvarma and K. Balasubramanian
Department of Demography The Australian National University Canberra, Australia

I t is well known that social status is an influencing variable on the mortality as well as the fertility of a population. K. P. Singh's study "Child Mortality, Social Status, and Fertility in India" (Social Biology, 1974, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 38S388) on this subject in the Indian context is important in the sense that not much work has been done to bring out such relationships. However, there are a few points worth mentioning here.
It is not known whether the sample in the study is representative of all women of Chandigarh, let alone of India, and as such, the generalization of the findings to portray Indian conditions seems unjustified. The method of drawing the sample and of determining the sample size not being known, it is difficult to apply any statistical tool to analyze the data. But, assuming that the sample is a random one arid that the data are amenable to statistical treatment, some of the differentials mentioned in the paper could well bear a closer scrutiny.*
From Table 1, the assertion that child mortality and social status are related could be made stronger if the differences among the proportions of children surviving in the four social categories were tested for statistical significance. The chi-square test of proportions performed by the authors shows that the differences among the

proportions of children surviving in the four social status categories are significant at the 5 per cent level.
Further, by looking at the social status categories, taken two at a time, it is possible to find out which of the categories are responsible for the observed differentials. It was found that categories 1 and 2,1 and 3, 2 and 3, and 3 and 4 were not significantly different from each other, whereas categories 1 and 4 and 2 and 4 were significantly different, the levels of significance being 5 per cent in each case. Thus, the apparent differences among the four social categories gets reduced to differences between categories 1 and 4 and 2 and 4. This finding implies that social status as a variable explains significant differentials in child mortality only when the differences in social status categories are large. Differences among the proportions of women experiencing child mortality are also found to be significant at the S per cent level of significance, supporting further the differentiarèhild mortality by social status.
Social status can be regarded as an independent variable which affects both fertility and child mortality. The relationship between child mortality and fertility within a social status is in fact a two-way process. Low social status is associated with poor sanitation and poor hygiene, leading to

90

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 1

Communications

91

high child mortality, which in turn results in smaller anovulatory periods in noncontraceptive societies. This process gives rise to smaller birth intervals and consequently higher fertility. Again, high fertility is associated with poor health of the mother and child, and poor child care, which results in high child mortality. These are the biological and public health factors which operate upon fertility and child mortality. There are also the psychological factors which, in the face of high child mortality, influence parents to have large numbers of children in order to ensure the survival of at least some of the offspring. Thus, the relationship between fertility and child mortality is quite complex.
Further, it has been assumed that "(a) the higher the social status, the lower will be the incidence of child mortality, and (b) the lower the incidence of child mortality, the lower will be the family size" (Singh, 1974, p. 385). This assumption leads to the conclusion that child mortality is an intervening variable, a conclusion which is contrary to what has been stated in .the third paragraph of the paper.

The fourth social status category was found to exhibit a lower level of fertility than the third, and this result was ascribed by Singh to certain "exceptions" in the fourth category. In this context it was stated that "had these exceptions not existed, the fertility of the fourth group would have been the highest" (Singh, 1974, p. 387). Surely, when we are dealing with marital fertility, sterile women cannot be excluded to ensure that all women had ever borne children. At best, the sample could have been drawn in such a way that it represented a universe of only such women as had ever given birth to children. Under such circumstances, the need to make the statement quoted above would not have arisen. On the other hand, if the sample were randomly drawn from the universe of married women, the so-called "exceptions" would be acceptable as a part of the population characteristic.
Although the paper brings out an important issue of demographic research in India, more intensive studies covering larger sections of the population are needed to draw any meaningful and valid conclusion.

Reply to Note by Dasvarma and Balasubramanian
K. P. Singh
Department of Sociology Punjab University Chandigarh, India

It should be pointed out that the sample was chosen from the Chandigarh population and is representative of all women above the age of 20 years. Hence, the findings pertain only to Chandigarh and not to

India as a whole. In the original title, the phrase "in India" was not included and appears to have been added afterwards for the sake of identification of the country to which the study pertains.

