Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Economic security, informational resources, and women's reproductive choices in urban Mozambique
Victor Agadjanian
To cite this article: Victor Agadjanian (1998) Economic security, informational resources, and women's reproductive choices in urban Mozambique, Social Biology, 45:1-2, 60-79, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1998.9988964 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1998.9988964
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 30
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47

Economic Security, Informational Resources, and Women's Reproductive Choices in Urban Mozambique

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Victor Agadjanian
Department ofSociology Arizona State University Tempe, Arizona 85287-2101

ABSTRACT: Reproductive changes in sub-Saharan Africa are contingent upon women's socioeconomic conditions and informational and cultural resources. This study focuses on socioeconomic and cultural determinants and correlates of the intention to stop childbearing and of contraceptive use among urban women in Mozambique. It uses data from a survey of 1,585 married women conducted in Greater Maputo in 1993, and it employs logistic regression for multivariate analysis. The results of the analysis indicate that although the stopping intention and contraceptive use are interrelated and similarly affected by such factors as education or the area of residence, the intention to stop childbearing is mainly driven by women's perception of their material conditions and socioeconomic security, while contraceptive use is largely a product of social diffusion and the legitimization of innovative, Western-origin information and technologies. The study proposes that these findings may help explain the unique features of the fertility transition in sub-Saharan Africa.

Recent human history has witnessed a nearly universal trend from larger to smaller families. Despite its global impact, however, this trend is complex and multidimensional. In today's sub-Saharan Africa, this complexity is embedded in broader social transformations generated by both internal dynamics and by the importation--direct or indirect, forced or voluntary--of Western technology, sociocultural institutions, and lifestyles.
Reproductive changes have been most advanced in sub-Saharan cities because urban dwellers have greater exposure to alternative economic strategies, cultural styles, and social networking than do small-town and rural residents (National Research Council, 1993a). Urban reproductive dynamics are closely linked to the contradictory changes women's lives undergo in the city. On the one hand, urban women gain access to a great variety

of informational and economic resources that offer them at least some economic autonomy and social independence from traditional, lineage-based norms and obligations. On the other hand, urban women's detachment from the traditional system often leads to a loss of the social cushioning and assistance that lineage and marriage networks usually provide in the rural setting. Urban life, as Clignet once put it, "increases both the inconsistencies of a woman's status and the number of strategies that she can utilise to cope with them" (Clignet, 1967, p. 277). Using data from Maputo, the capital and largest city of the Republic of Mozambique, this study illustrates and explores these intricate links between social change and reproduction by focusing on two elements of fertility-related attitudes and behavior--the intention to stop childbearing and the use of contraception.

60

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

61

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

The intention to stop childbearing is a measure of the "ceiling" of desired fertility. Of course, this ceiling, as African women and men set it, is seldom definitive. In today's sub-Saharan cultural context, the desirability of childbearing remains undisputed and its limitation is often considered temporary, circumstance-driven, and potentially reversible. But regardless of its strength, persistence, and realization, the intention to stop childbearing reflects a clear departure from pro-natalist or noninterference attitudes that commonly prevail in a pre-transitional society.
Contraceptive use in this study is defined as any experience with Westernorigin or modern reversible methods of fertility control. In an environment with a very low contraceptive prevalence--of which Mozambique is typical--any attempt to use contraception, regardless of its duration and clinical effectiveness, indicates a new type of reproductive behavior requiring knowledge and acceptance of an imported technological and sociocultural practice.
The intention to stop childbearing and contraceptive use are positively correlated, since both are influenced by similar economic and socionormative constraints (Westoff, 1990); yet I argue that these two phenomena are essentially different. Once fertility limitation becomes thinkable and acceptable, the intention to have no additional children emerges as a radical, but at the same time, simply articulated decision. In contrast, contraceptive use may not purport an objective as radical, but it is a much more complex action that requires a certain minimum of Westernized cultural, informational, and technological preparedness. Thus, I consider them as two compatible but distinct manifestations of women's reproductive ad-

justment to perceived economic and informational conditions of urban life.
My conceptual schema can be seen as part of the ongoing dialogue in demography and related fields over the roles of demand for children versus diffusion factors in reproductive change (Pollak and Watkins, 1993). I suggest that the intention to stop childbearing is mainly driven by demand for a smaller family resulting from individuals' perception of their material conditions and socioeconomic security. In contrast, the acceptance of modern family-planning methods is largely a product of social diffusion and the legitimization of innovative, Western-origin information and technologies. I test this schema by relating each of these outcomes to women's sociodemographic, socioeconomic, and ethnocultural characteristics.
I do not intend to explore and measure the effects of the intention to stop childbearing and of contraceptive use on completed fertility. Although the assessment of such effects represents an ultimate concern of demographers and population policymakers, it lies beyond the theoretical scope of this study, which focuses on the initial rather than concluding stages of reproductive behavior. However, the overall depressing impact of both the stopping intention and contraceptive use on parity is implied.
As is the case with most fertility studies, I limit this analysis to the women's side of reproductive life. Of course, procreation is not an exclusively female domain, and decisions regarding fertility are made within the household and therefore involve husbands and extended kin (Isiugo-Abanihe, 1994; Mott and Mott, 1985). This fact does not mean, however, that the ideas women express and the actions they take with respect to childbearing

62

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

contradict the position of their partners, kin, and affines. In sub-Saharan societies, women's childbearing-related choices reflect neither random individual caprices nor docile compliance with their husbands' will; their motivations and actions are deeply rooted in and determined by the dominant gender and procreative ideology (Renne, 1993).
I also limit this analysis to women who are in marital unions--formal or informal. In contemporary Africa, matrimony remains practically universal and most reproductive events happen during marriage. As a result, despite the growing number of births that occur outside of marriage, reproductive attitudes and behavior of women in marital unions continue to determine fertility trends in society at large.
Greater Maputo, the site of this research, is in many ways typical of subSaharan cities. However, it differs from the majority of them in at least three important aspects. First, Maputo is characterized by a unique interplay of Portuguese and Bantu linguistic and cultural traditions. Through centuries of interaction, the two originally distant cultures have melded to produce a complex and multidimensional sociocultural alloy. Second, for a decade and a half after Mozambique's independence from Portugal in 1975, the socialist policies pursued by the FRELIMO government halted and depressed the socioeconomic differentiation of the African population (which even during colonial times had not been very pronounced). As a consequence, ethnocultural diversity thrived against the backdrop of considerable socioeconomic homogeneity. Only from the late 1980's did the government slowly begin to liberalize the economy and to dismantle the welfare net created during the socialist

years. An economic elite began to emerge, as the destitute poor multiplied. Concurrent with the unraveling of economic reforms, Maputo has experienced an unprecedented openness to foreign cultural influences through radio, television, and movies; through imported consumer tastes and products; and through other channels. And finally, the third-- and tragic--peculiarity of Maputo is the impact of a brutal civil war that ravaged independent Mozambique during most of its existence until almost the end of 1992. Although the hostilities, which devastated the countryside, never spilled over into the capital city itself, their indirect impact was immense, especially since the late 1980's, when the conflict engulfed the country's southern region. The war intensified rural migration to Maputo, particularly of women and children, and substantially diminished contacts of the city's residents with rural areas.
For various historical and political reasons, the sociodemographic and family planning dynamics of Mozambique, and of Maputo in particular, have not been well studied, and the existing data are patchy and unreliable, even by modest sub-Saharan standards. The National Demographic Survey, conducted in Mozambique in 1991, estimated the population of Greater Maputo at 1.3 million (Republica de Mozambique, 1995), although the actual size of the city population might have been considerably larger. A survey conducted in 1987 estimated the birth rate in Greater Maputo at 36.9 per thousand, compared to 52.5 in accessible rural areas (Monreal, 1991:3.11). According to the same survey, the prevalence of effective contraception (including sterilization) was 15.2 per cent in Maputo, much higher than the 3.7 per cent

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

63

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

rate found in Mozambique's rural regions. Another survey, conducted in 1991 among a small sample of women in some peri-urban areas of Maputo, estimated the total fertility rate at 4.8 children per woman (Graham et al., 1991, p. 22). Unpublished estimates of the total fertility rate in the city derived from the 1991 National Demographic Survey oscillated around five children per woman, although varying considerably, depending on the adjustment technique used (National Directorate of Statistics, 1993).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DATA
This study is based on a survey conducted in Greater Maputo in 1993, following more than two years of preparatory ethnographic research. The survey sample consisted of 1,585 randomly selected women who recently had a normal birth in one of the city's six maternity wards or who had brought their babies there for registration and vaccination shortly after delivering them elsewhere. Unusual for sub-Saharan Africa, over 95 per cent of births in the city are reported to take place in a medical institution (Repiiblica de Mocambique, 1993, p. 161). If the cases of women who bring their babies to a maternity ward after birth are added, the number of women who pass through maternity clinics during or right after childbirth approaches 100 per cent. Even if the reported proportion of deliveries which occur at maternity wards is somewhat inflated, the chosen sampling procedure would still yield a fairly representative sample of married and reproductively active Maputo women.

The survey sample was restricted to women in a marital union (formal or informal) who resided permanently in Greater Maputo. The sampling frame also excluded women who had fewer than two living children, because the ethnographic evidence I collected in Maputo suggested that a vast majority of married women do not seriously consider terminating their childbearing until after having at least two children.
RESPONSE VARIABLES
Intention to stop childbearing.--The intention to stop childbearing is a dichotomous variable dividing the sample into those who said that they did not want to have more children in the future versus all others. Among the survey respondents, the potential stoppers constituted 42.7 per cent; the rest wanted more or were not sure. Admittedly, the recency of confinement could have affected the respondents' fertility desires. The bias, however, may not be large; in several sub-Saharan Demographic and Health Surveys, fielded in more conventional settings, the percentages of declared stoppers among urban women were about as high as in the Maputo survey (cf. Burundi, 1988, p. 54; Ghana, 1989, p. 54). In any case, in this study I do not view the intention to stop childbearing as a solid precursor of subsequent fertility performance but rather as a sign of the "thinkability" of fertility limitation.
Contraceptive use.--The other response variable, contraceptive use, is also a dichotomous variable and is operationalized as having ever used any modern contraceptive method--mainly oral contraceptives (the Pill), the intrauterine device (IUD) and injectables (mainly Depo-Provera). The ever-contraceptors made up only 29.8 per cent of the sample.

64

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

EXPLANATORY VARIABLES AND
CORRESPONDING HYPOTHESES
This subsection briefly describes the explanatory variables to be used in this analysis and proposes hypotheses about their association with the response variables. The definition and distribution of the explanatory variables are presented in Table 1.
Number of living children.--Because the economic contributions of children to their households' economic well-being and to parents' old-age support is limited in the urban milieu, the number of children becomes a measure of the financial burden carried by urban families. Previous research has established a negative relationship between parity and demand for children (Frank, 1987), and I expect that the number of children will be positively correlated with the intention to stop childbearing. At the same time, the number of children does not influence women's access to Westernized informational resources, and I therefore do not anticipate any effect of this variable on contraceptive use.
Education.--Education is measured as the number of completed years of formal schooling. Formal education both expands women's socioeconomic opportunities and autonomy, and exposes them to Westernized cultural influences. The cross-national evidence of the strong relationship between education and reproductive behavior is overwhelming (see, e.g., Jejeebhoy, 1995), and I expect to find a positive association between this predictor and both response variables.
Radio ownership.--Most surveyed women were unable to report accurately their individual and household income, and I use ownership of a radio set as an

approximate measure of household material well-being. In a society that still places a considerable emotional premium on large offspring, greater wealth should be conducive to higher desired fertility and therefore, other things being equal, correlate negatively with the intention to stop childbearing. However, the material conditions do not necessarily influence women's informational resources and their access to contraceptives, most of which are distributed free of charge through a network of state-run clinics. I therefore do not expect to find any significant association between radio ownership and contraceptive use.
Work for income.--Based on the existing evidence with regard to women's participation in the paid workforce (Oppong, 1983; Shapiro and Tambashe, 1994; Ware, 1977), I propose that the type of employment may have greater importance for reproductive decisions than whether or not one works outside the home. Accordingly, in this analysis I distinguish three employment categories--not working for pay, waged or salaried employment (roughly corresponding to the formal sector), and self-employment (the informal sector). I expect to find that self-employed women--mainly market or street vendors--whose greater economic autonomy is another side of greater economic vulnerability, are particularly likely to express an intention to have no more children. On the other hand, women who are employed in the formal sector are a highly Westernized minority of the city's female population. The collectivized environment in which most of them work is propitious for the exchange of imported ideas and practices. I therefore expect that working for a wage or salary increases the likelihood of having tried modern contraception.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

TABLE 1
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR ALL VARIABLES
Variable
Response variables Intention to stop childbearing (per cent) Wants no more children Wants more or unsure Use of modern contraception at any moment in life (per cent) Used at least once Never used
Explanatory variables Number of living children (mean, standard deviation) Completed years of education (mean, standard deviation) Radio ownership (per cent) Household owns a radio Household owns no radio Work for income (per cent) Does not work for income Self-employed Works for a wage or salary Interethnic marital union (per cent) Same native tongue as husband's Not same native tongue as husband's Bridewealth (lobolo) status of marital union (per cent) Bridewealth paid Bridewealth not paid Monogamous or polygynous marital union (per cent) Monogamous Polygynous Type of residence (per cent) Coresides with affines only Coresides with husband, and children only (no extended kin) Coresides with own kin or children only Daily use of the Portuguese language (per cent) · Does not use Portuguese Uses Portuguese occasionally Uses mainly/only Portuguese Religious affiliation (per cent) Big church or religion A Zionist (Zione) church No religious affiliation Area of residence in Maputo (per cent) Lives in a central area of the city Lives in a peripheral area of the city Duration of residence in Maputo (per cent) Lived in Maputo before 10/1986 In-migrated to Maputo after 10/1986
Control variables Age (mean, standard deviation) Living sons (per cent) Has at least one son Has no sons Living sons, youngest child excluded (per cent)" Had at least one living son prior to last birth Had no living son prior to last birth
"Used in the analysis of contraceptive use.

65
Statistic
42.7 57.3
29.8 70.2
3.8 (1.8) 3.7 (2.7)
75.6 24.4
69.5 22.1
8.4
49.4 50.6
56.1 43.9
80.3 19.7
38.5 42.1 19.4
38.2 43.6 28.3
53.4 27.3 19.4
44.3 55.7
78.2 21.8
27.9 (5.5)
86.9 13.1
75.9 24.2

66

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Interethnic marital union.--Marriage across ethnic boundaries, here approximated by difference in spouses' native tongues, becomes increasingly common in the urban milieu. Women in such marital unions may be more independent from the constraints and obligations that normally bind a traditional homogamous marriage, but may also feel greater vulnerability due to the lack of social support and stability that homogamous marriage traditionally provides. Therefore I expect that having a husband of a different ethnolinguistic background strengthens the intention to stop childbearing compared to having a husband of the same ethnolinguistic origin. Interethnic marriage, however, does not automatically increase women's access to Westernized informational resources, and I expect no significant association between this variable and contraception.
The bridewealth status of marriage.-- Despite its significant erosion in the urban milieu, bridewealth, called lobolo in southern Mozambique, remains an essential--if unofficial--social institution, almost synonymous with complete marriage. Since the payment of lobolo limits a woman's autonomy and implies an obligation on her to produce many offspring, I expect that being in a union cemented by bridewealth decreases the likelihood of expressing the intention to stop childbearing. At the same time, the payment of lobolo does not preclude urban women's access to Westernized cultural information, and therefore I do not expect any effect of bridewealth on contraceptive use.
Polygyny.--There is no consensus in the literature on the effect of polygyny on reproduction in sub-Saharan Africa (Muhsam, 1956; Clignet, 1970; Burch, 1983; Pison, 1986; Pebley and Mbugua, 1989).

Polygyny in cities is not as common as in rural areas because of an unfavorable sex ratio, the decline of agricultural activities. in which women's contribution is particularly valuable, and stronger moral and religious objections (Clignet, 1970, p. 22). Moreover, an urban polygynous union is different from a rural one: in the city, women married to polygynous men become more independent from their husbands but also receive much less support from them. Their socioeconomic vulnerability may give them an incentive for restricting fertility. I therefore expect that being in a polygynous union increases the probability of the intention to stop childbearing. On the other hand, being in an urban polygynous union per se does not limit women's access to Westernized informational resources and hence should not affect their contraceptive use.
Type of coresidence.--In this analysis I consider three types of coresidence: with the husband and children only, with the in-laws, and with the woman's own relatives or her children only. Married women's coresidence with their affines is a traditional norm in Mozambique's patrilineal south and usually means greater dependence on husband and his kin but also a higher degree of traditional security. In contrast, married women's sharing the roof with their own kinfolk, let alone coresiding with their children only, is an anomaly that connotes both greater autonomy from husbands and greater socioeconomic insecurity. Hence I hypothesize that coresidence with own relatives or with children only correlates with a stronger intention to stop childbearing in comparison to coresidence with in-laws. On the other hand, living in a two-parent nuclear household, i.e., with the husband and children only, represents the most

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

67

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Westernized coresidence pattern in today's sub-Saharan cities. I assume that this coresidence arrangement connotes greater access to Westernized informational resources, and I therefore expect that it is positively associated with contraceptive experience.
Use of Portuguese.--In Maputo the Portuguese language is the principal conduit for Western-origin normative and technological information, and the use of Portuguese in daily life is one of the strongest indicators of an individual's integration into the Westernized urban culture. For this analysis I constructed a three-level index variable of Portuguese use in daily life: not using Portuguese at all, using it occasionally, and using mainly or only Portuguese. The information on such a typical Western-origin resource as modern contraception is most likely to circulate through Portuguese language circuits; hence I expect an increase in the chances of having contracepted at each higher stage of Portuguese use. On the other hand, the use of Portuguese per se may not be related to women's perception of their socioeconomic conditions. Accordingly, I do not anticipate any significant net effect of Portuguese use on the intention to stop childbearing.
Religious affiliation.--The association between religion and reproduction is commonly construed as either an artifact of social traits that characterize members of certain denominations or a direct product of religious tenets and proscriptions (Mosher and Goldscheider, 1984). My conceptualization of religious affiliation in the urban sub-Saharan context instead emphasizes participation and networking. Membership in a religious group places a woman in intensive contact with other women, often of very different back-

ground and lifestyles, thus contributing to the exchange of information, tastes, and experiences. The larger and the more diverse the religious group to which a woman belongs, the more intensive is her exposure to diverse informational networks and flows.
I subdivided the survey respondents into three categories of religious affiliation--adherents of large and wellrooted urban denominations (the Roman Catholic and mainline Protestant churches), members of small churches of Pentecostal bent, commonly known as Zione (or Zionist, as they are called in Englishspeaking Southern Africa), and women with no religious affiliation. I expect that participation in a large denomination with a culturally diverse membership increases women's exposure to Westernized influences and therefore is associated with a higher likelihood of contraceptive use. In contrast, religious affiliation is largely irrelevant to Maputo women's material conditions, and I do not expect to find any influence of it on the intention to stop childbearing.
Area of residence in the city.--The material constraints of modern urban life, especially the high costs of living, are more strongly felt in the city's central areas than in its more rural-like suburban fringe. For this analysis, Greater Maputo is divided into two clusters: one including the urban core, the so-called cidade de cimento, or "cement city," and its immediate periphery, and the other comprising most of the so-called cidade de canico, or "reed city." I expect that residing in the central section of the city, with its greater economic and material constraints, positively influences the intention to stop childbearing. At the same time, Westernized influences are much more intensive

68

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

and pervasive in the central parts of the city than in the vast semi-rural caniqo belt and so is access to contraceptive information and methods. I therefore hypothesize that residing in the urban core has a positive association with contraceptive use.
Duration of residence in the city.-- This variable measures the length of women's potential exposure to diverse urban informational flows. While many non-Maputo-born respondents were unable to report the exact year in which they came to live in the capital, virtually all of them could relate the time of their arrival to the plane crash that ended the life of the Mozambican president Samora Machel in October of 1986. I use this event as a watershed for a dichotomous indicator of the duration of life in the city. Based on previous studies of ruralto-urban migration and fertility in subSaharan Africa (Brockerhoff, 1994; Brockerhoff and Yang, 1994), I hypothesize that longer life in the city and therefore longer exposure to urban informational and technological innovations increases the likelihood of experimenting with such a typically urban, Westernorigin resource as contraception. At the same time, the duration of city life, other things being equal, should not influence significantly women's sense of socioeconomic autonomy-security, and I do not anticipate any significant effect of this variable on the intention to stop childbearing.
I can summarize my hypothesis as follows. First, I expect to find that the predictors that represent mainly women's socioeconomic autonomy and security--the number of children, ownership of a radio set, self-employment, interethnic marital union, marriage through bridewealth, polygynous union, coresidence with own

kin or children only--exert significant effects on the probability of expressing the intention to stop childbearing. Second, I propose that the explanatory variables that describe or represent primarily women's exposure to Westernized informational resources and exchanges--duration of residence in Maputo, salaried employment, use of Portuguese, nuclear household, and religious affiliation--significantly influence the probability of contraceptive use. Finally, I suggest the predictors that reflect both the socioeconomic and informational dimensions--education and area of residence--affect both response variables.
CONTROL VARIABLES
Respondent's age.--I include respondent's age, both in linear and quadratic forms, in the analysis to control for potential differences in perceived ability to bear children, social appropriateness of doing so, and number of opportunities to contracept.
At least one living son.--Evidence from the Demographic and Health Surveys does not point to any strong preference in the gender composition of children in most sub-Saharan societies (Arnold, 1991). My ethnographic fieldwork in Maputo led me to conclude that most women ideally wanted an equal number of sons and daughters, but that having at least one son was especially important. To account for this potential bias, I use having or not having at least one living son as the other control variable.
MODELS
The dichotomous formulation of the response variables warrants employing logistic regression for multivariate analysis. Two logistic regression models are therefore constructed and compared: one

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

69

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

predicting the odds of expressing the intention to stop childbearing and the other predicting the odds of having ever used a modem contraceptive method. For both models I use the same set of explanatory and control variables, because my primary intention is to establish whether the factors that affect the intention to stop childbearing do not affect contraceptive use as much, and vice versa.
The results of the analysis, presented in the following section, generally supported my expectations, albeit with several noteworthy exceptions. The bivariate associations between the dependent and explanatory variables and the results of the multivariate logistic regression are presented in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. I will focus the discussion on the multivariate results and refer to the bivariate relationships when necessary.
RESULTS
THE INTENTION TO STOP CHILDBEARING
As I expected, the number of children emerged as a powerful motivation behind women's intention to terminate childbearing: its positive effect on the likelihood of expressing such an intention was strong and statistically very significant. Also consistent with my expectations, the multivariate test showed that education had a statistically significant positive effect on the intention to stop childbearing. However, potential stoppers were less educated on average than respondents who did not express an intention to end their childbearing (3.5 and 3.8 years of school, respectively), which was mainly due to the lower parity of more educated women.
Radio owners had fewer potential stoppers than did women with no radio at

home. In the multivariate model, owning a radio set also showed a significant negative effect on the intention to stop childbearing. This finding conforms to my hypothesis about the relationship between material conditions and fertility desires, that in a traditionally pronatalist milieu greater material comfort and security tend to discourage the attempts to end reproduction.
The results for work illustrate the importance of the difference in type of employment. Although salary-earners and self-employed women had similar percentages of potential stoppers, well above that of nonworking women, in the multivariate test the gap between salaried employment and not working disappeared, explained by other variables in the model. However, the difference between not working and self-employment weathered the addition of other predictors and came out statistically significant. This result confirms my expectations. As I proposed, self-employed women--mainly market, street, or home vendors--are, in general, more economically independent than nonworking women but, at the same time, are pushed into the labor force by dire necessity. Such women usually carry a greater share of individual responsibility for child care and may feel particularly insecure, both of which tend to depress reproductive intentions.
Contrary to my prediction, the ethnic composition of the marital union did not show any association with the intention to stop childbearing at either bivariate or multivariate levels. The composition of interethnic unions in Maputo may provide some explanation of this result. Most such unions involve representatives of historically and culturally close (albeit linguistically often distinct) ethnic groups of the south, and one may argue that the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

70

Agadjanian

Social Biology

TABLE 2
BIVARIATE ASSOCIATION WITH THE INTENTION TO STOP CHILDBEARING AND WITH CONTRACEPTIVE USE

Explanatory Variable
Number of living children (mean, s.d.) Completed years of education (mean, s.d.) Radio ownership (per cent)
Household owns a radio Household owns no radio Work for income (per cent) Does not work for income Self-employed Works for a wage or salary Ethnic composition of marital union (per cent) Same native tongue as husband's Not same native tongue as husband's Bridewealth status of marital union (per cent) Bridewealth paid Bridewealth not paid Monogamous or polygynous union (per cent) Monogamous Polygynous Type of coresidence (per cent) Coresides with affines only Coresides with husband, and children only.... Coresides with own kin or children only Use of the Portuguese language (per cent) Does not use Portuguese Uses Portuguese occasionally Uses mainly/only Portuguese Religious affiliation (per cent) Big church or religion A Zionist (Zione) church No religious affiliation Area of residence (per cent) Lives in a central area Lives in a peripheral area Duration of residence in Maputo (per cent) Lived in Maputo before 10/1986 In-migrated to Maputo after 10/1986

Wants No More Children
4.8 (1.9) 3.5 (2.9)
41.0 47.8
39.1 50.1 53.0
42.5 42.9
43.0 42.2
40.1 51.1
33.8 46.8 51.5
45.1 39.6 47.0
45.1 38.5 42.5
46.3 39.7
45.3 33.3

Ever Contracepted
3.8(1.7) 4.9 (2.7)
32.4 21.9
27.7 22.5 66.7
23.7 35.7
28.9 30.9
30.0 29.1
26.2 30.6 35.4
13.9 35.2 52.6
38.7 19.7 21.6
34.5 26.1
34.7 12.3

Total sample (per cent).... .. . ....

42.7 29.8

differences between homogamous and heterogamous marriages in such a context should not be strong.
Nor did this analysis confirm my expectation that bridewealth, by restricting women's autonomy and enhancing their traditional sense of security, would discourage them from seeking an end to their reproductive careers. In contrast to

interethnic marriage and bridewealth, being in a polygynous union did appear to increase women's penchant for fertility limitation. Supporting my hypothesis about greater vulnerability of urban women married to polygynous men and its effect on these women's reproductive plans, respondents in polygynous unions had a higher percentage of potential stop-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

71

TABLE 3
LOGISTIC REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF THE INTENTION TO STOP CHILDBEARING AND OF CONTRACEPTIVE USE (ODDS RATIOS)

Variables
Number of children
Education
Owns a radio
Does not work Self-employed
Works for a wage or salary
Same native tongue
Bridewealth paid
Polygynous marriage
Coresides with affines Coresides with own kin Husband andchildren only No Portuguese use Some Portuguese use Mainly/only Portuguese use
Big church Zionist No religious affiliation
Lives in a central area
In Maputo after 10/1986
Age
Age squared Has no sonsc
Constant --2 LogLikelihood Cases'*
°p<0.01. *p<0.05. cLast child excluded for contraception. ''Fifteen cases with missing data excluded.

Wants No More Children
1.88" 1.15" 0.84b
1.00 0.79" 0.95
1.01
0.94
1.27"
1.00 1.27" 1.11
1.00 1.09 1.45"
1.00 0.88 1.08
1.16*
1.01
0.81
1.01*
0.70"
3.32 1579.43
1,570

Ever Comracepted
1.04 1.14"
1.02
1.00 0.84* 1.40*
0.94
0.98
1.23*
1.00 1.14 1.20*
1.00 1.23" 1.57"
1.00 0.79" 0.73"
1.15*
0.61"
1.52"
0.99"
0.84*
8.07" 1566.55
1,570

pers than those in monogamous unions. When other variables were controlled in the multivariate test, the polygynous status of current marriage tended to increase significantly the odds of wanting no more children.
Conforming to the image of traditional dependency-security, women who only lived with their affines had fewer poten-

tial stoppers than respondents who either coresided with their ownrelatives or children only, or coresided with their husbands and children only. I hypothesized that the situation of women coresiding with their own relatives or children only was particularly unstable and should translate into a stronger inclination to fertility limitation. The multivariate test

72

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

confirmed this hypothesis, that is, that living with own kin or children only significantly raised the probability of the stopping intention compared to coresidence with affines. Urban married women who live with their relatives rarely do so by choice. In today's urban society it usually happens when their marital unions are nominal or fractured, their partners are not supportive, and sharing the roof with kin often becomes the only way to survive.
The association of daily use of Portuguese with the intention to stop childbearing deviated somewhat from what I anticipated. Respondents who used Portuguese only occasionally had a lower proportion of potential stoppers than both the women who used mainly/only Portuguese and those who did not use it at all. When the two greater-use categories were compared to not using in the multivariate test, only the mainly/only Portuguese use category showed a strong and statistically significant positive effect on the intention to stop childbearing. One way to explain this result is to refine my initial conceptual model. At the highest level of sociocultural integration into urban society, here represented by the predominant use of the official language, both material aspirations and cultural preferences are radically different than at its lowest level. Using mainly or only Portuguese in the context of Maputo connotes both higher requirements for material quality of life (including the quality of children) and more Westernized cultural tastes. Thus, at this height of urban sophistication, both material ambitions and Westernized tastes work together to depress reproductive desires.
As I expected, religious affiliation did not have any net impact on the intention to stop childbearing. The variation in the

share of potential stoppers across the three categories of religious affiliation showed an unclear pattern and disappeared once other variables -were controlled. In accordance with my argument, women living in those areas were somewhat more likely to express the intention to stop childbearing than women from the city's outer fringe. My hypothesis also withstood the multivariate test. Residing in the central part of the city significantly increased the likelihood of wanting no more children compared to living in its semi-rural suburbs. Finally, women who lived in Maputo for more then seven years were more likely to express the intention to stop childbearing than more recent arrivals, but as I anticipated, no statistically significant effect of the time spent in the city on the likelihood of expressing this intention could be found in the multivariate test.
CONTRACEPTIVE USE
In contrast to the previous model and as I expected, number of children did not influence the likelihood of having used a modem contraceptive use. Apparently, contraceptive use in that context was parityindependent, and therefore material constraints associated with the number of children had little relevance to contraception. Also in line with my expectations and with findings of countless demographic studies, formal education had a strong positive effect on the likelihood of having used contraception. In fact, the magnitude of this effect was similar to that of the stopping intention model. The role of schooling is so potent and vast that it should not be associated with solely the socioeconomic or informational sides of reproductive life; it is truly germane to both.

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

73

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

As I expected, ownership of a radio proved unrelated to contraceptive experience in the multivariate test, despite the fact that there were noticeably more evercontraceptors among women with a radio. Since practically all modern contraceptives were available in Maputo free of charge, pecuniary costs of contraception were negligible, at least in comparison with its informational costs.
The analysis detected a remarkable pattern of association between type of work and contraceptive use that was quite distinct from the case of the intention to stop childbearing. Respondents who worked for a wage or salary had a much larger share of ever-contraceptors than the rest of the sample, whereas selfemployed respondents were less experienced in contraceptive use than even nonworking women. The results of the multivariate test confirmed my expectations regarding salaried employment, this most Westernized type of labor force participation. It exerted a strong positive influence on the likelihood of having ever contracepted in comparison with not working. At the same time and unexpectedly, self-employment showed a significant negative effect on the probability of contraceptive use. Although no definite explanation of this finding is readily acceptable, I can suggest that selfemployed women--mainly market, street, or home vendors--may represent one of the least Westernized segments of the city's female population, largely untouched by such cultural and technological innovations as modern contraception.
As in the case of the intention to stop childbearing, but this time in line with my expectations, no net effect of interethnic union on contraceptive use was present. Although the share of ever-

contraceptors was considerably lower among endogamously married respondents than among respondents whose husbands were of a different ethnolinguistic stock, the multivariate test showed that other variables accounted for this imbalance. In sum, it seems plausible to suggest that in urban society the ethnic composition of the union is not a major factor in women's reproduction-related aspirations and actions. Also supporting my hypothesis, no effect of lobolo payments on contraceptive experience was present. Here again, I am inclined to suggest that women's reproduction-related aspirations and actions are largely independent from the degree of the formalization of the marital union. This suggestion, however, does not necessarily contradict the cross-national evidence of higher fertility rates in more formalized unions (Burch, 1983; Preston, 1986).
A statistically significant positive association between having used contraceptives and being in a polygynous union is probably the most puzzling finding from the standpoint of my theory. It ostensibly contradicts the conceptualization of modern contraception as an informationally sophisticated, Westernized practice, for polygyny does not usually connote greater access to Westernized informational and cultural resources. Perhaps the increasing insecurity that polygyny implies in the urban milieu speeds up women's contraceptive "education"? This explanation would provide another bridge between the two dimensions--socioeconomic and informational--that I outlined earlier. It is also possible, however, that polygynous men who feel well insured against the "misfortune" of having insufficient offspring are more likely to tolerate and even encourage their wives' contraceptive use.

74

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

The detected relationship between type of coresidence and contraceptive use was in agreement with my expectations. The proportion of ever-contraceptors was highest among women coresiding with their relatives or with their children only and lowest among those who lived with their affines. In the multivariate model, however, only living in a nuclear household had a significant positive effect on the probability of contraceptive use relative to coresiding with the husband's kin. Thus, as I hypothesized, the most Westernized type of coresidence is associated with the Western-origin practice of modern contraception.
Unlike the U-shape pattern of the bivariate association between use of Portuguese and the intention to stop childbearing, the proportion of women who reported having ever used modern contraceptives increased considerably at each subsequent level of Portuguese use. In the multivariate test, the effect was also stronger than in the stopping intention model. Both using Portuguese occasionally and especially using mainly/only Portuguese in everyday communication significantly increased the probability of contraceptive practice relative to not using the official language at all. This result fully supports my hypothesis and clearly illustrates the importance of the Portuguese language channels for the diffusion and exchange of innovative cultural and technological information.
As I expected, contraceptive experience demonstrated a strong association with religious affiliation. The shares of ever-contraceptors among Zionists and nonaffiliated women were much below that among the members of mainstream urban churches. This pattern persisted in the multivariate test. Membership in a

large church had a significant positive impact on the probability of having contracepted compared to being a Zione or having no church affiliation at all. It is unlikely that adherents of large, wellestablished denominations draw inspiration for birth control from church services. At least Catholics--who constituted almost one-third of those who belonged to mainstream churches-- surely do not. Nonetheless, the Catholics' share of ever-contraceptors was much larger than the survey sample average (42.7 vs. 29.8 per cent). On the other hand, the contraceptive disadvantage of Zione women cannot be directly linked to their religious beliefs, because fertility control is usually ignored in the Zionist theological discourse. But even if the contraceptive message does not come directly from the pulpit, women from wellrooted urban churches avail themselves of more and more diverse channels of information networking--both inside and outside of their congregations--and thus have greater exposure to reproductionrelated informational exchanges than do women with no access to such networks.
The association between area of residence and contraceptive use was also as I anticipated. The proportion of evercontraceptors was larger among women living in the city core, and in the multivariate test residing in the central part significantly increased the chances of having used modern contraceptives. Women who live in the central section of Maputo are exposed to more intensive, dense, and diverse informational and cultural influences; they are better informed about modern contraception and are more willing to try it.
Unlike the stopping intention model and in conformity with my expectation,

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

75

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

duration of residence in Maputo had a very strong effect on contraception. The proportion of ever-contraceptors among after-1986 arrivals was extremely small, and having lived less than seven years in Maputo impressively decreased the likelihood of prior contraceptive use in the multivariate test. Apparently, the length of exposure and access to Westernized cultural and informational alternatives and to the infrastructural puissance of the urban family planning machine play an important role in shaping the desire for contraception. This finding is especially true for a country in which most rural family planning clinics, where they ever existed, were destroyed during the civil war.
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
In conceptualizing women's intention to stop childbearing and their contraceptive use as indicators of urban reproductive change, I proposed that both indicators similarly reflect a shift from pronatalist or non-interference reproductive behavior toward fertility limitation, but that they may also account for two different, albeit interrelated, types of constraints and resources--socioeconomic autonomy and security and access to Westernized cultural and technological information. The foregoing analysis lent considerable support to this conceptual schema.
The association of the response variables with educational attainment provides the most conspicuous illustration of the connection between fertility desires and contraceptive use. The statistical effect of education was very similar in both cases. Education both helps women reevaluate their household and reproductive roles and facilitates their access to

cultural innovations. But what lies beyond education? The variance that education leaves unexplained may indeed be of a different nature in each case.
Thus, the number of children, a key biosocial parameter but a poor measure of informational Westernization, explained much of the variation in the intention to stop childbearing, but was practically irrelevant to contraceptive use. Material assets, represented by radio ownership, affected only the intention to stop childbearing. Type of employment in general corroborated my theoretical premise. Self-employment, which in many cases meant self-reliance, was a powerful factor in lowering the ceiling of desired fertility. In contrast, working in a formal (salaried) sector environment, which is generally more collectivized and therefore more propitious to intensive informational exchanges, had a positive effect on contraceptive use. Coresidence with the woman's own kin or with children only, a usual sign of social and economic insecurity, had a strong positive impact on the intention to stop childbearing. On the other hand, a nuclear two-parent household, a more Westernized deviation from the traditional patrilocal arrangement, was more conducive to the acceptance of the Westernized practice of contraception. Participation in larger and more diverse informational networks represented by membership in large, wellestablished religious congregations ensured a contraceptive advantage but did not affect the intention to end childbearing. The area of residence and the socioeconomic and cultural environment it represents proved pertinent to both dimensions and affected both response variables. The duration of life in the city and therefore the length of exposure to

76

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

urban reproductive innovations was as important for contraception as it was irrelevant for the intention to stop childbearing.
In some cases the hypothesized difference between the two dimensions was not confirmed. Notably, the polygynous union not only significantly enhanced the desire for no more children but also positively affected the probability of contraceptive use, thus indicating how the extreme insecurity can "substitute" or complement the mechanism of information diffusion. Unexpectedly, self-employment decreased the likelihood of having contracepted compared to not working outside the home. And the use of Portuguese, an unmistakable mark of the degree of integration into urban society, proved pertinent both to the ceiling of desired fertility and to access to informationally and technologically complex forms of fertility regulation, even though it showed a stronger link with the latter. Obviously, real-life reproductive choices are too complex to fit perfectly into a simple two-element scheme; they follow various pathways--both alternately or sequentially.
The detected significant and meaningful associations constituted one group of findings; the lack of a clear relationship where it could be anticipated is another important result. Neither the intention to stop childbearing nor contraceptive use was affected by the ethnic composition of the marital union, suggesting that ethnic endogamy does not exert any appreciable influence on reproductive dynamics in that particular context. Likewise, the bridewealth status of marriage did not have any effect on either of the response variables, which may imply that the relevance of this institution to reproduc-

tion--to both its socioeconomic and infocultural sides--is diminishing. If these findings are substantively correct, they may have broad implications for the vision of social and demographic change in sub-Saharan societies. Seemingly archaic and irrelevant social forms can successfully coexist with Westernization and thus persist for much longer than the "rational" logic of development might suggest. Such coexistence is found not only in Africa or other developing regions but also in the West's own historical backyard. The curious fact of modern Western society is not the decline of monogamous marriage, childbearing, or religion, but the very survival of these "obsolete" institutions (Ogburn, 1922; Schneider and Schneider, 1992).
This comparison of the intention to have no additional children with the use of modern contraceptives in relation to selected sociodemographic and cultural characteristics should not obfuscate the broader causal connection between demand for children and contraception. Demand for children--their number, spacing, composition, and quality--is the principal engine of fertility change (Pritchett, 1994). This engine, however, functions differently, depending on what social fuel it uses. Women of distinct backgrounds and characteristics may articulate and pursue their fertility desires in differing ways and with differing persistence. As this study suggests, women with greater access to or acquaintance with Westernized informational and cultural resources are more likely to use effective contraception and hence possess an effective instrument for realizing their fertility desires.
It is important to note that the use of modern contraception among Maputo

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

77

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

women, as well as among women in other parts of sub-Saharan Africa, does not necessarily connote fertility limitation or even delaying pregnancy beyond the traditionally prescribed norm. Everywhere on the subcontinent women often use Western contraceptives for spacing births as a substitute for traditional prolonged postpartum abstinence but with no intention to reduce the final number of children (Oni and McCarthy, 1986; Caldwell and Caldwell, 1987; Caldwell et al., 1992; National Research Council, 19936). One recent study in rural Gambia has even concluded that modern Western contraceptive technology successfully blends with the traditional, largely natural, fertility regime (Bledsoe et al., 1994).
This evidence from different subSaharan settings provides an interesting and instructive illustration of how a seemingly more sophisticated practice, both informationally and technologically, like Western contraception, can proliferate much faster than a simple-to-formulate but culturally hard-to-accept goal of having a small family. Indeed, contraception, like any innovative information and technology, may be more difficult to learn, but easier to legitimize than such a fundamental revision of the traditional normative code as fertility limitation. In this sense, the "new type of fertility transition" in some parts of the subcontinent (Caldwell et al., 1992) may be a result of a relatively wide availability of effective contraceptives that precedes a radical societal reassessment of the value of reproductive investment.
However, this study warns against any "traditionalization" of modern contraceptive practices. As I observed, the use of modern contraceptives in Maputo was generally associated with greater involve-

ment in the Westernized urban culture. The study also suggests that once the legitimization barrier is broken, for many Maputo women fertility limitation becomes an obvious means of coping with socioeconomic hardships and uncertainties.
If this finding is correct, we should expect that the confluence of perceived economic costs of childbearing and legitimization of Western contraception in a place like Maputo will produce dramatic changes in reproductive behavior and eventually a rapid decline of fertility levels. Aggressive structural adjustment policies currently underway in Mozambique, and particularly noticeable in its capital city, may further precipitate this decline. Although the reduction of government expenditures on social services such as family planning may result in an increase of the monetary costs of contraceptives, the exacerbated perception of the rising costs of childbearing and the intensified proliferation of Westernized tastes and lifestyle associated with structural adjustment will most likely outweigh this increase for the majority of city denizens.
Of course, Maputo dwellers may not be representative of all Mozambicans. The gap in reproductive tastes and contraceptive availability between the capital city and the rest of the country, especially the rural areas, is enormous. Even without any systematic and reliable data on hand, one can conjecture that no sustained fertility change has begun to take shape among the rural population. However, the significance of Maputo should not be underestimated--first, because it contains about one-tenth of the nation's population in its immediate sociocultural orbit, and second, because this orbit is constantly expanding to encompass more and more Mozambican women and men.

78

Agadjanian

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful tothe Population Council for support in conducting this research. I would

also like to thank Rose Weitz and Cecilia Menjfvar for their valuable comments and suggestions.

REFERENCES

ARNOLD, F. 1991. Sex preferences forchildren and ISIUGO-ABANIHE, U. C. 1994. Reproductive motiva-

its demographic and health implications, p.

tion andfamily-size preferences among Niger-

249-273. In Proceedings of the demographic

ian men. Stud. Fam. Plan. 25:149-161.

and health survey world conference, Washing- JEJEEBHOY, S. J. 1995. Women's education, auton-

ton, D.C., 5-7 August 1991,Vol. 1.

omy, and reproductive behaviour: Experience

BLEDSOE, C. H., A. G. HILL, U. D'ALESSANDRO, and

from developing countries. Calderon Press, Ox-

P. LANGEROCK. 1994. Constructing natural fertil-

ford.

ity: The use of Western contraceptive technolo- MONREAL, T. 1991. Comportamento reprodutivo da

gies in rural Gambia. Pop. Develop. Rev. 20:

mulher moçambicana, 1987. Ministério da Saúde,

81-113.

Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, and UNFPA,

BROCKERHOFF, M. 1994. Fertility andfamily plan-

Maputo, Moçambique.

ning inAfrican cities: The impact of female mi- Mott, F.L., and S.H.MOTT. 1985. Household fer-

gration. Population Council Working Papers No.

tility decisions in West Africa: A comparison of

68. male and female survey results. Stud. Fam.

BROCKERHOFF, M., and X. YANG. 1994. The impact

Plan. 16:88-99.

of migration on fertility in sub-Saharan Africa. MUHSAM, H.V. 1956. Fertility of polygynous mar-

Soc. Biol. 41:19-43.

riages. Pop. Stud. 10:3-16.

BURCH, T. K. 1983. The impact of forms of family NATIONAL DIRECTORATE OF STATISTICS. 1993. Personal

and sexual unions and dissolution of unions on

communication ofthe statisticians ofthe National

fertility, p. 532-567. In R. Bulatao and R. D. Lee

Directorate ofStatistics of Mozambique.

(eds.), Determinants of fertility in developing NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL. 1993a. Demographic

countries, Vol. 2. Academic Press, New York.

change in sub-Saharan Africa. National Acad-

BURUNDI. 1988. Enquête démographique et de santé

emy Press, Washington, D.C.

au Burundi, 1987. Ministère de l'Interieur,

. 1993b. Factors affecting contraceptive use

Gitega, Burundi, and Institute forResource De-

in sub-Saharan Africa. National Academy Press,

velopment/Westinghouse, Columbia, Maryland.

Washington, D.C.

CALDWELL, J. C., and P. CALDWELL. 1987. The cul- MOSHER, W. D., and C. GOLDSCHEIDER. 1984. Con-

tural context of high fertility in sub-Saharan

traceptive patterns of religious and racial groups

Africa. Pop. Develop. Rev. 13:409-437.

in the United States, 1955-76: Convergence and

CALDWELL, J. C , I. O. ORUBULOYE, and P. CALD-

distinctiveness. Stud. Fam. Plan. 15:101-111.

WELL. 1992. Fertility decline in Africa: A new OGBURN, W. 1922. Social change. W. Huebsch, New

type of transition? Pop. Develop. Rev. 18: York.

211-242.

ONI, G. A., and J. MCCARTHY. 1986. Use of contra-

CLIGNET, R. 1967. Environmental change, types of

ceptives for birth spacing in a Nigerian city.

descent and child rearing practices. In H. Miner

Stud. Fam. Plan. 17:165-171.

(éd.), The city in modem Africa. Praeger, New OPPONG, C. 1983. Women's roles, opportunity costs

York.

and fertility, p. 547-589. InR. Bulatao and R. D.

. 1970. Many wives, many powers: Author-

Lee (eds.), Determinants of fertility in develop-

ity and power in polygamous families. North-

ing countries, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York.

western Univ. Press, Evanston, IL.

PEBLEY, A. R., and W. MBUGUA. 1989. Polygyny

FRANK, O. 1987. Thedemand for fertility control

and fertility in sub-Saharan Africa. In R.

in sub-Saharan Africa. Stud. Fam.Plan. 18:

Lesthaeghe (ed.), Reproduction and social orga-

181-201.

nization in sub-Saharan Africa. Univ. of Califor-

GHANA. 1989. Ghana demographic andhealthsur-

nia Press, Berkeley, CA.

vey, 1988. Ghana Statistical Service, Accra, PISON, G. 1986. Démographie de la polygamie.

Ghana, and Institute for Resource Develop-

Population 41:93-122.

ment/Macro Systems Inc., Columbia, Maryland. POLLAK, R. A., and S. C. WATKINS. 1993. Cultural and

GRAHAM, D. H., I. BAPTISTA LUNDIN DE COLOANE,

economic approaches tofertility: Proper marriage

A. FRANCISCO, W. NALL, M. WALKER, and

or mésalliance. Pop. Develop. Rev. 19:467-496.

P. JENKINS. 1991. Peri-urban baseline research PRESTON, S. 1986. Changing values and falling

results: Maputo Mozambique. Final report to

birth rates, p. 176-195. In K. Davis, M. S.Bern-

USAID mission, Maputo, Mozambique. Ohio

stam, and R. Ricardo-Campbell (eds.), Below-

State University, Columbus, OH.

replacement fertility in industrial societies:

Vol. 45, No. 1-2

Reproductive Choices

79

Causes, consequences, policies. Pop. Develop. Rev. 12(Suppl.). PRITCHETT, L. H. 1994. Desired fertility and the impact of population policies. Pop. Develop. Rev. 20:1-55. RENNE, E. P. 1993. Gender ideology and fertility strategies in an Ekiti Yuruba village. Stud.Fam. Plan. 24:343-353.
REPÚBLICA DE MOÇAMBIQUE. 1993. Relatório sobre os resultados finais do inquérito às famílias na cidade de Maputo, Vol. 1. Direcção Nacional de Estatística, Maputo, Moçambique. . 1995. Moçambique: Panorama demográfîco e sócioeconómico. Direcção Nacional de Estatística, Maputo, Moçambique.
SCHNEIDER, J., and P. SCHNEIDER. 1992. Going for-
ward in reverse gear: culture, economy and po-

litical economy in the demographic transition of a rural Sicilian town. In J. R. Gillis, L. A. Tilly, and D. Levine (eds.), The European experience of declining fertility, 1850-1970: The quiet revolution. Blackwell, Cambridge,MA.
SHAPIRO, D., and B. O. TAMBASHE. 1994. The im-
pact of women's employment and education on contraceptive use and abortion in Kinshasa, Zaire. Stud. Fam. Plan. 25:96-111. WARE, H. 1977. Women's work and fertility in Africa, p. 1-34. In S. Kupinsky (ed.), The fertility of working women: A synthesis of international research. Praeger, New York.
WESTOFF, C. F. 1990. Reproductive preferences and fertility rates. Internat. Fam. Plan. Persp. 16: 84-89.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

