Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Race, ethnic group, and disease
Albert Damon
To cite this article: Albert Damon (1969) Race, ethnic group, and disease, Social Biology, 16:2, 69-80, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1969.9987804 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1969.9987804
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 16 View related articles Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Albert Damon
Department of Anthropology Harvard University Cambridge, Massachusetts

The associations between disease and racial or ethnic group concern a variety of scientists and administrators. The practicing physician can use such information in the diagnosis and treatment of disease; the public health official, in planning programs which aim to detect, prevent, or eradicate disease, as well as in allocating scarce and costly health resources like doctors, nurses, educators, clinics, and hospitals. The epidemiologist uses such data to help explain the distribution and determinants of disease frequency, thereby suggesting leads for the laboratory scientist's investigation of the causes of disease. The demographer uses knowledge of the racial distribution of disease to help explain distinctive patterns of population structure or of vital statistics.
Among basic scientists, the geneticist deals with the mechanisms and mode of transmission of hereditary disease within populations and with the differing gene frequencies among populations separated in time, place, and origin. The anthropologist tries to account for such population differences in terms of the origin, evolution, distribution, and differing environments-- natural, biological, and cultural--of the populations concerned. Disease is a major selective factor in human evolution, and its present distribution affords clues to the

past history and future course of mankind. The difference between the approaches of
the basic and the applied human biologist is that the former attempts to explain human variation. He regards the manifestations of human diversity as the dependent variable--dependent on climate, habitat, migration, inbreeding, and genetic mechanisms. The applied scientist, on the other hand, takes the manifestations of human variability as given--that is, as the independent variable--and tries to turn these biological differences to practical ends, such as finding, treating, and preventing disease.
Before presenting the associations between race and disease, let us define some terms. The science of the distribution and determinants of disease in man is epidemiology, an applied biomedical discipline which has recently expanded its scope from infectious diseases ("epidemics") to the chronic, noninfectious disorders of multiple or uncertain etiology which now account for most of the disability and deaths in advanced societies. Examples are coronary heart disease, hypertension, cancer, "strokes," arthritis, peptic ulcer, and mental illness.
As in other observational sciences, the first step in epidemiologic method (Mac-

69

70

Damon

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Mahon, Pugh, and Ipsen, 1960) is description. The prevalence of disease is charted in respect to time, place, and person. The personal or "host" characteristics most relevant to disease frequency are age, sex, and race. Of secondary importance, on the whole, are other biological traits like physical constitution, birth order and maternal age, and socioeconomic traits like income, occupation, and marital status. Sometimes, as for single-gene disorders like hemophilia, genetic constitution is of prime importance.
From his initial description the epidemiologist frames hypotheses to account for the observed distributions. He then tests these hypotheses by specifically designed quantitative, analytic studies, still observational in method* If his hypothesis survives analytic test, his final step is to clinch the proof by experiment--as, for example, in fluoridating water supplies to reduce caries frequency.
It can be seen that clinical medicine, pathology, physical anthropology, and demography all contribute to descriptive epidemiology. Our concern here is with the personal characteristic of race--a concept of physical anthropology--in its association with disease, as defined clinically and pathologically. We shall summarize the evidence briefly and then discuss possible explanations. Fortunately the only strong emotion aroused by this aspect of race is humanitarian, to prevent or relieve suffering, so that we need not plead to justify the research or debate the ethics of examining the evidence.
DEFINITION OF RACE AND
ETHNIC GROUP
For descriptive purposes, the epidemiologist analyzes disease rates among groups of persons who are more homogeneous than the general population, whether this relative homogeneity has been derived biologi-

cally or culturally. The word "relative" should be stressed, both because human beings and human groups, like all living things, are innately variable and because no group is completely isolated from outside influence. A biologically distinct group can be termed a race or population. Such a group, as a result of past breeding patterns, has a "relatively" large percentage of genes in common. The great preponderance of human genes are, of course, shared by all men. A racial group may vary in number from a few hundred to a few hundred million, and in residential area, whether of origin or of current residence, from local to geographic to continental in size (Garn, 1965).
A racial group may, and in fact often does, have distinguishing physical features --like skin color, hair form, and facial conformation--as well as distinctive aggregates of genes ("genotype") and of traits ("phenotype") determined by laboratory test but not externally apparent. Examples of such cryptic genetic traits are blood groups, hemoglobin variants, blood cell and serum enzymes, and ability to taste phenylthiocarbamide.
A culturally distinct group is an ethnic group. Frequently the two kinds of homogeneity, biological and cultural, overlap or coincide, as in the case of most primitive tribes or of linguistic, religious, or colored minorities in a city or country, provided only that the members of the group share a common ancestry. For many practical purposes then, including epidemiologic description, it may not matter how a particular group under study became distinctive, nor the precise proportion of biology and culture in its present distinctiveness. The Boston Irish, Italian, Jewish, Armenian, and Negro communities, for example, are distinctive both biologically and culturally; they are racial as well as ethnic groupings.
Biological and cultural similarity can

Vol. 16, No. 2

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease

71

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

reinforce one another. On the one hand, distinctive physical features make it easy for society to practice or enforce certain breeding patterns, as intermarriage or interbreeding between white persons and Negroes is now forbidden in South Africa. On the other hand, distinctive cultural practices like religion may isolate breeding populations more or less completely, as in the case of the Jews for many centuries, or small contemporary groups like the Amish, Dunkers, and Hutterites. Whatever has caused or continues to maintain a group in relative isolation, social or biological, the net result is a group with more genes or social practices, or both, in common than the population at large.
It is important to distinguish between biological and cultural homogeneity in investigating the cause of disease or in attempting prevention. In the case of genetic diseases occurring mainly or exclusively among groups which may be both racial and ethnic, it would be fruitless to seek explanation in terms of current cultural practices. Whatever the cultural or environmental factors at the origin of or contributing to the persistence of the hemoglobin S (sickle-cell) mutation among African Negroes or Tay-Sachs disease (infantile amaurotic idiocy) among Jews, the current bearers of these genes are defined biologically, not culturally. On the other hand, one should not ascribe differences in disease frequency to racial or biological homogeneity unless cultural and environmental factors can be ruled out. For all human diseases, both heredity and environment are involved, the relative proportions varying from one disease, population, and person to another.
RACE AND DISEASE
For a general picture let us first examine racial differences in disease within a single

country, the United States. Here, medical diagnosis and population coverage, though by no means perfect, are more uniform for the various racial and ethnic subgroups than would be the case in international comparisons. There are three major indices of health or disease status for a population or group: mortality as reflected by death certification, examination of a representative sample, and morbidity (illness) as measured by household or hospital surveys. We shall consider only the first two, since hospital records and household interviews correspond poorly with the true medical status of a population.
Mortality in the United Slates. In the 1960 census, Whites made up 88.6% of the population of 179,326,000, and Nonwhites 11.4%. The Nonwhites were 92% Negro, 2.6% American Indian, 2.3% Japanese, 1.2% Chinese, 0.9% Filipino, and 1.1% all others. Needless to say, the "Whites" were also ethnically and biologically diverse, as will be discussed below. Mortality rates for Whites and Nonwhites in 1900 and 1965 appear in Table 1. In both years the Nonwhite death rates exceeded those for Whites. Despite the great reduction in death rates since 1900, 60% among Whites and 63% among Nonwhites, the relative proportions (adjusted for age) have moved only slightly toward equality. A further breakdown by age, omitted here, shows 1965 mortality rates for Nonwhites higher at all ages except 75 and over.
More informative is the comparison of death rates by cause, set out in Table 2. On the whole, the White rates exceeded Nonwhite rates in the chronic, noninfectious, and "degenerative" diseases, with the major exceptions of diabetes, hypertension, and "strokes" (vascular lesions of the central nervous system), which are associated with hypertension. The Nonwhites,

72

Damon

Social Biology

on the other hand, hadhigher death rates for infectious diseases and genital cancer, With the sole exception of genital cancer, White cancer rates were higher. Among subcategories of cancer not shown in Table 2, White death rates were four to five times higher than Nonwhite rates for testicular and skin cancer, roughly equal forprostatic and endometrial cancer, butonly 50% and

67% ashigh asNonwhite rates for cervical and penile cancer, respectively.
National Health Examination Survey. Data from this Survey, conducted between 1962 and 1964 on 6,672 adults aged 18 to 79years and representing the civilian, noninstitutionalized population of the United States, can tell only about common morbid conditions. Onewould hardly expect such a

TABLE 1
DEATH RATES FOR WHITES AND NONWHITES IN THE UNITED STATES, 1900 AND 1965
(Annual rates per 1,000 population in specified group)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

YEAS
1900 1965

MORTALITY RATES

White

Nonwhite

Unadjusted Adjusted*
17.0 17.6 9.4 7.1

Unadjusted Adjusted*
25.0 27.8 9.6 10.3

RATE IN WHITES AS PERCENTAGE OF
RATE IN NONWHITES
Unadjusted Adjusted*
68 63 98 69

* Adjusted to the age distribution of the total U.S. population in 1940, to take account of age differences and changes in the White and Nonwhite populations.

TABLE 2
DEATH RATES FROM SELECTED CAUSES FOR WHITES AND NONWHITES IN THE UNITED STATES, 1965 (Per 100,000 population in specified group)

CAUSE
Suicide Leukemia Arteriosclerotic heart disease Urinary cancer Lymphosarcoma Breastcancer Peptic ulcer Respiratory cancer Digestive cancer Motor vehicle accidents Vascular lesions of the central
nervous system Genital cancer Cirrhosis of liver Diabetes mellitus Accidents, other than motor
vehicle Pneumonia Hypertensive heart disease Tuberculosis Syphilis Homicide

MORTALITY RATES

White
11.9 7.4 303.8 7.5 8.1 14.6 5.6 27.7 49.6 25.3
102.3 20.5 12.5 16.7
28.9 28.9 24.7 3.4 1.0 3.0

Nonwhite
5.0 4.1 175.8 4.6 5.1 9.5 3.8 20.6 41.8 25.8
114.7 23.3 14.6 20.1
41.2 44.2 55.3 9.3 2.8 24.6

RATE IN WHITES AS PERCENTAGE or
RATE IN NONWHITES
238 180 173 163 159 154 147 134 119
98
89 88 86 83
70 65 45 37 36 12

Vol. 16, No. 2

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease

73

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

small sample to contain many persons with cancer, for example. For the same reason-- small numbers in the total sample--the Nonwhites were virtually all Negroes.
The major findings relevant to race and disease are these. White and Negro rates were similar for coronary heart disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteoarthritis. Negro rates were significantly higher for hypertension; for hypertensive heart disease, both absolutely and as a percentage of those with hypertension; and for syphilis, as indicated by positive serological test. Negroes had superior hearing and (uncorrected) visual acuity, for both near and distant vision. Negroes had higher mean blood pressure levels, both systolic and diastolic, than Whites. Negro men had higher blood glucose and lower cholesterol levels than White men. Negroes of both sexes had only two-thirds as many decayed, missing, and filled teeth as Whites, even among persons of the same income or education. On the other hand, Negroes had one and a half times the periodontal (gum) disease of Whites.
Special surveys.Data for other Nonwhites in the United States are sparse, being confined, among American Indians as a whole, to infectious diseases and accidents, both of which show higher than national rates (Wagner and Rabeau, 1964), or to surveys of specific conditions. For example, osteoarthritis is relatively frequent among Blackfoot and Pima Indians; diabetes, among the Papago; and gallbladder disease, trachoma, and congenitally dislocated hips among Southwestern Indians in general. On the other hand, Southwestern Indians have relatively little duodenal ulcer (Sievers and Marquis, 1962) despite a high percentage of Indians (83% or more) with blood group O, which is associated with duodenal ulcer among Caucasians, Japanese, and Nigerians.
On Hawaii, persons of pure or pre-
dominantly Polynesian ancestry have strik-

ingly high rates of diabetes (Sloan, 1963). For coronary heart disease, their rates exceed those among Caucasians, Filipinos, and Japanese living in Hawaii (Moellering and Bassett, 1967). Rates were higher for pure Hawaiians than for part Hawaiians. Among men with coronary heart disease, Hawaiians were three times as likely to die from the acute episode as Japanese, and pure Hawaiians were more likely to die than part Hawaiians.
Chinese and Japanese in the United States show some distinctive patterns, particularly in respect to cancer. Among both groups, death rates for prostatic cancer and breast cancer are much lower than for the White population, and rates for digestive cancer (esophagus, stomach, and liver) much higher. The Japanese have unusually high rates for esophageal and stomach cancer as do the Chinese for nasopharyngeal and liver cancer (Smith, 1956a, b). In both groups, chronic lymphatic leukemia is about half as common as among the White population (Shimkin and Loveland, 1961).
The number of such comparisons could be greatly extended, within other countries having distinctive racial and ethnic groups, such as South Africa and Israel, as well as in the United States. Tables 3 and 4, the former and part of the latter from McKusick (1967), summarize the associations between race or ethnic group and disease for simply-inherited disorders (Table 3) and for disorders of complex genetics or in which genetic factors are unproved (Table 4). On the whole, the single-gene disorders are extremely rare compared to those of multiple causation, which constitute the major burden of disease in developed countries.1 In Table 4 we have attempted to include only confirmed associations, omitting curiosities and single reports, however intriguing (e.g., Kudo, 1968).
1 For references on individual conditions listed in Table 3, see McKusick, 1966;for references on some of the multifactorial disorders, Table 4, see Damon, 1962, and the sources cited in the present paper.

74

Damon

Social Biology

DISCUSSION
What use can we make of the clear associations between racial or ethnic group and disease presented so far? The practical scientist can, as mentioned, apply them immediately to the detection, diagnosis, and treatment of disease. A given expenditure of resources will find, cure, and prevent more cervical cancer, syphilis, and tuberculosis among Nonwhites in the United States than among Whites, for example. In clinical medicine, fever, abdominal pain, and leucocytosis may have different implications in a Northern European (a "surgical" condition like appendicitis or cholecystitis), a Mediterranean (favism, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, or familial Mediterranean fever),

and a Negro (possible sickling crisis). In the two last cases, the patient may be spared needless surgical exploration if the physician is aware of the ethnic and racial associations of disease.
Much more difficult is explaining the associations. Toward this end we shall follow the useful checklist of MacMahon etal. (1960):
1. Errors of measurement. 2. Differences between groups with respect
to more directly associated demographic variables. 3. Differences in environment. 4. Differences in bodily constitution. 5. Differences in genetic constitution.
Errors of measurement, the first item, means that racial or ethnic distributions of disease are liable to distortion due to in-

TABLE 3
RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISEASE: SIMPLY INHERITED DISORDERS*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Ethnic Group
Ashkenazic Jews
Mediterranean peoples (Greeks, Italians, Sephardic Jews)
Africans Japanese (Koreans) Chinese Armenians

Relatively High Frequency

Relatively Low Frequency

Abetalipoproteinemia Bloom's disease Dystonia musculorum deformans Factor XI (PTA) deficiency Familial dysautonomia Gaucher's disease Niemann-Pick disease Pentosuria Spongy degeneration of brain Stub thumbs Tay-Sachs disease

Phenylketonuria

Familial Mediterranean fever

Cystic fibrosis

G-6-PD deficiency, Mediterranean

Thalassemia (mainly 0)

G-6-PD deficiency, African type Hemoglobinopathies, esp.
Hb S, Hb C, o and 0 thai, persistent Hb F

Cystic fibrosis Hemophilia Phenylketonuria Wilson's disease

Acatalasia Dyschromatosis universalis
hereditaria Oguchi's disease

o thalassemia G-6-PD deficiency, Chinese type

Familial Mediterranean fever

* Data from McKusick, 1967. For references on individual conditions, see JIcKusick, 1966.

TABLE 4
RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISEASE: MULTIFACTORIAL DISORDERS WITH A COMPLEX OR UNPROVED GENETIC COMPONENT*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Ethnic Group

High Frequency

Low Frequency

Ashkenazic Jews

Buerger's disease
Diabetes mellitus Hypercholesterolemia
Hyperuricemia Kaposi's sarcoma Leukemia Pemphigus vulgaris Polycythemia vera Ulcerative colitis and
regional enteritis

Alcoholism Cervical cancer Pyloric stenosis Tuberculosis

Sephardic Jews

Cystic disease of lung

Northern Europeans Pernicious anemia

Irish Major CNS malformations (anencephaly, encephalocele)

Chinese

Nasopharyngeal cancer Trophoblastic disease

Chronic lymphatic leukemia Prostatic cancer

Japanese

Cerbrovascular accidents Cleft lip-palate Gastric cancer Trophoblastic disease

Acne vulgaris
Breast cancer Chronic lymphatic leukemia Congenital hip disease Otosclerosis Prostatic cancer

Filipinos (U.S. only) Hyperuricemia

Polynesians (Hawaiians) Clubfoot Coronary heart disease Diabetes mellitus

Africans American Indian

Ainhum Cervical cancer Esophageal cancer Hypertension Polydactyly Prehelical fissure Sarcoidosis Systemic lupus erythematosus Tuberculosis Uterine fibroids
Congenital dislocation of hip Gallbladder disease Rheumatoid arthritis Tuberculosis

Arteriosclerosis Congenital hip disease Gallstones Major CNS malformations
(anencephaly, encephalocele) Multiple sclerosis Osteoporosis and fracture
of hip and spine Otosclerosis Pediculosis capitis Polycythemia vera Psoriasis Pyloric stenosis Skin cancer
Duodenal ulcer

Icelanders

Glaucoma

Eskimos

Otitis, deafness Salivary gland tumors

* Enlarged from Damon, 1962, and McKusick, 1967.

76

Damon

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

adequate diagnosis, differential access to and utilization of medical facilities, and lack of precision in estimating populations at risk. Transient residence and low utilization of medical facilities, even within the same medical care plans, are more common among Nonwhites than among Whites in the United States. Jews, on the other hand, make maximum use of medical facilities in comparison with other White subgroups. As for diagnosis, skin rashes or skin cancer might be harder to diagnose among Nonwhites than among Whites. Not only have such errors been considered before entering the diseases in Tables 3 and 4, but the internal evidence of the tables--one or another group higher for some diseases, lower for others--shows that no such simple explanation can account for the associations observed.
Differences betweengroups with respectto more directly associated variables. Some reported differences between groups may reflect differences in age, sex, or socioeconomic status rather than differential disease susceptibility. When disease rates are compared for Whites and Nonwhites of similar age, sex, and socioeconomic status--in respect to occupation, residence, education, income and the like--and when the differences persist, they cannot be attributed to these demographic variables. Such is the case for many of the disorders in Tables 3 and 4.
Differences in environment. Apart from the demographic variables associated with socioeconomic status just mentioned, there are many finer differences in customs and way of life. Dietary habits, use of tobacco and alcohol, amount of physical exertion, age at first intercourse or at marriage, number of children, contraceptive and infant feeding practices differ from one group to another and doubtless underlie many ethnic differences in disease.
The relative contributions of heredity and environment to such differences can be assessed epidemiologically in two ways:

by studying disease rates among migrants-- that is, the same breeding group in different environments--and among members of different racial or ethnic groups in the "same" environment. (The quotation marks indicate that the micro-environment of an ethnic group need not be identical to that of its neighbor in the same geographic or macro-environment.) For example, rates of stomach cancer are higher for Japanese living in the United States than for American Whites. But rates for Japanese living in Hawaii exceed those for Japanese in the mainland United States, while rates for Japanese living in Japan are highest of all. Among the Japanese living in Hawaii, rates of stomach cancer are higher for those born in Japan than for those born in Hawaii. A similar situation holds for nasopharyngeal cancer among Chinese in California. Thus, the causal factors must be associated with a way of life that changes with migration, whether or not a minor genetic factor may also be involved.
On the other hand, Negroes of West African origin have higher blood pressure and more hypertensive disease than Whites in a variety of environments in the Caribbean, Panama, and the United States (summarized by Phillips and Burch, 1960; Florey and Cuadrado, 1968). This consistency in various environments argues for heredity.
An example of the comparison of different breeding populations in the "same" environment would be the Hawaiian studies of coronary heart disease already cited (Mollering and Bassett, 1967), showing marked differences among men of pure Hawaiian, part Hawaiian, and Japanese descent. Unfortunately, one cannot be sure how similar their living habits were.
Differences in body constitution. This topic brings us closer to the biological associations of interest to the anthropologist and geneticist. A few examples must suffice. Melanin protects against sunlight, ac-

Vol. 16, No. 2

Race, Ethnic Croup, and Disease

77

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

counting for the much lower rates of skin cancer among pigmented groups. The Negro ectoderm responds to injury with excessive connective tissue to form keloids, or raised scars. Connective tissue from Caucasians, Negroes, Eskimos, and American Indians is reported to differ in amount and composition (Boucek et al., 1958).
The increased density of Negro bone (Trotter, Broman, and Peterson, 1960) may in part account for the relatively low frequency of spine and hip fractures among elderly Negroes (Bollet et al., 1965; Moldawer et al., 1965). On the other hand, despite the reduced bone density of Orientals, presumed to be genetic (Garn et al., 1960), Wong (1965) reported lower rates of forearm fractures among Chinese and Malays in Singapore than among Swedes in Sweden. Negroes have markedly lower frequencies of Legg-Perthes disease, an osteochondrosis of the femoral head affecting mainly young males, than do Caucasians (Goff, 1954). American Indians, who may also have lower frequencies of Legg-Perthes disease, are much more susceptible to congenital dislocation of the hip than Whites, whereas Negroes are markedly less so. Anatomical differences in the shape of the acetabulum have been adduced in explanation.
The nasal index, breadth/length, varies with humidity and inversely with latitude (Weiner, 1964). The long, narrow nose of Eskimos is not wholly successful as an adaptation to a cold, dry environment. This may explain in part their frequent upper respiratory infections, leading to draining ears and deafness (Brody and McAlister, 1965), in contrast to Africans and Malayans.
The rarity of pediculosis capitis (head lice) among Negroes is unexplained but may relate to some characteristic of the scalp or hair.
A physiological characteristic which var-
ies among breeding populations is the level
of immunity against micro-organisms. Lack-

ing previous exposure, some groups are extremely susceptible to diseases which are mild in other populations. Fatal epidemics of measles and upper respiratory infections among Eskimos and Melanesians, smallpox among American Indians, and susceptibility to tuberculosis among all of these groups as well as Negroes, have been well documented. On the other hand, Ashkenazic Jews are relatively resistant to tuberculosis, presumably because they have lived for centuries under crowded conditions where only the resistant survived. Negroes appear relatively resistant to vivax malaria, for similar selective reasons (Bruce-Chwatt, 1967).
Research into the disease and immunological status of the few remaining isolates, unexposed to the larger culture, can contribute greatly to our understanding of disease as a selective factor in evolution, the history and geography of disease, and our knowledge of human origins and distribution (Hackett, 1963; Hudson, 1963, 1965; World Health Organization, 1968).
One way to demonstrate the reality of racial differences in physiological and biochemical functions, some of which underlie differences in disease frequency and severity, is by a list, as in Table 5. Further research will undoubtedly disclose many more racial differences than appear in this partial list. Race is clearly more than skin deep. In fact, the validity of the classical scheme of human races, described morphologically by early anthropologists and subsequently confirmed on serological grounds, is independently substantiated by physiological and pathological evidence. Some of the three-way distributions, as for bone density, twinning, and possibly blood pressure, are particularly striking.
Differences in genetic constitution. Such differences determine many of the bodily characteristics just mentioned, such as skin color or bone density. For only a few of the single-gene disorders in Table 3 is there

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

78

Damon

Social Biology

evidence for heterozygote advantage, the mechanism usually postulated for the persistence of such deleterious genes in numbers beyond those expected from mutation-- that is, as "balanced polymorphisms." Hemoglobin S has been shown to confer resistance to falciparum malaria in heterozygotes. The same is strongly suspected but not yet fully established for other abnormal

long way to go in accounting for them all and probably never can.
The genetic component is overwhelming in the single-gene disorders. In the multicausal disorders, environmental factors tend to dominate the genetic ones. There is little doubt, for example, that alcoholism, tuberculosis, and cervical cancer are largely environmental in origin. But even for tu-

TABLE 5
SOME RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN PHYSIOLOGY AND BlOCHEMISTY

TRAIT
Birth: weight skeletal maturation dental maturation neurological maturation
Neonatal motor development Acuity, auditory and visual Blood pressure Bone density Color blindness Corneal arcus Fibrinolysin activity Isoniazid inactivation Keloid formation Lactase deficiency (adult) Pulmonary function Serum globulins Skin resistance, electrical Tasting, phenylthiocarbamide Twinning, dizygotic

IN RELATION TO CAUCASOID NORMS

Negroids

Mongoloids (Orientals)

__
-j-
+

44---- ------ -i-
4- + ---f-
-j- +
+

hemoglobins, for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and for thalassemia. Increased fertility, another aspect of heterozygote advantage besides resistance to disease, has been reported for carriers of cystic fibrosis (Knudson, Wayne, and Hallett, 1967), and suggested, together with improved survival, for heterozygote carriers of Tay-Sachs disease (Myrianthopoulos and Aronson, 1966).
But with almost 30% of human genetic loci estimated to be polymorphic, and with most of these probably "relics" of previous selective crises (Bodmer, 1968), we have a

berculosis, an infectious disease most common in low-income, crowded communities, several twin studies--the latest by Harvald and Hauge (1965)--have shown a genetic substrate, and the disease is much more frequent and severe among Negroes than among White persons, independent of childhood infection (Lurie, 1964). Incidentally, it should be noted that diseases with a genetic component need not be associated with race--for example, peptic ulcer (Damon and Polednak, 1967).
Diseases which change in frequency or manifestation over periods too short for

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 2

Race, Ethnic Group, and Disease

79

genetic influences (mutation, selection, gene flow, drift) to operate must be mainly environmental in origin. Examples relevant here arethedecline in mortality from hypertension and cervical cancer, and the oscillations in leukemia rates in the United States during the last thirty to forty years.
In connection with the genetic influences just noted, McKusick (1967) points out that no racial or ethnic differences in mutation rates have been found and that gene flow as well as mutation could account for the occasional occurrence of (say) cystic fibrosis in an American Negro.
A further difficulty in assessing the genetic component in the multifactorial diseases in Table 4 is that the genetic component is polygenic rather than monogenic, as in the simply-inherited disorders of Table 3. Variability in both the genetic and the environmental determinants of disease means that one cannot expect associations to hold or to be equally strong among all populations at all times or in the same population at different times and in different places. Research among racially mixed populations, as well as among the isolates, the migrants, and the different sedentary groups living in the same environment already discussed should help settle these questions.
SUMMARY
Differences in disease as well as in physiological and biochemical function have been documented among the major classical races of man, as well as among a variety of breeding populations which are ethnically or culturally as well as biologically distinct.

The diseases and the functional characteristics of racial or ethnic groups areboth monogenic and polygenic; polygenic diseases often have a strong environmental component aswell.
Some of themost striking associations are the virtually exclusive concentration of certain single-gene disorders in one or another group, such as pentosuria, dysautonomia, and the lipoidoses among Jews, thalassemia and familial Mediterranean fever among Mediterranean peoples, and sickle-cell and some other hemoglobinopathies among Africans. Of the multifactorial diseases of complex or uncertain inheritance, there is a relatively high frequency of diabetes, leukemia, polycythemia vera, and ulcerative colitis among Jews, hypertension, polydactyly, and sarcoidosis among Negroes, and diabetes and coronary heart disease among Polynesians (Hawaiians). Twinning frequency, bone density, lactase deficiency, and auditory and visual acuity also differ among the major races of man.
Distinctive racial or ethnic patterns of disease can be profitably applied by the public health official to the detection and prevention of disease and by the clinician in diagnosis and treatment. The anthropologist can gain insight into human origins, relationships, distribution, and adaptation. The geneticist has new material for the study of heredity in human populations. And finally the epidemiologist gains clues to the cause of some of man's major diseases, with the ultimate hope of eradication.

REFERENCES

BODMER, W. F. 1968.Demographic approaches to the measurement of differential selection in human populations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 59:690699.
BOLLET, A. J., G. ENGH, and W. PARSON. 1965.
Epidemiology of osteoporasis. Arch. Int. Med. 116:191-194.
BOUCEK, R. J., N. L. NOBLE, K. T. KAO, and H. R. ELDEN. 1958. The effects of age, sex, and

race upon the acetic acid fractions of collagen (human biopsy-connective tissue). J. Gerontol. 13:2-9.
BRODY, J. A., and R. MCALISTER. 1965. Draining
ears anddeafness among Alaskan Eskimos. Arch. Otolaryngol. 81:29-33.
BRUCE-CHWATT, L. J. 1967. Malaria. In P. B. Beeson and W. McDermott (eds.) Textbook of medicine. Saunders, Philadelphia.

80

Damon

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

DAMON, A. 1962. Some host factors in disease: Sex, race, ethnic group, andbody form. J. Nat. Med. Ass. 54:424-431.

males onOahu--a review of 505 cases occurring between 1955 and1964. J. Chronic Dis. 20:89101.

DAMON, A., and A. P. POLEDNAK. 1967. Constitu- MOLDAWER, M., S. J. ZIMMERMAN, and L. C. COL-

tion, genetics, and body form in peptic ulcer: LINS. 1965. Incidence of osteoporosis in elderly

A review. J. Chronic Dis. 20:787-802.

whites and elderly Negroes. J. Amer. Med. Ass.,

FLOREY, C. D U V., and R. R. CUADRADO. 1968.

194:85-862.

Blood pressure in native Cape Verdeans and in MYRIANTHOPOULOS, N. C., and S. M. ARONSON.

Cape Verdean immigrants and their descendants 1966. Population dynamics of Tay-Sachs disease,

living in New England. Hum. Biol. 40:189-211. I. Reproductive fitness andselection. Amer. J.

GARN, S.M. 1965. Human races. 2d ed.Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
GARN, S. M., E. M. PAO, and M. E. Rihl. 1964. Compact bone in Chinese and Japanese. Science

Hum. Genet. 18:313-327.
PHILLIPS, J. H., and G. E. BURCH. 1960. A review
of cardiovascular diseases in thewhite and Negro races. Medicine 39:241-288.

143:1439-1440. HACKETT, C. J. 1963. Ontheorigin of thehuman
treponematoses. Bull. World Health. Org. 29: 7-41.

SHIMKIN, M. B., and D. B. LOVELAND. 1961. A note
on mortality from lymphatic luekemia in Oriental populations in theUnited States. Blood17: 763-766.

HARVALD, B., and H. M. HAUGE. 1965. Hereditary
factors elucidated by twin studies. In J. V. Neel et al. (eds.), Genetics and the epidemiology of chronic diseases. U.S. Public Health Service, Publication No. 1163. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
HUDSON, E. H. 1963. Treponematosis andanthropology. Ann. Int. Med. 58:1037-1048. . 1965. Treponematosis and man's social evolution. Amer. Anthrop. 67:885-901.
KNUDSON, A. G., L. WAYNE, and W. Y. HALLETT.
1967. On the selective advantage of cystic fibrosis heterozygotes. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 388-392.
KUDO, T. 1968. Spontaneous occlusion of the circle of Willis. A disease apparently confined toJapanese. Neurology 18:485-496.
LURIE, M. B. 1964. Resistance to tuberculosis. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
MCKUSICK, V. A. 1966. Mendelian inheritance in man. Catalogue of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked phenotypes. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore. . 1967. The ethnic distribution of disease in the United States. J. Chronic Dis. 20:115-118.
MACMAHON, B., T. F. PUGH, and J. IBSEN. 1960.
Epidemiologic methods. Little, Brown, Boston.
MOELLERING, R. C., and D. R. BASSETT. 1967.
Myocardial infarction inHawaiian and Japanese

SIEVERS, M. L., and J. R. MARQUIS. 1962. Duodenal
ulcer among Southwestern American Indians. Gastroenterology 42:566-569. SLOAN, N.R. 1963. Ethnic distribution of diabetes mellitus in Hawaii. J. Amer. Med. Ass. 183: 419-424. SMITH, R. L. 1956a. Recorded and expected mortality among the Japanese of theUnited States and Hawaii, with special reference to cancer. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 17:459-473.
. 1956b. Recorded and expected mortality among the Chinese of Hawaii and the United States, with special reference to cancer. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 17:667-676.
TROTTER, M., G. E. BROMAN, and R. R. PETERSON.
1960. Densities of bones of white and Negro skeletons. J. Bone Jt. Surg. 42-A:50-58.
WAGNER, C. J., and E. S. RABEAU, 1964. Indian
poverty andIndian health. Health, Education, and Welfare Indicators, March, p.24-44. WEINER, J. S. 1964. Climatic adaptation. In G. A. Harrison, J. S.Weiner, J. M. Tanner, and N.A. Barnicot, Human biology. Oxford Univ. Press, New York. WONG, P. C. N. 1965. Epidemiology of fractures of the forearm among the major racial groups in Singapore. Acta Orthop. Scand. 36:168-178.
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 1968. Research on
human population genetics. Tech. Rept. 387. Geneva, Switzerland.

