Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Some notes on the genetics of behavior traits in man, especially of abnormal mental traits like Schizophrenia
M. Ye. Vartanian & V. M. Gindilis
To cite this article: M. Ye. Vartanian & V. M. Gindilis (1973) Some notes on the genetics of behavior traits in man, especially of abnormal mental traits like Schizophrenia, Social Biology, 20:3, 246-253, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1973.9988050 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988050
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

Some Notes on the Genetics of Behavior Traits in Man, Especially of Abnormal Mental Traits Like Schizophrenia

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

M. Ye. Vartanian and V. M. Gindilis
Institute of Psychiatry Academy of Medical Sciences Moscow, USSR

It is well known that, with few exceptions, behavioral traits in man including the mental disorder schizophrenia are not based on classical Mendelian genetics. This fact accounts for the difficulties which occur in attempting genetic analyses of such traits. Support for a more complex mode of inheritance include the following three reasons: (1) polygeny has been found to fit statistically as the appropriate mechanism for genetic determination of complex behavioral traits; (2) complex behavioral traits are not separable into their elementary components in order to permit traditional Mendelian analysis; (3) there is a heterogeneity of genetic mechanisms controlling even the relatively simple behavioral acts. As a result, most simple genetic methods of evaluation are inappropriate for the analysis of the inheritance of many behavioral traits in man.
Among existing methods in this field, the twin method has been found to be quite adequate for the solution of some problems in the genetics of human behavior. In our opinion, however, traditional explanations used in interpreting the results of twin anal-

yses require some modifications. Differences between monozygotic twin partners with regard to a trait have been explained, for example, as the result of environmental influences on the expressions of the genes involved in the control of the given trait. Differences between monozygotic twin partners as compared with differences between dizygotic twin partners has often been used for quantitative evaluation of the contribution of these influences to the total variance. One can approach this problem, however, from a different point of view.
Indeed, after the separation in the early stages of clevage, monozygotic twins initiate their existence in space and time to a great extent as independent organisms. Though they possess identical genomes, the degree of the similarity for some traits can depend upon the characteristics of the gene systems which are involved in the control of these traits. If the system includes only one major gene, then it apparently possesses few degrees of freedom (possible deviations in the expression of the gene). That is why monozygotic twin pairs show as a rule very high concordance rates for hereditary dis-

246

Vol. 20, No. 3

Genetics of Behavior Traits

247

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

eases, whether somatic or mental, which are apparently due to one mutant gene.
On the contrary, if we deal with a complex trait controlled by many genes, then an increased number of degrees of freedom in the system should be expected. This means that possible deviations in expression from such a gene system should by no means be as rare and as imperceptible as those found in monogenic systems. It is not very likely that the identical polygenic systems would be expressed in a different manner due to the different microenvironments in which monozygotic co-twins develop.
It is possible, of course, that the abovementioned variation in expression is functional in nature and inherent in the genome as an evolutionary adaptive mechanism. Such a mechanism would reflect purely stochastic aspects of gene expression in ontogeny even when the microenvironmental conditions are the same. In other words, we should like to point out that paired differences between monozygotic twin partners may, in fact, be due to genetic factors and not only to environmental influences. In such cases we can expect that the differences between monozygotic twin pairs for a particular trait will occur more often and with greater variability as the number of genes involved in the control of the given trait increase.
We have presented this point of view in more detail elsewhere (Vartanian and Gindilis, 1972). In this publication we should like to add some examples for illustration. One interesting case published recently concerned monozygotic twin sisters from Denmark discordant for color blindness and with the father also affected by the same trait (Philip et al., 1969). The authors of this report quite naturally assumed that in this case the reason for the difference with regard to color blindness in the two twin sisters was apparently due to the frequency

of inactivation of one or another of the two X chromosomes in each of the co-twins. In the affected twin sister, the maternal X chromosome with the normal allele for color vision was more frequently inactivated, while in the normal twin the paternal X chromosome with the mutant allele was more frequently inactivated. This unusual case illustrates a genetic mechanism which can lead to monozygotic twin divergence even with a monogenic trait. Based on this finding, we may all the more expect the existence of similar consequences for polygenic traits with some genes on the X chromosome.
The data published by Vandenberg and his colleagues (1962) support this conclusion. These authors have demonstrated that for some metrical traits (which are obviously polygenic) within-pair differences in female monozygotic twins are significantly higher than those found for the same traits between male monozygotic partners. The authors are correct in assuming that the cause of this is the phenomenon of X chromosome inactivation in females.
Other genetic situations can also lead to monozygotic twin divergence. One is based on the existence of certain mitochondrial genes. It is believed that these genes take part in the control of some energy sources and that their role is consequently important for the metabolism of the whole cell. Many investigators believe that these genes undergo mutations which are later reproduced during the division of the mitochondria. Further complications occur based on the fact that the segregation of mitochondria in cell division is not as precise as the segregation of nuclear genes. Hence, if the dividing cell contains several mutant mitochondria, then an unequal number of these may appear in each of the daughter cells. This divergence in mitochondrial genes in the two cell lines will increase during subsequent cell divisions. In other words, it is

248

Vartanian and Gindilis

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

possible that through the mechanism of random segregation of mutant mitochondria during the cleavage stages of monozygotic twin development divergence results in spite of the identity of their nuclear genes and irrespective of the environmental conditions in which the given monozygotic twin pair is developed.
The idea that discordance between monozygotic twin partners may include a purely genetic component has also been supported by Smith (1970) who based his statistical procedures on the concept developed by Falconer and Edwards in their description of a polygenic trait with a threshold manifestation. Smith writes, "in the absence of environmental similarities concordance rates for a disease in MZ twins will only be high if the heritability is very high. Thus a low concordance rate in MZ twins cannot be taken to prove that genetic factors are not important in the predisposition to a disease" (p. 90).
According to Smith, the concordance for traits in monozygotic twins is a function not only of heritability, but of the frequency of the given trait in the general population as well. In Figure 1 we have adapted Smith's findings, applied them to schizophrenia, and marked an appropriate curve corresponding to a frequency of one per cent. (This figure is approximately the prevalence of schizophrenia in the general population.) As can be seen, a relatively low concordance rate of 40% corresponds to a significantly high rate of heritability equal to 80%. Even when the concordance rate is 20% (one of the lowest figures found in the published data) this still corresponds to a sufficiently high level of heritability, that is, 60%.
Therefore, a low concordance rate for a trait in monozygotic twins does not mean that the contribution of genetic factors in the determination of the given trait is in-

significant. If traits are controlled by many genes, it should be expected that the concordance rates for traits in monozygotic twins will be less than usually found for monogenic traits. While some of the abovementioned considerations are rather hypothetical, the finding obtained by Smith is a fact which requires adequate biological interpretation.
Schizophrenia is a behavioral disorder that can be considered an example of an abnormal behavioral trait suitable for an investigation of many of the problems in human genetics including those discussed above. This is true, of course, only within the framework of a biological concept of schizophrenia. Many psychiatrists, however, are inclined to doubt the validity of this conception. The problem of "nature-nuture" when applied to schizophrenia has existed for a long time, and each of the two alternatives has been discussed with many pros and cons during these years. We must admit that at either end the arguments given by both sides are convincing only to those who have formulated them.
Lately, new approaches have been developed to solve this old problem. These include the studies of adopted children (Rosenthai and Kety, 1968; Heston, 1970) as well as the studies of the offspring of schizophrenic monozygotic twins (Fisher, 1971). In our opinion these studies should finally enable us to conclude that heredity is of prime importance for the development of schizophrenia.
This finding certainly does not mean that the role of the environmental factors should be disregarded. Moreover, their significance is evident in some clinical forms of schizophrenia, especially those which have a relatively good outcome. Specific hereditary factors, however, are the primary major requisite for the development of the more severe schizophrenic psychoses, while the

Genetics of Behavior Traits

249

POPULATION INCIDENCEf%J_

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

20 40

100

HERITABILITY (%)

FIG. 1.--Expected heritability of schizophrenia given the various concordance rates in monozygotic (MZ) twins. Middle curve corresponds to 1%, the prevalence of schizophrenia. Adapted from Smith, 1970.

environmental circumstances appear to play a role only as nonspecific precipitation factors.
Since the hereditary aspects of this disorder is often the major one, we think it time to analyze the nature of this specific hereditary predisposition to schizophrenia. The genetic investigations carried out at present in our laboratory initially strive to achieve this aim. A general design of our investigations consists in the genetic testing

of different clinical and biological displays of schizophrenia in such a way that we can consider each of them as independent and elementary aspects of the disease pattern. We believe that our analysis will establish whether or not the characteristics which we are exploring are controlled by independent gene systems or whether they follow as a consequence of one and the same mutant gene. It is our opinion that a population of monozygotic and dizygotic

250

Vartanian and Gindilis

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

twins, concordant and discordant for schizo- Among the relatives of patients with

phrenia, may serve as adequate population periodic schizophrenia, however, acute

for such an analysis. We shall, of course, psychotic conditions were seen more fre-

take into consideration the various aspects quently, while cases of schizoid psycho-

of the twin method which have been pre- pathy were seen significantly less frequently

viously discussed.

than in the relatives of patients with con-

At present we are in the process of ac- tinuous schizophrenia. The relatives of cumulating data from studies of our twins probands with shift-like schizophrenia ocand their closest relatives according to cupied an intermediate position.

various clinical, psychometric, neurophysio- These findings can be explained from a

logical, and biological tests. These proce- genetic point of view in a variety of ways.

dures are used in the evaluation of schizo- One may assume, for example, that con-

phrenic patients at our institute. In this tinuous, shift-like, and periodic forms of

connection we should like to present some schizophrenia are really different genetic

findings obtained from our genetic evalua- entities. If this were so, these three forms of

tion of schizophrenia displays in our twin schizophrenia would occur as a result of

population.

independent mutant genes. Another pro-

Based on our long term clinical investi- posal is that the primary genetic trigger is

gation at the Institute of Psychiatry, we are one and the same for all the clinical forms

able to conclude that a genetic aspect of of schizophrenia. Then the specific manifes-

importance is to be found in the develop- tations of each form would depend on other

ment of the schizophrenia process. Schizo- genetic or environmental factors. We hope

phrenia is classified in our institute into that further analysis of our twin family

three main forms: (1) nuclear schizo- data will give additional information along

phrenia--the continuous process with rela- these lines in order to avoid the develop-

tively rapid development of a deep ment of poorly-founded widely-generalized

schizophrenic deterioration; (2) periodic hypotheses.

schizophrenia--a disorder characterized by Some of the clinical-genealogical corre-

an alteration of acute psychotic affective lations mentioned seem to be reflected in

conditions and relatively good remission; biological findings. As has been shown in

and (3) intermittent schizophrenia--a form our laboratory previously, patients with

between the two above mentioned types (a different clinical forms of schizophrenia also

shift-like form) in which the process de- differ in the frequency of positive tests for

velops a series of attacks accompanied by serum antibodies to brain proteins. The

gradual personality changes.

anti-brain antibodies are found regularly in

A genealogical analysis of several hun- patients with continuous (nuclear) schizo-

dred families where the probands were phrenia, while periodic schizophrenics do not

characterized by different forms of schizo- differ in the frequency of this trait from nor-

phrenia have shown that each of these mal individuals (Kolyaskina and Kushner,

clinical types has a particular family back- 1971; Kolyaskina et al., 1971). Other bio-

ground (Shakhmatova et al., 1971). A sig- logical phenomena found in schizophrenics

nificant accumulation of schizoid psycho- are related to the increase of the total

paths has been found among the relatives of activity and quantitative changes in the

probands with continuous schizophrenia, spectrum of serum lactic dehydrogenase

whereas secondary cases of psychotic mani- izoenzymes (LDH). Unlike the immuno-

festation were only encountered rarely. pathological shifts, however, these bio-

Vol. 20, No. 3

Genetics of Behavior Traits

251

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

chemical abnormalities are seen in all activity and the isoenzyme spectral shifts

schizophrenic patients irrespective of the reflect increased membrane permeability or

clinical form of the disease (Lozovsky and cell destruction. Based on this knowledge

Mishchenko, 1971).

from the field of cell biology as well as

At present we do not possess sufficiently the evidence obtained in our own labora-

convincing arguments necessary to demon- tory, it is possible that membranotropic

strate a markedly close relationship between mechanisms play an important role in the

the levels of pathogenesis and those re- development of schizophrenia. If this is

flected by the biological phenomena. Wedo the case, consideration should be given to

not as yet know whether these findings re- the possibility that a correlation exists

flect the primary factors which should be between immunologic and membranotropic

regarded as a triggering mechanism for mechanisms in schizophrenia. I t may be

the emergence of the disease entity or assumed that the immunopathologic shifts

whether they reflect secondary conse- observed in patients and some of their

quences of a previously developed patho- relatives are a result of a primary genetic

logical process. An investigation of the abnormality in the function or structure of

immediate relatives of schizophrenic pa- the nerve cell membrane. This defect may

tients may be of significance to resolve this be the cause of an increased outflow of

problem. To date, our laboratory has col- brain antigens beyond the organ which

lected data on more than one hundred in turn results in an autoimmune response.

relatives of schizophrenics. Some data One can, of course, also assume that both

concerning the frequency of positive tests phenomena are a result of independent

for serum anti-brain antibodies and the causes. The emergence of anti-brain anti-

total activity of serum LDH are given in bodies, for example, may be explained by

Table 1. It is clear from this table that our spontaneous mutations of certain genes in

findings in the group of relatives of schizo- some lymphocytes belonging to a specific

phrenic patients as a whole differ signifi- cell line (Burch, 1971). Our choice of

cantly from that observed in normal per- which mode of hereditary transmission we

sons. The findings in the schizophrenic accept in schizophrenia will depend upon

patients are similar to those observed in which of the suppositions concerning the

their relatives. Further details ·with regard nature of the biological abnormalities found

to these studies will be discussed by one of in this disease will turn out to be the right

us (Vartanian) elsewhere.

one.

It is well known that increased LDH It is our hope that analysis of this twin

TABLE 1
SERTJM LDH AND ANTI-BRAIN ANTIBODIES IN NORMAL PERSONS, SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS, AND THE RELATIVES OF SCHIZOPHRENICS

SAMPLE
Nonnal persons Schizophrenic
patients Relatives of
schizophrenics

TOTAL ACTIVITY OF LDH (in un/ml/min)

NO.

* ± s-

SO 290 ± 9

91 340 ± 7

38 320 ± 14

FREQ. OPPOSITIVE TESTS ON SERUM ANTI-BKAIN ANTIBODIES
No. positive No. results
87 3 3.5 ± 2.0
344 77 22.4 ± 2 . 2
136 28 20.6 ± 3.S

252

Varlanian and Gindilis

Social Biology

data will give additional information which will enable understanding of the genetic mechanisms underlying the biological mechanisms detected in specific schizophrenic patients and some of their relatives. Many

point of view of various single-gene models (Odegard, 1972). The findings obtained in our Institute (Shakhmatova and Gindilis, unpublished) support the findings published by Odegard and reported in Table 2.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
MORBID RISKS FOR SIBLINGS OF PROBANDS IN RELATION TO THE NUMBER OF SCHIZOPHRENIC RELATIVES IN THE PARENT GENERATION

NUMBER OF PSYCHOTIC
RELATIVES IN PARENT GENERATION"
0 1 2 3
Total

AUTHORS' DATA (444 FAMILIES)

NO. of Siblings

NO. of
Psychotic Siblings

%
Without Correction

361 36

10.0

127 21

16.S

78 14 17.9

29 9 31.0

595 80 13.4

ODEGARD'S DATA

No. of Siblings

No. of
Psychotic Siblings

990 67 521 55 284 45

% (Corrected)
8.3 14.9 20.9

179S

167

9.3

* Authors' data include only uncles and aunts; Odegard's data include parents as well.

authors have proposed various well-known hypotheses regarding the modes of inheritance in schizophrenia, and it is unnecessary with this audience to evaluate them once again. We should, however, like to focus attention on one proposal that seems to us to be of importance. Among those suggesting polygenic inheritance is one postulating a small number of complementary interacting genes at specific loci, I t should be pointed out that many arguments in favor of an additive polygenic model are also true for the model based on complementary major genes. For example, the morbidity risk of schizophrenia among the siblings of a proband increases when the number of affected relatives in the parental generation (uncles and aunts) increased from zero to one or more affected relatives. This fact may be understood in the framework of polygenic inheritance only, but cannot be explained from the

Furthermore, as discussed earlier, the relatively low concordance rate for schizophrenia between monozygotic twins (with a high heritability) can best be explained in the context of polygenic models. On the other hand, some of the difficulties which one faces with the model of additive polygenes and a threshold for the manifestation of schizophrenia does not appear in the model of complementary interacting major genes. Based on our present state of knowledge, the latter model seems to be the most adequate for the description of the hereditary transmission in schizophrenia,
In the near future, we intend to subject all of the data obtained in our twin study to a cross-correlation analysis. We hope this analysis will add to an understanding regarding the hereditary predisposition to schizophrenia and will result in a verification of one of the different models for its inheritance.

REFERENCES

BURCH, P. R. J. 1971. Schizophrenia: Initiation and development. Brit. J. Psychiat. 118:451452, 545.
FISHER, M. 1971. Psychoses in the offspring of

schizophrenic MZ twins and their normal cotwins. Brit. J. Psychiat. 118:43-52. HESTON, L. L. 1970. The genetics of schizophrenia and schizoid disease. Science 167:242-256.

Vol. 20, No. 3

Genetics of Behavior Traits

253

KOLYASKINA, G. I., and S. G. KUSHNER. 1971. The
role of hereditary factors in development of the immunopathological shifts in schizophrenia. Zh. Nevropat. Psikhiat. im S. S. Korsakova 71: 245-247.
KOLYASKINA, G. I., R. R. LIDEMAN, D. V. LOZOVSKY, and D. D. ORLOVSKAYA. 1971. Bio-
logical factors of schizophrenia. Bull. Acad. Med. Sci. USSR 5:59-61.
LOZOVSKY, D. V., and B. P. MISHENKO. 1971. The
membranotropic damaging effects in schizophrenia. Zh. Nevropat. Psikhiat. im. S. S. Korsakova 71:711-717. ODEGARD, O. 1972. The multifactorial theory of inheritance in predisposition to schizophrenia. In A. R. Kaplan (ed.), Genetic factors in schizophrenia. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill.
PHILIP, J., C. H. V. ANDERSON, V. DREYER, E. FREIESLEBEH, H. GURTLER, M. HANGE, F. KISS-
MEYER-NIELSEN, L . S. NIELSEN, M . PERS, E. B.

ROBSON, A. SVEJGAARD, and B. SORENSEN. 1969.
Colour vision deficiency in one of two presumably MZ twins with secondary amenorrhoea. Ann. Hum. Genet. 33:185-195.
ROSENTHAL, D. and S. S. KETY. 1968. The trans-
mission of schizophrenia. Pergamon Press, London.
SHAKHMATOVA, I. V., I. L. AKOPOVA, E. K. LOBOVA,
T. M. SIRYACHENKO, and V. L. SHENDEROVA.
1971. Genealogical studies in schizophrenia. Bull Acad. Med. Sci. USSR 5:46-50. SMITH, C. Heritability of liability and concordance in MZ twins. 1970. Ann. Hum. Genet. 34:85-91.
VANDENBEEG, S. G., V. A. MCKUSICK, and A. B.
MCKUSICK. 1962. Twin data in support of the Lyon hypothesis. Nature 194:505.
VARTANIAN, M. Y. and V. M. GINDILIS. 1972.
Genetic models and biological research in schizophrenia. In A. R. Kaplan (ed.), Genetic factors in schizophrenia. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

