Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Book notes
Thomas J. Bouchard Jr.
To cite this article: Thomas J. Bouchard Jr. (1978) Book notes, Social Biology, 25:2, 166-168, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988334 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988334
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

166

Book Reviews

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

there are regions of the human genome in which variation has little or no detrimental effects on fetal development. At the molecular level, such regions consist of highly repetitive ("satellite") DNA.
The most serious problem with the book, especially for the nonspecialist, concerns the last chapter, authored by Lewandowski and Yunis. Entitled "Phenotypic Mapping in Man," it attempts the assignment of complex phenotypic features to individual chromosomes or chromosomal segments. Presumably, the authors embarked on this highly speculative enterprise stimulated by the dramatic advances in mapping of single gene loci by somatic cell genetic methods. However, in contrast to single gene loci which specify measurableamounts of direct gene products, little is known about the nature or interaction of genes which define complex phenotype features. At present, it is therefore impossible to explain the phenotypic disturbances of chromosomal imbalance by established molecular concepts, such as gene dosage effects or regulatory gene imbalances. For example, unwary male readers might be compelled to clandestinely analyze their chromosomes when they discover that the "phenotypic map" (Fig. 2 in the last chapter) lists chromosome 11 as responsible for quantitative parameters of penile development. Others might simply be confused by the "assignment" of one and the same malformation (e.g., anal atresia) to more than one chromosome. In fact, most of the malformations "mapped" by Lewandowski and Yunis are nonspecific and occur in a variety of chromosomal as well as nonchromosomal syndromes.

plasia of the thymus in partial trisomy for the long arm of chromosome 1 as evidence that "this segment of chromosome 1 is related to normal thymic development." But, they overlook the fact that all of these children experienced severe intrauterine distress prior to birth and that intrauterine distress frequently leads to thymic hypoplasias regardless of whether or not there is an underlying chromosomal defect.
In spite of these caveats, the book can be recommended to all readers who desire up-to-date information on the practical results of the chromosome banding technology in human genetic pathology. These readers might find the introductory chapter by Sanchez and Yunis especially instructive and stimulating. Chapters such as "Classical Chromosome Disorders" (Gorlin), "Syndromes Involving Chromosomes 4, 9 and 12" (Rethore), "Abnormalities of Chromosomes 11 and 20" (Francke), and a few others (Pfeiffer; Wyandt et al.) are definitely "state of the art" and a pleasure to read.
HOLGER HOEHN
Division of Genetic Pathology Department of Pathology SM--30
University of Washington Seattle, Washington
Book Notes
HUMAN FERTILITY: THE BASIC COMPO-
NENTS: By Henri Leriden. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1977. 202 pp. $19.00 (hardbound).

The attempt to assign complex phenotypic features to specific chromosomal segments is further marred by questionable conclusions from clinical observations. For example, Lewandowski and Yunis quote findings of aplasia or severe hypo-

In a revised and expanded version of Aspects Biometriques de la Fecundite Humaine, Leriden takes a scholarly and concise look at the components underlying human fertility--the physiobiological basis of reproduction, fecundability, in-

Vol. 25, No. 2

Book Reviews

167

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

teruterine morality, the nonsusceptible period, permanent sterility, levels of natural fertility, contraception, abortion, and sterilization. All concepts are well designed and treated both conceptually and quantitatively. The methodological pitfalls of different definitions are nicely shown. Two chapters (9 and Appendix B) clearly illustrate the usefulness of models in the study of fertility. The discussion of intrauterine mortality as well as the analysis of birth intervals, while necessarily brief in such a short book, are excellent presentations of the problems. There is a useful classified bibliography of 450 items.
THE COLLECTED PAPERS OF CHARLES
DARWIN. Vols. 1 and 2: Edited by Paul H. Barrett. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1977. 499 pp. $40.00 (two volume set, hardbound).
Darwin's known articles, letters to editors, notes and prefaces to books, excluding three lengthy articles already published in book form, are reprinted in these two volumes. Included also are bibliographies of species collected by Darwin and of his books. The articles are arranged chronologically. The editor has footnoted annotations of many technical terms to facilitate reading by the general reader. Virtually all the articles, including the briefest letters, are a pleasure to read. The ensemble clearly portrays the intellectual breadth, the humility, the humor, and the candidness of one of the world's great scientists.
THE DECLINE OF BELGIAN FERTILITY,
1800-1970: By Ron J. Lesthaeghe. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1977. 278 pp. $16.50(hardbound).
This book is fourth in a series of the decline of fertility in Europe. Belgium is fascinating both because of its cultural

hetrogeneity and its special geographic location with respect to fertility decline. The author makes very clear that non-causal theory of the fertility decline in Europe is not appropriate. Lesthaeghe conveys a clear picture of the sudden change in fertility as influenced by the complex interactions of historical, cultural, and political events. Two important factors, industrialization-urbanization and secularization, can account for two-thirds to threefourths of the regional variations in marital fertility. This book is well worth reading both by professionals in the area of population studies and by those interested in the broad cultural factors that influence patterns of human behavior.
THE POLITICS OF POPULATION CONTROL:
By Thomas B. Littlewood. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, Indiana, 1977. 232 pp. $11.95 (hardbound).
Written by a journalist, this is a popular but not unscholarly treatment of the political complexities underlying the construction of a population policy in the United States. While systematically drawing on statistical sources to demonstrate changing population trends, the treatment is primarily repertorial. The emphasis is on anecdotes and examples and not on systematic coverage and analysis. Nevertheless, a large number of diverse issues are discussed in an informative manner. Of particular interest are the discussions of the role of the Catholic church in inhibiting the dissemination of birth control information, the issue of Cuban immigration and its political ramifications, teen-age illegitimacy, race and political boundaries (e.g., Congressional districts, metropolitan planning), and the consequences of migration to the Sun Belt. This wellwritten book is a good introduction to the area.

168

Book Reviews

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

A HISTORY OF ITALIAN FERTILITY DUR-
ING THE LAST TWO CENTURIES: By
Massimo Livi-Bacci. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1977. 311 pp. $16.50 (hardbound).
Written under the auspices of the Office of Population Research, Princeton University, this book is the third in a series on the decline of European fertility. It documents the overall decline in the birth rate in Italy beginning at the end of the nineteenth century. But it also demonstrates that there was great variation in fertility from time to time and region to region. The evidence also supports the hypothesis of a gradual diffusion of a standard of reduced family size from urban to rural regions and high socioeconomic level to low socioeconomic level. Of striking interest is the currently blurred relationship between fertility and urbanization and the U-shaped relationship between fertility and socioeconomic level.
A regression analysis using six social and economic indicators of provincial populations--proportion married, infant mortality, illiteracy, industrialization, ruralization, and urbanization--was moderately successful. The correlation patterns illuminate probable causal patterns, and the author is cautious about reasoning from aggregate data to individual behavior. The much less than perfect predictions suggest that many other factors will have

to be assessed in order to explain why fertility varies as dramatically as it does from place to place and time to time. A final chapter on fertility determinants-- biological factors, family structure, and selected characteristics of Italian society-- attempts to incorporate nonquantifiable factors and the unique features of this society into the discussion.
URBANIZATION, POPULATION GROWTH,
AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE
PHILIPPINES: By Ernesto del Mar Pernia, Greenwood Press, Westport,Conn., 1977. 213 pp. $17.50 (hardbound).
This book presents data obtained from the census findings in the Philippines during the twentieth century. Of interest is the fact that over the last twenty years, the Philippines have experienced urban growth at a rate similar to Burma, Thailand, and Indonesia. This rate has been much slower than that found for Japan, Taiwan, and the Republic of Korea. Migration contributed substantially (about 50 per cent) to metropolitan growth, but only minimally to other regions. This book will be useful to those interested in Asian demography.
THOMAS J. BOUCHARD, JR.
Department of Psychology University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota

