Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Psychosocial factors in blood pressure variation: A comparative study of young Samoans
Joel M. Hanna
To cite this article: Joel M. Hanna (1996) Psychosocial factors in blood pressure variation: A comparative study of young Samoans, Social Biology, 43:3-4, 169-190, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1996.9988922 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1996.9988922
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 9
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:47

Psychosocial Factors in Blood Pressure Variation: A Comparative Study of Young Samoans

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Joel M. Hanna
Department of Physiology University of Hawaii Honolulu, Hawaii 96822

ABSTRACT: Traditional peoples contacting modern cultures frequently experience increased levels of blood pressure. The aim of this investigation was to identify some acculturation-related psychosocial factors which might contribute to those elevations. Young Samoans living in a traditional village, in modernizing American Samoa, and as migrants in Hawaii were studied. Casual blood pressure, anthropometric measurements, and extensive interview data were collected. The most important factor predicting variation in blood pressure was body mass (BMI). This finding was particularly evident among the acculturated and migrant Samoans. In those locations women's abandonment of breast feeding may contribute to their higher BMI. Among acculturated and migrant women, measures of social support favored lower blood pressures. Among men in all locations a greater number of close social ties was linked to higher blood pressures with the exception of ties with parents. Parental ties were linked to substantially lower blood pressures. A knowledge of Samoan traditions favored lower blood pressure among migrant men, while knowledge of American culture favored higher pressures. Coping strategies and complaint behavior were also significant contributors in all locations.

Traditional peoples exposed to modernized cultures often experience an epidemiological transition. Childhood mortality and infectious disease morbidity are reduced while chronic diseases of adulthood become more pronounced (Hull, 1982; Zimmett, 1979; Taylor et al., 1989; Powles, 1992). This epidemiological transition is often accompanied by increases in body mass and in skinfold thickness (Prior, 1974; Pawson, 1986; Bindon and Baker, 1985; McGarvey, 1991), as well as by more frequent minor health problems such as dental caries and respiratory distress (Corruccini and Kaul, 1983; Stebbins, 1991). From a health perspective there is a change from the symptoms of infectious and nutritional disease to those of chronic disease. These changes are often attributed to

"Westernization" or "modernization," which are state (categorical) variables with limited explanatory power. Although there have been calls for identification of those aspects of culture contact which promote epidemiological change (Murphy, 1982; Cohen, 1978; Marmot and Syme, 1976), progress has been slow.
Among the chronic health risks following acculturation, the most frequently identified is hypertension. Blood pressures increase to potentially pathological levels in a short time and seem to do so at relatively younger ages. Elevations in blood pressure can be linked to coronary and cerebral insult which elevate both morbidity and mortality. The most proximate cause of hypertension is obesity, but this in itself is inadequate to account for all

169

170

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

blood pressure elevations. Psychosocial factors also seem to play a role.
BACKGROUND FACTORS
OBESITY
Of the factors observed in the transition, an increase in body fat and subsequent elevations in blood pressure are most commonly documented. Neither is in itself morbid, but the resulting obesity and hypertension are major risk factors for the development of chronic disease. The importance of obesity is difficult to overestimate for it is the underlying factor leading to chronic hypertension and diabetes (Rocchini, 1990; Cowley, 1992; Reisin et al., 1978; Tuck et al., 1981; Rocchini et al., 1988). Migrants develop obesity in accelerated form (Baker and Hanna, 1981; Bindon and Baker, 1985; Hackenberg et al., 1983) so that their age and blood pressure relationships rapidly approach those of the dominant culture (Cohen, 1978; Hanna and Baker, 1979). Among migrant children, obesity occurs at an early age as do associated elevations in blood pressure (Cohen, 1978; Bindon and Zansky, 1986; McGarvey and Schendel, 1986). The excessive use of tobacco and alcohol also contribute to the overall transition (Graves, 1967; Marshall, 1979, 1991; Stebbins, 1991; Klatsky et al., 1977, 1986), while more frequent births also may elevate migrant women's blood pressures (Scotch, 1963).
Although obesity is a major contributor to the change in health status, it is not a necessary condition. Hypertension, stroke, and diabetes are also found in the non-obese, where their occurrence has been related to psychosocial stressors (Jenkins, 1982; Kasl,

1984; Thiel et al., 1973; Murphy, 1982). Since culture contact is a potentially stressful process, it has been hypothesized that a change in the social environment plays a role as a psychosocial stressor (Wirsing, 1985).
SOCIAL RELATIONS
There is a large body of evidence suggesting that social relationships-- social ties, networks, and the support which they offer--may influence health through buffering or by reducing the level of stress (Caplan, 1974; Cohen and Syme, 1985; Hall and Wellman, 1985; Fiore et al., 1983; Walker et al., 1994). Research has identified several social characteristics which may change during the process of acculturation and become stressors. The overall size of a network seems important because larger networks offer more resources than do smaller ones (Walker et al., 1994). Similarly, the composition of social ties is important. The inclusion of friends, close relatives, and parents has been associated with network support (Stokes, 1983; Wellman and Worthley, 1989; Rock, 1984; Riley and Eckenrode, 1986). The frequency and form of interaction also contributes (Riley and Eckenrode, 1986; Walker et al., 1994) as does the gender of network members (Riley and Eckenrode, 1986; Kessler and McLeod, 1984; Antonucci and Akiyama, 1987; Stokes and Wilson, 1984; Flaherty and Richman, 1989). In each case the process of acculturation or migration may modify network relationships.
INDIVIDUAL ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOR
Individuals are parts of networks, but they also assume personal ap-

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

171

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

proaches to management of psychosocial stressors. These personal adaptations can become important in meeting the stresses arising from the new environment. Graves and Graves (1977, 1985) have identified a Personal Adaptive Strategy (PAS) as such an adaptive process. A migrant can rely upon relatives (Kin), friends and co-workers (Peer), or upon their own resources (Self) to adapt successfully. Depending upon the selection, adaptation can prove stressful or stress-reducing in the coping process following migration. Another type of personal adaptation has been described by Marmot and Syme (1976), who studied Japanese Americans. According to their observations, retention of elements of Japanese culture favored lower blood pressure, hence lower stress, while assimilation of elements from the dominant culture yielded blood pressure elevations. Individual adaptive behaviors may lead to status inconsistency, which has recently been associated with acculturation. According to this paradigm, a large discrepancy between individual status and available resources is stressful (Smith, 1967; Dressier et al., 1987a,b; Dressier, 1990; 1995; Cohen, 1978; Janes, 1990a,b; McGarvey and Schendel, 1986; Bindon et al., 1991). This concept has proven useful in acculturation and migration studies. As a final example of personal adaptive behavior, the expression of affective and physical complaints has been associated with individual levels of stress. A high frequency of physical complaints, or somatization, has been linked with longterm health risk (Kleinman, 1986). Complaints were closely associated with the stresses of acculturation and

assimilation (Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993) or with urbanization (Swartz et al., 1989).
PREVIOUS SAMOAN RESEARCH
Samoans have been exposed to American culture for more than a generation in American Samoa and as migrants to Hawaii and to California (Baker and Hanna, 1981; Baker et al., 1986; Janes, 19906). Causes of death have become more similar to those of modernized populations, while among traditional populations they have not greatly changed, although there is evidence that some transition may now be underway (Baker and Crews, 1986; Taylor et al., 1989). Exposure to American culture has led to substantial elevations in body mass (Pawson, 1986; Pawson and Janes, 1981), in blood pressure (McGarvey and Baker, 1979; McGarvey and Schendel, 1986), and to less favorable blood Hpid patterns (Pelletier and Hornick, 1986).
While obesity is clearly the primary factor contributing to elevated blood pressure, a number of psychosocial stressors have been identified as potential contributors. McGarvey and Baker (1986) studied blood pressure variation on the Island of Tutuila, American Samoa. Those villages they believed to be more "modern" exhibited higher average blood pressures than others. Although aspects of the methodology for village selection have been questioned (Martz, 1982), the importance of culture contact was not. In another study of migrants to Hawaii, those living in rural and heavily Samoan populated towns showed higher blood pressures than those living in urban public housing. This result was observed after

172

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

adjustment for age and body fat and holds the implication that some aspects of migrant Samoan culture may differentially influence blood pressure. One of those aspects may be demands placed upon migrants by migrant networks. Studies of migrants to San Francisco (Janes, 1990a,fr), San Diego (DuBois, 1989), Honolulu (Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993) and to New Zealand (Macpherson, 1978, 1979) have documented stressful descriptions of ethnic networks requiring contributions of time, resources, and money. Status inconsistency (or lifestyle incongruity) seems to be another factor implicated in blood pressure elevation among Samoans. Its influence has been observed among older Samoans in American Samoa and San Francisco (Bindon et al., 1991; Janes, 1990). In their comprehensive summary of Samoan blood pressure from several locations, McGarvey and Schendel (1986) also found status incongruity as an important psychosocial factor. In addition, they identified education, complaint behavior, emotional depression, and numbers of children (for acculturated mothers) as potential stressors. For each factor there were modest associations with blood pressure.
Thus, some elevations in blood pressure among Samoans may reflect the contributions of psychosocial stressors arising from contact between Samoan and American culture. However, with the exception of the work of McGarvey and Schendel (1986), each inquiry has described a single location such as American Samoa, Hawaii, or California. McGarvey and Schendel have summarized observations from several different locations, made at different times, with various age group-

ings, and with different methodologies and protocols. A truly comparative study of psychosocial variation and blood pressure has yet to be described. Likewise, most investigations have focused upon mature adults with chronic diseases, but morbid associations with chronic disease are typically established years or decades prior to the appearance of symptoms. Chronic hypertension, diabetes, tobacco-induced disease, and other pathological states develop slowly. In order to understand more fully the casual relationships, it will be necessary to examine a younger cohort at risk, a cohort which is experiencing the stressors, but at a time before the gross pathological changes become fully established. The present investigation attempts to accomplish these aims. It applies a uniform methodology to three populations of young adults at differing levels of exposure to American culture.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Samoan adults between 18 and 37 years were studied at three locations. Forty-seven (22 males, 25 females) individuals lived in a Western Samoan village located on the island of Savai'i. The site was selected because it was identified as one of the most remote and least acculturated villages still to be found in Western Samoa (WS). The sample included a large portion of the young adults in the village. In American Samoa (AS), another 48 individuals (26 males, 22 females) from seven villages in the Pago-Pago area were recruited. These were young adults who had participated in an earlier study and were restudied five years later. They represent a sample of

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

173

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

young Samoans who did not migrate in the interim and have been described earlier in some detail (Pearson and Hanna, 1989; Hanna et al., 1990). In Hawaii (HI), 48 young Samoans (22 males, 26 females) were interviewed. They were residents of urban Honolulu living mostly in public housing. Most were immigrants, only a few had been born in Hawaii, but all had been resident in Hawaii for at least three years. A discussion of the social network characteristics and family relations of these groups has been provided by Fitzgerald and Howard (1990). Similarly, a detailed description of the lifestyle of each population has been presented in other reports (Fitzgerald, 1989; Pearson, 1989). Some characteristics of this sample are provided in Table 1.
Casual blood pressure was measured on several occasions after the individual had been at rest for at least one-half hour. In the case of extreme variation repeated measures were taken and the lowest blood pressure recorded. Systolic and diastolic pressures were measured with a mercury sphygmomanometer. With few exceptions the same person recorded all pressures. Anthropometric measurements (Table 1) followed the procedures of Weiner and Laurie (1969).
Each participant provided detailed information concerning several aspects of health, lifestyle, opinions, and social relationships during structured interviews. There were eight distinct protocols requiring several hours of interviews over several days. Included was a circle diagram containing numbers, names, and degree of association with friends and relatives (see House and Kahn, 1985). There was also a trun-

cated genealogy which included one generation above and one generation below ego. There was a 25-item graduated test of knowledge of Samoan concepts, and a similar 20-item multiple choice list of American cultural items. Previous reports have discussed details of their construction and employment (Fitzgerald and Howard, 1990; Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993; Fitzgerald, 1989; Hanna, nd).
SOCIAL NETWORKS AND SUPPORT
The circle diagram and the genealogy provided information concerning social ties, interactions, and exchanges. Each participant was presented with a diagram of four concentric circles. Ego was the center circle, and those people to whom he/she felt closest ("I cannot imagine life without them") were placed in the next concentric circle. The second concentric circle included people he/she liked, but were not so close. The outermost concentric circle included the rest of the people he/she knew. For each person named, information as to gender, relationship, frequency of contact, type of interaction, place of residence, and ethnicity was requested. A total of 5,947 individuals were so identified. Each was placed in a category CLOSE, MID, or DISTANT depending upon their perceived closeness to ego as shown by circle position. Family relationships for each named person on the circle were categorized as CLOSE FAMILY (parents, sibs, and children), NEAR FAMILY (grandparents, parents' sibs, and cousins), DISTANT FAMILY (all more remote relatives), and AFFINE (those related by marriage). A fifth category was derived from the names on the circle diagram, FRIENDS,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

174

Hanna

Social Biology

TABLE 1
MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS"

SAMPLE
CHARACTERISTICS
Men Age (years) Married Employed Height (cm) Weight (kg)6 BMI" Mean SF (mm)6 Systolic Pres. (mm) Diastol. Pres. (mm) Income ($/year) Birth Place

Western
Samoa
N=22 23.6 (3.4)
8 7 173.1 (4.7) 73.5 (7.1) 24.43 (2.5) 9.2 (4.4) 128.9 (9.9) 76.6 (11.3) $648 WS 21, AS 1

American Samoa
N=26 24.2 (5.4)
6 19 174.2 (5.3) 86.6 (13.0) 28.5 (5.4) 17.1 (7.3) 127.0 (7.4) 83.3 (8.5) $3255 AS 25, HI 1

Women Age (years) Married Employed Height (cm) Weight (kg)* BMI* Mean SF (mm)* Systolic Pres. (mm) Diastol. Pres. (mm) Income ($/year) Birth Place

N=25 23.6 (3.5)
14 7 161.3 (4.2) 65.0 (7.9) 25.0 (2.6) 18.6 (7.0) 121 (12.6) 74.0 (11.7) $314 WS 25

N=22 23.3 (4.2)
5
12
162.6 (5.1)
78.5 (14.6) 29.7 (5.4) 25.2 (8.4) 113 (10.0) 74.2 (10.6)
$3785 WS 1,AS 21

"WS. Western Samoa: AS. American Samoa: HI. Hawaii: CA. California. ^Statistically significant difference between locations (see text for explanation).

Hawaii
N=22 26.3 (5.4)
12 13 175.3 (4.7) 92.9 (16.9) 30.1 (4.6) 20.2 (7.6) 130.4 (15.2) 77.3 (11.4) $8823 WS 3,AS 18 HI1
N=26 24.4 (4.2)
15 13 163.7 (4.5) 86.6 (14.3) 32.3 (5.4) 30.7 (8.2) 118.2 (9.3) 75.5 (9.6) $4223 WS 5, AS 13 HI 7, CA 1

which included friends and coworkers. ties described by each informant-- In addition to frequency, interactions their perceived closeness, their relawere characterized by types of assis- tionship, andthedegree andtypesof tance. EMOTIONAL SUPPORT was regular interaction. the sum of the individuals who were available when the informant was sad, MEASURES OF ADAPTATION OR COPING mad, or needed advice. INSTRU- From the several protocols, a perMENTAL SUPPORT was the number sonal adaptive strategy wasconof individuals who provided foodand structed (Graves and Graves, 1977, gifts, assisted with social obligationsor 1985). This strategy was based upon gave or loaned money. For each type about thirty items inwhich the subject of support the number of named indi- chose kin, peers, or self tomake decividuals who fulfilled these conditions sions or solve problems. Thesum of was summed. The circle diagram thus the number of choices in each category provided several aspects of the social became the KIN, PEER, or SELF PAS

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

175

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

variable. As part of a health history, there was a list of 91 items (mostly symptoms) covering physical and mental health as well as aspects of affect and minor annoyances. The TOTAL SYMPTOMS score was the total number of symptoms checked, the SOMATIC SYMPTOMS included those referring to specific physical pains and problems, while the AFFECT SYMPTOMS described the total number of specific emotional symptoms listed. HASSLES during the last thirty days from the Hassles and Uplifts Scale were also included (Kanner et al., 1981).
The SAMOAN CONCEPTS score was the number of correct responses on a 25-item multiple choice test of Samoan concepts. The items were graduated from easy to difficult. U.S. CONCEPTS was the number of correct answers on a 20-item test involving middle-class American concepts. A higher score on U.S. CONCEPTS reflected greater assimilation of American knowledge.
Table 2 summarizes the variables and indices employed in the present investigation. During analysis, each variable or index was standardized (ztransformation) by site and by gender to make them comparable. They were then employed as independent variables in a stepwise multiple regression with systolic or diastolic blood pressures as dependent variables. BMI, as a measure of obesity, was also included as an independent variable to determine its relative predictive power. If the multiple regression continued for an excessive number of steps, it was arbitrarily terminated when less than an additional 3 per cent of the variation

was explained. Table 3 summarizes regression relationships by gender and location for BMI, social, and personal adaptation variables.
Status incongruity was examined following Janes (1990a) with the discrepancy between status and resources investigated from two perspectives. The first was from within the Samoan community, and the second was in relation to the dominant society (in American Samoa and Hawaii). Within the Samoan community, status was derived from community involvement as evidenced by organization affiliation, offices held, chiefly titles and other measures of social participation. Resources available were personal income, tangible aid and other nonfinancial assistance from friends and family, as taken from the circle diagram. Status with respect to dominant society was determined through occupational classification. Four categories of occupation (housewife/farmer, unskilled, skilled, professional) were compared to education and training as well as to resources (financial and nonfinancial) available. In a technique employed by Dressier (Dressier et al., 1987a,b; Dressier, 1990), each measure of status and of resources was standardized. The sum of the resources was then subtracted from the status, yielding a difference. Those with the largest discrepancy between status and resources show the greatest difference while those with less discrepancy show smaller differences.
Some individual characteristics were also investigated. These included educational level (years of formal schooling), employment status (employed vs. unemployed), marital

176

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
PSYCHOSOCIAL VARIABLES

Variables
Network or Support Variables
TOTAL SIZE CLOSE FAMILY NEAR FAMILY
DISTANT FAMILY AFFINE FAMILY FRIENDS GENDER INTERACTION
EMOTION SUPPORT
INSTRUMENTAL SUPPORT
CLOSE
MID
DISTANT
Personal Coping Variables SELF PAS PEER PAS KIN PAS U.S. CONCEPTS SAMOAN CONCEPTS SOMATIC COMPLAINTS
AFFECTIVE COMPLAINTS
TOTAL COMPLAINTS FREQ HASSLES PRESSURE

Components
Total number of individuals named on the circle Number of parent, child, sib, spouse named on the circle Number of grandparents, uncle, aunt, cousins named on the circle Number of other relatives named on the circle
Number of spouse's family named on the circle Number of friends or coworkers named on the circle Gender of each named individual Sum of eight different kinds of interactions with each individual named Number of times of emotional support or advice was offered on a regular basis by the named individual Number of loans, physical assistance, or gifts of items or food received on a regular basis by the named individual Number of persons in the inner concentric of the circle diagram Number of persons in the intermediate concentric of the circle diagram Number of persons in the outer concentric of the circle diagram
Score on self portion of PAS Score on kin portion of PAS Score on peer portion of PAS Score on 20-item test of American Middle Class concepts Score on 25-item test of Traditional Samoan concepts Number of physical complaints on 91 item health symptoms checklist Number of emotional complaints on 91 item health symptoms checklist Total complaints on 91 item health symptoms checklist Number of hassles reported for the last month Perceived pressure in everyday life

status, coffee drinking, tobacco use (smokers vs. nonsmokers), and alcohol use (drinkers vs. nondrinkers).
RESULTS
ANTHROPOMETRIC VARIABLES
Variation in body mass (BMI) and blood pressure was examined by analysis of variance. A two-way analysis of variance indicated significant BMI differences by gender and by site. BMI

was higher in women than in men, and Western Samoan values were lower than those from American Samoa and Hawaii, the latter being about equal (Table 1).
The systolic and diastolic blood pressures of men were statistically higher than women, but there were no statistical differences between locations (Table 1). Although the systolic and diastolic pressures are within the ranges described in earlier studies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

177

TABLE 3
PREDICTORS OF SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC BLOOD PRESSURES"

SYSTOLIC PRESSURE

Variable
Men Western Samoa CLOSE FAMILY SELF PAS , HASSLES CLOSE

Effect
+ + + +

American Samoa CLOSE AFFECTIVE COMPLAINTS. U.S. CONCEPTS SELF PAS

DIASTOLIC PRESSURE
Variable

Effect

0.08 CLOSE FAMILY

+ 0.40

0.16 INSTRUMENTAL SUPPORT .... - 0.46

0.30

0.44

0.14 CLOSE 0.22 SELF PAS 0.28 TOTAL COMPLAINTS. 0.33 U.S. CONCEPTS
BMI

+ 0.14 - 0.31 + 0.42 - 0.51 + 0.64

Hawaii
BMI SELF PAS CLOSE SOMATIC COMPLAINTS.... SAMOAN CONCEPTS U.S. CONCEPTS Women Western Samoa BMI

+ + + +
+

0.29 BMI 0.40 SAMOAN CONCEPTS 0.57 U.S. CONCEPTS 0.60 0.66 0.70
0.37 CLOSE FAMILY. BMI

+ 0.35 - 0.41 + 0.56
0.28 0.46

American Samoa BMI TOTAL COMPLAINTS EMOTIONAL SUPPORT HASSLES

+ 0.13 BMI + 0.30 SOMATIC COMPLAINTS. - 0.44 EMOTIONAL SUPPORT.. + 0.48

- -20 + 0.34 - -43

Hawaii BMI TANGIBLE SUPPORT

+ 0.27 PRESSURE
- 0.31 TOTAL COMPLAINTS. BMI

+ 0.25 + 0.38 + 0.48

"Variables are listed in order of entry. Effect is + or - influence on pressure. R2 is total explained variation in blood pressure.

(Bindon and Baker, 1985; McGarvey and Schendel, 1986; Pawson and Janes, 1981; Hanna and Baker, 1979), they show no apparent acculturation or migration effect. It may be concluded that the influence of culture contact and migration are not fully expressed in these samples. Perhaps they have not reached an age where these effects can be observed.

A number of anthropometric variables, including height, weight, body mass index (BMI), several measures of skeletal dimensions, skinfold thickness at six sites and their sum, were then regressed on systolic and diastolic blood pressures. For men the best single predictor was BMI, but for women BMI and mid-axillary skinfold thickness were of similar value. Because BMI

178

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

has been found to be predictive of obesity among Polynesians (Evans and Prior, 1969), it was employed in most further analysis. There were significant associations between systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, and BMI in all female samples and in migrant males. Age and blood pressure correlations were not statistically significant, again reflecting the youth and limited age range of the samples.
PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS
The effects of smoking, drinking alcohol, drinking coffee, educational level, being unemployed, being married, and place of birth yielded no significant differences in blood pressure when compared by analysis of variance.
A history of pregnancy did not influence blood pressure in a pooled sample of all women (n = 75), nor did regressions of systolic and diastolic blood pressure on number of children show statistical significance. A r-test contrasting women with children against those with no children also yielded no statistical differences. However, among acculturated women (HI, AS), a history of pregnancy did seem to have some influence on subcutaneous fat thickness. In American Samoa and Hawaii, the sum of six skinfold measurements were significantly greater in women with one or more children than in women with no children (F=2.4, df 1/46, p< 0.05). This finding was largely the result of differences in the sub-scapular and suprailiac skinfold sites. The values were 36.0 mm vs. 43.2 mm for sub-scapular and 33.6 mm vs. 40.0 mm for suprailiac. There were no significant age cor-

relations. There was no similar variation among Western Samoan women. In acculturated women multiple births had an additive effect on skinfold thickness, that is, the thickness differential increased with a greater number of children.
NETWORKS AND SUPPORT
There was a clear association between measures of social support and blood pressure. In all cases INSTRUMENTAL and EMOTIONAL support were associated with lower blood pressures. Support associations seem more characteristic of acculturated (AS, HI) women (Table 3).
Among men there is a pattern of associations between the number of individuals perceived as being CLOSE ("I cannot imagine life without them") and elevations in blood pressure. For Western Samoan men, the association was with close family members (CLOSE FAMILY), but 91 per cent of the CLOSE FAMILY were also CLOSE, hence these variables are measuring the same factor. To investigate this association, the CLOSE category was subdivided in three dimensions. First, CLOSE individuals were divided into the following relationship categories, (a) parents, (b) spouse and children, (c) sibs, (d) other family, and (e) friends and coworkers. This division was based upon the assumption that different relationships offer differing types of support (Walker et al., 1994) and could thus influence blood pressure. A second dimension was the degree of interaction with each individual who was named as CLOSE. This subdivision was based upon a concept that more frequent and varied interaction would distinguish supportive rela-

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

179

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

tionships. INTERACTION was derived from the eight types of interactions described from the circle diagram. The resulting nine point scale (8 through 16) was equally categorized into High, Medium, and Low. The third dimension was the gender of the named person. This dimension was included because of the differential influence of men and women as members of networks (Kessler and McLeod, 1984; Riley and Eckenrode, 1986; Walker et al, 1994). These three categories-- relationship, interaction, and genderwere employed as independent variables in a multiway analysis of variance. This analysis revealed only the presence of parents in the CLOSE category had an influence on blood pressure. The parent category was linked to significantly lower blood pressures than other relationship categories, the values falling more than 4 mmHg for systolic and diastolic pressures. Thus, except for parents, an increasing number of CLOSE individuals leads to increased blood pressure, regardless of relationship, amount of interaction, or gender of the named individual.
PERSONAL ADAPTIVE VARIABLES AND
COPING
There was a general association between complaint behavior (SOMATIC SYMPTOMS, AFFECT SYMPTOMS, TOTAL SYMPTOMS, HASSLES) and blood pressure (Table 3). The extensive interviews implicated many of these complaints resulted from acculturation experiences (Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993). Largely among women, there were also associations between measures of recent support (INSTRUMENTAL, EMO-

TIONAL) and blood pressure. In all cases support is related to reduced blood pressure.
For men, two other personal associations were evident (Table 3). First, degree of cultural knowledge is related to blood pressure in those men exposed to American culture. Among migrant men (HI) a knowledge of Samoan cultural concepts (SAMOAN CONCEPTS) was associated with lower systolic and diastolic pressures (Table 3). Thus, cultural knowledge and identity had a positive effect on blood pressure in Hawaii. As a contrast, knowledge of American middleclass concepts (U.S. CONCEPTS) associated with higher blood pressure in migrant men. Assimilation of American cultural knowledge appears to have been stressful among migrants (HI). In American Samoa that knowledge yielded lower blood pressures (Table 3). Second, there was a relationship between men's employment of a self-reliant personal adaptive strategy (SELF PAS) and blood pressure. In Western Samoa SELF PAS was linked to elevations in blood pressure while in the other locations it was associated with decreased blood pressure.
Evaluation of status inconsistency yielded negative results. The discrepancy model, which posits a gap between resources and status, was not supported. In Western Samoa there were no significant relationships when blood pressure was regressed on community status as compared to monetary income or other resources available. In the acculturated communities there was no apparent relationship with community status, job status, income, or other resources.

180

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Thus, several kinds of blood pressure relationships were identified. Most evident was the importance of body mass (BMI) in prediction of blood pressure in women and in migrant men. Of the network variables, with the single exception of parents, a larger number of reported close ties related to higher blood pressure. Social support had a beneficial effect, reducing blood pressures. Personal adaptive techniques also influenced blood pressures. Complaint behavior was linked with higher blood pressure, and many of the complaints by acculturated Samoans (AS, HI) were the results of interactions with American culture. For migrant men a Samoan cultural knowledge was associated with reduced blood pressure, but a knowledge of American culture yielded elevations in blood pressure. A self-reliant coping strategy was important for men in all locations.
DISCUSSION
Some characteristics of the samples should be noted in considering blood pressure relationships. First, this is a sample of young adults and cannot be considered representative of all age groups in the Samoan population. It is further apparent that the symptoms of chronic disease are not yet manifest, nor are the well-documented effects of alcohol, smoking, and obesity evident. Yet many of the preconditions for their development must be present if these young adults are to develop the previously identified patterns of risk. Second, although the American and Western Samoan samples are probably representative of young adults in those communities, the Hawaii sample may

not be so widely representative because they were drawn from public housing, a subpopulation which has lower casual blood pressures than migrants living in rural Hawaii (Hanna and Baker, 1979).
ANTHROPOMETRIC VARIABLES
The most common result of migration or acculturation is an increase in body mass reflecting an accumulation of body fat (Prior, 1974; Pawson, 1986; Bindon and Baker, 1985; McGarvey, 1991). This increase is the primary risk factor for development of many chronic diseases and is clearly present in this study. The traditional villagers have significantly lower BMI than either the acculturated American Samoans or the migrants to Hawaii (Table 1). Because this is a relatively young sample, the elevations in blood pressure which accompany higher in BMI can be anticipated within a few years.
Factors contributing to elevations of BMI in migrant or acculturating Samoans remain to be identified. A simple dietary explanation seems unlikely (Hanna et al., 1986), but a change in activity levels is possible. Western Samoans daily engage in more strenuous work than their acculturated peers and, when the latter are required to engage in strenuous effort, they secrete stress hormones at a significantly higher level (Pearson et al., 1990). Thus, a daily activity differential can probably account for some of the observed BMI variation.
The work presented here suggests that the number of pregnancies may also contribute to higher body mass in some women. In the acculturated locations (AS, HI), skinfold thickness is greater in women after childbirth and

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

181

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

further increases with the number of children. Bindon's (1985) study of Samoan breast feeding practices suggests an explanation. He reports that only about 40 per cent of American Samoan children under five months of age are breastfed, while in Western Samoa the percentage is 89. Fitzgerald (1993) further observes that breast feeding is of longer duration and with less supplementation in the rural villages of Western Samoa. Hence, the active Western Samoan mothers may be expending substantially more caloric energy in lactation than their American Samoan and Hawaiian sisters. The caloric cost of lactation can be high, more than 850 Kcal per day (National Academy of Sciences, 1974), and should have a significant influence on energy balance. Thus, it can be hypothesized that abandonment of breast feeding may contribute to greater postpartum fat retention, higher BMI, and ultimately to higher blood pressure in acculturated women. The process is amplified as the number of children increases. A similar relationship to blood pressure has been described by Scotch (1963) in his classic paper. This hypothesis is further supported by interview data in which women in the acculturated sites recognized that pregnancy was an important source of weight gain. Women in American Samoa and in Hawaii reported weight gain followed pregnancy, but Western Samoan women did not (Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993). There are clearly additional factors involved, but limitation of breast feeding may be a contributory aspect of the elevation of BMI following acculturation.
McGarvey and Schendel (1986) have reported a reduced blood pres-

sure among women born in Western Samoa, when women with fewer than five children were contrasted with women with more than five children. Unfortunately, they also included women with no children among their lower group so that equivalent evaluations cannot be made.
SOCIAL SUPPORT AND NETWORKING
There is an extensive literature on social support, social networking, and their influence on health (Caplin, 1974; Gottleib, 1981; Cohen and Syme, 1985; Wasserman and Galaskiewicz, 1994). Much of that literature is concerned with mortality, especially among the elderly, or employs subjective reports of well being. This study identifies two areas where networking and support may have a direct physiological effect upon blood pressure.
In this investigation, the CLOSE category describes a series of social ties which are part of an ego-generated network. While these are a series of dyads rather than a network, the results are suggestive. Network research has shown that larger networks may offer greater social support by virtue of their larger resource base (Walker et al., 1994). It would seem to follow that greater support should favor lower, rather than higher, blood pressures. Therefore, the significant relationship between the number of CLOSE ties and higher blood pressure presently observed may seem anomalous. However, it is now recognized that social ties--especially close ties--are complex relationships. Each contains a number of dimensions which extend beyond simple feelings of closeness or feelings of support (Hall and Wellman, 1985; Walker, Wasserman and

182

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Wellman, 1994; Riley and Eckenrode, 1986). Some close ties are stressful even within supportive networks. Origins of stress include problematic interactions, unmet expectations for support, and temporal changes in relations (Rook, 1984; Fiore et al., 1983). According to this view, as network size increases so does the opportunity for a greater accumulation of stressful interactions. Moreover, network members develop empathy. Unfortunate events for one member can cause distress throughout the network (Eckenrode and Gore, 1981; Kessler and McLeod, 1984). Thus, larger networks also provide an opportunity for accumulation of stressful events. Kirchbaum et al. (1995) have called this a "boomerang" effect of support.
An important exception to the multidimensional nature of social ties seems to be the relationship between parents and adult children. Research in the United States and the Western world has suggested that this is a strong and usually supportive relationship. Walker et al. (1994, p. 59) conclude the relationship between parent and adult child is "the strongest of all intimate and active ties," which provides a broad range of support unmatched by other associations. In this study, when the CLOSE category was subdivided, only the parent-adult-child category yielded lower blood pressure. All other close relationships were similar, averaging more than 4 mmHg higher. The . magnitude of the difference is physiologically significant. Thus, a close parental relationship among young Samoans has a strong and beneficial influence on their blood pressure, which, if sustained, could ultimately influence health in later years.

This investigation has identified an association between social support, gender, and variation in blood pressure. The results support the substantial literature suggesting that social support has a buffering or stressreducing capacity (Caplan, 1974; Cohen and Syme, 1985; Hall and Wellman, 1985; Fiore et al., 1983; Walker et al., 1994; Wasserman and Galaskiewicz, 1994). Those individuals with the greatest support should experience the lower blood pressures in stressful situations. This association is particularly evident in Table 3 where instrumental or emotional support is associated with lower blood pressures in acculturating (AS) and migrant women (HI).
There is also substantial evidence that men and women differ in their responses to stress, including differing patterns of response in blood pressure (James and Pickering, 1993; Allen et al., 1993; Linden et al., 1993) and in excretion of stress hormones (Kirschbaum et al., 1995; Hanna, ms.). The combination of stress, gender differences, and social support make the picture somewhat complex. Women under stress respond more intensely to their social environment, but they also benefit more substantially from support than do men (Riley and Eckenrode, 1986; Kessler and McLeod, 1984; Antonucci and Akiyama, 1987; Stokes and Wilson, 1984; Flaherty and Richman, 1989). In the present study there is a clear suggestion that women are more responsive to perceived support and those effects are most evident among women who are potentially exposed to the highest levels of stress. That is, the associations are clearest and strongest among acculturating and

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

183

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

migrant women (Table 3). This finding supports a hypothesis that social support has a beneficial effect on blood pressure during culture change, and that this beneficial effect is most clearly evident among women. As noted in Table 3, blood pressure relationships are evident in traditional men (WS) and in acculturating (AS) and migrant women (HI). In each case there is an inverse association between the amount of instrumental or emotional support received and blood pressure. The more frequent associations among women underlines their greater sensitivity. There seems to be no overall pattern to support relationships other than agreement that accumulation of such support yielded lower levels of stress as evidenced by lower blood pressures. These physiological observations confirm the voluminous support literature (Caplan, 1974; Gottleib, 1981; Cohen and Syme, 1985).
INDIVIDUAL ADAPTIVE STRATEGIES
Several individual coping strategies have been identified and associated with variations in blood pressure. Among men a SELF PAS seems important. It is linked to blood pressure elevations in Western Samoa and to reductions in Hawaii and American Samoa. Due to the process of Americanization in the latter locations, self reliance is viewed as appropriate behavior, hence lower levels of blood pressure follow (Table 3). In traditional Samoa, with its family orientation, self reliance is not a valued behavior (Graves and Graves, 1977). Elevated blood pressures suggest it can be a stressful adaptation. Sutter (1980), who studied Western Samoan children during their first school year,

reported adjustment problems for children who were forced to become self reliant. When required to do their own school work, some children were unable to adapt. They dropped out of school rather than engage in individual problem solving or otherwise work for themselves in the classroom, although they had no problems working with other children toward group solutions. Their level of stress was clear from elevations in stress hormones excreted during the school week. James et al. (1985), who investigated hormone excretion among Western Samoan men, also found the highest levels of hormone excretion among self-reliant students in a Western Samoan college. But, some aspects of Samoan life do require a measure of self promotion, however stressful it may seem. Movement up the social hierarchy requires a degree of initiative and self promotion especially for young men (Janes, 1990a). They are attempting to achieve status, prestige, and leadership positions within the community. This movement requires mobilization of self and family resources, often in competition with other young men within the family. Thus, the association of high blood pressure with self promotion in Western Samoa may reflect the general stresses in this age group trying to gain status. As shown in Table 3, it is also these men who benefit most greatly from instrumental support.
Another adaptive technique is evident in complaint behavior expressed by men and women (Table 3). Complaints included SOMATIC SYMPTOMS, AFFECT SYMPTOMS, and HASSLES. In an earlier paper (Hanna and Fitzgerald, 1993) it was determined that the expression of

184

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

complaints in Western Samoa was largely a manifestation of overwork or boredom with village life, while in the other sites complaints concerned the stresses of acculturation. There was a strong element of somatization, with anxiety displaced into headaches, joint pains, tiredness, dizziness, and hyperventilation. A similar pattern of increased somatization has been observed with urbanization among residents of the United States, but the pattern is more characteristic of women than of men (Swartz et al., 1989). In his survey of symptomology in China and America, Kleinman (1986) suggested that somatization is common and reflects a variety of physical and psychosocial stressors. In extreme form it may portend future mental illness, but most commonly it provides a culturally acceptable mode of communication of distress. Complaint behavior is common in Samoa (Howard, 1986), in other migrant Samoan communities (Janes, l990a,b; DuBois, 1989), in China, and in Western culture (Kleinman, 1986), but it has not often been linked to specific physiological response. The present results suggest that general complaints may also reflect a channeling of blood pressure in younger adults, which could foreshadow the development of high blood pressure during the later decades of life.
McGarvey and Schendel (1986) also reported complaints associated with blood pressure in an American Samoa sample. In contrast to this study, they reported higher blood pressures were linked to fewer expressed complaints. Their instrument was the Cornell Medical Index which is a simple instrument providing for limited responses. The

present investigation employed extensive interviews which required a number of hours of interaction and enabled a degree of rapport not possible in a brief survey. Thus, respondents were more likely to expand responses and to give a more detailed picture of their underlying distress.
For migrant men another index of coping behavior is associated with knowledge of Samoan culture as determined by the SAMOAN CONCEPTS test. There is a strong negative relationship with blood pressure among these men. Retention of cultural identification has been hypothesized to provide a framework aiding in stress reduction during acculturation (Marmot and Syme, 1976; Cohen, 1978; Hull, 1979; Murphy, 1982) and has been linked to lower blood pressures during acculturation. For example, Marmot and Syme (1976), employing a sample of Japanese Americans, concluded those who retained a primarily Japanese orientation showed lower blood pressures than those who had assimilated elements of American cultural behavior. Hackenberg et al. (1983) came to similar conclusions in a Philippine survey. They contrasted four groups--migrants, sedentary, urban, and rural Filipinos--to determine the relative influence of migration and acculturation on blood pressure. Migration was less important than cultural assimilation in blood pressure variation. Those individuals who assimilated less of the dominant culture also retained the lower blood pressures. Thus, among Japanese Americans, Filipinos, and Samoan migrants, retention of an orientation toward the natal culture may prove beneficial for maintenance of resting blood pressure, per-

Vol. 43, No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

185

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

haps also providing a long-term reduction in risk for development of chronic disease.
The influence of U.S. CONCEPTS varied according to location. For migrant men (HI), assimilation of knowledge of the dominant, but nonnatal, culture was associated with elevations. This effect of assimilation has been observed elsewhere (Marmot and Syme, 1976; Hackenberg et al., 1983). For young American Samoan men, a knowledge of American culture elements bears the opposite relationship to blood pressure. A greater knowledge of AMERICAN CONCEPTS yielded lower blood pressures (Table 3). While the cause of this relationship for American Samoans is not immediately clear, there are limited opportunities for employment on the Island of Tutuila and most of them are related to contact with American culture. Working in the fish cannery, the bank, for the Territorial Government, or in many of the businesses requires some knowledge of things American. In addition, during the school years of this cohort, much of the educational system was taught over television from programs oriented to the American Mainland. Those individuals with a greater knowledge of things American may simply be better adapted to an acculturated lifestyle so long as their culture of upbringing remains dominant.
Status incongruity was not supported as a predictor of blood pressure in any research location. These findings contrast with research elsewhere (Smith, 1967; Dressier, 1985; Dressier et al., 1987a,b) and with other studies of Samoans (Janes, 1990a,b; McGarvey and Schendel, 1986; Bindon et al., 1991). The lack of association in

this work may result in part from either the relative youth of the sample or from the status incongruity model employed. This study examined the discrepancy between status and resources. Recent work by Dressier (1991) and by Bindon et al. (1991) has shown that an accretion model may be more useful. According to that approach, the stressor is an accretion of material items and behaviors from the dominant culture which cannot be supported with the available resources (Dressier et al., 1987a,6). Appropriate data to examine this alternative approach are not available.
There is a lack of association between some established risk factors (smoking, drinking, or education level) and blood pressure in the present investigation. While this is not a unique finding (see Hackenberg et al., 1983), the strength of such relationships seems well established. It would appear that the narrow age range and the relative youth of the present samples would preclude an expression of these associations. Just as the morbidity of cigarette smoking may require twenty years for expression (Stebbens, 1991), these factors may also require some time for full expression.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This investigation has contrasted three samples of young adult Samoans living in communities which differ in their degree of exposure to American culture. The focus was upon factors which might lead to future elevations in blood pressure and to chronic hypertension. The clearest result of acculturation or migration was an increase in

186

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

body mass (BMI), especially among women. Due to the youth of the sample there was no corresponding elevation in blood pressure, and it was hypothesized that this will occur in the future as this cohort ages. In agreement with evidence that dietary and behavior patterns in acculturated locations favor obesity, this study suggests that number of pregnancies may also make some contribution. It is suggested that abandonment of breastfeeding contributes to postpartum fat retention, which then favors elevations in women's blood pressure.
Migration and acculturation also have a potential for modification of social networks and support relationships. In all locations, emotional and instrumental support are associated with reduced blood pressures suggesting a supportive function. This finding lends some credence to the concept that social support reduces the level of stress or offers some stress buffering. This study did not examine social networking in a comprehensive manner, but did consider limited social ties. Among men there was a clear association between the number of close ties and increases in blood pressure. Larger networks may yield more problematic close ties and prove to be more stressful than smaller ones. The important exception was social ties to parents which was linked to a significant reduction in blood pressure. The parentadult-child association has often been identified as supportive for the child, and according to this investigation, that association is also found in Samoan communities regardless of their degree of exposure to American culture.

Individual coping behaviors also reflect aspects of adaptation to the migrant environment. A relatively greater knowledge of Samoan concepts yielded reduced blood pressures in migrant men, suggesting a retention of cultural identity may have favorable health consequences. On the other hand, a greater knowledge of American concepts yielded higher blood pressures. As has been noted in other investigations, cultural assimilationexchange of elements of traditional culture for those of the dominant culture--provides for elevated health risk during acculturation. Another coping behavior clearly related to acculturation was the employment of self reliance. For traditional Samoan men, self reliance was stressful, but perhaps necessary, while in the acculturated communities it seems to have been stress reducing. It was argued that self reliance is rewarded in American culture, but considered non-Samoan by traditional villagers.
A final aspect of personal coping strategies was the expression of complaint behavior. In all locations there was a positive association between frequency of complaints--physical, emotional, hassles--and blood pressure. The interesting difference is in the content of the complaints. In the acculturated environments they largely concerned contact with American culture, while in traditional Samoa they concerned village life. The content was different, but the results were similar.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author expresses thanks to Dr. M. H. Fitzgerald, Dr. J. D. Pearson, and

Vol. 43, No. 3 - 4

Blood Pressure

187

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

Dr. A. Howard for assistance and advice. moan assistants for their help. This work Special thanks to Chief Lilomiava Galai,to was supported by a grant from NIMH, the Samoan participants, and to the Sa- #MH 40675.

REFERENCES

ALLEN, M. T., C. STONEY, J. F. OWENS, and K.

minor chronic non-infectious diseases.Med.

MATTHEWS. 1993. Hemodynamic adjust-

Anthrop. 7:36-47.

ments to laboratory stress: The influence of COWLEY, A. W. 1992. Long-term control of ar-

gender and personality. Psychosom. Med. terial blood pressure. Physiol. Rev. 72:231-

55:505-517.

300.

ANTONUCCI, T., and H. AKIYAMA. 1987. An ex- DRESSLER, W.W. 1985. Extended family rela-

amination ofsex differences in social support

tionships, social support, and mental health

among older menand women. Sex Roles

in a southern Black community. J. Health

17:737-749.

Soc. Behav. 26:39-48.

BAKER, P. T., and D. E. CREWS. 1986. Mortality

. 1990. Lifestyle, stress andblood pressure

patterns andsome biological predictors, p.

in a southern Black community. Psychosom.

93-122. In P. Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker

Med. 52:182-198.

(eds.) The changing Samoans: Behavior and

. 1991. Social support, lifestyle incongru-

health in transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New

ity, and arterial blood pressure ina southern

York.

Black community. Psychosom. Med. 53:608-

BAKER, P., and J. HANNA. 1981. Modernization

620.

and the biological fitness of Samoans, p. 14- DRESSLER, W. W., A. MATA, A. CHAVEZ, and

18. In C. Fleming and I. Prior (eds.), Migra-

F. E.VITERI. 1987a. Arterial blood pressure

tion, adaptation and health in the Pacific.

and individual modernization in a Mexican

Epidemiology Unit, Wellington Hospital,

community. Soc. Sci. Med.24:679-687.

Wellington, NZ.

DRESSLER, W. W., J. E. DOS SANTOS, P. N. GAL-

BAKER, P., J. HANNA, and T. BAKER (eds.). 1986.
The changing Samoans: Behavior and health

LAGHER, and F. E. VITERI. 19876. Arterial blood pressure and modernization inBrazil.

in transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Amer. Anthrop. 89:398-409.

BINDON, J. R.1985. Theinfluence of infant feed- DuBois, B. 1989.Hypertension and social sup-

ing patterns on the growth of children in

port: The medical anthropology of olderur-

American Samoa. Med.Anthrop. 7:183-

ban Samoans. Ph.D. Dissertation. University

195. of Hawaii, Honolulu.

BINDON, J. R., and P. BAKER. 1985. Moderniza- ECKENRODE, J., and S. GORE. 1981. Stressful

tion, migration andobesity among Samoan

events and social supports: The significance

adults. Ann.Hum.Biol. 12:67-76.

of context, p. 43-54. In B. Gottlieb (ed.),

BINDON, J. R., D. E. CREWS, and W. W.

Social networks and social support. Sage,

DRESSLER. 1991. Life style, modernization

Beverly Hills, CA.

and adaptation among Samoans. Collegium EVANS, J. G., and I. A. M. PRIOR. 1969. Indices

Anthrop. 15:101-110.

of obesity derived from height and weightin

BINDON, J. R., and S. ZANSKY. 1986. Growth

two Polynesian populations. Brit. J. Prev.

and body composition, p. 222-253. InP.

Soc. Med.23:56-59.

Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The FIORE, J., J. BECKER, and B. COPPEL. 1983. Social

changing Samoans: Behavior andhealth in

network interactions: A buffer or a stress.

transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Amer. J. Commun. Psychol. 11:432-442.

CAPLAN, G. 1974. Support systems and commu- FITZGERALD, M. H. 1989. Modernization andthe

nity mental health. Behavioral Publ., New

menstrual experience among Samoans.

York.

Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Hawaii,

COHEN, J. B. 1978. Migration, health, andaging,

Honolulu.

or becoming Americanized may be hazard-

. 1993. Islactation nature's contraceptive?

ous to your health, p. 214-220. In C.

Data from Samoa. Soc. Biol. 39:55-64.

Macpherson, B. Shore, andR. Franco (eds.), FITZGERALD, M. H., and A. HOWARD. 1990. As-

New neighbors: Islanders in adaptation.Cen-

pects of social organization inthree Samoan

ter S. Pacific Stud., U.C. Santa Cruz, Santa

communities. Pacific. Stud. 14:31-53.

Cruz, CA.

FLAHERTY, J., and J. RICHMAN. 1989. Gender

COHEN, S., and S. L. SYME. 1985. Social support

differences in the perception and utilization

and health. Academic Press, New York.

of social support: Theoretical perspectives

CORRUCCINI, R., and S. KAUL. 1983. The epide-

and an empirical test. Soc. Sci. Med.

miological transition and anthropology of

28:1221-1228.

188

Hanna

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

GOTTLEIB, B. J. (ed.). 1981. Social networks and JAMES, G. D., AND T. G. PICKERING. 1993. The

social support. Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.

influence of behavioral factors on thedaily

GRAVES, T.D. 1967. Acculturation, access and

variation of blood pressure. Amer. J. Hyper-

alcohol in a triethnic community. Amer. An-

tens. 6:170S-173S.

throp. 69:306-321.

JANES, C. R. 1990a. Migration, social change

GRAVES, T. D., and N. B. GRAVES. 1977. Pre-

and health. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford.

ferred adaptive strategies: An approach to JANES, C. R. 19906. Migration, changing gender

understanding New Zealand's multicultural

roles and stress: The Samoan case. Med. An-

workforce. New Zealand J. Ind.Relations

throp. 12:217-248.

2:81-90.

JENKINS, C. D. 1982. Psychosocial risk factors

GRAVES, T. D., and N. B. GRAVES. 1985. Stress
and health among Polynesian migrants to

for coronary heart disease. Acta Med. Scand. Suppl. 660:123-133.

New Zealand. J. Behav. Med. 8:2-19.

KANNER, A. D., J. C. COYNE, C. SCHAEFER, and

HACKENBERG, R. A., B. HACKENBERG, H.MAGALIT, E. CABRAL, and S. GUZMAN. 1983.Mi-

R. S. LAZARUS. 1981. Comparison of two modes of stress measurement: Daily hassles

gration, modernization, and hypertension:

and uplifts versus major life events. J. Be-

Blood pressure levels in four Philippine com-

havior Med. 4:1-39.

munities. Med. Anthrop. 7:45-71.

KASL, S.V. 1984. Stress and health. Ann. Rev.

HALL, A., and B. WELLMAN. 1985. Social net-

Pub. Health. 5:319-341.

works and social support, p. 23-41. In S. Co- KESSLER, R. C., and J. D. MCLEOD. 1984. Sex

hen and L. Syme (eds.), Social support and

differences and vulnerability to undesirable

health. Academic Press, New York.

life events. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 49:620-631.

HANNA, J. Social stressors and hormone excre- KIRSCHBAUM, C., T. KLAUER, S. H. FILIPP, and

tion among young Samoans. Manuscript.

H. HELLHAMMER. 1995. Sex-specific effects of

HANNA, J., and P. BAKER. 1979. Biocultural cor-

social support on cortisol and subjective re-

relates of blood pressure of Samoan migrants

sponses to acute psychological stress. Psycho-

to Hawaii. Hum. Biol. 51:481-497.

som. Med. 57:23-31.

HANNA, J., and M. FITZGERALD. 1993. Accultur- KLATSKY, A. L., G. D. FREIDMAN, and M. A.

ation and symptoms: A comparative study of

ARMSTRONG. 1986. The relationships between

reported health symptoms in three Samoan

alcoholic beverage use and other traits to

communities. Soc. Sci. Med. 36:1169-1180.

blood pressure: A new Kaiser Permanente

HANNA, J., D. PELLETIER, and V. BROWN. 1986.

study. Circulation 73:628-636.

The diet and nutrition of contemporary Sa- KLATSKY, A. L., G. D. FREIDMAN, A. B. SIEGE-

moans, p. 275-296. In P. Baker, J. Hanna

LAUB, and M. J. GERARD. 1977. Alcohol con-

and T. Baker (eds.), The changing Samoans:

sumption and blood pressure. N. Eng. J.

Behavior and health in transition. Oxford

Med. 296:1194-1200.

Univ. Press, New York.

KLEINMAN, A. 1986. Social origins of distress and

HANNA, J., M. FITZGERALD, J. PEARSON, A.

disease. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.

HOWARD, and J. MARTZ-HANNA. 1990. Selec- LINDEN, W., L. CHAMBERS, J. MAURICE, and

tive migration from Samoa: A longitudinal

J. W. LENZ. 1993. Sex differences in social

study of pre-migration differences in social

support, self-deception, hostility, and ambu-

and psychological characteristics. Soc. Biol.

latory cardiovascular activity. Hlth. Psychol.

37:204-214.

12:376-380.

HOUSE, J. S., and R. L. KAHN. 1985. Measures MACPHERSON, C. 1978. Samoan migration to

and concepts of social support, p. 83-105. In New Zealand and Polynesian migration and

S. Cohen and L. Syme (eds.), Social support

settlement, p. 11. In C. Macpherson, B.

and health. Academic Press, New York.

Shore, and R. Franco (eds.), New neighbors:

HOWARD, A. 1986. Questions and answers. Sa- Islanders in adaptation. Center S. Pacific

moans talk about happiness, distress, and

Stud., U.C. Santa Cruz, CA.

other life experiences, p. 174-202. In P.

. 1979. The Polynesian migrant family: A

Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The

Samoan case study, p. 120-137. InP. Koop-

changing Samoans: Behavior andhealth in

man-Boyden (ed.), Families in New Zealand

transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

society. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

HULL, D. 1979. Migration, adaptation and ill- MARMOT, M., and L. SYME. 1976. Acculturation

ness: A review. Soc. Sci. Med. 13:25-36.

and coronary heart disease in Japanese-

JAMES, G., D. JENNER, G. HARRISON, and P.

Americans. Amer. J. Epidem. 104:225-247.

BAKER. 1985. Differences in catecholamine MARSHALL, M. 1979.Weekend warriors: Alcohol

excretion rates, blood pressure, and lifestyle

in aMicronesial culture. Mayfield, Palo Alto.

among Western Samoan men. Hum. Biol.

. 1991.The second fatal impact: Cigarette

57:635-647.

smoking, chronic disease, and the epidemio-

Vol. 43,No. 3-4

Blood Pressure

189

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

logical transition in Oceania. Soc. Sci. Med. Effect ofweight loss without salt retention in

32:1327-1342.

the reduction of blood pressure in overweight

MARTZ, J. M. 1982. Adult blood pressure on Tutuila, American Samoa: An analysis by

hypertensive patients. N. Eng. J.Med. 298:1-6.

distance tothe Pago Pago Harbor area.Mas- RILEY, D., and J. ECKENRODE. 1986. Social ties:

ters Paper. Penn. State Univ., University

Subgroup differences in benefits and costs.J.

Park.

Pers. Soc. Psychol. 51:770-778.

MCGARVEY, S. T. 1991. Obesity in Samoans and ROCCHINI, A. P. 1990. Theinfluence of obesityin

a perspective on itsetiology in Polynesians.

hypertension. News Physiol. Sci. 5:245-249.

Amer. Clin. Nutr. 53:1586S-2594S.

ROCCHINI, A. P., V. L. KATCH, J. ANDERSON, J.

MCGARVEY, S. T., and P. T. BAKER. 1979. The

HINTERLITER, D. BECQUE, M. MARTIN, and

effects of modernization and migration on

C. MARKS. 1988. Blood pressure inobese ad-

Samoan blood pressures. Hum. Biol. 51:461-

olescents: The effect of weight loss. Pediat-

479. rics 82:16-24.

MCGARVEY, S., and D. SCHENDEL. 1986. Blood ROOK, K. S. 1984. The negative side ofsocial in-

pressure in Samoans, p. 351-393. In P.

teraction: Impact on psychological well-

Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The

being. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 46:1097-1108.

changing Samoans: Behavior andhealth in SCOTCH, N. A. 1963. Sociocultural factors in the

transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

epidemiology of Zulu hypertension. Amer.

MURPHY, H. B. M. 1982. Blood pressure and J. Publ. Hlth. 53:1205-1211.

culture: Thecontributions of cross-cultural SMITH, T. 1967. Sociocultural incongruity and

comparisons to psychosomatics. Psychother.

change: A review ofempirical findings. In L.

Psychosom. 38:244-250.

Syme and L. Reeder (eds.), Social stressand

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES. 1974. Recom-

cardiovascular disease. Milbank Mem.Fund

mended dietary allowances. NAS,Washing-

Quart. 45:23-39.

ton, D.C.

STEBBINS, K. R. 1991. Tobacco, politics, and

PAWSON, I. G. 1986. The morphological charac-

economics: Implications for global health.

teristics of Samoan adults, p. 254-274. In P. Soc. Sci. Med. 33:1317-1326.

Baker, J. Hanna, and T. Baker (eds.), The STOKES, J. 1983. Predicting satisfaction with so-

changing Samoans: Behavior andhealth in

cial support from social network structure.

transition. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Amer. J. Commun. Psych. 11:141-152.

PAWSON, I. G., and C .JANES. 1981.Massive obe- STOKES, J., and D. WILSON. 1984. The Inventory

sity ina migrant Samoan population. Amer.

of Socially Supportive Behaviors: Dimen-

J. Publ. Hlth. 71:508-513.

sionality, prediction, and gender differences.

PEARSON, J. D. 1989. Stress anddaily activities in

Amer. J. Commun. Psych. 12:53-69.

three Samoan groups. Ph.D. Dissertation, SUTTER, F. K. 1980. Communal versus individual

Penn. State University, University Park.
PEARSON, J., and J. HANNA. 1989. Selective mi-
gration as a bias in modernization studies:

socialization at home and in school in rural and urban Western Samoa. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Hawaii, Honolulu.

Premigration differences in morphology and SWARTZ, M., R. LINDERMAN, D. BLAZER, and L.

blood pressure among 15-30-year-old Amer-

GEORGE. 1989. Somatization symptoms in the

ican Samoans. Amer. J. Hum. Biol. 1:263-

community: A rural/urban comparison. Psy-

269. chosomatics 30:44-53.

PEARSON, J., J. HANNA, M. FITZGERALD, and P. TAYLOR, R., N. LEWIS, and S. LEVY. 1989. So-

BAKER. 1990. Modernization and catechola-

cieties in transition: Mortality patterns in Pa-

mine excretion ofyoung Samoan adults.Soc. Sci. Med. 31:729-736.

cific Island populations. Int. J. Epidemiol. 18:634-646.

PELLETIER, D. L., and C. A. HORNICK. 1986. THIEL, H., D. PARKER, and T. BRUCE. 1973.

Blood lipid studies, p. 327-350. In P. Baker,

Stress factors and the risk of myocardialin-

J. Hanna, andT. Baker (eds.), The changing

farction. Psychol. Res. 17:43-60.

Samoans: Behavior and health in transition. TUCK, M. L., J. SOWERS, L. DORNFELD, G.

Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

KLEDZIK, and M. MAXWELL. 1981. The effect

POWLES, J. 1992. Changes in disease patternsand

of weight reduction on blood pressure,

related social trends. Soc. Sci. med.35:377-

plasma renin activity, and plasma adloster-

384. one levels inobese patients. N. Eng.J. Med.

PRIOR, I. A. M. 1974. Cardiovascular epidemiol-

304:930-933.

ogy inNewZealand and the Pacific. N. Zea. WALKER, M., S. WASSERMAN, and B. WELLMAN.

Med. J. 524:245-252.

1994. Statistical models for social support

REISIN, E., R. ABEL, M. MODAN, D. S. SILVERBERG, H. ELIAHOU, and B. MODAN. 1978.

networks, p. 53-78. In S. Wasserman and J. Galaskiewicz (eds.), Advances in social

190

Hanna

Social Biology

network analysis. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
WASSERMAN, S., and J. GALASKIEWICZ (eds.).
1994. Advances in social network analysis. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
WEINER, J. S., and J. LOURIE. 1969. Human bi-
ology: Aguide tofieldmethods. F. A. Davis, Philadelphia.
WELLMAN, B., and S. WORTHLEY. 1989. Broth-
er's keepers: Selecting kinship relations in

broader networks of social support. Sociol. Perspect. 32:273-306.
WIRSING, R. 1985. The health of traditional societies and the effects ofacculturation. Curr. Anthrop. 26:303-322.
ZIMMETT, P. 1982. The medical effects of lifestyle changes in Pacific populations. J. Food Nutrition 39:23-27.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:47 08 December 2015

