Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Are husbands a barrier to women's family planning use? The case of Morocco
Ilene S. Speizer
To cite this article: Ilene S. Speizer (1999) Are husbands a barrier to women's family planning use? The case of Morocco, Social Biology, 46:1-2, 1-16, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1999.9988984 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9988984
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 37
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

Are Husbands a Barrier to Women's Family Planning Use? The Case of Morocco

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Ilene S. Speizer
Department of International Health and Development Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine New Orleans, Louisiana 70112
ABSTRACT: Little is known about men's role in the adoption of family planning. Recent studies suggest that men may be a barrier to women's use of family planning. However, it is not clear whether husbands represent a true or a perceived barrier. Using the 1992 Morocco Demographic and Health Survey data, this study examines (1) whether women and men report concordant fertility desires, discussions, and contraceptive use; (2) the accuracy of women's perceptions of their husbands' fertility desires; and (3) whether husbands are a barrier to women's family planning use. The results demonstrate that, controlling for women's own fertility desires, husbands' true fertility desires are associated with family planning use. Likewise, women who perceive their husbands to want fewer children than they want are more likely to use family planning. Future fertility and family planning programs need to include men to reduce their role as both perceived and true barriers to family planning use.

Until the late 1980's, fertility and family planning information on men was sparse. Consequently, to study couple fertility desires and family planning use, researchers often improvised with available female data. Specifically, two methods were employed to account for unavailable male or couple responses. The first method used women's reported knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) to represent couple KAP (Greene and Biddlecom, 1997). This approach assumed that husbands and wives had similar reproductive attitudes and goals, an assumption that has been found to be incorrect in a number of exhaustive literature searches and studies that compare husbands' and wives' KAP (Becker, 1996; Ezeh and Mboup, 1997; Mason and Taj, 1987). The second method used women's perceptions of their husbands' KAP as a proxy for the husbands' true KAP. In light of low levels of couple communica-

tion in much of the developing world (Ezeh et al., 1996), this approach may fail because there is no reason to assume that women would actually know their husbands' KAP.
Using only female data, researchers have done a number of studies which indicate that husbands are a barrier to women's family planning use. For example, using female data from several Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), one study shows that (1) husband disapproval is among the top three reasons given by women for nonuse of family planning; and (2) the percentage of women using family planning varies by whether or not the women think their husbands approve of family planning (Bongaarts and Bruce, 1995). Likewise, a recent study in Morocco finds that women report that husband's opposition and religious opposition are important barriers to family planning use (Westoff and Bankole, 1998). Finally,

1

2

Speizer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

a study among metropolitan women in Indonesia finds that perceived husband disapproval of family planning is an important determinant of family planning use when women's level of education and number of living children is controlled (Joesoef et al., 1988). Based on these studies, one would recommend that in order to raise levels of family planning use, women's perceptions of their husbands' attitudes must change, not necessarily the husbands' true attitudes.
To determine if husbands' true attitudes have an effect on women's family planning use, researchers need male data. Many studies that have included both husbands and wives have indeed shown that husbands are a barrier to women's family planning use (Casterline et al., 1996; Ezeh, 1993; Kritz et al., 1995). For example, a study using data from the Philippines finds that husbands' fertility preferences are strongly associated with whether or not women are currently using family planning (Casterline et al., 1996). This Philippine study also reveals comparable effects of husbands' and wives' fertility desires on women's reported use of family planning to delay a birth. Similarly, a study using data from Ghana finds that husbands' fertility desires significantly affect women's family planning approval (Ezeh, 1993). Furthermore, this Ghana study provides focus group results from men and women to demonstrate that men are an important, recognized barrier to women's family planning use. Both the Philippine and the Ghana studies fail to determine the role of husbands as perceived and actual barriers to family planning use to permit an assessment of whether perceived husband's desire for children is as important as husband's actual desire.

The only recent studies found that include both the husbands' perceived attitudes and the husbands' true attitudes in a model of women's family planning use were in Ghana (Salway, 1994) and Kenya (Lasee and Becker, 1997). Using the 1988 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey, Salway (1994) found that husband's family planning approval, fertility desires, and the wife's perceptions of her husband's family planning approval were not associated with the woman's use of family planning, controlling for the woman's own fertility desires. However, husband's reported discussion of family planning was found to have an effect, even after controlling for the woman's reported discussion, suggesting an indirect role of the husband on a woman's family planning use. The author concludes that the attitudes and preferences of the wife are more important in determining contraceptive use than the attitudes and preferences of the husband (Salway, 1994).
Similar to the Ghana study, a study using the 1989 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey analyzed the role of husbands and wives in family planning decision making (Lasee and Becker, 1997). This study finds that the important determinants of women's family planning use are knowledge by both spouses of a source of family planning and the wife's perception of her husband's approval of family planning. The remaining communication variables--couple approval of family planning, reported couple discussion of family planning, the wife's own approval, and the husband's perception of his wife's approval--have no effect on current family planning use. Also, couple desire for children was not found to be associated with family planning use. This study revealed that husbands play a role

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

3

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

in family planning adoption, either by expressing their family planning attitudes to their wives or based on normative views of male family planning approval.
The above studies indicate that husbands have a potentially important role in determining whether women adopt family planning. Husbands may act as a perceived barrier (Bongaarts and Bruce, 1995), a true barrier (Casterline et al., 1996), or an indirect barrier (e.g., husbands' reported discussion, Salway, 1994) to women's family planning adoption. No recent study, however, determines the role of husbands' true fertility desires and wives' perceptions of their husbands' fertility desires simultaneously to determine whether, controlling for women's own fertility desires, husbands are a true and/or perceived barrier to family planning adoption. Furthermore, no study has determined whether women's perceptions of their husbands' fertility desires correspond to the husbands' true fertility desires.1 This information is important to unravel whether perceived husband barriers are reflections of true husband attitudes, or simply portray misconceptions based on normative or expected high male fertility desires.
Based on data from the 1992 Morocco Demographic and Health Survey, this study indicates the advantages of obtaining male data to assess if and how husbands are a barrier to women's family planning use. First, this analysis determines whether wives and husbands report concordant fertility desires, discussions, and contraceptive use, to demonstrate the distinction between wives' and husbands'

reports of the same event. Second, an assessment of the accuracy of women's perceptions of their husband's fertility desires is presented. This information provides an indication of whether women's reports can be used as a proxy for husband data. Third, an analysis of whether husbands are a barrier to women's family planning use is presented. This last analysis permits a determination of whether perceived husband desires are as important as husband's true fertility desires in the Moroccan context.
The 1992 MDHS is particularly useful for these analyses because of the availability of male data and because Morocco is currently in a transitional stage of the fertility transition (Ashford, 1995). Among the recent list of DHS countries with male data (mostly sub-Saharan African countries), Morocco is one of the few with a total fertility rate as low as 4.0 and current modern family planning use at 36 per cent of married women.2 Because over a third of women use modern family planning methods (and almost half use any method), it is possible to examine differentials in women's reported use and relate these differentials to husbands' fertility desires.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The data for these analyses are from the Morocco Demographic and Health Survey (MDHS) conducted between January and April 1992 (Azelmat et al., 1993). In the 1992 MDHS, a sample of 9,256 women between the ages of 15 and 49 was interviewed. Fifty-five per cent (N = 5,118) of these women were married or in union. In

1Lasee and Becker (1997) examine the accuracy of perceptions of approval of family planning and relate this to couple communication, but do not examine accuracy of perceptions of fertility desires.

2Based on DHS II countries. The one exception is Egypt, 1992.

4

Speizer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

addition to the female sample, all men over age 20 (single and married) from a third of the households visited for women were eligible for interview. A total of 2,122 men were eligible for interview. Of these men, 63 per cent were successfully interviewed, resulting in a sample of 1,336 men in the 1992 MDHS. Because 30 per cent of the male sample is single, and many men did not match with a wife, the MDHS data contain information on a total of 751 couples when spouses are matched. The husband-wife sample is representative of couples where the wife is between the ages of 15--49.3 For these analyses, we do not include couples with a currently pregnant wife (17.8 per cent) and couples with missing responses for the variables of interest. The total sample size for these analyses is 567.
For these analyses, perceived barriers to family planning use are based on women's perceptions of their husbands' fertility desires relative to their own fertility desires. Furthermore, true barriers to family planning use are based on the husbands' reported fertility desires. Both perceived and true husband desires may be associated with women's family planning use through different mechanisms. Firstly, women may act on the number of children they think their husbands want. Secondly, men's true desires may have an effect separate from the effect of changing women's perceptions if, for example, a man who no longer wants children is more likely to discuss family planning or encourage family planning use without stating clearly his fertility desires to his wife.
In the analyses of couple agreement, husband and wife reports of desire for ad-
3Thesample of women is a self-weighting sample; thus, the sample of couples is also.

ditional children, discussion of child desires, and current use of any family planning method are presented. In the MDHS, both husbands and wives were asked if they wanted another child, with the choice of responses being: wants, does not want, cannot have, spouse cannot have, and undecided. For men, the desire for child variable has been coded as wants child, and does not want child (see Table 1). Men who said that they could no longer have children are grouped with the men who said they did not want children. Men who reported that their wife could not bear children or that they were undecided were dropped from the analysis (N = 37).4 For women, a comparable desire for child variable has been created, with women who were undecided or had missing responses dropped from the analysis (N = 36). The second variable used for the agreement analysis is whether each person reports ever discussing with his or her spouse the number of children desired (yes/no) (see Table 2). The third variable used to examine spousal agreement is reported current use of any method of family planning by each partner (yes/no). For each analysis of couple agreement kappa values are presented and analyzed based on the following scale: < 0 = poor agreement; 0 to 0.20 = slight agreement; 0.21 to 0.40 = fair agreement; 0.41 to 0.60 = moderate agreement; 0.61 to 0.80 = substantial agreement; 0.81 to 1.0 = almost perfect agreement (StataCorp, 1997).
To determine whether women's reports of their husbands' fertility desires
4Those men who said their wives could not have children are coded as missing because in Morocco men have the option to take another wife or divorce and remarry to attain their fertility desires. Women did not have this answer as a response option.

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

5

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
PER CENT DISTRIBUTION OF CURRENTLY MARRIED NONPREGNANT WOMEN RESPONDENTS (N = 567) IN THE COUPLE SAMPLE BY SELECTED BACKGROUND CHARACTERISTICS AND FERTILITY DESIRES: MOROCCO DEMOGRAPHIC AND HEALTH SURVEY, 1992

Characteristic

Per Cent

EDUCATION
None Some
RESIDENCE
Urban Rural
OCCUPATION
Unemployed Employed
TYPE OF FLOOR
Unfinished Finished
PARITY
0-1 births 2+ births
BIRTH IN LAST YEAR
No Yes
AGE
Mean (standard deviation)
DESIRE FOR CHILD (wife)
Does not want Wants, delay Wants, now
HUSBAND'S DESIRE FOR CHILD"
Does not want Wants
WIFE'S PERCEPTION OF HUSBAND'S FERTILITY DESIRE
Wants same number as woman Wants more Wants fewer Don't know
"As reported by husband.

81.8 18.2
40.7 59.3
78.8 21.2
34.4 65.6
91.2
75.5 24.5 33.5 (8.1)
56.8 26.1 17.1
55.7 44.3
63.3 18.7 10.6 7.4

are an appropriate proxy for the husbands' true fertility desires, information on whether women think their husbands want another child or not is needed. Unfortunately, this information is not available in the MDHS and it is necessary to improvise with available data.5 Therefore, this analy-

sis uses information on whether women think their husbands want the same number, more, or fewer children than themselves, and this information is compared to the husbands' true reported fertility desires. With this perceived fertility information, four categories are created: husband

5In the Demographic and Health Surveys, information on women's perceptions of their husbands' approval of family planning is available and can be compared to the husbands' true approval. For this analysis, this infor-

mation is not used because the goal is to determine whether husbands' fertility desires are a barrier to family planning use and not whether husbands' opposition to family planning is a barrier to use.

6

Speizer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

wants the same number of children; husband wants more children; husband wants fewer children; and does not know husband's desire (see Table 1).
The analysis of perceptions is performed separately for women who no longer want children and women who want additional children. If a woman who no longer wants children says that her husband wants the same number of children she does, it is expected that the husband will report a desire to stop childbearing. Similarly, for a woman who no longer wants children and thinks her husband wants fewer children than she does, it is expected that the husband also does not want another child. Finally, if a woman who no longer wants children says that her husband wants more children than she does, the husband is expected to want another child (see Table 3). It is possible that this last categorization may be misrepresented. For example, a woman who says that her husband wants more children than she does may have had more children than she desired to meet her husband's desires, and at this time, the husband no longer wants children because they have met his desires. While it is not possible to tease out the misrepresented cases, we offer this possibility as a caveat of this analysis of relative fertility desires.
Likewise, among women who want more children we compare their perceptions of their husbands' relative fertility desires to the husbands' true reported fertility desires. A woman who wants additional children and reports that her husband wants the same number of children is expected to have a husband who wants more children. Furthermore, if a woman who wants more children says that her husband wants more children than she does, he is also expected to want more

children. Finally, it is not possible to determine the expected husband fertility desire among women who want additional children and report that their husbands want fewer children than themselves because this situation could equate to a male desire to stop or not to stop childbearing. The numbers and per cents for this last category are presented, but are not discussed. These types of comparisons permit an assessment of whether women have an idea of their husbands' fertility desires, or if perceptions are more likely to reflect the informant's own desires or some normative perception of male fertility desires.
Finally, to assess whether husbands are a barrier to women's family planning use, multivariate logistic regression analyses of women's reported current use of any family planning method are presented. Both modern and traditional methods are used because the focus is on whether husbands' desires (true or perceived) affect women's family planning adoption, whatever the method. The results are the same when only modern methods are the focus of analysis because the pill represents 85.5 per cent of the contraceptive use in Morocco. The independent variables of interest are: relative perceptions of the husband's fertility desire and husband's true desire for children, both as coded above. This analysis also controls for the woman's own desire for additional children. Other control variables included in the analyses are background demographic characteristics of the women. Husband characteristics have not been included because of the high collinearity between wife and husband characteristics and because the dependent variable of interest is women's reported family planning use, not couple use or husband use. The female control variables included are: education

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
MEASURING HUSBAND AND WIFE AGREEMENT ON REPORTED FERTILITY DESIRES, FAMILY SIZE, DISCUSSIONS, AND CURRENT FAMILY PLANNING USE: MOROCCO DHS, 1992

DESIRE
Does not want Wants another child All wives

PANEL A. DESIRE FOR ADDITIONAL CHILDREN

HUSBAND'S DESIRE

Does not want

Wants another child

263 (46.4%)

59 (10.4%)

53(9.4%)

192(33.9%)

316(55.7%)

251(44.3%)

Kappa value: agreement = 80.3%; kappa statistic = 0.60

ALL HUSBANDS
322 (56.8%) 245(43.2%)

REPORT
Did not discuss Discussed All wives

PANEL B. DISCUSSION OF NUMBER OF CHILDREN DESIRED

HUSBAND'S REPORT

Did not discuss

Discussed

79(13.9%)

118(20.8%)

75(13.2%)

295(52.0%)

154(13.2%)

413(72.8%)

Kappa value: agreement = 66.0%; kappa statistic = 0.21

ALL HUSBANDS
197(34.7%) 370(65.3%)

WIFE'S REPORT
Not using Using All wives

PANEL C. CURRENT USE OF ANY FORM OF FAMILY PLANNING

HUSBAND'S REPORT

Not using

Using

251 (44.3%)

44 (7.8%)

30(5.3%)

242(42.7%)

281 (49.6%)

286 (50.4%)

Kappa value: agreement = 87.0%; kappa statistic = 0.74

ALL HUSBANDS
295 (52.0%) 272(48.0%)

(none/some),6 age, place of residence (rural/urban), employment (unemployed/ employed), and type of floor in the household (unfinished/finished floor) (see Table 1 for distributions). We include type of floor in the household as an indicator of household socioeconomic status. Additional female control variables include whether or notthewoman had a birth in the last year, which controls for whetheror not the woman is exposed to the risk of childbearing (breastfeeding or amenorrheic), and the parity of the woman, coded zeroor

one birth versus two or more births.7 Where appropriate, interaction terms were created and tested todetermine whether differences in husbands' fertility desires (true or perceived) are associated with the wives' own fertility desires.
RESULTS
HUSBAND AND WIFE AGREEMENT
To determine if husbands and wives in the MDHS give similar responses toquestions on fertility desires, child discussions,

6Several coding schemes foreducation were tested. All approaches gave similar results asthis simple categorization.

7Several categorizations for number of children were tested. The results demonstrated that having two or more births compared to 0-1 birth had the same effect as each of the other categories.

8

Speizer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

and family planning use, we present matched husband and wife responses in Table 2. Panel A of Table 2 presents the comparison of husband and wife reported desire for additional children. At the aggregate level, women and men have similar fertility desires. When partners are matched, however, 20 per cent of couples disagree on child desires. Couples that disagree are divided equally such that neither partner is more likely to want or not want another child. The kappa value reveals a moderately high level of agreement, but not perfect agreement. The level of concordance between Moroccan couples is similar to the level found in a recent multi-country comparison (Becker, 1996). In contrast, the multi-country study found that when there is disagreement on fertility desires between spouses, generally men are more likely than women to want more children, a finding that does not hold in this Moroccan example (Becker, 1996).
The test of husband and wife concordance on discussion of number of children desired is presented in Panel B of Table 2. At the aggregate level, 65 per cent of women and 73 per cent of men report that discussion ever took place. In contrast, when couples are matched, only 52 per cent of husbands and wives actually agree that discussion ever took place. The kappa value for this variable reveals low levels of agreement. Interestingly, among the disagreeing couples, about two-thirds are couples where the husband reports that discussion took place and the wife does not. There are several possible explanations for this greater male reported discussion. First, a man may have told his wife something that she heard (or did not hear) but did not perceive as a discussion. Second, men may be reporting

discussion that took place with another partner than the matched wife (e.g., another wife or girlfriend). Third, men may say discussion took place when it never did because they think this is the accepted, expected response. Based on the available data, it is not possible to determine the true cause of differential reporting. This example illustrates that caution is necessary when matching couple responses or when one spouse's report is used to represent couple communication.
The final test of agreement examines couple family planning use and is presented in Panel C of Table 2. This table indicates that at the aggregate and couple level there is high concordance between husbands and wives on reported current family planning use, consistent with a recent multi-country study on couple contraceptive use (Becker, 1996). Again, this agreement is not perfect (kappa value of 0.74) which could be a consequence of several factors. For example, women may use methods without the knowledge of their husbands (e.g., pill or IUD) or be less likely to report male method use. Also, the male and female reports would differ if men report condom use that took place with another partner than the matched wife (Ezeh and Mboup, 1997).
WOMEN AS PROXIES FOR MEN
To test whether women's reports can be used as proxies for obtaining husband data, this section explores perceptions of spousal desire for additional children. In Panel A of Table 3, using women who no longer want children, the comparison of the wife's perception of her husband's fertility desire and his true fertility desire is presented. Sixty-four per cent of women who do not want any more children think that their husbands want the

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

9

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
COMPARISONS OF WIVES' PERCEPTIONS OF THEIR HUSBANDS' DESIRE FOR ADDITIONAL CHILDREN AND THE HUSBANDS' TRUE DESIRES FOR CHILDREN, BY WOMEN'S OWN DESIRE FOR CHILDREN, MOROCCO DEMOGRAPHIC AND HEALTH SURVEY, 1992

Panel A. Women's Report of Husband's Desire for Children and Husband's True Desire Among Women Who No Longer Want Children (N = 322)

HUSBAND'S DESIRE

Does not want

Wants another child

ALL HUSBANDS

WOMEN'S PERCEPTION OF DESIRE
Same (i.e., does not want) More (i.e., wants) Fewer (i.e., does not want) Does not know

173 43 35 12

33 206 (64.0%) 13 56 (17.4%) 7 42 (13.0%) 6 18 (5.6%)

All wives

263(81.7%)

59 (18.3%)

...

PANEL B. WOMEN'S REPORT OF HUSBAND'S DESIRE FOR CHILDREN AND HUSBAND'S TRUE DESIRE AMONG WOMEN WHO WANT MORE CHILDREN (N = 245)

HUSBAND'S DESIRE

WOMEN'S PERCEPTION OF DESIRE
Same (i.e., wants) More (i.e., wants) Fewer (i.e., does not want or wants) Does not know

Does not want
31 7 11 4

Wants another child
122 43
7 20

ALL HUSBANDS
153(62.5%) 50(20.4%) 18(7.4%) 24(9.8%)

All wives

53 (21.6%)

192 (78.4%)

...

same number of children that they do. This finding implies that the women think their husbands do not want additional children. Eighty-four per cent of these women actually have husbands who do want to stop childbearing (173/206). Similarly, among women who think that their husbands want fewer children than they do, 83 per cent actually have husbands who say they do not want any more children. In contrast, among women who think their husbands want more children than they do, only 23 per cent actually have husbands who want another child (13/56). This finding suggests that perceived high fertility desires of husbands by wives do not necessarily correspond to the husbands' true desires, or that women may have gone beyond their own fertility desires to meet their husbands' desires,

now resulting in the husband being prepared to stop childbearing.
In Panel B of Table 3, a similar analysis is presented for women who want additional children. Notice that like women who do not want any more children, a similar, large per cent of women think their husbands want the same number of children that they do (i.e., the husband wants children). The majority of these women are correct in this perception. The same high level of accuracy is also found among women who think their husbands want more children than they do (i.e., the husband wants children). Finally, among women who want additional children, 10 per cent report that they do not know their husbands' fertility desire. This per cent is higher than the per cent among women who no longer want children (6 per cent).

10

Speizer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Women who want to continue childbearing have less need to discuss fertility desires with their spouse and are more likely to lack knowledge of their husbands' desires.
These results suggest that women in the MDHS tend to be knowledgeable of their husbands' fertility desires when they think their spouse has similar fertility desires to themselves. In contrast, when these women think that their husbands have differing fertility desires than themselves, the perception may be incorrect or may represent a case where the woman had more children that she desired to accommodate her husband's fertility desires. Finally, women who no longer want children are more likely to report a perception of their husbands' desire than women who want additional children. This finding suggests that when fertility desires are met by a woman in Morocco, couples may be more likely to interact and discuss subsequent fertility preferences.
HUSBANDS AS A BARRIER
TO WOMEN'S USE
The final analysis examines whether, in the Moroccan context, husbands are a barrier to women's family planning use. In the 1992 Morocco DHS, the second most important reason for nonuse of family planning given by women who want no more children and are not menopausal or sterile is that the husband disapproves of family planning (the first reason being health concerns). There are many problems with using this simple question to assess the effect of husband approval on women's contraceptive use (Bongaarts and Bruce, 1995). However, it does give a preliminary indication of the role of husbands in family planning adoption. Because, as shown above, women's perceptions of their husbands' fertility or family planning

attitudes do not necessarily correspond to the husbands' true attitudes, it is not clear whether reported husband disapproval of family planning is a true or simply a perceived barrier to family planning use.
This analysis tests whether husbands are indeed a barrier to women's family planning use, and if so, if this is a true or a perceived barrier (or both). The coefficients from the logistic regression analysis of the determinants of women's current use of any family planning method are presented in Table 4. Four models are presented. The first model includes women's perceptions of their husbands' fertility desires. The second model is the same as the first with an interaction term for women who want more children and report that they do not know their husbands' fertility desires. The third model includes only the husbands' true desire for additional children. Finally, the fourth model includes both the husbands' true fertility desires and the wives' perceptions of their husbands' fertility desires. Note that only the first and second models that determine the role of husbands as perceived barriers could be presented if male data had not been collected in the MDHS.
The effects of the background variables in each model are similar. Women who are older or have had a birth in the last year are less likely to use family planning than younger women and women who have not had a birth in the last year. Conversely, women who have any education, are from urban areas, or have a finished floor are more likely to use family planning than the less modernized women. Finally, women who have a low parity (0-1 children) are less likely to currently use family planning than women who have had two or more births.

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

TABLE 4
LOGISTIC COEFFICIENTS FOR ANALYSIS OF WHETHER HUSBANDS ARE A PERCEIVED OR TRUE BARRIER TO WOMEN'S FAMILY PLANNING USE, MOROCCO DHS, 1992

Variable
AGE
RESIDENCE
Rural (ref) Urban
EDUCATION
None (ref) Some
WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT
Not working (ref) Working
TYPE OF FLOOR
Unfinished (ref) Finished
BIRTH IN LAST YEAR
No birth (ref) At least one birth
NUMBER OF CHILDREN
2 or more (ref) 0-1
WOMAN'S DESIRE FOR CHILD
Does not want (ref) Wants
PERCEPTION OF HUSBAND'S DESIRE
Same as woman (ref) Husband wants more Husband wants fewer Wife does not know
HUSBAND'S TRUE CHILD DESIRE
Does not want (ref) Wants INTERACTION: wants child and does not know husband's desire

Model I

Model II

Model m

Mode! IV

-0.12 (0.02)c -0.12 (0.02)c -0.13 (0.02)c -0.13 (0.02)c

0.51(0.25)* 0.49(0.25)° 0.49(0.25)* 0.52(0.26)*

0.55 (0.30)" 0.54 (0.30)" 0.62 (0.30)* 0.58 (0.30)"

0.33 (0.26)

0.33 (0.26)

0.30 (0.25)

0.33 (0.26)

1.11 (0.27)c

1.15 (0.26)c

1.07(0.26)c

1.11(0.26)°

-1.74(0.27)c -1.73(0.27)c -1.75 (0.27)c -1.73(0.27)c

-4.16(0.77)c -4.14(0.77)c -4.04(0.78)c -4.02(0.78)c

-1.54(0.27)c -1.66(0.28)c -1.32(0.30)c -1.42(0.31)c

-0.09 (0.27) -0.09 (0.27)

. . . -0.04 (0.27)

0.69(0.34)* 0.68(0.34)*

...

0.63(0.34)"

-0.51(0.45) -1.50(0.71)* . . . -1.47(0.72)*

. . . . . . -0.58 (0.27)* -0.49 (0.27)"

...

1.86(0.91)*

...

1.83(0.92)*

Model chi-square (d.f.) No. of observations
'psQAQ. bp £ 0.05. 'p s 0.001.

219.15(11) 567

223.52(12) 567

217.08(9) 567

226.81(13) 567

These women have not yet met their desired family size and therefore have less need for family planning than women who have had more births and are closer to attaining their desired family size.
The effects of women's perceptions of their husbands' desire for children and husbands' true desire for additional children are presented at the bottom of Table 4. Note first that in all the models,

women's own desire for children is an important determinant of any family planning use. Women who report that they want additional children are less likely to use family planning than women who no longer want children. Model I demonstrates that women who think that their husbands want fewer children than they do are more likely to use family planning than women who think their

12

Speizer

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

husbands want the same number of children. Women who think their husbands want fewer children than they do may use family planning to meet their perceived husbands' lower fertility desires (to stop or delay a birth), with the hope that later, if a difference in fertility desires exists, it can be resolved. In this model, the other perception variables are not significant.
Model II includes an interaction term and demonstrates that among women who no longer want children, not knowing the husbands' fertility desires is associated with less family planning use compared to women who no longer want children and think their husbands want the same number of children. Consequently, these women who do not know their husband's fertility desires are probably more likely to have another child since they are not using family planning to avoid the next unwanted (by the woman) pregnancy (Bankole, 1995; Westoff and Bankole, 1998). The interaction term in this model is positive and significant illustrating an attenuated effect for women who want additional children. Compared to women who no longer want children and think their husbands want the same number of children as they do, women who want more children and do not know their husbands' fertility desires are less likely to use family planning.8 No other interactions were found to be significant in this model. Therefore, perceptions of husbands' fertility desires are not necessarily a barrier to family planning use in Morocco, but rather may be a barrier to attaining desired family
8For this group, the effect is .-1.30 (-1.66 + -1.50 + 1.86), slightly larger than the effect for women who no longer want children and do not know their husbands' fertility desires (-1.50).

size, especially for women who want more children but think their husbands want fewer children, or for women who lack knowledge of their husbands' fertility desires.
In Model III, the effects of husbands' true fertility desires are presented. Controlling for a woman's own fertility desire, if the husband reports that he wants additional children then the woman is less likely to report family planning use. No interaction was found between women's desire for children and husbands' true desire for additional children.
Model IV in Table 4 presents the results of the analysis that includes perceived desire for additional children, the husbands' true desire for additional children, and the important interaction term above. The results of this model are similar to the two previous models, indicating an additive effect of perceived and true husband fertility desires. The test of significance between Model II and Model IV gives a chi-square of 3.29 with 1 degree of freedom (p = 0.07) which is borderline significant, indicating that both the husbands' true and perceived fertility desires are potentially important. For example, controlling for women's own fertility desires, we find that husbands' true desire for additional children is associated with nonuse of family planning. Also, women who perceive that their husbands want fewer children than they do are more likely to use family planning than women who think their husbands want the same number of children as they do. Finally, women who report not knowing their husbands' fertility desires are less likely to use family planning. In this model, the effect of husbands' true fertility desires may be mediated by greater husband-wife communication, more positive husband

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

attitudes toward family planning, or greater exposure to family planning information. These mediating effects do not necessarily result in changing the wife's perceptions of her husband's fertility desires, but may result in current family planning use.
Figure 1 presents simulation results based on Model IV in Table 4. These simulations indicate the effect of each husband barrier on the level of contraceptive use, holding all other variables constant. Among all nonpregnant women, 48 per cent are using some form of family planning in the original data. If, however, all husbands were to want more children, only 43 per cent of women would currently use any family planning. Conversely, if all the husbands did not want another child, 51 per cent of women would use family planning. The effects of husbands as perceived barriers are also shown in Figure 1. Holding all other variables constant, if all women thought their husbands wanted fewer children than themselves, 58 per cent of women would currently use some form of family planning. If all women did not want children and did not know their husbands' fertility desires, only 32 per cent of women would use any family planning. The level of family planning use is slightly higher (39 per cent) in the case where all women want more children but do not know their husbands' fertility desires. These women may use family planning to space their next desired birth.
DISCUSSION

ences on men's role in family planning adoption remain just that--inferences. A number of recent studies have demonstrated that using women's responses to represent the couple may be misleading because husbands and wives do not necessarily report concurrent family planning attitudes and behaviors (Becker, 1996). This finding was true also for Moroccan couples. This analysis demonstrated that using women's reported discussion or desire for children to represent the discussion or fertility desire of the couple would result in a number of misclassified couples. However, using women's report on current family planning use would result in less incorrect classifications, but the number would still be greater than zero.
This study also determined whether women's perceptions of their husbands' fertility desires adequately represent the husbands' true fertility desires and could be used as a proxy for obtaining husband data. Although there was high accuracy for the majority of women who thought that their husbands had similar fertility desires, when the women thought their husbands had differing fertility desires, the women tended to be wrong. This assessment is limited by the available data which do not correspond exactly to the husband-desire questions. Better data on women's perceptions of their husbands' desire for another child and the number of additional children desired are needed to determine completely whether women's reports of their husbands' fertility desires can be used as a proxy for the husbands' true desires.

To determine whether husbands are women's barrier to family planning use, it is important to obtain data from husbands on their KAP. Without male data, infer-

Finally, this analysis showed that there are multiple influences on women's family planning use. First, a woman's own desire affects whether or not she adopts

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

0.7
0.6
I 0.5
0.4 1 0.3
0.2 0.1

W3 ft

Original Data

All husbands want children

All husbands do not want any more children

Women think husbands want same number
of children

Women think husbands want more children

Women think husbands want fewer children

All women do All women want

not want and

and do not

do not know know husbands'

husbands' desire

desire

Husband as barrier

FIG. 1.--Simulation for per cent of women using any contraception under various husband barrier scenarios (based on Model IV of Table 4)

C/3
Ed 5) o

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 1-2

Husbands and Family Planning

15

family planning. Second, controlling for a woman's own fertility desires, her husband's true fertility desires affect use. Third, among women who want no more children, if the wife reports that her husband's fertility desires are unknown, she is less likely to use family planning and a subsequent birth is probably more likely to take place. These women have a true unmet need for family planning because they are at the most risk of having an unwanted (to the woman) birth. These women could be affected indirectly by family planning programs that focus on men and men's role in reproductive health. Increasing men's involvement in family planning by promoting couple discussions and recommending that men accompany women to family planning facilities may make it more likely that women learn their husbands' desires and thus adopt family planning when they and their husbands no longer want children. An additional important determinant of women's family planning use is the perception that the husband wants fewer children than the woman, controlling for the woman's own fertility desire. Thus, some women who still want children may be adopting family planning to meet the perceived lower fertility desires of their husbands. These women could be using family planning to space their births but subsequently may need family planning to limit childbearing once they meet their own fertility desires and the

perception of their husbands' lower fertility desires. It would be useful to provide information to these women on long-term methods (e.g., IUD and implant) that could be adopted to meet both their own and their husbands' current or future fertility desires.
Family planning researchers have made great strides in understanding and assessing women's unmet needs for family planning. Clearly, there are several groups of women with an unmet need. Some have an unmet need because of a lack of access or knowledge of family planning or distribution facilities. Others have an unmet need but have husbands who want more children and are a barrier to women's adopting family planning. Finally, some women have an unmet need but perceive their husbands to be a barrier to family planning adoption. Family planning programs that increase male involvement will not only reduce misconceptions about high male fertility desires, but also could reduce the effect of husbands as true and perceived barriers to family planning use.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Support for this project came from the EVALUATION Project (Contract DPE-3O6OC-00-1054-00). The author would like to thank Jane T. Bertrand, Stan Becker, and Robert Magnani for their insightful comments on an earlier version of this paper. Permission to use these DHS data was granted by Macro International, Inc.

REFERENCES

ASHFORD, L. 1995. New perspectives on population: Lessons from Cairo. Pop. Bull. 50.
AZELMAT, M., M. AYAD, and E. A. HOUSN. 1993. En-
quête nationale sur la population et la santé, 1992. Macro International, Columbia, MD. BANKOLE, A. 1995. Desired fertility and fertility be-

havior among the Yoruba of Nigeria: A study of couple preferences and subsequent fertility. Pop. Stud. 49:317-328. BECKER, S. 1996. Couples and reproductive health: A review of couple studies. Stud. Fam. Plan. 27:291-306.

16

Speizer

Social Biology

BONGAARTS, J., and J. BRUCE. 1995. The causes of
unmet need for contraception and the social content ofservices. Stud. Fam. Plan. 26:57-75.
CASTERLINE, J. B., A. E. PEREZ, and A. E. BIDDLE-
COM. 1996. Factors underlying unmet need for family planning in the Philippines. Population Council Working Papers, Number 84.
EZEH, A. C. 1993.The influence of spouses over each other's contraceptive attitudes in Ghana. Stud. Fam. Plan. 24:163-174.
EZEH, A. C., and G. MBOUP. 1997. Gender differentials in contraceptive prevalence rates. Stud. Fam. Plan. 28:104-121.
EZEH, A. C., M. SEROUSSI, and H. RAGGERS. 1996.
Men's fertility, contraceptive use,and reproductive preferences. Demographic and Health Surveys Comparative Studies, Number 18,Macro International, Calverton,MD.
GREENE, M. E., and A. E. BIDDLECOM. 1997. From
absent to problematic: Men in demographic accounts of reproduction. Paper presented at the annual meetings of the Population Association of America, March, Washington,D.C.
JOESOEF, M. R., A. L. BAUGHMAN, and B. UTOMO.
1988. Husband's approval of contraceptive use

in metropolitan Indonesia: Program implications. Stud. Fam. Plan. 19:162-168.
KRITZ, M. M., P. MAKINWA-ADEBUSOYE, and F. Du.
1995. Spousal agreement, women's status and family planning in Nigeria. Cornell University Working Paper, Number 95-07, Ithaca,NY.
LASEE, A., and S. BECKER. 1997. Husband-wife
communication about family planning and contraceptive use in Kenya. Int. Fam. Plan. Pers. 23:15-20 and 33.
MASON, K. O., and A. M. TAJ. 1987. Differences between women's and men's reproductive goals in developing countries. Pop. Devel. Rev. 13:611-638.
SALWAY, S. 1994. Howattitudes toward family planning and discussion between wives and husbands affect contraceptive use in Ghana. Int. Fam. Plan. Pers. 20:44-47, 74.
STATACORP. 1997. Stata Statistical Software: Release 5.0. Stata Corporation, College Station,TX.
WESTOFF, C. F., and A. BANKOLE. 1998. The time
dynamics ofunmet need: An example from Morocco. Int. Fam. Plan. Pers. 24:12-14 and 24.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

