Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Becoming voluntarily childless: An exploratory study in a Scottish city
Elaine Campbell
To cite this article: Elaine Campbell (1983) Becoming voluntarily childless: An exploratory study in a Scottish city, Social Biology, 30:3, 307-317, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1983.9988544 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988544
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 8
View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

Becoming Voluntarily Childless: An Exploratory Study in a Scottish City

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Elaine Campbell
Department of Social Studies, The Queen's University of Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland

ABSTRACT:This paper looks at motives that inform the decision to remain voluntarily childless. It is assumed that voluntary childlessness is not a pathological condition nor is it determined by specific social situations. Situations provide the context within which motives emerge, in the case of voluntary childlessness providing individuals or couples with the opportunity to consider unconventional interpretations of family life that may eventually lead to its rejection. Individuals who become childless prior to finding a "partner" tend to come from families which deviated from the nuclear ideal and to reject parenthood. Those whose decision emerges after a "partnership" has been formed tend to have created alternative life styles and wish to protect the advantages of living without children. It is tentatively concluded that the proportion of couples remaining childless will increase.

Marriage remains the legitimate context for parenthood. Those who marry not only have the right to become parents but are expected to do so (Busfield, 1974; Busfield and Paddon, 1977; Veevers, 1972). The majority of Scottish couples conform to these expectations. In 1971 fewer than 2 per cent, or just under 15,000 out of a million women, married once only and at ages under 45, were childless by choice. The previous twenty years had in fact witnessed a decline in childlessness among women marrying during the prime reproductive years, the early to midtwenties. In 1951, of women aged 45 to 49, who had married at 20 to 24, and at 25 to 29, possibly 2 per cent and 6 per cent respectively were voluntarily childless. By 1961the proportions were down to 1per cent and 3 per cent. In 1971 the situation was unchanged. More recent indications are of an increase, how dramatic, however, remains to be seen (OECD, 1979).
Failure to conform to these expecta-

tions is excused if due to sterility or serious genetic impediment; no similar excuse or justification exists for those who choose to remain childless (Mead, 1949; Firestone, 1972; Veevers, 1980). Their behavior is interpreted as selfish, neurotic, unnatural, immature, and either censured as abrogation of social responsibility or pitied as proof of some personal, yet unavoidable, character defect (Polit, 1978; Blake, 1979).
Until recently, these views found some support in the work of social scientists who stressed the normality and value of conventional family life (Veevers, 1973; Skolnick, 1973) and who looked for explanations of deviant behavior in personal pathology, faulty socialization, or adverse social conditions. The applicability of these assumptions to the study of the voluntarily childless appears not to have been tested, but in other areas of social life proved disappointing. There appeared to be no obvious psychological or physiological differences between the deviant

307

308

Campbell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

and nondeviant nor did a defective social environment always lead to nonconformity.
Disappointment led to dissatisfaction and to the emergence of perspectives that reject the determinism of these early approaches, and that assume all individuals "are capable of wishing to do anything and doing anything they wish" (Box, 1981, p. 132). The question then becomes one of explaining how an individual comes to want to deviate, and wanting to deviate how he comes to do so. Relating these questions to the voluntarily childless, this study attempts to identify situations that, by providing individuals with the opportunity to interpret parental and childless roles in other than conventional ways, provide them with the motivation that under favorable circumstances will result in voluntarily childless marriage.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data were collected during 1974-75 from 78 individuals who were partners in voluntarily childless marriages, defined as marriages where both partners shared the intention to remain childless. Respondents were volunteers contacted at family planning clinics in and around a Scottish city. Since the aim of the study was to obtain a detailed biographical account of the situations and motives informing the decision to remain childless, interviews were unstructured and recorded on tape. The success of this approach depends upon the cooperation of "participants in the sphere of life . . . who are acute observers and well informed" (Blumer, 1969, p. 41). Although the scarcity of contacts made it impossible to preselect respondents according to these criteria, the 34 couples and 10 wives eventually interviewed

proved willing and able to recount their life histories and to put into words, if not always articulately and systematically, their decision to remain childless. Their characteristics are summarized in Table 1.
RESULTS
The decision to remain childless stems from one of two basic positions. Individuals are motivated either to avoid the penaltiesof parenthood or to protect the rewards of childlessness (Veevers, 1980) (see Table 2). The two positions are not mutually exclusive. Individuals, as their circumstances change and external pressures for them to conform grow, may supplement, modify, and reject as redundant their initial motivation (Veevers, 1980). They nevertheless remain aware of the distinction between motives that informed and those that emerged out of their commitment to childlessness.
AVOIDANCE OF PARENTHOOD: SITUATIONS, INTERPRETATIONS,AND
MOTIVES
Individuals whose decision to remain childless begins with avoidance of parenthood are able to trace their commitment back to childhood or adolescence. Having observed or participated in family life, they decide neither to emulate nor to reenact what they they have seen or experienced. Twenty-seven of the 30 avoiders had never expected to become parents; the noncommittal views of 3 others had changed to avoidance on the prospect of marriage. Primary motives informing the wish to avoid parenthood are presented in Table 3.
PARENTHOOD AS DAUNTING PROSPECT
Fifty per cent of all childless women and 30 per cent of childless men dis-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 3

Becoming Voluntarily Childless

309

TABLE 1
SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESPONDENTS

fu~- ~* ·*.·« Characterises
Mean age Mean age at marriage Mean no. of years married
Socioeconomic status I (Professional occupations, etc.) II (Intermediate occupations) III Non-manual (Skilled occupations) Ill Manual (Skilled occupations) Member of the Armed Forces Full-time student Housewife
Level of schooling attained Left as soon as old enough Stayed on but no qualifications Stayed on till 16/18with some qualifications College of Education/Art College University/Polytechnic Mature student

Wives
(JV=44)
29 24 5
7 19 13 1 0 1 3
10 3
16 3 11 1

Husbands
(N=J4)
31 25 6
10 14 3 4 1 2 0
6 0
11 5 10 2

TABLE2
BASES OF INDIVIDUAL MOTIVATION

Avoidance of parenthood Protection of childlessness

Bases

Women (N=44)
17 27

Men (N=34)
13 21

TABLE3
PRIMARY MOTIVES INFORMING THE WISH TO AVOID PARENTHOOD

Motives
Parenthood as daunting prospect Parenthood as loss of control over self and future. Parenthood asfinancialdeprivation Parenthood as too heavy a responsibility Children as objects of dislike

Wom.e"
2 8 1 2 4

,.Men,,
0 7 1 3 2

310

Campbell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

paraged the daily tasks of parenthood, describing them as monotonous, grubby, and unrewarding; 27 per cent of the women and 10 per cent of the men also belittled the mechanics of pregnancy and childbirth, stressing the discomfort, disruption, ugliness, pain, and lack of dignity involved. These interpretations provide material for the case against parenthood but are generally perceived as insufficient reason for its rejection.
Only two women recognized the daunting prospect of parenthood as having provided the initial motivation for their commitment to childlessness. Both could trace their unconventional views back to early childhood and to strained relations with mothers who denigrated and advised against the maternal role.
PARENTHOOD AS LOSS OF CONTROL OVER
SELF AND FUTURE
Loss of control over self and future was the most frequently cited motive for avoidance of parenthood. Recognizing a parent's prime responsibility to be to his family and not to himself, 8 women and 7 men had decided during adolescence to avoid this selfless image.
Ten of the 15 may have been prompted to this interpretation by their experiences of family life. Of the 6 women, 4 had witnessed marital breakdown, 1 had been illegitimate and placed in children's homes, 1 had a handicapped sibling, and all described their mothers as having been "martyrs" to motherhood (Veevers, 1979). Of the 4 men, 2 had elderly parents, 2 had mothers engrossed in careers, and all were only children.
Possibly of greater significance, and a feature common to all 15 as adolescents, was the lack of importance they attached to the conventional values, opin-

ions, and sentiments expressed by those with whom they had close contact, particularly parents. Relations were described as affectionate, yet remote, a factor that has been linked by sociologists to certain forms of adolescent deviance (Box, 1981).
Loss of control, once recognized as a feature of the parental role, becomes a significant argument for its rejection. Thirty per cent of all childless women saw motherhood as a threat to their identity. Mothers were described as "cabbages" buried beneath the trivia of childbearing and childrearing. Although acting as justification for a decision taken on alternative grounds, this description of the selfless, almost invisible woman is nevertheless a powerful image reinforcing commitment to childlessness.
PARENTHOOD AS FINANCIAL
DEPRIVATION
One of the most obvious costs of parenthood but one given little emphasis by the childless, is the financial (Baum and Cope, 1980). Having more money to spend than their peers was described by 45 per cent of childless women and 50 per cent of childless men as an advantage but not their reason for wishing to avoid parenthood.
One man and one woman, however, had decided in adolescence to try to avoid the material hardships experienced during childhood. The man, an only child, believed his parents to have been financially deprived when compared with childless relatives and had equated their relative deprivation with parental responsibilities. The woman had faced a severely disturbed childhood--marital breakdown, divorce, mother's illness and death, father's blindness and subsequent remarriage

Vol. 30, No. 3

Becoming Voluntarily Childless

311

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

and death, children's homes--and had decided to avoid the financial insecurity and deprivation she attributed to family life.
PARENTHOOD AS TOO HEAVYA
RESPONSIBILITY
Although 27 per cent of childless women and 28 per cent of childless men considered childbearing a difficult task in present-day conditions--problems of discipline, education, and drug-taking being frequently mentioned--only 2 women and 3 men had based their commitment to childlessness upon a wish to avoid the heavy responsibilities involved in raising "decent citizens."
Central to this interpretation were their observations and evaluations of the effects of parenting upon themselves; a positive evaluation of their parents' performance had lead one woman and man to avoid parenthood on the basis of their inability to live up to such standards. In contrast, one woman and two men described their parents as having let them down and themselves as having emerged from childhood neither as secure nor as stable as they might otherwise have been. Fearing a similar effect upon any children they might have,

they had decided to avoid the responsibility.
CHILDREN AS OBJECTS OFDISLIKE
Thirty-two per cent of childless women and 40 per cent of childless men appeared intolerant of children and childish activities. For 3 women and 2 men, however, negative feelings toward children formed their reason for wishing to avoid parenthood. The men were only children whose fathers had been absent for long periods during childhood and who now felt particularly ill at ease with male infants. The women, on the other hand, rejected children of both sexes; all 3 had experienced family life characterized by marital breakdown and mothers ambivalent towards the maternal role.
The wish to avoid parenthood is based upon negative evaluation of the parental role. Direct involvement in unconventional family situationsdeviations from the ideal model of parents and children living together in comparative harmony, with husband and wife adhering more or less to traditional gender roles--appears to have provided 22 of the 30 avoiders with the opportunity to consider an alternative to conventional family life (Table 4).

TABLE 4
UNCONVENTIONAL FAMILY SITUATIONS OF AVOIDERS

Only child Marital breakdown Handicapped sibling Anti-natalist mother Career-oriented mother.... Taken into care Absent same-sex parent....

Situations

..

·Exceeded by number of situations since the categories were not mutually exclusive.

Women (JV=13)'
3 7 2 2 0 2 2

Men
6 3 2 0 2 0 3

312

Campbell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Obviously not all individuals experiencing unconventional family situations translate this experience into the desire to avoid parenthood. A factor that may facilitate this process is the distance, social and geographical, that individuals place between themselves and their families of origin (Box, 1981). Levels of mobility experienced by avoiders prior to the development of a childless relationship are summarized in Table 5.
Social and geographical mobility may weaken the significance of the opinions, values, and sentiments of conventional others, i.e., parents, to whom the individual may be emotionally attached. Sixty-five per cent of the women and 70 per cent of the men who had wished to avoid parenthood described their relations with parents during childhood and adolescence as affectionate, yet remote, situations subsequently exacerbated by social and geographical mobility.
While unmarried, an individual's commitment to avoiding parenthood may go unchallenged; its significance is to the context of marriage. Recognizing the close relationship between marriage and parenthood, 12 of the 17 female avoiders but only one of the males had questioned the possibility of marriage,

believing they would not meet a partner who would share their perspective. They were in fact acting upon the assumption that parenthood is in some way natural and conforming to perceptions of themselves as unnatural and abnormal. The 5 women and 12 men who had seen no obstacle in the way of marriage had recognized childlessness as a legitimate alternative and themselves as rational decision-makers.
For a couple to be voluntarily childless, they must share the intention to remain childless. Thirteen women and 12 men had found like-minded partners. Three women and 2 men had rejected an earlier prospective partner on the grounds of incompatible reproductive goals. Four women and 1man had been able to persuade partners, conventionally committed, to accept the idea of marriage without children.
PROTECTION OF CHILDLESSNESS:
SITUATIONS, INTERPRETATIONS, AND
MOTIVES
The motives creating commitment to protecting childlessness emerge out of stable, long-standing relationships. Individuals, previously committed to parenthood, decide to forego this option in

TABLE5
LEVELS OF SOCIAL AND GEOGRAPHIC MOBILITY EXPERIENCED BY AVOIDERS PRIOR TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF A CHILDLESS RELATIONSHIP

Mobility
Social mobility Upwardly mobile Downwardly mobile Immobile
Geographic mobility Mobile Immobile
Both social and geographic mobility

Women (AT» 17)
14 0
3
10 7

Men
10 0 3
10 3

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 3

Becoming Voluntarily Childless

313

order to maintain, foster, and protect also the motive informing the decision

the advantages of living together with- of 2 women and one man in whose mar-

out children. The primary motives of the riages one partner experienced a deep

26 women and 17 men who had made emotional dependence. A child would

this decision are presented in Table 6. mean sharing the emotional resourcesof

the dominant partner who was invariCHILDLESSNESS ASMARITAL HARMONY ably male and who accepted the fe-

Sixty per cent of all childless women male's right to the final say on the ques-

and 68per cent of childless men believed tion of parenthood.

a child would detract from their marital A further scarce resource shared by

relationship. Although in the majority couples is leisure time. One of the

of cases this interpretation had emerged widely recognized advantages of child-

out of the decision to remain childless, 7 lessness is a couple's ability to spend women and 4 men had based their com- time doing things together. It was the mitment on the belief that childlessness motive however of only 2 women whose would protect marital harmony. Of main experience of companionship was these, 3 women and 3 men were partici- the social outing. Both women had been pants in relationships centered around introduced to the idea of childlessness sexual harmony. They assumed parent- by their husbands and had accepted hood would threaten this bond by low- commitment on the grounds that their ering the female's level of involvement compliance was one way of avoiding the and reducing her sexual appeal. All 6 strain increased segregation might place were skeptical of conventional family on their marriage. life, 5 of the 6 linking their views to

childhood experiences which included CHILDLESSNESS AS A CONDITIONFOR

long periods of separation from parents,

MARRIAGE

the absence of a same-sex parent, and the career-oriented mother. These experiences are likely to have engendered a less positive commitment to parenthood, and one the reality of married life could readily question.

One woman and 2 men had agreed to remain childless as a condition for marriage; the marriages would otherwise not have been contracted. Although all 3 had experienced doubts as to whether they should renounce commitment to

The possible conflict of interest be- parenthood, having done so, they had

tween marital and parental roles was reinforced their decision by drawing up

TABLE6
MOTIVES INFORMING COMMITMENT TO THE PROTECTION OF CHILDLESSNESS

Motives
Childlessness as: Marital harmony Condition for marriage Routine Fulfillment Social and moral responsibility .

women (N=2T)
1
1 11 7 1

Men
(AT=21)
4 2 7 7 1

314

Campbell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

a case for childlessness independent of their partners' and which encompassed motives both of avoidance and protection.
CHILDLESSNESS AS ROUTINE
Couples who delay conception may find that childlessness becomes an implicit assumption informing their daily routine. They plan, spend, socialize, work, and relax from an increasingly childless perspective (Veevers, 1980). Wanting to protect the routine they had created was in fact the motive behind the decision to remain childless taken by the 11 women and 7 men who had experienced delay. Of these, 4 women and 1 man had tried to become parents and had failed, but had not sought medical advice. The other 7 women and 6 men had never been in or had got out of step, through late marriage or other adverse circumstances such as financial difficulty or family illness, with the reproductive timetable represented by the actions of their peers. At the time they had acknowledged their commitment, all 18 were over the age of 30 and had considered themselves, particularly the women, "too old" for parenthood (Rindfuss and Bumpass, 1976).
They lead comfortable but ordinary lives with male and female adhering to traditional gender roles. Born before or during World War II (the average age of the men being 38, of the women 35), they appear to have been part of a generation for whom the gender roles had been clearly defined. The women work at jobs, not careers, and are primarily responsible for the home; the men are breadwinners with limited domestic responsibilities.
Postponement will increase the likelihood of childlessness by allowing couples the opportunity to compare their sit-

uation with that of conforming peers while at the same time developing a childless existence for themselves. At least some observations will favor childlessness, and delayers frequently cite the significance of the comparative peace and tranquility of their situation for their decision to remain childless. They are also able to partially excuse their nonconformity in terms of earlier attempts to conceive or the inappropriateness of their age.
CHILDLESSNESS AS FULFILLMENT
Also protective of their way of life were 7 women and 7 men whose commitment had been made during the early years of marriage, in their early to mid-twenties. They had expected to become parents but when faced with realizing their expectations had opted for the greater fulfillment they hoped to achieve by remaining childless and pursuing alternative goals (Table 7). Being able to achieve these goals more readily was recognized as an advantage amongst the childless as a whole and was frequently cited as integral to the case against parenthood (Table 8).
The 14 men and women whose decision to remain childless was based upon the interpretation of childlessness as fulfillment had rejected conventional beliefs that stress the importance of children for a meaningful and satisfying existence. They did so on the basis of rational discussion, seeing their decision as a logical and legitimate extension of planned parenthood. Following this cultural directive, they had avoided unplanned pregnancy and had simply extended this to indefinite postponement. They recognized the deviant nature of their commitment but believed themselves to be at the forefront of a movement toward freedom of reproductive

Vol. 30, No. 3

Becoming Voluntarily Childless

315

TABLE 7
GOALS INFORMING THE NOTION OF CHILDLESSNESS AS FULFILLMENT

Woman's career Standard of living Spontaneous action

Goals

Women
3 1 3

Men
2 1 4

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

TABLE8
GOALS RECOGNIZED AS BEING MADE MORE ACCESSIBLE BY CHILDLESSNESS

Woman's career Standard of living Spontaneous action

Goals

Women (N-44)
27 45 75

Men (/V=34)
10 50 82

choice. Of the 14,12 were upwardly mobile, 10 were university-educated, and all were members, or prospective members, of the professional middle-class. As in the case of many avoiders, they had moved away from the expectations and values of their parental background and appeared totally at ease with their nonconformity.
CHILDLESSNESS AS MORAL ANDSOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY
Just over 30 per cent of respondents expressed anxiety over the "state of the country and of the world" and, more specifically, over the "population problem" and saw this as a feature of their case for remaining childless. They admitted, however, that if other more personal motives had been absent, such altruistic notions would not have prevented them from having children. Only one woman and one man recognized their decision to remain childless as a moral and social responsibility. Both were in their early twenties,

university-educated, and emotionally detached from their families of origin.
Becoming childless in order to protect the rewards of living together without children, involves couples in the reversal of a prior commitment to parenthood. Obviously the agreement of both spouses is required if the marriage is to be voluntarily childless. Twenty-four of the 26 couples saw their commitment as mutual and their decision as having emerged out of their relationships with neither partner as instigator.
Certain situations appear to favor this outcome. Forty per cent of "protectors" had experienced postponement, delay, or problems with pregnancy. They were drawn from varying social backgrounds and saw their childlessness as more accident than rational decision. This was not the case with the remaining 60 per cent, all of whom described their commitment to be the result of rational consideration. The factors allowing this group the opportunity to escape conven-

316

Campbell

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

tion are similar to those of "avoiders"-- than to inform the early stages of the

an unconventional family background childless career. These and other mo-

and/or upward social mobility linked to tives may also take the form of post hoc

a high level of education. These findings justifications (Kiesler, 1977) or be used

suggest that the childless will not neces- as "relevant facts" to supplement ac-

sarily be drawn from the higher status counts. A dislike for children, the

sections of society (Baum and Cope, 1980), but that these groups will be disproportionately represented (Veevers, 1980).

daunting prospect of parenthood and its responsibilities, and thefinancialadvantages of childlessness were "motives" frequently used in this way. Respondents tended not to differentiate the mo-

CONCLUSIONS

tivational status of the many strands to their accounts and to have difficulty re-

Obviously no firm conclusions as to the situations and motives informing the decision to remain childless can be drawn from this small-scale exploratory study (Veevers, 1980). Evidence how-

calling the relevance and timing of specific "motives," but the probing and demand for detail required by a biographical approach overcame some, if not all, of these difficulties.

ever suggests that voluntary childless- Such an approach is also appropriate

ness is not a reflection of neurosis or im- when attempting to identify situations

maturity, nor do the childless appear as favoring the emergence of a childless

selfish or as irresponsible as the stereo- motivation (Blumer, 1969). Tentative

type implies.

identification has already been made--

Although explaining reproductive being an only child, having parents

behavior has proved notoriously dif- "martyrs" to parenthood and being out

ficult (Movius, 1976; Houseknecht, of step with the reproductive timetable

1978; Veevers, 1979), the childless, have received particular attention

partly in response to their deviant status (Veevers, 1980). This study supports

(Mills, 1940), appear to have little dif- these findings, but suggests that the situ-

ficultyarticulating their motives. Inter- ations identified only provide individu-

preting the relevance of such motives, als with the opportunity for considering

however, remains problematic. Repro- the childless alternative and are neither

ductive motivation is not only complex, necessary nor sufficient conditions.

but is also variable and likely to change Whether they take the opportunity--

with the individual and his circum- and having taken it, decide to remain

stances (Allport, 1955). In other words, childless--will depend upon how they

motives that inform initial commitment weigh their various interests. Wanting

to childlessness may be superceded by to avoid parenthood or to protect child-

others more relevant to a later stage in lessness must be seen to provide benefits

the life-cycle (Veevers, 1980).

outweighing the costs of nonconformity.

Findings from this study indicate that two of the more accessible motives, a desire for freedom and, on the part of women, the opportunity to pursue careers (Baum and Cope, 1980; Veevers, 1980), are more likely to emerge out of

Included in the latter will be the disapproval of conventional others. The childless tend, in fact, to have distanced themselves emotionally from those, particularly parents, who might be expected to express conventional opinions

Vol. 30,No. 3

Becoming Voluntarily Childless

317

in relation to family life and to have created a childless relationship which acts as a cushion against criticism.
It might be tentatively concluded that the proportion of childless couples is likely to increase. On the one hand, the depressed nature of the economy and of social life in general may be expected to lead to postponement of pregnancy and to a subsequent desire on the part of some couples to protect the rewards of childlessness. On the other hand, the growth in one-parent families and of families in which women work or pursue

careers provide at least one set of conditions for avoidance of parenthood. It is also possible that the idea of childlessness as a legitimate objective may become more widely accepted as behavior, expectations, and values in the area of family life come under increasing scrutiny.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Drs. Nancy Loudon and Margaret Oliver without whose initial help in gaining access to respondents this study would not have been possible.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

ALLPORT, G. W. 1955. Becoming. Yale Univ. Press, Princeton.
BAUM, E. and D. R. COPE 1980. Some characteristics of intentionally childless wives in Britain. J. Biosoc. Sci.12:287-299.
BLAKE, J. 1979. Iszero preferred? American attitudes toward childlessness in the 1970's. J, Marr. andFam. 41:245-257.
BLUMER, H. 1969. Symbolic interactionism. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Box, S. 1981. Deviance, reality and society. 2nd ed. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, London
BUSFIELD, J. 1974. Ideologies and reproduction. In M.P.M. Richards (ed). The integration of the child into asocial world. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
BUSFIELD, J., and M. PADDON 1977. Thinking
about children. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge. FIRESTONE, S. 1972. The dialectic of sex. Paladin, St. Albans. HOUSEKNECHT, S.K. 1978. Voluntary childlessness: A social psychological model. Altern. Lifestyles 1:379-402.
KIESLER, S. B. 1977.Post hoc justifications of family size. Sociometry, 40:59-67.
MEAD, M. 1949. Male and female. William Morrow, New York.

MILLS, C. WRIGHT 1940. Situated actions and vocabularies of motive. Am. Soc. Rev. 5:904-913.
Movius, M. 1976. Voluntary childlessness: The ultimate liberation. Fam. Coord. 25:57-63.
OECD. 1979. Child and family. Demographic developments in the OECD countries. Paris.
POLIT, D. F. 1978. Stereotypes relating to family-size status. J. Marr. Fam. 40:105-14.
RINDFUSS, R. R., and L. R. BUMPASS. 1976.
How old is too old? Age and the sociology of fertility. Fam. Plan. Pers. 8:226-230. SKOLNICK, A. 1973. Theintimate environment. Little Brown, Boston. VEEVERS, J. E. 1972.The violation of fertility mores: Voluntary childlessness as deviant behaviour. In C. Boydell, C. Grindstaff and P. Whitehead (eds.), Deviant behaviour and societal reaction. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Toronto.
. 1973.Voluntary childlessness: A neglected area of family study. Fam. Coord. 22:189-205.
. 1979. Voluntary childlessness: A review of issues and evidence. Marr. Fam. Rev.
. 1980, Childless by choice. Butterworths, Toronto.

