Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Differential fertility by intelligence: The role of birth planning
J. Richard Udry
To cite this article: J. Richard Udry (1978) Differential fertility by intelligence: The role of birth planning, Social Biology, 25:1, 10-14, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1978.9988313 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988313
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5
View related articles Citing articles: 34 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

Differential Fertility by Intelligence: The Role of Birth Planning

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

J. Richard Udry
CarolinaPopulation Center University of North Carolina Chapel, Hill, North Carolina
ABSTRACT: In a sample of urban white U.S. women, an inverse relationship is demonstrated between fertility and IQ and is shown to come about because low-IQ women have more unwanted births than high-IQ women. The excess of unwanted births among low-IQ women is caused by their elevated failure rate with temporary physician-administered contraceptive methods. In order to control their fertility according to their own desires as well as do high-IQ women, low-IQ women require increased use of permanent birth control methods.

Over the past decades, a number of papers have examined the relationship between intelligence and fertility. The primary purpose has been to determine

prepared to cope. Focus on the genetic issues has led to the neglect of this problem.

whether or not there is a dysgenic differential in fertility, under the assumption that a sizeable proportion of the variance in intelligence is genetically controlled. These studies have not been consistent in their conclusions. For example, Cattell (1950), Frederick Osborn (1971), and R. T. Osborne (1975) have reported dysgenic effects; Waller (1970), Bajema (1963), and Higgins, et al. (1962) have reported either no effects or eugenic effects. Cattell (1974) has reviewed factors which continue to threaten the validity of findings in such studies.
Irrespective of the findings of such studies, the fact remains that among the ever-married population low-IQ parents have more offspring than high-IQ parents. The larger number of children in each sibship may further depress the IQ of the children (Zajonc, 1976). Low-IQ parents may thus be faced with the problems of rearing large numbers of low-IQ children, a situation with which they are ill-

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The present paper identifies a sample of urban white ever-married women in which IQ is inversely related to fertility. It explores the role of birth planning in producing this inverse relationship.
The sample derives from an area sample survey of ever-married white women age 15-44 in low- and high-income census tracts in 16 U.S. cities interviewed in 1974 in connection with an evaluation of family planning programs in those cities.1 About one hundred women were interviewed in each city, except in Milwaukee, Akron, Houston, Columbus, and Memphis where about two hundred women were interviewed. While the sample is a probability
1 The cities in which interviews were conducted were Portland, Oregon; Houston, Texas; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Muskegon, Michigan; Utica, New York; Atlantic City, New Jersey; Wilmington, Delaware; Altoona and Johnson City, Pennsylvania; Savannah, Georgia; West Palm Beach, Florida; Jackson, Mississippi; Memphis, Tennessee; Columbus and Akron, Ohio; and Mobile, Alabama.

10

Vol. 25, No. 1

Differential Fertility

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

sample of the census tracts selected, it is not strictly representative of the total population of those cities since cities were not represented in the sample proportionate to their populations and since not all census tracts were in the pool from which the sample was drawn. Nevertheless, it represents a broad spectrum of the socioeconomic strata in U.S. urban areas. There is no reason to suspect that the sample is unrepresentative of U.S. urban ever-married women within the age range 15-44.
The first task was to.establish that there was a relationship between intelligence and fertility, net of social background factors. Intelligence (IQ) was measured by a shortened adaptation of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test suitable for administration as a part of a comprehensive field survey. This test is admittedly very far from culture fair and is known to be highly influenced by educational and other social background factors. Fertility was measured as children ever born (CEB). Because the sample varied in age, age and marital duration were measured and controlled. Because our IQ test is known to be sensitive to social background factors, father's occupational status at respondent's age 14 (coded on the Nam-Powers scale) was controlled. While it must be taken for granted that IQ causes some of the variance in education, education was nevertheless controlled. In this way, the analysis introduces controls for two social sources of variance in IQ scores, even though IQ probably also affects these two control variables. Consequently, these data present a relatively conservative estimate of the relationship between IQ and CEB.
RESULTS
Table 1 gives the results of analysis of covariance in which IQ is the independent

TABLE 1
ANALYSIS OF COVABIANCE OF IQ ON CHILDREN EVER BORN, USING AGE, DURATION OF MARRIAGE, EDUCATION, AND FATHER'S OCCUPATION AS
COVARIABLES

IQ and Covariables
Main effect of IQ Covariables
Age Duration of marriage Education Father's occupation

F
3.54
53.20 481.55
14.01 16.77

Signif.
0.028
0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001

variable, CEB is the dependent variable, and the covariables are age, duration of marriage, education, and father's occupational status. The main effect of IQ on CEB is statistically significant. Table 2 shows a 0.19 difference between the mean CEB of high- and low-IQ groups when covariables are controlled. While this difference is small, it is statistically significant. The high-IQ group has about nine-tenths as many children as the low-IQ group, other variables controlled.
Because the original purpose for which these data were gathered was to answer questions about the effectiveness of family planning programs, considerable data were gathered on current fertility desires, planning status of births, and patterns of use of contraception. These data will allow us for the first time to examine the possible role of birth planning in the relationship between IQ and fertility. The following possibilities are examined.
1. Low-IQ women desire morechildren than high-IQ women. In this case, higher fertility would represent their accomplishment of higher fertility goals. Examination of the data shows that low-IQ women desire 0.16 more children than high-IQ women. Therefore, desired family size was added as a covariable to the analysis shown in Table 1. If desired family size accounts for the relationship between IQ and CEB, then the significance of IQ should disappear as a main effect. Fur-

12

Udry

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
MEAN CHILDREN EVER BORN BY IQ ADJUSTED
FOR COVARIABLES
CHILDREN EVER BORN

TABLE 3
PERCENTAGE or WOMEN HAVING UNWANTED BIRTHS IN THREE-YEAR PERIOD FOR THOSE AT RISK AT BEGINNING OF PERIOD, BY IQ AND MARITAL
STATUS AT TIME OF INTERVIEW

IQ

Mean

No.

HUSBAND PRESENT

OTHEI

Low Medium . . . High

1.89
1.86 1.71

S90 IQ % No. % No.

612 62S L o w

. . .24.7 146 25.4

63

Medium

16 7 168 22.2 54

H i g h . . . . . . 1 1 0 191 8.7 46
ther, the CEB difference between high-

and low-IQ groups in Table 2 should be eliminated. In fact, desired family size is a significant covariable. But the significant level of IQ as a main effect is unchanged, and the difference in CEB between highand low-IQ groups remains unchanged. Differences in desired family size associated with IQ are therefore not the explanation for the relationship between IQand CEB.

wanted birth in the three-year index period by marital status at time of interview. For women with and without spouses present, the low-IQ women report two to three times the percentage of unwanted births as the high-IQ women. Since the results in Table 3 may be an artifact of a relationship between social background factors (which are shown in Table 1 to be related to IQ) and percentage of unwanted

2. Low-IQ women have more unwanted births, a regression analysis was prepared

fertility than high-IQ women. This hy- with "having an unwanted birth" as the

pothesis was examined by identifying un- dependent variable, IQ asthe independent

wanted births occurring to each women at variable, and age of respondent, father's

risk of unwanted fertility at an index point occupation, and respondent's education as

three years before the interview. The mea- controls, again using only women at risk

sure is therefore the proportion of women of an unwanted birth. The regression

at risk of an unwanted birth three years analysis is displayed in Table 4. While

ago who had an unwanted birth in the age, as expected, was an important de-

three-year interval. Only 668 out of the terminant of unwanted births, neither of

original sample of more than 2,000 women the social background variables had any-

were at risk of an unwanted birth at the thing approaching significant regression

index point. A woman is at risk of an coefficients. We can therefore conclude

unwanted birth if her desired completed that low-IQ women have a much higher

parity is not greater than her parity at the number of unwanted births than high-IQ

index point. This system allows for some women and that social background factors

slippage in desired family size, and there- are not contributors to that relationship.

fore an underenumeration of unwanted

births, since the desired family size was

TABLE 4

determined at interview, not at the index REGRESSION OF "HADUNWANTED BIRTH IN THREE

point. It is well known that a small pro- YEARS" ON AGE, EDUCATION, IQ, AND FATHER'S

portion of women alter their desired fam-

OCCUPATION FOR WOMEN AT RISK AT BEGINNING OF PERIOD

ily size upward to accommodate births

which before the fact would have been

Variables

b

F Signif.

identified as unwanted.

Age

-0.02

76.69

0.001

Education
Table 3 presents the percentage of IQ

-0.005 -0.002

0.54 NS 6.45 0.05

women at risk who experienced an un- Father's occupation-0.0009 2.30 NS

Vol. 25, No. 1

Differential Fertility

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Why do low-IQ women have more unwanted births than high-IQ women? There are three possibilities. (1) Low-IQ women use less effective contraceptive methods. (2) Low-IQ women fail more frequently with equally effective methods. (3) Low-IQ women do not rationalize unwanted births as effectively as high-IQ women. The third possibility can be eliminated logically, because if it were the sole explanation there would be nofertility difference to explain.
Do low-IQ women at risk of unwanted births have more unwanted births because they use less effective contraceptive methods? A tabulation, by IQ, of the percentage of women at risk who were using a physician-administered contraceptive (PAC) method (pill, IUD, sterilization) at both the beginning and end of the threeyear index period shows that a somewhat higher percentage of high-IQ women were using PAC methods (38 per cent of highIQ women vs. 30 per cent of low-IQ women). Therefore, the variable "using/not using PAC method at beginning and end of the period" was added to the regression shown in Table 4. While use of PAC methods explains a significant amount of variance in unwanted births, the coefficient for IQ is unchanged and still significant, and its F ratio is hardly reduced by the addition of "use of PAC." We conclude that while fewer low-IQ women use PAC methods, this fact does not account for their disproportionate number of unwanted births.
From the fact that after entering "use of PAC" in the regression, IQ still had essentially the same coefficient and F-ratio, we can conclude that the relationship between IQ and unwanted births is attributable to the more effective use by high-IQ women of methods theoretically of similar effectiveness.2 Table 5 shows the percentage of
2 It is possible that high-IQ women are using "bet-

TABLE 5
PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN HAVING UNWANTED BIRTHS IN T H R E E YEARS FOR THOSE AT RISK, BY IQ AND USE OF PAC METHOD DURING ENTIRE
PERIOD OF RISK

IQ
Low
High

USED A PAC METHOD ENTIRE PERIOD
Yes No
% No. % No.
11.1 63 30.8 146 8.2 73 22.8 149 3 4 89 14.9 148

women at risk who experienced an unwanted birth in the three-year period separately for those "using a PAC method for the entire period" and those not "using a PAC method for the entire period." The first thing to note is that those not using a PAC method during the entire period had unwanted births at about three times the rate of those using a PAC method during the entire period. But more important for our analysis, within method-use categories, low-IQ women experienced unwanted births at more than twice the rate of high-IQ women. We conclude that the disproportionate number of unwanted births occurring to low-IQ women can be accounted for by their disproportionate failure with methods theoretically of equal effectiveness. Here "failure with method" must be interpreted broadly to include discontinuance or sporadic or otherwise incorrect use of the method.

CONCLUSIONS
Low-IQ women in the present sample
have slightly higher fertility than high-IQ
ter" PAC methods than low-IQ women. Perhaps a higher percentage of the high-IQ women at risk are sterilized or spend a larger proportion of the index period sterilized. A variable was added to the regression equation in Table 4, indicating whether the woman or her husband was sterilized, and if so, for what part of the index period. Use of PAC was not included in this regression. "Sterilized time" had a trivial and insignificant regression coefficient and did not affect the remainder of the regression in any way. This finding indicates that the difference by IQ in unwanted births which is attributable to use of PAC is associated with use of temporary methods.

14

Udry

Social Biology

women, even after social background factors have been controlled. Low-IQ women have slightly higher fertility because they have more unwanted births than high-IQ women, not because they desire more children. While low-IQ women do not use PAC methods as often as high-IQ women, this fact is not the explanation for the relationship between IQ and frequency of unwanted births. This relationship can be explained by the fact that low-IQ women at risk of unwanted births fail more frequently than high-IQ women to prevent the births they do not want while using temporary methods theoretically of equal effectiveness.
Following this argument to its logical implications for program application, we can infer that low-IQ women are in need of permanent methods of fertility prevention when they have reached their desired family size if they are to be able to control

their fertility as well as high-IQ women. It should be emphasized that, according to our data, education is not necessarily the answer, since the differential in unwanted births for women at risk by education net of IQ is not significant. Within the ethical framework guiding family planning service delivery in the United States, the public purpose is to make it possible for Americans to realize their own fertility goals. Low-IQ women can only control their fertility in accordance with their desires as well as high-IQ women with the use of permanent methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by funds from the Center for Population Research, NICHD NO1-HD-42804, NOl-HD-32715 and HDOS798-04. Thanks to Bruck Eckland for useful comments on an earlier draft and to Judy Kovenock for management of the data analysis.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

BAJEMA, C. 1963. Estimation of the direction and intensity of natural selection in relation to human intelligence by means of the intrinsic rate of natural increase. Eugen. Quart. 10:175-187.
CATTELL, R. B. 1950. The fate of national intelligence: Test of a thirteen-year prediction. Eugen. Rev. 42:136-148. . 1974. Differential fertility and normal selection for IQ: Some required conditions for their investigation. Soc. Biol. 21:168-177.
HIGGINS, J. V., E. W. REED, and S. C. REED. 1962.
Intelligence and family size: A paradox resolved. Eugen. Quart. 9:84-90.

OSBORN, F. 1971. Races and the future of man, p. 149-157. In R. H. Osborne (ed.), Biological and social meaning of race. Freeman, San Francisco.
OSBORNE, R. T. 1975. Fertility, IQ, and school achievement. Psych. Rep. 37:1067-1073.
WALLER, J. H. 1970. Differential reproduction: Its relationship to IQ test score, education, and occupation. Soc. Biol. 18:122-136.
ZAJONC, R. B. 1976. Family configuration and intelligence. Science 192:227-236.

