Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Perceived contribution of children to marriage and its effects on family planning behavior
Patricia L. Tobin
To cite this article: Patricia L. Tobin (1975) Perceived contribution of children to marriage and its effects on family planning behavior, Social Biology, 22:1, 75-85, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1975.9988148 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988148
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage and Its Effects on Family Planning Behavior
Patricia L. Tobin
Department of Sociology and Anthropology North Carolina State University Raleigh, North Carolina

[i

mi

«.VIH

,

4 N
J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

In recent years there has been a great deal of interest in the social factors involved in differential fertility control. Modern contraceptive techniques, by permitting the voluntary disassociation of sexual pleasure from reproduction, have made childbearing more subject to rational control. While a number of fertility studies have explored various factors related to the decision to control fertility (including the sociocultural environment of couples and the structure of family relations), little attention has been paid to the couple's assessment of the costs and rewards of having children. One exception is a study dealing with the feelings of personal restriction created by children and fertility planning, but the findings from this study proved inconclusive (Riemer and Whelpton, 1955). As parenthood becomes more of a deliberate decision and less a matter of exposure to biology, it seems imperative to determine whether family planning behavior is influenced by a couple's attitudes toward the role of children in marriage. In an attempt to understand birth control actions as meaningful responses to familial and marital orientations, the pres-

ent research was designed to examine the impact of the perceived consequences of having children on a couple's contraceptive practices and the tendency to plan births.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
To the extent that procreation is a rational process, the decision to practice birth control is, in part, dependent upon the couple's perception of the probability or improbability that such behavior will lead to desirable consequences. Mishler and Westoff (1955, p. 132) suggest that "a particular pattern of fertility performance and control depends on the extent to which having a child (or a certain number of children) is compatible with other life values, and interests . . . ." Although most married couples take it for granted that they will have children (even among voluntarily childless couples [Veevers, 1973] only a minority make childlessness a stipulation of marriage), the possibility of postponing or regulating childbearing permits evaluation of children in light of their implications for marital and personal gratification (Hoffman and Hoffman, 1973, pp. 46-47 and 52-53). Thus, parenthood be-

75

76

Tobin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

comes significant in terms of how it reflects back on the marriage relationship and the style of life established to that point. The first and each additional birth affects not only the parents but the family as a whole by creating new role relationships and diffusing responsibility (Udry, 1974, pp. 382383). These consequences can be perceived by a couple as either desirable or undesirable depending on whether children are viewed as essential, inconsequential, or detrimental to marital development and fulfillment.
Numerous studies have examined the effect of children on marital adjustment and marital happiness. However, the research bearing on the relationship between family size and marital adjustment is somewhat contradictory. Studies have reported both an inverse relationship between family size and happiness in marriage (Reed, 1947; Burgess and Cottrell, 1939, pp. 258-259) as well as a direct relationship (Popenoe, 1940, p. 268). Furthermore, Blood and Wolfe (1960, pp. 262-263) found that mothers with three children expressed more satisfaction with their marriages than women with fewer or more children. Interpretations of the effects of family size become even more complicated when attitudes toward having children are considered. In this connection, Burgess and Cottrell (1939, pp. 260-261) found that the desire for children was positively associated with adjustment in marriage, regardless of whether the couple actually had children.
Some of the contradictions in the research on family size and marital adjustment can be explained by examining the family life cycle. The family life cycle concept is significant in this regard because the presence and ages of children are intrinsic aspects of its formulation; successive stages in the cycle are demarcated by both the development (social aging) of

individual family members and changes in family composition.
Two recent studies (Rollins and Feldman, 1970; Burr, 1970) have revealed that marital adjustment varies with changes in the family life cycle. In fact, a rather consistent pattern emerges. Couples express their greatest satisfaction with marriage between the prechild and early childbearing stages. Marital satisfaction is at a low point when children are school-age (oldest child is between six and thirteen years of age). After the children have left home, satisfaction increases almost to the level characteristic of beginning marriages. Apparently, the presence of dependent children in the home creates pressures and concerns, especially for the wife, which detract from positive companionship experiences with the spouse.
These findings seem to indicate that the life cycle stage of the family--as reflected by the presence and self-sufficiency of children in the home--is more crucial to variations in marital adjustment than actual family size. However, Rollins and Cannon (1974) caution that the explanatory power of the family life cycle may have been overstated. In a subsequent analysis, although the U-shaped trend between family life cycle and marital satisfaction was confirmed, only a small amount of the total variation in marital satisfaction was accounted for by stages of the family life cycle.
While objective evidence suggests that children do not uniformly contribute to marital happiness, parenthood may subjectively provide the primary or only source of marital satisfaction for some individuals. If given a choice, many women prefer the motherhood role as an alternative to extrafamilial roles or to idleness. Under these circumstances, childbearing and childrearing become extremely attractive activities (Rainwater, 1965, pp. 184-195). Moreover,

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

77

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

children represent a source of companionship and emotional security for some parents, even though satisfactory relationships with children tend to vary over the family life cycle (Burr, 1970, p. 36). In studying happily and unhappily married couples, Luckey and Bain (1970) found that children provided the greatest and only source of common satisfaction among unhappily married couples. In contrast, among the happily married couples, the mutually rewarding aspects of their marriages were not confined to children; companionship as well as other aspects of the marital relationship provided areas of common satisfaction.
Not all couples view the prospects of having children as highly rewarding or essential to the fulfillment of their marriage. Parenthood generally Creates a change of focus for a couple in the sense that childbearing allows less time, freedom, and privacy for the husband and wife to interact with one another and to concentrate on their mutual development (Pohlman, 1969, pp. 90-96). Moreover, pregnancy and child care are viewed by some as detrimental to the mother's physical health, attractiveness, and emotional stability (Pohlman, 1969, pp. 116-123). Emotional strain and loss of physical attractiveness are especially costly in marriages which place a premium on sociability, vitality, and glamour. Indeed, extensive family responsibilities are likely to be seen as undesirable if confinement due to childrearing interferes with the pursuit of extra-familial activities which carry public recognition and prestige. Finally, children may represent a financial burden if their presence (or number) is seen as depriving other members of the family of certain material gains and advantages.
The importance of recognizing the different meanings placed on the role of children in marriage lies in understanding how these anticipated consequences of having children might affect the family planning

behavior of couples. It is the contention of Mishler and Westoff (19SS, p. 136) that "the greater the extent to which children are seen as potentially restricting the range of desired experiences and activities, the stronger the desire to prevent or postpone a first pregnancy. (Of course, an opposite effect may be expected if children are visualized as expanding the range of experience.)" Following this line of.argument, the purpose of this study is to test the following hypothesis: The more important children are to marital development, the later the use of reliable contraceptive to limit childbearing and the greater the tendency to have unplanned births. Thus, differences in the salience of parenthood are expected to produce variations in the pattern of contraceptive use exhibited by couples throughout their marital years. Furthermore, couples who reveal a lack of concern for either the timing or limitation of pregnancies--as represented by a large proportion of unplanned births--are likely to be the same couples who welcome pregnancies and emphasize the rewarding consequences of having children over the costs. · There is a possibility that the association between the evaluation of children and family planning behavior varies under varying family conditions. Fawcett (1970, p. 110) has suggested that "children serve different functions in different kinds of societies, as well as between strata within a society . . . . " A study of socioeconomic status and maternal roles (Swinehart, 1963) indicated that women of different socioeconomic statuses differ in their satisfaction with the maternal role and their primary objectives in childrearing. Moreover, women who have been married longer are likely to be more favorably disposed toward the consequences of having children than newly married women due to the current emphasis on female self-actualization, independent of the homemaker role. How-

78

Tobin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

ever, there is also some indication (Leslie, situation in general. Respondents were

1967, pp. 528-529) that initial pregnancies, asked to indicate first whether they agreed

even if they are unplanned, are ·wanted by or disagreed with each statement, and next,

most couples and create only minor upsets how they believed their husbands would

in the marital relationship, while later preg- respond to each item. The following are

nancies are most likely to result in negative sample statements comprising the Value of

consequences, especially if the births are Children Scale:

unwanted. As a result of these findings, the effects of length of marriage, social status of the wife, and family size will be examined in conjunction with the basic hypothesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS Data to test the hypotheses were obtained from interviews with 433 women between the ages of 15 and 45 who were married and residing with their husbands at the time of the study.1 Restricting the sample to married women permitted references to their perceptions of their husbands' evaluation of children as well as the husbands' behavior with regard to conception control. The husband's influence on the wife's behavior was felt to be important, but time and money did not permit a survey of male attitudes. Married women

"When children prevent a husband and wife from really enjoying each other . . . , they are better off without children." "A large family brings a husband and wife closer together."
"Having children will strengthen the family . . . and give the parents companionship as the children grow older." " . . . a couple should have only a few children in order to maintain a good standard of living."
There were six possible response patterns
corresponding to each item in the scale.
A wife could perceive her husband as shar-
ing her views (both agreeing or both dis-
agreeing with the statement) ; she could
perceive their views as dissimilar (wife
agrees/husband disagrees or wife disagrees/
husband agrees) ; or she would express her
own views, but be unaware of her husband's
feelings.

without children were included in the study A tally of the response frequencies for

in order not to bias the findings against each item indicated that very few respon-

those couples who had deliberately pre- dents chose any but the two consonant

vented pregnancy for a period of time after responses. Therefore, the dissonant husband-

marriage.

wife responses were grouped together into

a single category. A score of " 7 " was as-

MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES
A scale assessing the value of children consisted of a series of items that were developed to measure a couple's perceptions of the effects of large and small families on the marital relationship and the family

signed to those responses reflecting positive contributions of children to marriage, a score of " 1 " was assigned to responses reflecting negative assessments of children, and a score of "4" to any mixed responses. The respondent's scale score consisted of the summated weighted responses of seven

1 The data for the present study were collected as a part of a larger research project, the purpose of which was to evaluate the effectiveness of a family planning clinic located in a county in Kentucky. Households in the urban area of the county were sampled randomly from the city directory, while households in the rest of the county were included by means of an area sampling technique.

items (a high total score represented a positive evaluation of the consequences of having several children).
An item analysis was performed on the seven items to measure the extent to which the statements differentiated the group of

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

79

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

subjects with the highest total scores from the group with the lowest total scores (see Edwards, 1957, pp. 152-156 for elaboration of this method). Since some items differentiated the high and low groups more than others, the seven items were tested for internal consistency. The alpha obtained was equal to 0.43 indicating only a moderate degree of internal consistency (for an explanation of alpha as a measure of reliability, see Guilford, 1954, and Bohrnstedt, 1969). Selective elimination of the less discriminating items only served to lower the alpha coefficient; therefore, the original seven items were retained as the final scale.
An index on contraceptive patterns was constructed to reflect the reported pattern of birth control practiced by a couple throughout their marital history. In developing the index, only contraceptive methods that were reported as "regularly used" were considered. The methods reported by the respondents were then divided into three categories: A, reliable methods (intrauterine device, birth control pills, diaphragm); B, semireliable methods (foam, jelly, cream, condom); and C, unreliable methods (withdrawal, rhythm, suppositories, douche). The timing of contraceptive use was ranked into the following categories: (1) use never initiated (low), (2) irregular use, (3) use only after the fourth pregnancy, (4) use before the fourth pregnancy but after the first, and (5) use before the first pregnancy (high). Within the last three categories, contraceptive classifications were arranged by reliability of the methods. Respondents were classified according to when they started using the most reliable method of all those they had used. This index seemed to differentiate reasonably well between different patterns of contraceptive use.
The correlation of contraceptive practice and expected family size produced a gamma

of --0.604. Since expected family size is one of the best indicators of fertility or completed family size, it would appear that the constructed index of effective contraceptive behavior was an adequate measure of the intention or ability to limit family size.
The degree of birth planning exercised by a couple was measured in terms of the proportion of total pregnancies that were unplanned. In this survey a distinction was made among (1) planned births, those wanted at the time of conception, (2) accidental births, those that occurred despite the fact the couple had been using something to try to prevent conception, and (3) unplanned births, those that occurred when a couple was neither trying to achieve nor trying to avoid conception. An unplanned pregnancy, then, was not an accidental conception, but one for which there was no prior planning or consideration one way or the other concerning the possibility of having a child. If accidental pregnancies had constituted all unplanned pregnancies, then the measure would have been confounded by those who had never used contraception.
A socioeconomic status index, based on the husband's principal occupation, his level of education, and total family income was used as a measure of social status. The computation of the socioeconomic status index was based on the measure developed by the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1963). The ranks associated with education, occupation, and income all ranged from a low of 1 to a high of 7. A respondent's socioeconomic status score was the sum of the ranks assigned to the three separate indicators.
RESULTS
The association between variables was measured by Goodman and Kruscal's gamma (Hays 1963, pp. 655-656) and

80

Tobin

Social Biology

partial gamma (Davis, 1967).2 Table 1 presents the zero order gammas between all variables. It was hypothesized that positive evaluation of children would be negatively related to effective contraceptive

women who have been married longer and
women with larger families are somewhat
more likely to emphasize the positive consequences of having children.3 On the other
hand, children are viewed as somewhat less

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
ZERO ORDER ASSOCIATIONS* BETWEEN AIX VARIABLES

Variables X(l) Value of children
X(2) Socioeconomic status
X(3) Years married
X(4) Number of children
X(S) Contraceptive pattern X(6) Proportion of unplanned
pregnancies

X(2) --0.21 (--0.24)
...
...
...
...

X(3)
0.19 (0.13) 0.06 (--0.02)
...
...
...

X(4)
0.23 (0.22) --0.13 (--0.19) 0.61 (0.53)
...
...

X(5)
--0.38 (--0.23)
0.33 (0.28) --0.3S (--0.19) --0.S6 (-0.33)
...

X(6)
0.18 (0-08) --0.38 (--0.31) 0.33 (0.25) 0.47 (0.31) --0.S3 (-0.3S)

* Values without parentheses are gamma coefficients. Values ·within parentheses are Pearson correlation coefficients.

practices and positively related to proportion of unplanned pregnancies. The direction of both hypotheses was supported, although the magnitude of the associations differed considerably. A woman's assessment of the advantages and disadvantages of children in marriage was much more closely related to the use of contraception (gamma, --0.38), than to the tendency to have unplanned pregnancies (gamma, 0.18). These findings were somewhat surprising since contraceptive pattern and unplanned pregnancies were thought to be similar measures of the same phenomenon, i.e., family planning.
A further look at Table 1 reveals that

rewarding by women from higher social statuses. The three control variables also show moderate to strong associations with contraceptive pattern and proportion of unplanned pregnancies, suggesting the need to look at length of marriage, family size, and socioeconomic status as conditions affecting, directly or indirectly, family planning behavior.
In order to determine the extent to which the association between evaluation of children and family planning behavior is influenced by socioeconomic status, size of the family, and length of marriage, the basic relationship was examined again with the latter three variables controlled. The find-

2 Gamma has been used as the primary statistic for analysis in this paper because most of the variables reflect ordinal relations among observations. However, for comparative purposes, Pearson correlation coefficients and partial correlations were calculated as well. Except for lower magnitudes for some of the correlation coefficients, the more sensitive statistics produced the same interpretation of the data as did the gamma coefficients.

3 The positive association that was found between family size and the evaluation of children contradicts the observation made by Leslie (1967, pp. 528-529) cited earlier. Tabular analysis revealed that about three-fourths of all couples with three children or less felt that children created some burdens or hardships for a marriage. However, couples with more than three children were almost equally divided in their assessments of the costs and rewards of having children.

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

81

ings are presented in Table 2. Socioeconomic status and number of children (and length of marriage, if correlation coefficients are calculated) appear to explain most of the association between evaluation of children and proportion of unplanned pregnancies. In each instance, when the test

or size of family is taken into consideration, the tendency of some couples to place more emphasis on the positive contributions of children to marriage is manifest in less reliable patterns of contraceptive use (Table 2).
From the results in Table 2, it might

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

TABLE 2
PARTIAL COEFFICIENTS* RELATING VALUE OF CHILDREN TO CONTRACEPTIVE PATTERN AND PROPORTION OF UNPLANNED PREGNANCIES W I T H SELECTED VARIABLES CONTROLLED

VARIABLES

Zero Order Coefficients

CONTROL VAMABLES

Socioeconomic Status

Years Married

Number oí Children

Contraceptive pattern Proportion of unplanned pregnancies

--0.38 (-0.23)
0.18 (0.08)

--0.26 (-0.18) --0.01
(0.00)

--0.36 (--0.22)
0.1S (0.04)

--0.27 (--0.17)
0.09 (0.00)

* Values without parentheses are gamma coefficients. Values within parentheses are Pearson correlation coefficients.

variables are controlled, the gamma values are reduced to zero. Hence, women of lower social status are more likely to view children as essential to marriage and also to have a relatively large proportion of unplanned pregnancies; but their evaluations of children are not directly related to their tendency to plan births. Similarly, the more children a woman has, the greater the probability that some of them will be unplanned. The direction of causation in the link between the number of children and evaluation of children is difficult to determine because attitudes toward children may vary in response to change in family size or, conversely, they may be a determining factor of family size. Only longitudinal analysis could adequately unravel the causal sequence.
In contrast to the above findings, the association between evaluation of children and contraceptive practice is not completely eliminated when controls are made for social status, length of marriage, or number of children. Even when social status

appear that attitudes toward children occur as part of a sequence in which antecedent factors (socioeconomic status and family size) stimulate varying assessments of parenthood, and these attitudes, in turn, lead to divergent family planning practices. However, the perceived consequences of having children clearly do not mediate the effects of any of the antecedent factors on contraceptive patterns or the proportion of unplanned pregnancies (See Table 3). Therefore, it cannot be established that a causal sequence exists between the three sets of variables. Because the relationship between the assessment of children and contraceptive pattern persists even when socioeconomic status and family size are controlled, it must be concluded that the evaluation of children independently influences contraceptive practice, at least to certain degree.
There is some evidence to suggest that evaluation of children differs among social status groups not only because of the salient values of these groups but also because of

82

Tobin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
PARTIAL COEFFICIENTS* RELATING SELECTED VARIABLES TO CONTRACEPTIVE PATTERN AND PROPORTION OP UNPLANNED PREGNANCIES WITH VALUE OF CHILDREN CONTROLLED

VARIABLES
Contraceptive pattern Proportion of unplanned pregnancies

Number of Children
--0.53/--0.S6 (-O.29/-O.33)
0.4S/0.47 (0.31/0.31)

Socioeconomic Status
0.32/0.33 (0.23/0.28)
--0.38/--0.38 (--0.30/--0.31)

YearsMarried
-O.33/-O.3S (-O.17/-O.19)
0.31/0.33 (O.24/O.2S)

* Values without parentheses are gamma coefficients. Values within parentheses are Pearson correlation coefficients. Values to the right of the slash are zero-order coefficients.

the alternatives to children that are available to satisfy these values. Hoffman and Hoffman (1973, pp. 61-67) point out that employment may be a true alternative to children for highly educated women whose qualifications enable them to obtain interesting jobs, but for less educated women employment is likely to supplement motherhood and act as an alternative only to housework.
Understanding the differences among social status groups is facilitated by stratifying the basic relationship between evaluation of children and family planning behavior for different levels of socioeconomic status. In Table 4 it is evident that the strength of the association between the evaluation of children and contraceptive

TABLE 4
VALUE OF CHILDREN AND F A M I L Y PLANNING BEHAVIOR BY SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS WITH YEARS MARRIED AND F A M I L Y SIZE CONTROLLED

Value of Children Valueof Children

Socioeconomic and Contraceptive and Unplanned

Status

Pattern

Pregnancies

Controlled for Years Married

Low Medium High

--0.34 --0.30 --0.36

0.04 0.08 0.19

Low Medium High

Controlled for Numberof Children

: . . --0.33 --0.16 --0.35

--0.07 0.08 0.16

pattern varies depending upon the level of socioeconomic status of a couple. In fact, regardless of whether length of marriage or number of children is controlled, a rather consistent pattern emerges. The assessment of the advantages and disadvantages of having children has the greatest impact on the contraceptive practices of high status women.4
If contraceptive practices are seen as deliberate activities, then the behavior of high status women can be predicted by their attitudes toward children, while the behavior of lower status wives appears to be predicted more by the number of children they already have. On the other hand, the association between the evaluation of children and unplanned pregnancies is virtually wiped out at all levels of socioeconomic status when length of marriage or number of children is controlled. The differential effect of the value of children on the two dependent variables is readily apparent.
The findings of some of the studies discussed earlier in the paper suggested that during different periods of family development, parents have different attitudes to-
4 Partial correlations reveal even greater distinctions between groups. The strength of the relationship for high socioeconomic respondents is very close to the zero order value (--0.26 and --0.21 when controlled for years married and family size, respectively). The lower and middle socioeconomic groups show values of --0.15 and --0.14 when years married are controlled and --0.12 in both cases when family size is controlled.

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

83

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

ward the consequences of having children. In order to examine the conditions under which the evaluation of children becomes most salient in determining conception control, women were grouped according to the number of children they had and the number of years they had been married (Table 5). Patterns of contraceptive practice re-

TABLE S
VALUE OP CHILDREN AND FAMILY PLANNING BEHAVIOR BY FAMILY SIZE AND LENGTH OF MARRIAGE WITH SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS CONTROLLED

Variables

Value of

Value of

Children and Children and

Contraceptive Unplanned

Pattern Pregnancies

Controlled Controlled

for SES

for SES

Number of children 0-1 2 3
Years married Less than S years . . . . . Between 5 and 10
Between 10 and 16
16 years plus

--0.28 0 03
--0.70
--0 20
--0.38
--0.39
--0 22 -0.27

--0.14 0.17 0.19
--0 03
--0.14
0.13
0.12 0.10

fleet the assessment of the consequences of having children most clearly for women who have had three children. Apparently, the presence of at least three children represents a crucial turning point in differentiating the contraceptive practices of couples who see children as central to marital development from the pattern of those who see children as problematic or simply complementary to the marital relationship.
Moreover, the contraceptive patterns of women who have been married more than ten years reflect their attitudes toward children less than the patterns of women married for a shorter length of time. This finding is difficult to interpret without longitudinal data for two reasons. Either

the relationship between evaluation of children and contraceptive patterns is weak for couples who have been married longer than ten years because adequate contraception was not available during the initial stages of childbearing for those who wanted to plan their families, or attitudes toward the consequences of having children generally change during the life cycle so as not to reflect the attitudes which originally give impetus to birth control practices. Although the effects of stratifying women in terms of the size of their family and the number of years married do not produce clear-cut results, it is important to note that views on parenthood have a varying impact upon contraceptive practices depending upon the stage of family and marital development.
The relationship between the evaluation of children and birth planning does not appear to vary in any consistent way when stratified by the number of children in the family or the number of years a couple has been married (Table S).5 These findings and the results found earlier when family size was controlled suggest that the meanings which couples attach to parenthood have no direct or independent impact on the tendency to plan births.
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study has been to determine the extent to which the perceived consequences of having children influence family planning behavior. Two separate measures of family planning were utilized, contraceptive pattern and propor-
5 An unexpected finding in Table S was the negative association between favorable assessment of children and tendency to plan births for women who had been married for less than five years and for those who were childless or had only one child. In this case, the association is probably confounded by women who view children as essential to marriage, but because they are recently married, have no children and, therefore, no unplanned pregnancies.

84

Tobin

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

tion of unplanned pregnancies. With regard to the first measure of family planning, it was found that the more a woman viewed children as an essential part of the marital experience, the less likely she was to use reliable contraception early in marriage. This was most true of high status women and least true of middle and lower status women.
Factors other than the perceived contribution of children to the marital relationship appear to influence the contraceptive practices of middle and lower status women. Hoffman and Hoffman (1973) have suggested that such things as employment of the wife and lack of sufficient help with household tasks and child care are likely to operate as "barriers" to childbearing among these women. Furthermore, children may not be evaluated by these women as either a strength or weakness of marriage, but as a source of personal reward and affiliation for the individual parent (Udry, 1974, pp. 381-382; Hoffman and Hoffman, 1973, pp. 52-53).
The influence of the evaluation of children on contraceptive practices also was contingent upon the number of children a couple had had and the number of years they had been married. Early years of marriage or the point at which a moderate size family had been reached (3 children) seemed to be important conditions through which the consequences of parenthood became salient considerations for the practice of contraception.
In terms of the second measure of family planning, it was found that the differences in incidence of unplanned pregnancies among women was more a result of socioeconomic circumstances and the tendency to have a large family (for whatever reason) than attitudes toward children. The association between evaluation of children and unplanned pregnancies appeared to be

spurious due to the mutual association of these variables with family size and socioeconomic status.
I t is apparent that in future studies of family planning behavior the measure of effective birth control should be selected with care. If the findings of this research can be accepted, then contraceptive practices and the tendency to have unplanned pregnancies are products of somewhat different causal sequences. Consequently, the use of different dependent measures might lead to slightly different interpretations of the impetus behind family planning. For example, ranking low on early reliable contraceptive use is not necessarily the same as ranking high on the tendency to have unplanned pregnancies. The former behavior may reflect the desires and designs of the couple, while the latter condition may be a response to extrinsic aspects of the family situation, such as limited access to power and other resources in the society that provide individuals with a sense of efficacy and control over their lives and their environment.
Moreover, these two aspects of family planning have different implications for policy decisions. Changing the incidence of unplanned pregnancies would entail attacking those structural conditions which handicap couples in changing their life circumstances. It would involve educating them to the concept of family planning and the techniques of birth control, increasing their contact with various service agencies and facilities, and generally broadening their social and economic opportunities (see Schorr, 1966). Changing contraceptive patterns, on the other hand, might involve encouraging alternative adult roles, especially for women, and creating differential incentives for childbearing. Policies in the latter instance would be more difficult to institute because they would involve changing val-

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

85

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

ues, attitudes, and marital patterns ofin- preference andchoice by encouraging conteraction. Such policies might also prove formity to one family type. to beundesirable if they limited individual

REFERENCES

BLOOD, ROBERT O., and DONALD M. WOLFE. 1960. Fund, Current Research in Human Fertility.

Husbands and wives. The Free Press, New Milbank Memorial Fund, New York.

York.

POHLMAN, EDWARD. 1969. Psychology of birth

BOHRNSTEDT, GEORGE. 1969. A quick method for planning. Cambridge, Mass.: SchenkmanPub-

determining the reliability and validity of mul- lishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.

tiple-item scales. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 34:542-548. POPENOE, PAUL. 1940. Modern marriage. The

BURGESS, ERNEST W., and LEONARD S. COTTRELL. Macmillan Co., New York.

1939. Predicting success or failure in marriage. RAINWATER, LEE. 1965. Family design: Marital

Prentice-Hall, New York.

sexuality, family size, andcontraception. Aldine

BURR, WESLEY R. 1970.Satisfaction with various Publishing Company, Chicago.

aspects of marriage over the life cycle; a ran- REED, ROBERT B. 1947. Social and psychological

dom middle class sample. J. Marr. Fam. 32: factors affecting fertility: The interrelationship

29-37.

of marital adjustment, fertility control and

DAVIS, JAMES A. 1967. A partial coefficient for size of family. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 25:

Goodman and Kruskal's gamma. Amer. Statist. 383-425.

Assoc. 62:189-193.

RIEMER, RUTH, and P. K. WHELPTON. 1955. At-

EDWARDS, ALLEN L. 1957.Techniques of attitude titudes toward restriction of personal freedom

scale construction. Appleton-Century-Crofts, in relation to fertility planning and fertility.

New York.

Milbank Mem.Fund Quart. 33:63-111.

FAWCETT, JAMES T. 1970.Psychology and popu- ROLLINS, BOYD C., and KENNETH L. CANNON.

lation: Behavioral research issues in fertility 1974. Marital satisfaction over the family life

and family planning. The Population Council, cycle: A reevaluation. J . Marr. Fam. 36:271-

New York.

282.

GUILFORD, J. P. 1954. Psychometric methods. Mc- ROLLINS, BOYD C., and HAROLD FELDMAN. 1970.

Graw-Hill, New York.

Marital satisfaction over the family life cycle.

HAYS, WILLIAM L. 1963. Statistics for psycholo- J. Marr. Fam.32:20-27.

gists. Holt, Rinehart andWinston, New York. SCHORR, ALVIN L. 1966. The family cycle andin-

HOFFMAN, LOIS W., and MARTIN L. HOFFMAN. come development. Social Security Bulletin

1973. The value of children to parents, pp. 19- (February): 14-26.

76. In James T. Fawcett (ed.), Psychological SWINEHART, JAMES W. 1963. Socio-economic level,

Perspectives on Population. Basic Books, New status aspiration, andmaternal role. Amer. So-

York.

ciol. Rev.28:391-399.

LESLIE, GERALD R. 1967. The family in social con- UDRY, J. RICHARD. 1974. The social context of

text. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

marriage. 3rd ed. J. B. Lippincott, New York.

LUCKEY, ELEANORE B., and JOYCE K. BAIN. 1970. U.S. BUREAU OFTHE CENSUS. 1963. Methodology

Children: A factor in marital satisfaction. J. and scores of socio-economic status. Working

Marr. Fàm. 32:43-44.

Paper #15. U.S. Government Printing Office,

MISHLER, ELLIOT G., and C. F. WESTOFF. 1955. Washington, D.C.

A proposal for research on social andpsycho- VEEVERS, J. E. 1973.Voluntarily childless wives:

logical factors affecting fertility: Concepts and An exploratory study. Sociol. Soc. Res. 57:356-

hypotheses, pp. 121-50. In Milbank Memorial 66.

