Social Biology
ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19
Transmission of information about the environment in the human species: A cybernetic view of genetic and cultural evolution
Carl Jay Bajema
To cite this article: Carl Jay Bajema (1972) Transmission of information about the environment in the human species: A cybernetic view of genetic and cultural evolution, Social Biology, 19:3, 224-226, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987989 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987989
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 3
View related articles
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:33

Transmission of Information about the Environment in the Human Species: A Cybernetic View of Genetic and Cultural Evolution

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Carl Jay Bajema
Department of Biology Grand Valley State College Allendale, Michigan

What a man is and all that he knows is a result of information passed on to him by the DNA code of his genes and by the sensory information he receives throughout his lifetime.1
Many species of animals possess two systems for processing, interpreting, utilizing, and transmitting information about their environments to other members of the same species--a genetic system based on genes (DNA) and a nongenetic or cultural system based on the brain. The brain is most highly evolved in the human species. The genetic evolution of the biological capacity for nongenetic (cultural) transmission of information concerning the environment in the human species by the symbolic processes of language has made cultural adaptation the primary means by which human populations adapt to their environments.
The idea that cultural evolution has replaced genetic evolution, i.e., that cultural evolution has put an end to genetic evolution is one of the most widely held misconceptions concerning human evolution. When both genetic and cultural evolution are

viewed from the perspective of cybernetics (see Figure 1), it becomes readily apparent that cultural evolution has not replaced genetic evolution (Bajema, 1971; Dobzhansky, 1964). Both genetic and cultural adaptation to the environment are going on simultaneously, and the two systems are constantly interacting as human populations adapt to their environments.
It is via natural selection that information about the environment is transmitted to the gene pool of a population. This is accomplished by differential reproduction of different genotypes changing the frequencies of genes in populations. Those individuals carrying the genetic information about the environment that best enables them to survive and reproduce transmit the most genes and thus the most genetic information about the environment to the next generation(s). Cultural adaptation to the environment takes place via the differential transmission of ideas which influence how human beings perceive and interact with the environment which affect survival and reproductive patterns in and between human populations.

The effect that cultural evolution has had

1 The source of this quotation is unknown to the author of this paper.

on genetic evolution in the human species

224

Vol. 19, No. 3

Environment in the Human Species

225

Differential transmission of ideas via
differential communication

Variation reduction (output)

Feedback

Natural selection (differential reproduction)

Feedback

Variation reduction (output)

Information stored in human brains and supplementary storage banks --books, pictures, computers, etc.
Ideas (variation input)

Individual human being -- environment
interaction
Changing environment (variation input)

Information stored in
DNA of genes in human beings
Gene mutations (variation input)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

Cultural evolution

Genetic evolution

Fie. I.--Transmission of information about the environment in the human species--a cybernetic view of genetic and cultural evolution.

has been so great that the rates of evolution with respect to such human physical characteristics as brain size (Campbell, 1963; Tobias, 1971) and dentition (Bilsborough, 1969; Kinzey, 1970) are among the more rapid rates of mammalian evolution which have been calculated from fossil evidence (Kurten, 1959). Thus, the data indicate not only that human genetic evolution has not ceased, but that the rate of genetic change for some human characteristics accelerated as the human species evolved the capacity for transmitting information about the environment via the symbolic processes of language.
Natural selection has not ceased operating to bring about genetic change in contemporary societies. The direction and/or intensity of natural selection in relation to human physical health and behavior patterns have been altered by cultural changes. For example, the direction and intensity of natural selection in relation to sickle-cell hemoglobin (Allison, 1954, 1964) has been altered by such cultural developments as specific agricultural practices (Wiesenfeld,

1967), the development and use of pesticides to control the populations of mosquitoes which serve as vectors for malaria, and still more recently by the development of inexpensive specific medical therapy (urea treatment) which alleviates the adverse symptoms of sickle-cell anemia (Nalbandian et al., 1971a, 19716).
As Theodosius Dobzhansky (1964, p. 7) has pointed out, "it is precisely because we know that mankind changes so greatly in cultural aspects that we can be reasonably confident that the human species is changing to some extent genetically." There are two conditions necessary for genetic change to take place--a changing environment and the presence in human populations of genetic variants, some of which confer upon their carriers a higher fitness in the newly emerging environments. Cultural evolution has created selective pressures which have brought about genetic changes which increased man's capacity for the cultural transmission of information about the environment. These genetic changes in turn increased the fitness for

226

Bajenia

Social Biology

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:33 08 December 2015

and the dependence of their carriers on culture and stimulated further cultural developments. These cultural developments in turn initiated still further genetic changes. Thus, a positive relationship has existed between cultural and genetic evolution in the human species with respect to what we call intelligent behavior.
The great changes that have and are taking place in the social structure of human societies affect the direction and/ or intensity of natural selection particularly with respect to human behavior patterns (Bajema, 1972). It is interesting to note that the emerging urban-industrial welfarestate environments of the United States appear to be cultural environments which cause natural selection to operate to bring about a very slight increase in the frequency of those genes in the population which in interaction with the environment lead to the development of above-average intelligence (as measured by IQ). At least this is the case in all three of the primarily urban native-born white American popula-

tions where the operation of natural selection in relation to individual differences in intelligence has been studied. The results of these three studies are discussed in more detail in another paper presented at this symposium (Osborn and Bajema, "The Eugenic Hypothesis").
The use of cybernetic models to describe genetic and cultural evolution helps us to more clearly understand how the genetic and cultural systems for transmitting information about the environment complement each other. These two systems for transmitting information about the environment are so interlocked that change in the information content of one system frequently brings about a change in the information content of the other system.
The evidence indicates that the genetic evolution of man's capacity for culture greatly expanded the cultural dimension of human evolution which in turn has had the effect of increasing the rate of genetic evolution in the human species.

REFERENCES

ALLISON, A. 1954. The distribution of the sicklecell trait in East Africa and elsewhere, and its apparent relationship to the incidence of subtertian malaria. Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 48:312-318.
_____. 1964.Polymorphism and natural selection in human populations. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 29:137-149
BAJEMA, C. (ed.) 1971. Natural selection in human populations: The measurement of ongoing genetic evolution in contemporary societies. Wiley, New York.
_____. 1972. Some thoughts concerning the direction and intensity of natural selection with respect to human physical health and behavior patterns in industrial welfare state democracies. In I. Porter (ed.), Heredity and society. Pergamon Press, New York.
BILSBOROUGH, A. 1969. Rates of evolutionary change in the hominid dentition. Nature 223: 146-149.
CAMPBELL, B. 1963. Quantitative taxonomy and human evolution, p. 50-74- In S. Washburn

(ed.), Classification and human evolution. Aldine, Chicago.
DOBZHANSKY, T. 1964. Evolution--organic and superorganic. Bull. Atom. Sci. 20 (May): 4-8.
KINZEY, W. 1970. Rates of evolutionary change in the hominid canine teeth. Nature 225:296.
KURTEN, B. 1959. Rates of evolution in fossil mammals. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 24:205-215.
NALBANDIAN, R., G. SCHULTZ, J. LUSHER, J. AN-
DERSON, and R. HENRY. 1971.Sickle cell crisis terminated by intravenous urea in sugar solutions--A preliminary report. Amer. J. Med. Sci. 261:309-324.
NALBANDIAN, R., S. ANDERSON, J. LUSHER, A.
AGUSTSSON, and R. HENRY. 1971. Oral urea and the prophylactic treatment of sickle cell disease-- A preliminary report. Amer. J. Med. Sci. 261: 325-334.
TOBIAS, P. 1971. The brain in hominid evolution. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.
WIESENFELD, S. 1967. Sickle-cell trait in human biological and cultural evolution. Science 157: 1134-1140.

