PLANNED PARENTHOOD
By DR. SARVEPALLI RADHAKRISHNAN

Vice-President of India

We are happy to publish this text, revised
and approved by the author, of this import‘ant address which was delivered on Monday,
November 24th, 1952, at the inauguration
of the Third International Conference on
Planned Parenthood, held in Bombay.

HAVE come here today as a student
[retin than asa teacher. I have come here
to learn about family planning. I am
glad that a large number of experts from
foreign countries who have studied this
question from the scientific, technical and
professional aspects are here to advise us
as to what we should do on this very vital
problem. If you ask me why, in spite of my
ignorance of the details of the scientific
and technical aspects of family planning, I
find myself here, my answer to you is that I
fell a prey to the irresistible appeal of the
president of the Family Planning Association
of India.

Just a few minutes ago I had the pleasure
of addressing students of technology at
Matunga, while opening two hostels there.
The advice given to students in our country
according to tradition is—I will give you
the sanskrit first—‘‘ matr devo bhava, pitr
devo bhava, acarya devo bhava, atithi devo
bhava, prajatantum mat vyavacchesih ’’—
“do not cut off the thread of offspring.”’
Students, when they complete their careers,
are called upon to enter the state of the householder and there the advice given to them is
“do not cut off the thread of offspring.”
In other words, they are called upon to marry
and produce offspring. We never regard sex
as something impious or obscene. It is the
duty, normally speaking—we are not making
laws for exceptional cases—of young students
when they leave the universities to enter
into the state of marriage, and there the
main purpose of marriage is inculcated as
the production of offspring. Marriage is the
union of man and woman, and family life
is enlarged and completed by the arrival
of children.

15

Those who wish to avoid children for
personal reasons, or for reasons of comfart,
or for reasons of leading independent liver.
are not encouraged. All the same, if you
subject women to frequent childbirths,
you will be guilty of cruelty to human beings,
you will undermine their health, you will
impair family happiness, you will be making
difficult marriages which otherwise might
have been successful. If, therefore, your
intention is to safeguard the health and
happines of family life, you must determine
the time of childbirth, space the arrival
of the children. I take it, to determine this
is to plan a family. If, therefore, your main
interest is to secure the health and happiness
of both mothers and children, if your main
interest is to bring down the infant and
maternal mortality in this country which is
so ruinous, it is essential for us to adopt
a system of family planning. I appeal for
that in the name of social welfare of both
parents and children. I do not think it is’
anybody’s view here that we should overstrain and tax the health of mothers, and
bring into being weaklings who are not able
to stand the strain of life, people whose
bodies are crippled from the very start.
It is, therefore, essential that there should
be some system of planning of families.

There is a social aspect to this problem
also. We have today two and a half billion
human beings in this world. We now talk
about human rights. The Declaration on
Human Rights has been adopted by the
United Nations and the UNESCO. In other
words,. we wish to provide for children all
facilities of food, clothing, shelter, medicine,
education, etc. We have committed ourselves to this doctrine of human rights.
There was a time when we regarded human
beings as so much chattel; human beings
were poor, ignorant, illiterate, diseased and
crippled. Those days are over. People are
not prepared to accept as axiomatic poverty,
misery, starvation and the like. We are
16 os THE EUGENICS REVIEW

committed to a social welfare State. It is our
aim in this country to see to it that our
children are given every kind of facility
to grow into healthy, happy, responsible
citizens of our community. Are we in a
position to do so at the present moment ?
Are we doing it? On every side I turn
there is discontent, dissatisfaction,
everybody thinks that every child however
humble it may be has a right to grow up in
peace and security, has a right to be treated
when it falls ill, has a right to be educated.
We are not in a position even with our
present population to give that kind of
assistance to our people. So it seems that
where other countries like Russia, or New
Zealand or Australia encourage larger families, there is a feeling that in our country
we must try to do something to limit
population. The Planning Commission
speaks of it ; as the Prime Minister’s message
read just now says, we must try to reduce
population, to limit population, and we are
not committed to any one method. Mahatma
Gandhi said that by means of abstinence
you must try to bring down population ;
he did not want so many people brought into
existence who could not properly be cared
for. That is the conviction of many of the
leaders of our country.

The question is sometimes raised whether
it is not true that God sends children into
this world and we should not interfere with
the ‘Will of God—that is the way in which
it is put. I may tell you that if God has
given us any intelligence, he has given it to
us to be used. Intelligence is a Divine gift,
anticipating consequences and planning with
special relevance to the facts. These are
things which we are called upon to adopt
because the human mind is a gift of the
Divine. We have had infanticide, we have
had pestilence, we have had floods and earthquakes, and we have been acquiescing in
all sorts of evil practices in this country.
We have inherited not only great areas of
light, but we have inherited large tracts
of darkness and ignorance.

What is civilization? It is a progressive
control of nature. While in the animal world
it is the environment that selects who sur
and 
vives and who does not survive, man is given
intelligence to adapt himself to the environment. The duty which human individuals
have is to find out what the social needs
are, what the physical needs are, what the
spiritual needs are, and strive to fulfil them.
God is not an external despot. He is there
in the innermost depth of our being, and
when the still small voice prompts us, asks
us to use our intelligence in a fairminded,
objective, honest way we are using the gift
of God for purposes of human welfare. That
is how we have to employ our intelligence
to achieve human welfare.

We have various ideas as to how there
can be limitation of population. There are
some who tell us that if we raise human
standards there will be a fall in the birth
rate—look at some of the advanced Western
countries. There are others who tell us
that by the application of modern science
and technology we can improve the world’s
yield of food, so that the increase of population will never outrun the subsistence level.
There are still others who tell us that if
we only change our economy, if our whole
social structure is altered, then we can go on
producing as many as we please with no
disastrous results. These are all different
ways in which we are called upon to look
at this problem of family planning. I want
to say these are long-term remedies. Our
need is desperate, the claims of humanity
appeal to us, and it is essential that we should
do something for regulating population.
We have interfered with nature, we have
controlled nature in lowering the death rate,
postponing death, combating disease, prolonging human life, to preserve ourselves
from floods and earthquakes. Im all these
matters, we are using human intelligence—
to prolong the life of human beings and to
preserve them for a higher purpose—that is
what we are attempting to do. But we are
told, just when it comes to limitation of
population, that we are interfering with
the drift of nature. The drift of nature is
excessive production. The poorer we are,
the more ill-nourished we are. Sex is the
only indoor sport open to us and large
families are produced. It is the poor people
PLANNED PARENTHOOD oe yy

that produce large families and not the rich
ones..

Now, how can we best bring about limitation of population? We are told that
Gandhi is our greatest authority here.
He said ‘I want limitation of population,
but the method which we should adopt
is the method of abstinence, austerity and
self-control.” There is no doubt that it is
the best method, but, I should like to ask,
whether it be by self-control or abstinence
or austerity of. living that limitation of
population is brought about, is not that an
interference with nature ? If we do not control ourselves, we will produce more,
and if we do control ourselves we will produce
less. Well, there is an interference with
nature even there, and so far as we are
concerned most of us are human beings
striving to be saintly, but have not yet
become saints. There is another method
which is called the ‘‘rhythm method.”
There are safe periods and there are unsafe
periods. In unsafe periods abstain, in safe
periods it doesn’t matter what we do.
Well, this method makes out that we can
interfere with nature. That is what they
tell us. It also recognizes that marriage
has got its own justification apart from
parenthood because we are allowed to use sex
for purposes of mutual satisfaction without
any expectation of producing offspring.
So, here again, there is this method of abstinence for certain periods, but indulgence
for certain other periods, and so, this method
also is an interference with nature and at the
same time admits that marriage has its
own value apart from parenthood. That is
what it comes to, but here we avoid the
application of mechanical and chemical
means. We have that next. There again,
there is interference with nature and we also
have a recognition that marriage has its
justification apart from parenthood.

There is a journal called Sczence published
by the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. That journal
points out that scientists are experimenting
with an anti-fertility drug which is to be
administered orally, which has got all the
value without the disvalue of other methods

which are now being adopted. Science, I
may tell you, will go on advancing and will
give us all sorts of methods which are bound
to be used for the use of man. All knowledge
is a double-edged sword, whether it is atomic
energy or whether it is contraceptives.
It all depends on the purpose for which this
knowledge is employed. If we employ it for
preserving health and happiness for medical,
scientific, social or economic reasons, we
cannot ban it. If we use these methods for
illicit gratification of our appetites or for
evading the consequences of our acts, it
is to be deprecated. So, whether we use it for
a or b depends entirely on the frame of mind
or the purpose for which we use it. In this
world there are no absolutes, except the
well-being of man. The world is one of
perpetual movement. We-call it the world
of sansara.

St. Paul thought celibacy was the highest
ideal, but then found that those who were
celibates were getting disturbed, disorganized and disintegrated in their minds.
So he said: “It is better to marry than to
burn.’ Instead of burning by the effects
of a single life, if our development requires
marriage, go and get married.

We know that Ghandi himself was a
philosophical anarchist who believed that
individuals must be self-regulated, selfcontrolled ; but in view of the circumstances
of the world he acquiesced in social regulations, prisons, police, etc. He taught us to
resist evil by non-violence and added,
“but if you can’t resist evil by non-violence,
cowardice is worse than violence. But resistance to evil is essential. Never submit to
evil.’”’ The ideal is non-resistance, resistance
by non-violent means but resistance by
violent means is not to be ruled out if we
are incapable of spiritual resistance. He
made a distinction between what may be
regarded as the ideal and what is to be
regarded as the permissible. Now, when we
have all these methods, when the Planning
Commission has told us, when the leaders
tell us that it is essential for us to control
increase of population, it is open to us to
find out, each for himself, what is best
adapted to his own development. I may say,
“mB. THE EUGENICS REVIEW

af, ‘the ‘purpose is not wrong, there is no
-ethical or spiritual harm done, and it is the
‘purpose which determines the use or abuse of
‘these modern inventions. If a surgeon
‘inflicts pain to heal he is not wrong ; if a
‘murderer inflicts pain to kill, he is guilty
of the greatest crime.

I am not an authority on these matters,
but I have heard these things talked about,
and I was trying to think for myself what
exactly should be the attitude so far as
our country is concerned. This attitude of the
ideal and the permissible has come down to us
from ancient times. There is a verse which
says “we have the vedic methods, the

LE W IY’ S HOLD A LARGE STOCK OF BOOKS ON EUGENICS ©

____ AND ALLIED SUBJECTS.
IN PIN STOCK OBTAINE: OBTAINED U! UNDER BOARD OF TRADE LICENCE. CATALOGUES
ON REQUEST. PLEASE STATE PARTICULAR INTEREST.

  

SECOND-HAND BOOKS: .
. Scientific and Technical Books:
Medical Books:

classified under subjects.

LONDON :

Telephone: EUSton 4282.

   

23 Gower Place, London, W.C.1
140 Gower Street, London, W.C.I

A constantly changing large stock of Medical and Scientific Literature on view,

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower St., W.C.1

Business hours: 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Saturdays to 1 p.m.

brahmanical method of fighting evil with
spiritual weapons. If we are unable to do it,
fight evil with military weapons. Both are
permissible, but spiritual resistance is higher
than military resistance.”” That is how the
ancient scriptures put it.

As I said, I do not know much of these
things, but I do know that something
requires to be done and your Conference,
consisting of so many experts, will be able to
tell us what are the harmful methods and
what are the health-producing methods.
I wish the Conference every success, and
hope that we in this country will profit by
the lessons which it will be able to give us.

     

FOREIGN BOOKS NOT

  
       
      
  

Libraries or small collections purchased.

        

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 1
