SOME RECENT STUDIES OF INTELLIGENCE

A Survey of the Society's ‘‘Occasional Papers’

By H. J. EYSENCK, Ph.D.

Psychological Department, Maudsley Hospital

HIS brief survey of the second, third,

and fourth “Occasional Papers on

Eugenics ’’* must open with a word
of appreciation to the editor of the series for
his success in bringing together authors of
such high eminence in their professional
fields who, although they are dealing with
matters of great complexity and great difficulty, yet write with a clarity and conciseness rarely found in social scientists. Add to
these qualities the paramount interest of the
subjects dealt with—ZIntelligence and Fertility,t The Trend of National Intelligence,t
Psychological Approaches to the Biography of
Genius§—and the great value of these publications becomes apparent.

The importance of these contributions is
increased by the fact that each of the authors
describes large-scale experimental studies
which he himself has personally carried out
or directed; these studies were started
several decades ago, and the authors are able
in their discussions to deal with the criticisms and objections which have been voiced
in the meantime. Some of these criticisms
are brought together in an article by Julian
Blackburn, and in reviewing the original
papers it will be convenient to deal with this
article also, as well as with the reply by Sir
Cyril Burt. ||

The essential point of Burt’s and Thomson’s argument is probably well enough
known to eugenists to need no more than
cursory mention. It might be presented in a
series of steps: (1) Intelligence is largely an
Hamish Hamilton Ltd.

¢ By Sir Cyril Burt. Pp. 43. Price 2s.

t By Professor Godfrey Thomson and other authors.
Pp. 35. Price 2s.

§ By Professor Lewis Terman. Pp. 24. Price 1s. 6d.

{] Population Studies, 1, 2, 1947, ‘‘ Family Size,

Intelligence Score and Social Class,” by J. Blackburn.
Pp. 165-76. By C. Burt, pp. 177-86.

21

innate quality. (2) People with lower intelligence tend to have more children than
people with higher intelligence. (3) The
intellectual level of the population is decreasing in consequence of these facts at a
rate of approximately 1-5 to 2 points of I.Q.
per generation—possibly a little less, possibly
a little more. (Step (1) is not strictly speaking essential for this conclusion; even if
intelligence were entirely due to environmental factors, (3) would follow from (2)
alone. However, on this basis the problem
would cease to be a eugenic one, and become
educational, and in Burt’s and Thomson’s
formulation step (1) is included in the argument, as it undoubtedly ought to be.)

The consequences of such a decline are
shattering in their implications. A loss of a
few points of I.Q. per generation may not
appear very serious, but, as Burt shows, “ if
the rate [of loss] assumed continues, then in
little over fifty years the number of pupils of
‘scholarship’ ability would be approximately halved and the number of feebleminded almost doubled.” It is doubtful if
civilization as we know it could survive such
a catastrophe.

Both Burt and Thomson are modest in
evaluating their data. They do not claim
that their work, or the similar researches
carried out by Cattell, Fraser Roberts, and
others, definitely prove their contention ;
what they claim is that all the available
evidence points clearly to the existence of a
grave problem, and that the time has come
for some very large-scale investigation to be
carried out to assess the exact amount of the
decline, preferably by the testing of total
populations, rather than samples, and by
actual direct comparison of different generations. It is difficult to see how that conclusion can be controverted, and there would be
very few psychologists nowadays who would
22 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not be found in agreement with Burt and
Thomson in this matter.

In the article cited above, Blackburn sets
out the main arguments which might be
adduced against this consensus of opinion.
His first point is that the authors whose
work he criticises have underestimated the
effect of environment on intelligence. Burt,
in an appendix to his pamphlet, enumerates
the many diverse ways in which psychologists
have tried to evaluate the relative contribution of nature and nurture, and Blackburn
cannot truly be said to have added anything
to the general argument. He shows, indeed,
that environment contributes something to
intelligence test scores—a point on which
Burt was one of the first to insist from the
very earliest days of the testing movement—
but he fails to show any reason for believing
that this something amounts to more than
50 per cent of the total variance of general
intellectual ability, as claimed by Burt.
Indeed, Burt is if anything excessively conservative in mentioning this value; many
people would put the contribution of innate
factors nearer to 80 per cent of the
variance.

Blackburn’s other criticisms relates to the
estimate of Burt and Thomson of the correlation between intelligence and fertility, which
is put by them in the neighbourhood of
—o-2. 'His argument here appears to rest in
the main on a statistical fallacy ; he quotes
figures from restricted ranges of ability in
which lower correlations are found between
intelligence and fertility, and argues from
these figures to the total population without
using the proper “ correction for selection ”’
formula of Pearson’s. Burt in his reply shows
that when this is done the results fall in line
with his own. Thus it does not appear that
the conclusions drawn by Burt and Thomson
can be regarded as in any degree invalidated.

While the two pamphlets reviewed so far
deal with roughly similar problems, Terman’s paper describes the history and the
most recent follow-up studies of his monumental work on genius, in which approximately 1,000 highly gifted California school
children were observed and tested during the
period from 1922 to 1946. This work was

reported in four large volumes, the latest
one of which has only recently appeared, and
is summarized on the last few pages of this
pamphlet.

The results are so fascinating that no one
interested in the natural history and social
importance of intelligence should fail to
acquaint himself with the paper. As might
have been expected, the total group of
children in their adult lives are very much
more successful than would have been an
unselected group. But perhaps even more
interesting than this finding is another one
which contrasts a successful and an unsuccessful group of ‘‘ geniuses’ in terms of
their outstanding character-traits. In order
of greatest difference, these are: perseverance, self-confidence, integration toward
goals, and freedom from inferiority feelings.
In terms of recent personality research, it
appears therefore that the general personality trait labelled “‘ neuroticism ”’ is of very
great importance in the success or failure of
equally intelligent persons in life. It is
reassuring to note that the non-neurotic,
successful group had fewer divorces, more
marriages and more children (1-7 as against
1-2) than the neurotic, failure group. If
“neuroticism ”’ is an inheritable quality, as
many psychologists believe, this may suggest
that the racial stock is getting progressively
less neurotic ; this ought to be followed up
by research on less intelligent and less highly
selected groups.

It is reassuring to find that plans are being
made to ensure the continued follow-up of
the entire gifted group at least until 1970,
by which time the ultimate fertility of the
group and its sum total of accomplishment
can be more accurately assessed. We may
emphatically endorse Terman’s concluding
remark : ‘“‘ Enough has already been learned
to demonstrate that children of I.Q. 140 or
above are potentially a nation’s most precious
asset. The demonstration that this is true
should be well worth the 150,000 dollars
which the research... has cost to date.”
And the hope may perhaps be expressed that
similar large-scale researches may be begun
in this country also, for the greater advancement of the social good.
