‘“ BIOMETRIKA.”’
By R. A. FISHER.

The last completed volume of BIOMETRIKA (Vol. x., April, 1914—
May, 1915) contains a series of contributions of very exceptional interest
to eugenists, presenting us, moreover, with the spectacle, rare in all the
sciences, of an advance in theory, yielding, as soon as it is applied,
practical and positive results of the first importance. In April appeared
a short note, under the name of “ Student,” from which it appeared that
that able statistician had, in consultation with Professor Pearson, devised
a method by which a great mass of existing material may be made to give
up its secrets. Hitherto it has been impossible to extract from such series
of figures as annual price numbers, trade returns, and birth-rate statistics,
the physical connections by which these quantities are related, owing to
the effects produced on each or all of them by progressive change. There
was no satisfactory way of eliminating the continuous and variable effect
of time. “Student” shows that if this time factor may be represented by

a@ power series bt +ct?+dt® - - - - ktm, so that
Xe — X, + bt, + ct,? + kt,m

and so ont for the n values of x corresponding, let us say, to n annual
figures, then X,, X,, will represent random variations in the quantities
considered, with the time factor eliminated, and the way to find the

correlation between a series X,, X,, - - -- Xn and another Y,, Y,-- - Yn, is to find the correlation between the mt) differences of the two series,
x and y.

The assumption of a power series for the expression of the time factor
is, of course, open to question; but the method proposed by “ Student ”
is to find in succession the correlation between the original figures, then
that of the differences between successive figures, then of the second
differences, and so on until a steady value for the correlation coefficient is
reached. This is carried out in three examples. The correlation between
Sauerbeck’s index numbers for prices and the bankers’ clearing house
returns is for the crude figures —.33, but for the third, fourth and fifth
difference the coefficient is small and apparently insignificant. The connection between marriage-rate and wages is of direct interest to the
eugenist; here, starting with a large negative correlation —.52, we find
from the second difference onwards values ranging closely about +.55,
showing that the crude statistics as published had not only obscured the
natural connection beween these two things, but had reversed it.

In the November number two articles develop the thought of this
short note. Dr. Anderson, of Petrograd, gives formule for the probable
errors of the successive difference—correlations where there is no timeeffect,and for thestandard deviations of the successive differences where the
differencing has been carried so far that the time-effect is eliminated. It
is interesting that Dr. Anderson considers that the method is applicable
when the time-effect cannot be represented by a power series. Miss
Beatrice Cave and Professor Pearson exhibit an extensive trial of the new
method. Taking Professor Montana’s table of index values for ten
different features of the economic development of Italy, a short series of
28 years, they tabulate the correlation coefficients of the crude figures
and of the first six differences, taking each feature in turn with all the
nine others, and with the “ synthetic index,” which is the arithmetic mean
‘* BIOMETRIKA.’”’ 63

of all ten. The result of this great labour, involving the calculation of
seven correlation coefficients for each of the fifty-five pairs of variables,
is a striking success in showing the importance of the new process. The
crude figures give correlations, of which the lowest is the very high value
+ .885; as the difference correlations are brought out remarkable changes
take place. The genuine correlations are separated from those which are
spurious. The correlation between the indices for the gross consumption
of tobacco and for savings banks’ returns is .984, from which one might
imagine that private expenditure was so well regulated that no one would
spend the smallest sum on tobacco without laying by a fixed proportional
amount in savings. But for the third and succeeding differences we read
— .327, —.380, —.402, —.431, showing that, as we should have expected,
when expenditure on tobacco is great, savings are correspondingly
diminished. It would be interesting to know how the regressions worked
out on a uniform currency basis. The Variate Difference Correlation
Method has evidently a great future. We do not yet know how much
precious information may be hidden, masked by the time-effect, in
existing vital statistics. On the economic side we may note the significant
remark “The very superficial statements, so frequently met with, that
such and such variates, both changing rapidly with the time, are
essentially causative, will doubtless cease to have scientific currency
directly the method of variate differences is fully appreciated. We shall
no longer assert that the fall in the phthisis death-rate can be off-hand
causatively associated with the contemporaneous rise in the number of
persons dying in institutions, or that the increased expenditure on business
is necessarily a measure of increased national prosperity ” (p. 353).

The first fruits of the application of the new method to vital statistics

appear in the May number as “ Further Evidence of Natural Selection in

an,” by Miss Ethel Elderton and Professor Karl Pearson. The correlations are found between death-rates of the same group of infants in
successive years of their life. Infantile death-rate is affected by the time
factor, being continuously influenced by industrial and administrative
changes, so that the figures drawn from the Registrar-General’s reports
give positive correlations for the death-rates of successive years. Neglecting the effects of changing conditions, this would, lead to the surprising
conclusion, eagerly drawn by those whose sentiment outruns their reason,
that the agencies of infantile death exert a weakening effect upon the
survivors, aud not as one would expect, a raising of the average level by
the removal of the weakest. Pearson and Snow had both shown conclusively that the average resisting power is as a matter of fact raised,
and that a high death-rate in the early years of childhood is the natural
effect of a low death-rate in infancy. But their methods of removing the
time factor were not so complete, and their results correspondingly less
conclusive than in the present paper.

The death-rates were worked out by comparing the number of children
born in any year with the number of deaths under one year of age in that
year, with the deaths between one and two in the succeeding year, and
soon. It is possible that the results are somewhat affected not only by
immigration and emigration, but by the grouping into years necessitating
the consideration of the death-rate of not exactly the same group of babies.
The variate difference method would seem to multiply any error due to
babies getting into the wrong year, but it should be noticed that these
effects would tend merely to blur the results and decrease the correlations
obtained ; these are so uniform and definite as to remove any doubt as to
their significance. The main results are as follows. The correlation
between the death-rates in successive years of life up to five is very
approximately —.7 for both boys and girls. This is a remarkably high
value, which is approached regularly by all eight series of numbers. One
can only conclude that natural selection is actively at work in civilised
64 EUGENICS REVIEW.

countries. It is important, in view of the limitation of families, that
there should be no doubt on this point. The partial correlations for a
two-year interval, when the intervening year is rendered constant were
also found. For the first and third year this is about —.48, for the other
two pairs about —.23 and —.25. So that the effects of selection are well
marked even in this case.

We may confidently hope that many other controversial matters will
be made clear by the new means at our disposal. There must be many
reactions between vital and economic data which take some years to take
effect. Much may be done by finding such lagging correlations. Again,
there would seem to be a prospect of the establishment of the fundamental
differential equations of sociology by correlating differences of different
orders.
