EUGENICS REVIEW

 

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society,
69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.
(Telephone—Victoria 2091.)

Editor for the Society—Maurice Newfield.

“Bugenics is the study of agencies under
social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future Senerations
either physically or mentally.”

NOTES OF THE
QUARTER*

| E can learn a great deal from the
wartime trend in the German birth

rate. The figures are, of course,

most revealing when set against the demographic background of pre-Nazi Germany
and of the period between the M achiergreifung
in 1933 and the outbreak of hostilities in
1939; and particularly when their development is compared with what must have been
hoped for as a result of the measures for
promoting fertility which, from the start,
formed such an important part of Nazi policy.
For a political party with Lebensraum emblazoned on its banners, the demographic
situation In 1933 was most unpromising. It
was evident, from official and unofficial estimates alike, that a continuance of the existing balance of births and deaths would leave
Germany, well before the end of the century,
with plenty of Lebensraum to spare. Needless to say, the Nazis themselves did not

* Owing to unavoidable delays in the publication of
the REvigEw various items, including comments on
Regulation B33, the Beveridge Report and R. R.
Kuczynski's paper on The New Population Statistics,
must be deferred for the next issue. We apologize to
contributors and correspondents whose material is held
over.

draw precisely this conclusion. On the contrary, they painted a picture of Germany,

young, vigorous and prolific, cramped within

81

its narrow borders by a hostile Empire,
senile, decadent and neither able to populate
its territories itself nor willing to let the
regenerate German people do so. The account
they gave of our demographic position may,
with a few minor reservations, be described
as accurate: the Nazis have never hesitated
to tell the truth when it has suited their
purpose. But they were rather less accurate
in their account of themselves.

The fact is, as D. V. Glass pointed out in
his scholarly study of Population Policies and
Movements,* that the German birth rate,
like that of most other European countries,
had fallen fairly continuously since the third
quarter of the nineteenth century. From the
high level of 39-2 per thousand in the period
1876-80, it declined to 31-6 per thousand in
1906-10, and reached the low figures of 15:1
in 1932 and 14-7 in 1933. (Our own birth
rates fell from 35-5 in the ’seventies to 14-4
in 1933.)

Putting the matter in terms which show
more plainly the decline in real fertility, the
German net reproduction rate fell, in under
60 years, from 1-448 to 0-698. The critical
years were 1924-6, when a rate below unity
was recorded for the first time and Germany
entered the rapidly growing ranks of
countries whose numbers were fated to
decline. By the time the Nazis came to
power, its replacement rate had fallen lower
than that of any European country except
Austria.

* * *

The picture can be filled in by the further
statistical material supplied in Mr. Glass’s
study,{ but this rough outline will at least

- * Oxford University Press, 1940.
t loc. cit., pp. 269-313.
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

explain why the struggle for Lebensraum
had to be supplemented by one to secure the
future generations of Germans to live in and
defend it. Admittedly, the economic inducements to parenthood were not as lavish as
they might have been. Still, they included,
among other measures, the granting of
interest-free marriage loans, repayable by
instalments spread painlessly over eight
years, and cancellable by fractions of a
quarter of the original sum on the birth of
each child ; changes in income tax and in
property and inheritance taxes to the advantage of large families; encouragement
by the Government of existing schemes for
family allowances and the sponsoring of new
ones; replacement of employees under 25
in various enterprises and public offices by
fathers of families ; provision of free places
in middle and higher schools, and other
forms of educational assistance; and extension of the Weimar programme of rural
settlement : all of which must have amounted
to a pretty impressive: total in a country
fresh from the extreme economic depression
of 1930-2. This point is worth a moment’s
attention, if only as a corrective to the view
sometimes put forward that the Nazi bribes
to fertility did not really amount to much.
They were numerous, they sounded good on
paper and over the ether, they seemed to
transfer the economic burden of parenthood
from the family to the State; but, in all
their barmecidal diversity, they could not be
compared, in plain monetary terms, with the
single unpretentious measure proposed in
this country—the provision of five shillings
a week for every dependent child in the
family.

There is, of-course, some substance in this
criticism ; but it does not take account of all
the facts. To begin with, to many of the
couples (according to Burgdérfer there were
altogether some 330,000 of them) who
through unemployment or low wages had
postponed their marriage until better times,
even small economic advantages, coupled as
they were with promises of greater prosperity to come, must have seemed ample
reason for not waiting any longer. And, in
fact, the depressed marriage rate of 1932—

7°9 per thousand of population—did give
place in 1933 to a boom in marriages, reaching in 1934 the extraordinarily high figure of
I1I-2 per thousand, which more than compensated for the deficit during the slump.
Again, these economic advantages must
themselves have counted for little in comparison with those which followed the sudden,
expansion of heavy industry, particularly of
the part concerned with the vast programme
of rearmament which the new government
had initiated so promptly and with so little
publicity. The reduction of unemployment,
from nearly five million to approximately
go0,000, must have done at least as much as
the direct economic inducements to parenthood to increase the number of marriages
and their productiveness. Finally, it is worth
bearing in mind that, with the return of
millions of men to regular employment,
there began the Kinder, Kiiche, Kirche
campaign for squeezing women out of industry and the professions. ‘‘ A job will
not bring happiness near, the home alone
is your proper sphere,’* proclaimed a
typical slogan of the time ; and, as jobs for
women became scarcer, must have done
so to an ever more receptive audience.
% ae aK

The derogation of Nazi’ incentives to
parenthood, and penalties on sterility, fails
also to take account of the fact that these
were but elements in a far more comprehensive population policy, in which persuasion and, naturally, repressive legislation
played a very large part. When all the
instruments of propaganda in the control of
the totalitarian state speak with one voice,
the exhortation does not, and could not be
expected to, fall on deaf ears. Neither the
rewards nor the blandishments, moreover,
were directed exclusively to those who had
gone through the formality of getting
married. Whole generations of unmarried
women would not, said Das Schwarze Korps,
be condemned to sterility through the moral
prejudices of musty philistines; and this
lofty sentiment was reflected both in a
nation-wide propaganda and in the exten
* Kirkpatrick, C. (1939) Women in Nazi Germany,
London ; quoted by Glass, D. V., op. ctt.
NOTES OF THE QUARTER 83

sion, by an ever increasing number of
municipalities, of economic assistance to
illegitimate children, provided only that the
parents had announced their intention in
advance and the authorities were satisfied
that the father had been chosen with due
regard to his health and, it goes without
saying, Aryan origin. The Nazis realized
from the first that traditional moral attitudes could be weakened by an unremitting
appeal to the highest moral motives. Psychologically shrewder in this respect than
the democracies, they based their propaganda
on the assumption that ordinary men and
women will do for God what they would
never do for Mammon. Their one blunder
in this campaign was in choosing, as the
impersonal end to be served, the need for
creating more man-power for the armed
forces of the future. If only they had hit
upon a more congenial motive, the demographic trend since 1933 might have been
very different.
a * *

What measure of success the Nazi population policy did achieve may be attributed
very largely to those of its elements which
were concerned with the suppression of birth
control propaganda and instruction, restrictions upon the sale of contraceptives, and
the vigorous enforcement of the law against
abortion. This last factor is regarded by
Glass* as the most potent of all. It is at any
rate indisputable that the “ psychic rebirth ”’
of the German people, to which in Nazi
propaganda upward movements in the birth

‘rate are usually attributed, has operated in
‘a highly selective manner. Thus, it is signi,ficant that ‘“‘ of the 615,630 marriages con‘tracted in 1933 and still in existence on
“December 31st, 1936, 219,334, or 36 per
cent, had borne only one child each, and
’ 240,793, or 39 per cent, had borne none. Of
“the 722,764 marriages contracted in 1934
and still in existence at the end of 1936,
287,288, or 40 per cent, had borne only one
child each, and a further 328,295, or 45 per
cent, had not borne any children.”t On
the other hand, the abortion rate declined
considerably in all the big towns and it may

* loc. cit., p. 312. ft tbtd.

be assumed that the decline was general
throughout the country. To quote again :

‘“‘ Suppose, for example, that the Liibeck
data apply fairly well to the whole of
Germany. This would mean that in 1932,
when abortion was most ffequent, there
would have been about 655,000 abortions
as compared with 1,007,798 births (including
still births). The Liibeck statistics show a
fall in the ratio of abortions to normal births.
from 65 per 100 in 1932 to 14 per 100 in 1938.
If we suppose that the total number of
pregnancies in Germany had remained at
the 1932 level, but that abortion frequency
had fallen at the Liibeck rate, there would
have been over 1,400,000 live and still births
in 1938. Even after allowing for the proportion of still births, this would have meant
more live births than were actually produced
in Germany in 1938. So if the suppression of
illegal abortion has been as successful as it
is said to be, that by itself would account for
the increase in births in recent years.’’*

* * *

We must be careful not to read too much
into the table of birth rates in the decade
1929 to 1938. It shows a close correlation
between low rates and the world slump, and

Live Births in Germany (including Saar Territory
from 1935)

 

- Live Births per Live Births per
Year | 1,000 population | Year | 1,000 population
1929 17°9 1934 18:0
1930 17°5 1935 18-9
1931 16:0 1936 19°0
1932 I5°1 1937 18-8
1933 14°7 1938 19°7

between higher and rising rates and the
development of Nazi policy. It does not
show how far, if to any considerable extent,
the upward trend was due to national
socialism as such, how far to the improved
economic position of the country resulting
from the policy of rearmament, how far to
the various elements in the Nazi population
policy. And of course it does not show
whether the change represents a permanent
reversal of a trend that had persisted for
over half a century or merely a sharp notch

* ibid.
84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in a curve that, sooner or later, would take a
downward course again. All that can be said
with confidence is that up to the war the
Nazi drive for population made an appreciable advance ; though apparently it did not
reach its objective of a net reproduction rate
well above unity. Still, to have pushed the
rate up from 0-698 in 1933 to very little
short of the full replacement level in 1938
was not bad going; even if it was not a
complete victory it hardly deserves to be
described—as it was recently by a correspondent of The Times (in what was in general
an unexceptionable and, indeed, brilliant
communication)—as a “‘ signal defeat.’’*
For the better ordering of our own
demographic future we must be quite honest
about this. We do not compromise in our
detestation of Nazi policies and of their
objectives by admitting that some components of these policies were well conceived
and could with advantage be incorporated
into policies of our own. We reject such
measures as the suppression of birth control
or the enforced domestication of women not
because they are ineffective but because they
are barbarous; but that is no reason why
we should not estimate the demographic
consequences of marriage and household
loans, family allowances, free education, and
other expedients for mitigating the economic
deterrents to parenthood ; or why we should
not consider how and on what basis a propaganda campaign for more and larger families

* October 5th, 1942.

should be conducted. We know that the
Nazi appeal for more soldiers did not strike
a responsive chord in every mother’s breast ;

but are we sure about what we have to offer
in the way of moral inducements ourselves ?

* * *

How has the war affected the German
birth rate? According to the correspondent
of The Times the figure for Greater Germany
stood at 20:4 in 1939 and remained at that
level in 1940. In 1941 the birth rate fell to
I9°I, which represented a loss of 116,000
live births ; and the decline continued, more
steeply, in the first four months of 1942,
when there were 120,000 fewer births than
in the corresponding period of 1939. If, as
seems probable from a study of the birth
rates which prevailed in 62 towns of Greater
Germany up to July 1942, the same trend
persisted throughout the year, the total loss
of births (taking 1939 as the standard year)
must have amounted to 450,000.

It is too early yet to estimate the significance of this relapse ; the correspondent
of The Times may be right in holding that
“the war has already inflicted on Hitler a
crushing defeat in the Nazi battle of the
birth rate,’”’ but a guess is not a diagnosis,
and for that we simply have not the data.
All we can say now, comparing crude pirthrate figures, is that the Nazi demographic
trend does not seem at the moment as
favourable as our own. The number of live

(Continued on page 104)

 

THE EUGENIST

ComE, human dogs, interfertilitate—
Blackfellow and white lord, brown, yellow and red!
Accept the challenge of the lately bred
Newfoundland terrier with the dachshund gait.

Breed me gigantic pigmies, meek-eyed Scots,
Phlegmatic Irish, perfume-hating Poles,

Poker-faced, toothy, pigtailed Hottentots,
And Germans with no envy in their souls.

ROBERT GRAVES.
104

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

(Continued from page 84)

births in England and Wales during the
June quarter of 1942 was the highest
recorded in any quarter since that of June
1930. The figure was 167,557, representing
a birth rate of 16-2 per thousand, compared
with 14-3 per thousand in the same period
of I94I.

In short, our demographic trend

  

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues :

Stanford University.
C. Gresz, Stanford University.

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE

   

SOCIETY

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS
INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. Tayior and A. G. R. STRICKLAND,

RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By ARTHUR

ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC
PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS,
N. P. SMaracpova, Institute of Zodlogy, University of Moscow.

THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION
IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA. By Rosert H. Sivsper and Vixtor Hampurcer, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. Atxeze, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago.
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

has changed for the better in a period in
which Nazi fertility has declined.

A birth rate of 16-2 is still well below
replacement level, but that we should have
reached it in the fourth year of war is reason
for real if restrained optimism. We shall
know later, when more facts are available
about the distribution of the births, whether
in 1942 we turned a dangerous corner in the
demographic history of our country.

    
   
   
   
      

RELATION TO —
By G. F. Gausg and

NICOTINES IN

    
     
      
 
   
 

Published
Subscription : 35s. 2d. per year.

UNIVERSITY PRESS

 
   
 

OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

“ For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the
several parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”

President : The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.

Chairman of the Executive Committee : The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.0.
Honorary Secretaries: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.
Aunual Subscription - °
Address: 28 Essex Street, London, W.C.2

One Guinea

 
