Darwinian Evolution of Mutations.
By R.A. Fisren, M A.

During the second half of the nineteenth century the Darwinian
theory of the gradual! evolution of all living forms by the agency of
Natura] Selection, slowly won its way to acceptance, first hy men of
science, especially breeders and geologists, and finally by the whole
body of educated opinion. It is not here the place to survev the full
extent of this revolution in human thought: it is enough that to thoughtful minds it dominated the outlook upon the history and destiny of the
human race, and gave birth at the hands of Francis Galton to the
Science, or rather the philosophy of Eugenics. But, during the present
century Darwin’s views have been exposed to criticism in detail and in
gross, from the two classes of students, the breeders and the Palaeontologists by whom it was first most readily received. It is the purpose
of the present note to examine very briefly the causes of this change of
attitude, and to clear away certain misunderstandings, which spring
chiefly from changes in the use of words, which have taken place during
the past half century.

In the first place the discovery of Mendelism had made us familiar
with the fact that obvious and easily distinguished differences: in
animals and plants are sometimes due to a single heritahle factor, and
some Mendelians have in consejuence taken offence at the gradual and
cumulative character which Darwin assigned to evolution. On the
other hand certain palaeontologists to whom the gradual and progressive character of the evolution of fossil remains is hecoming more and
more evident, feel that we have here something which the. geneticist
cannot explain, and consequently fall back upon Lamarck’s suggestion
of the inheritance of acquired characters, or upon the mystic word
‘*orthogenesis.’’ ‘Others again, impressed by the genetic constancy in
pure line breeding, have somewhat rashly insisted that genuine mutations neverocecur. These different views, though proper to put forward
for discussion among men of science, exert a bewildering effect upon the
general public, who tend tu lose their belief that science has anything
to teach them about the history and the destiny of their race.

Of the facts unknown to Darwin and his contempuraries we have to
take two into consideration. In the first place Mendelism shows not
only that obvious and easily distinguished differences may be due to
single factors, but that the ordinary differences between parents and
offspring, or between children of the same parentage, may be, and probably are for the most part, due to the segregation of Mendelian genes,
and not, as Darwin seems to have thought, largely to new and arbitrary
mutations of a heritable nature. What the older evolutionists took to
be for the most part new heritable differences , the Mendelian interprets
as, for the most part, old heritable differences, newly arranged accord82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ing to the Mendelian svstem. In the second place pure line experiment
have shown that in genetically strains, the appearance of entirely new
genes is of relatively rare occurrence. It is not usually understood
that these two new facts arc logically connected : for, once the Mendelian
view is accepted that genes do not blend, but segregate intact, it is
clear that if in every generation new genes are introduced, the variability of the species will increase without limit. If the genes of the
parents were to blend in the offspring, continual new mutations would
be necessary to maintain the variability; but as under the Mendelian
system of segregation there is no tendency for the variability to diminish, except in so far as by the gradual action of selection certain genes
tend to disappear, we must not assume that in a state of nature, where
the variability is approximately constant, new Mendclian alterations
are introduced into the currency of the stock, more rapidly than this
gradual elimination takes place.

The fundamental] facts upon which Darwin grounded his theory are
more firmly established than ever: the universal tendency of animals
and plants to breed up to the limits of subsistence has never been seriously questioned; the existence in wild and domesticated races of
heritable differences has been consistently verified; the incidence of
natural selection and the actual modification of types has been proved
by many careful investigations. Nevertheless owing to the changes
which have taken place in the use of words, many would feel almost as
though they were out. of date if they styled themselves Darwinians.
This change in terminology is principally due to the far reaching effects
of the factorial system on our ideas of the constitution of living things.
There is no need here to discuss the proper use of modern terms; for the
purposes of the present note, it will be sufficient to say that we shall
speak of a species as differing in any Mendelian factor, when two or
more allelomorphs of that factor are to be found in individuals of the
species; that every individual of the species must belong, in respect of
this factor, to one or other of the homozygous and heterozygous types
formed by combining like or unlike allelomorphs, that the word gene
will be used for the material basis of any allelomorph, and the word
locus for the material basis of a factor: so that we may speak of one gene
supplanting another in the same locus as one allelomorph replaces
another of the same factor. On the factorial system, then, an individual is specified, if, for every factor concerned, we assign it to one. or
other of the homozygous and heterozygous types: in the simplest case,
when the factor is dimorphic, there being only two homozygous and
one heterozygous types. Any organ or trait of the individual will
usually be influenced by many factors, so that the selection of any one
trait will influence the proportions of the allelomorphs of all the factors
which effect that trait. Since in nature many traits are, or more
correctly the whole complex of traits is, subject to selection, natural
selection within any species will necessarily be gradually increasing the
proportions of some allelomorphs, and diminishing those of their
alternatives, so that a gradual progress of the whole specific group must
take place on the whole in the direction of improved adaptation to those
needs which dominate selection.

The action of selection upon such a species wil! be exactly what the
DARWINIAN EVOLUTION OF MUTATIONS. 83

Darwinian would ‘anticipate, with the theoretical reservation that in
the absence of any mutations, progress must sooner or later cease ; for the
number of possible types formed by combining all the possible allclomorphs of all the factors present, though inconceivably great, is still
finite. Of these types one is presumably the best adapted to the
selecting environment, and when that tvpe is attained improvement
ceases. Of course the best possible combination of factors may not,
when selection commences, exist in a population of many millions;
thousands of generations of severe selection may be needed to bring it
into existence, and establish it as the dominant type; it is true also that
in the absence of new genes, the average value of any trait, such as
human stature, might be changed to a value far outside the existing
range of variation, merely hy selection. Still it must be admitted
that in the absence of mmtation the invariability of the selected species
would be progressively diminished, and will finally vanish, so bringing
evolutionary progress to an end.

Bat modern work, especially that of American workers on
Dros»phila shows conclusively that mutations, though infrequent, do in
fact occur; and it is worth while to observe exactly what hearing this
fact has upon the Darwinian theory of evolution.

If we suppose then that a mutation has occurred. and an entirely
new gene is present in a single individual of population consisting of
some thousands of millions, the history of its survival may be broadly
divided into two periods. In the first period its survival or extinction
is duc mainly to chance; in the second period mainly to the general
advantage or disadvantage in the struggle for existence which the new
allelomorph confers, on the average and in combination with the
existing currency of genetic types, as compared with the alternative
allelomorph which it displaces.

In consideration of the first stage we may suppose that the chance of
any gene of one individual appearing in 0,1], 2,3, -—————- individuals
individuals in the second generation, to be py, p:,P2,P3, - etc., such that p, + p: + p. es = . These fractions will depend
on the stage in the life history of the individual which we pick out for
consideration: for the adult reproductive stage of many plants and
animals, the series will he verv similar to the Poisson series.

Tf we construct a function f (n) =fy+p.n +p.n+ .
then the chance of any one gene being represented in the second filial

eneration by 0,1,2,8, —- individuals will be found by substituting
f ({ (x) ) for f (x).

This method enables us to cornpute the chance that the gene will
not have become extinct in any number of generations; assuming the
Poisson series the chance of survival for n generations is nearly 2/n;
while if it do survive the average number of individuals affected will be

n. Thus roughly one mutation in 50 will survive 100 generations, and
if so. it will on the average be represented in 50 individuals. These
results are worked out fora population stationary in number.

Very disadvantageous genes, such as dominant lethals, will of
course be cut off at once, but for those which are only of moderate
advantage or disadvantage. the above may be taken to represent the
‘first stage in survival, which is principally governed by chance. The
84 EUGENICS REVIEW.

second stage commences with the new gene established in a fairly large
group of individuals, of varving genctic constitution, so that a fair
number of new genetic combinations are being tested simultaneously .
If those individuals which contain the new gene are found on ths
average of the chances of life, and on the average of the genctic natures
with which it is combined, to he at a disadvantage i in the struggle for
existence, then the numher of the mutant form will gradually diminish
with large fluctuations due to chance; in this way the disadvantageous
gene will always be kept sufficiently rare to be in danger of extinc ‘tion,
and though the number bearing it may repeatedly be reduced very low
without actual extinction, vet sooner or later fortune will fail it, and
it will disappear from the race. On the other hand the gene which is
found to confer a slight average benefit en the indiv iduals bearing it,
will tend to increase in numbers somewhat more rapidly than its less
favourable allelomorph. F.ven if the average advantage be only of the
order of 1% in a generation, it will gradually spread through the
population

At first the fluctuations from year to vear will be large; so that
when 100 individuals are affected the average increase will he one ina
generation with a standard deviation of 10. But when the number of
affected individuals is larger the increase takes place with greater and
greater regularity; when the number of the new type has reached
1,000 000, each generation will bring an increase of 10,000 with a
standard deviation of 1 000. At this point the spread of the favoured
gene takes place with calculable regularity. Finally when nearly the
whole population is affected, its less favourable allelomorph becomes
sufficiently rare for its survival or extinction to be at the caprice of
fortune.

If we have rightly deseribed the manner in which « new mutation
is incorporated into the genera] stock of the hereditary qualities of a
species. and the manner in which the variability of the species is
maintained in spite of the occasional extinction of genes hy selection,
we are in a position to see how vreat an advantage it is to a species to
have adupted methods of sexual reproduction with inheritance on the
Mendelian system. For mutation is necessarily a leap in
the dark: the chances of failure is far greater than those
of success, especially when the effect of the mutation
is large. Hence there is a great deal to be gained if it be
possible to maintain the variability of the species, with a minimum of
mutations ;—that is to say with the ereatest stability of the reproductive processes. Now in a population differing in a great many
Mendelian factors, as all sexuai populations are found in nature to do,
a single mutation may enable thousands of new genetic combinatious
to be tested, and if any of these should happen to he very advantageons,
it will by selection become the predominant type. It cannot be denied
that many groups of animals and plants appear to carry on successlully
by asexual methods of reproduction, but the advantage of the Mendelian
inheritance of sexually reproductive organisms, especially when complex adaptations have tc be made to a slowly changing environment, is
sufficiently manifest.

Feb. 2nd, 1421.
