THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND
And the Diagnosis of Mental Deficiency

Being the substance of two addresses delivered to members of the Eugenics Society,
in association with the Psychology and Education Sections of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science at the Bristol Meeting of the latter, on September goth,

I193¢C.

By PROFESSOR R. J. A. BERRY, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E.

Director of Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony, Bristol.

The science of mind determines
human conduct. Psychology should, therefore, enable us to control our conduct both
through our understanding of ourselves and
through that of the motives and actions of
others. ‘‘’That Psychology has never
reached this plane of function,’’ says Goddard, ‘‘ needs no proof.”’ If Goddard be
right the explanation is probably to be
sought in the fact that modern psychology
has, perhaps, too completely dissociated
itself from known facts in the development,
functions, and disorders—both structural and
functional—of the brains of animals and
man, for ‘‘ who does not feel,’? asks Goddard, ‘‘ that the average graduate from a
course in academic Psychology is merely a
more or less successful juggler with psychological terms?’? On the other hand, Dr.
Sherlock tells us that ‘‘ the dependence of
mentation on the integrity of the brain is
universally accepted.”’ Even those nonmedically trained psychologists who admit
the truth of Dr. Sherlock’s statement,
usually attack the problems of mind from
the most complex and difficult angle,
namely, that of the highly developed and
intelligent adult. As a natural result,
there has been much confusion, many controversies have arisen, and the development
of the science has been slow.

Now it is unquestionably easier to understand an abstract concept like mind if
we understand’ the concrete thing—brain

AN alone possesses a mind and
psychology is the science of mind.

—which is its undoubted physical instrument, and it is still easier if we
study the simple, rather than the complex. In the mentally defective we
have such relatively simple material, and
hence their study forms the best introduction to the phenomena of mind as correlated
with the brain and nervous system, as also
to those aberrations of the brain and mind
commonly known as insanity. Mental deficiency is thus neither a disease nor a curable disease. It is just an arrest in the
normal growth and development of the
brain, with a corresponding and consequent
lack of intelligence and mentation, and a
bodily and sexual development closely approximating to normal. A child of six
years mental age with a six-year-old body
is normal, but a mind of six in a body of
twenty is something very different. Adult
sex development with the consequent strong
instincts induced thereby must obviously
modify the mental make-up of even the
normal, and still more of the mentally defective; and any science professing to study
the phenomena of the human mind should
take all these factors into consideration and
base its conclusions on known facts about
the brains of mammals and man. The real
and essential relationship between brain and
mind cannot be seen with the naked eye,
but what the eye cannot see, the microscope reveals, and the intimate and actual
correlation between the minute cells of the
brain and the phenomena of mind are as
real as are the relations of the atoms, elec
171
172

trons, and molecules of the physicist to the
physical world around us.

THE STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT

Every normal human individual passes,
in his bodily, mental, and sexual development, through various well-known and
easily recognizable stages, which are as
follows :

I. Mare AND FEMALE GERM PLASM.—
Heredity. Probably 80 to 90 per cent. of
primary mental deficiency is caused by a
bad heredity.

If. Nine Monrus Inrra-UTERINE LIFE.
-—From the fertilized ovum are developed
the bodily or somatic cells, the reproductive
cells, and the nerve cells or neurons.

III. Brrta.—The sex and brain cells are
here in a very rudimentary condition, so the
child is, at first, an unconscious, reflex,
mindless automaton, incapable of either the
reproduction of its species, or of purposeful
action or volition.

IV. Years oF Inrancy.—From the first
to the fourth years of life. During these
years the development of brain cells is extraordinarily rapid, and many neuroblasts
or embryonic brain cells become converted,
under the influence of environmental factors, into fully developed and functioning
brain cells, hence the dawn of intelligence.

V. YEARS OF CHILDHOOD.—From about
the fourth to the eleventh years of life.
All avenues, particularly sight and hearing,
lead to the brain, and the influence of environment is now very strong. ‘The home
1s as powerful an educational factor as the
school, but life is the greatest of all.

VI. A YEAR oF PRE-ADOLESCENCE.—
Usually about the eleventh year, during
which brain development slows down
slightly, to make way for the onsetting
maturity of the reproductive organs.

VI. THe Years or Puserty.—During
both the normal and the abnormal, these
years, usually about the twelfth and thirteenth, are periods of stress and danger.
Powerful new impulses now commence to
pass into the child’s brain and, in many

THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

instances, profoundly alter its whole mentality. In quite a large proportion of
any average population brain growth ceases
at about this level, and the individual passes
on into adult life as one of the so-called dull
normals.

VIII. Years or ADOLESCENCE.—During
the several years succeeding the onset of
puberty, say up to about the twentieth year,
the brain growth should complete its development and so attain its full maturity, but,
as stated, in an appreciable number of the
population this last 8 per cent. of brain
growth does not take place at all, but ceases
at the level of puberty.

IX. THe Apuit YEARS.—From the time
of completion of brain growth until such
time as death or senile dementia destroys
or obscures the individual’s intelligence or
mind.

X. THE Conclupinc YEARS oF SENILITY
AND O_p AGE.—During the closing years of
an average long life, the reproductive cells
of both male and female undergo a process
of dissolution and gradual death, so that
before the occurrence of general death there
has occurred a localized one of the sex cells,
as a consequence of which the individual is
no longer capable of the reproduction of his
species. Exactly the same may occur with
the brain cells, which undergo, with increasing age, a gradual dissolution, and the individual’s mentality may become so altered as
to cause us to speak of his condition as one
of senile dementia or physiological lunacy.

THE MEANING OF SANITY

Insanity is thus, from a physiological
standpoint, as inseparable from human life
as are birth and death. We come into the
world no better than the idiot, and we go
out of it, provided our bodily cells outlive
our reproductive and brain cells, in a state
of physiological senile dementia. Simply
expressed, every normal individual, who
lives long enough, passes through three
mental stages—unsanity, sanity, and insanity—and these three stages are indisputably correlated with the actual state of the
microscopic structure of the brain itself.
THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

There is great and pressing need for a more
educated public opinion on the phenomena
of insanity. In its widest sense, insanity
is a normal concomitant of human life. In
its narrowest pathological sense it is a reproach to our wilful misunderstanding of
the laws of nature. We should surely do
better to cease to look upon insanity as a
disease, and rather regard it as an inability
to react to the human environment in the
manner regarded as normal by normal
people. This inability to react to the en‘vironment in the normal manner is usually
the result of one or other of three main
general conditions—an embryological lack
of proper brain development; a premature
dissolution of brain cells; or, in the more
evanescent and therefore usually curable
insanities, of some toxic or similar cause
producing ill-health of the cerebral
neurons.

Mental deficiency is thus not a disease at
all. It is a premature arrest of normal brain
growth and development, and probably go
per cent. of all mental deficiency is developmental in origin ; that is to say, the damage
is done before birth, and cannot, therefore,
be cured after birth. Consequent, presumably, on a defective germ plasm from a rotten heredity, the fertilized ovum, in its
manifold sub-divisions to produce the thousands of millions of cells which make up the
human body, does not produce a sufficiency
of incipient brain cells or neuroblasts, to
give, after birth, the numbers of neurons
necessary for a normal reaction to the environment. It is, however, now fairly well
established that those brain cells—the polymorphic cells of the infra-granular cortex—
which preside over the more purely animal
functions of the human body, such as selfpreservation and sex, are often and naturally quite well developed, whereas the pyramidal cells of the controlling supra-granular cortex are the very ones which are most
lacking. Consequently, the defective of the
higher grades tends to gratify his animal
instincts quite freely and so frequently
comes into conflict with the law for various
forms of theft and _ sexual so-called

173

““crrmes.’’ He thus does not react to his
environment in the manner regarded as normal by normal people and by the laws
framed for the social protection of those
normal people. Crime and mental deficiency thus go hand in hand, and so human
society, by its continued neglect of eugenics
and the fundamental truths of heredity
and the laws of life, breeds its own
criminals.

MENTAL SCIENCE AND THE LAW

It is unhappily only too true that to-day,
even in England, the study of mental disorder and the advancement of mental science
are hampered and impeded by a variety of
unfortunate causes. Professor Haggard
of Yale University says, ‘‘ the treatment of
mental disease is not so well developed as
the treatment of other diseases because insanity has only recently been recognized as
a medical problem. Even to-day the diagnosis of insanity, unlike the diagnosis of
any other disease, involves the decision of a
Court of Law. Presumably this ancient
custom is retained because insanity deprives
a man of his freedom and property. But 2
man may also be deprived of his freedom on
account of leprosy or other infectious
disease. The Law Courts are not asked
to pass an opinion upon each case of smallpox or measles. In such cases medical
decision is final.’’

In England, progress in mental science
is still further impeded by the obsoleteness
of the legal conception of insanity, which
dates back to 1843; by the almost universal
ignorance of the most elementary laws of
nature governing brain, mind, sanity, insanity, and unsanity; by the public pronouncements of popular pundits on mind
and brain and other problems of which they
are clearly most profoundly ignorant, and
lastly by a species of grave suspicion of
the mental expert and all his works. Once
the people of this country can be educated
to the more elementary facts governing the
absolute dependence of a healthy mind on a
healthy brain, progress in mental science
will be increasingly rapid.
174

TYPES OF ARRESTED MENTALITY

I. Tue Ipiot.—The lowest type of arrested mentality recognizable in English
Law, though not necessarily by medical and
embryological science, is the idiot, defined
by Act of Parliament as ‘“‘ one so grossly
defective in brain development as to be unable to guard himself against common
physical dangers.’’ Brain growth is here
arrested either just before birth or just
afterwards. Idiots are, as a consequence,
usually speechless, hopeless, and helpless.
Fortunately most of them are sterile,
though this is not always the case. Clinically, they tend to fall into two types—the
apathetic and the excitable. The latter are
apt to be dangerous and are usually very
destructive.

As illustrative examples of idiocy I take
two inmates of Stoke Park Colony :

Case 1 is a girl aged 7 years (No. 2427).
She is a microcephalic idiot, with a head
about the size of a twelve-months-old baby.
She is speechless, helpless, unable to feed
or do anything for herself whatsoever. We
cannot carry out any tests as she is incapable of understanding the simplest directions. She will not grow out of it, and if
I could cure her I would.

Case 2 is a girl aged 5 years and 7 months
(No. 2432). She utters only meaningless
syllables, and is speechless and helpless.
She, too, will not grow out of it. Once an
idiot, always an idiot, because brain growth
is prematurely arrested and the damage has
been irretrievably done before birth.

As a proof of the statement that the child
does not grow out of it, I may refer to two
other inmates, sisters, aged 18 and 19 years
respectively, Cases 3 and 4 (Nos. 2290 and
2291). Both are speechless, useless, apathetic idiots. They are only capable of
meaningless movements and of making inarticulate noises and screaming fits. ‘They
have no interest in anything whatsoever,
and, however ironical it may sound or seem,
these sisters have had all the therapeutic
advantages of the provisions of the Mental
Deficiency Act of 1913. At the most moderate estimate, these sisters have cost the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ratepayers of this country some £3,000, and
are likely to cost as much again before we
have finished with them. And we could show
worse than these, for some human idiots are
such stunted, mis-shapen, hideous, and bestial specimens of morbid humanity, as to
arouse feelings of horror and repulsion
rather than of pity or levity. Unfortunately
those tender-hearted humanitarians who
raise a howl of protest at the mere mention
of sterilization or the still more kindly lethal
chamber have never seen these things and so
do not realize that the human body without
a brain is something worse than the beasts
of the field—and be it remembered that I
could quote even more terrible examples
than these pathetic and unfortunate sisters.

Il. THe Impecire.—The imbecile, in
English Law, is a person in whose case
there exists mental defectiveness not amounting to idiocy yet so pronounced that
they are incapable of managing themselves
or their affairs, or in the case of children,
of being taught to do so. The hard and
fast line drawn by the law between the Idiot
and the Imbecile does not, in actual fact,
exist. The one type passes insensibly into
the other and the differential diagnosis is
not always easy. Speaking generally,
brain growth in the imbecile is arrested
shortly after birth, somewhere during the
first four years of life, that is, in the infantile stage of normality. Imbeciles can
usually do simple jobs under supervision,
but are unable to perform sufficient work to
contribute appreciably towards their own
support. The development of the faculty
of speech is invariably late, and the vocabulary a poor one. ‘They cannot maintain a
rational conversation for more than a very
few minutes. On the other hand, a few imbeciles are exceedingly voluble in conversation, though the matter is childish and inconsequent. ‘There is thus a pouring out
of words without ideas, an echoing of sounds
which have been heard, with little or no
knowledge of their meaning. Imbeciles have
usually no standards of morality in any
sense or meaning of the word. They lie
without embroidery, are often sly and cunning, always in trouble, and possessed of
THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

pronounced immoral and anti-social tendencies, just as nature made them. ‘This is
because the pyramidal-celled supra-granular layers of the brain cortex are imperfectly
developed, and there is thus no restraint
over the animal instinctive reflexes of the
body.

Case 5 is an example of a juvenile imbecile. A girl aged 9g years and 9 months
(No. 2435). She is a low grade small-headed
imbecile of the voluble type with a limited
vocabulary. Her speech tends to the normal infantile one of echolalia, that is, she
repeats the last sounds or syllables heard
just as should the normal infant of from 21
to 31 months. She is mischievous, excitable, and very destructive. Her combined
Binet-Porteus intelligence quotient is only
17, instead of from 85 to 100. Her reasoning ability is absolutely nil.

Case 6 is another, but older example, of
imbecility—a girl aged 11 years 1 month
(No. 2426). She also is a small-headed, low
grade imbecile. She has no conception of
colours, is physically over-developed, but
mentally only an infant. She is the product of the modern looseness of thought
about the freedom and liberty of human
beings to breed, for her father was a dement
and her mother an ament.

TT. Tae Frrsie-Minpep.—In English
Law, the feeble-minded are persons in
whose case there exists from birth or from
an early age ‘‘ mental defectiveness not amounting to imbecility, yet so pronounced
that they require care, supervision, and control for their own protection or for that of
others.’’ Feeble-minded children, as well
as adults, differ so profoundly in the degree
of their mental under-development, and in
the environmental factors derived through
sight and hearing—the two great avenues
for good or evil to every brain—to which
their deficient brains are subjected, as to
make it practically impossible to generalize
as to their physical or mental characteristics. Each case is a study in itself. The
lower grades closely approximate to, and
cannot be distinctly separated from, the imbeciles. The higher grades are commonly
mistaken for normal, especially by the dull

175

normals. But careful examination and
scientific test and measurement show that
this is not the case. At least two-thirds
are microcephalic, whilst another sixth are
macrocephalic. In other words mental defectives tend to have abnormal heads and
brains and so scientific measurement reveals
facts not obvious to the naked eye of either
the doctor or the layman, and certainly
never to the erroneously proud parent. This
retardation of head and brain growth is also
corroborated by the nerve reactions of the
child. In some mentally defective children
there is a general diminution of activity.
They are heavy, stolid, tardy in response,
and laboured in all their movements. In
others, on the contrary, all movement is in
excess. They cannot sit still; they are
easily distracted from the task in hand;
they are full of tricks, habits, and mannerisms, because nerve impulses tend to
traverse the same well-worn channels to
which, by reason of their defect, there are
too few alternatives. Co-ordination of
movement is slowly and laboriously acquired, and the net result of all this disordered muscular activity from diminished
or altered nerve energy is a peculiarity of
balance, movement, and physiognomical
expression which is very characteristic.
Speech has often been acquired late, and late
acquisition of speech by a child is an invariable and important clinical suggestion
of an imperfectly developing brain. Even
when speech is acquired by the mentally
defective child it is often very imperfect and
unintelligible to everybody but the doubtless doting mother, whose imagination is
a gifted one. The chief defects consist of
a thickness and indistinctness of utterance,
an imperfect articulation of consonants, and
the like.
Feeble-minded children are imitators
rather than originators, and as their actions
are usually along the lines of least resistance, they are easily led, and still more
easily led astray, and so often become antisocial in their reactions to their environment
and their fellows. Criminals are thus
readily recruited from the ranks of the
feeble-minded. All feeble-minded children
176

are lacking in the logical, and most of them
in the ssthetic, sense. In a fortunately
small proportion there is, in addition, a deficiency or perversion of all moral sense.
They lie, steal, and are sexually grossly
immoral ; that is, they obey the unrestricted
dictates of nature without any powers of
repression whatsoever, for what nature has
denied, that cannot they do, and they are,
as 4 consequence, without the slightest compunction or realization that they are doing
anything seriously wrong. Dr. Tredgold
also states that some feeble-minded persons
will make utterly unfounded accusations
with a considerable amount of detail and
appearance of truth. They are not unknown even in the witness box.

Whilst some of these reactions approximate closely to those of the Moral Defective of the 1927 Act, it is to be specially
remembered that they are only in strict
accord with the laws of nature as regards
self-preservation and the reproduction of the
species. All animals, man included, conform to these laws, but the normal human
being is the only creation of nature endowed
with a pyramidal-celled brain of control
over these passions. In the feeble-minded
these same cells are insufficiently developed
for the purpose, and thus they naturally
give way much more readily and more frequently to the purely animal instincts of the
body and so come into collision with the law.
The responsibility is nature’s rather than
the individuals, but just as necessity knows
no law, neither does the law appear to know
any nature. It is not for one moment to be
imagined or believed that this is any plea
for the abolition of punishment for the
crimes of the feeble-minded or even the normal. It is rather but a suggestion that
our methods of dealing with defectives,
criminals, and the like, might be capable of
improvement, and it is open to doubt as to
who really are the fools—the feeble-minded
or those who bury their heads in the sands
of an obsolete ignorance and refuse to recognize them.

Whilst feeble-minded children differ from
each other very considerably in the degree
and nature of their deficiency, as also in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

their temperament, disposition, and general
behaviour, they all have at least two features in common. One, obvious to almost
everyone, is their inability to cope with the
stresses and strains of everyday life without assistance from others, and the other,
revealed by the microscope after death, and
during life from logical deduction from
observed tests and measurements has been
summarized in the exact words of that great
English authority, Professor J. Shaw Bolton
of Leeds: ‘‘ In all such cases there is a subnormal development of the brain cortex
which, except in the severer grades, is
limited to the pyramidal cell-layer of the
cortex, and a brain weight below that of the
normal average. ... I trust that future attempts to deal seriously with the incidence
of mental disease will treat the subject, not
as a branch of infectious disease, or at any
rate a toxemia, but as the greatest of the
degeneracies.’? These words written in 1912
may suggest some food for thought, and I
can safely leave to my readers the answer to
the problem, ‘‘ Is this same degeneracy today, in 1930, a canker gnawing at the very
vitals of the English people, or is all well
with us?”

It is thus clear that in the life cycle of the
ament, i.e., the mentally defective person,
we have an epitome of all the main varieties
of mental disorder. Beginning with a defective brain, he shows early signs of mental
instability and imperfect nerve function,
passes through various forms of so-called,
but miscalled, insanity, and finally ends in
a premature dementia, that 1s, an almost
complete loss of the little mental faculty he
ever possessed. Incidentally, the mental
defective reproduces, just like a slow-moving cinema picture, the mental life history
of us all, and thus is of interest to us all.

THE DIAGNOSIS OF DEFICIENCY

It is obviously impossible in the present
state of medical science to examine the brain
of a living patient, and to tell for certain
thereby whether or not neuronic development is imperfect ; so a variety of physical,
mental, psychological, and ‘ intelligence
THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

tests ’ have been devised to be carried out on
the living child with that very objective.
Their success in combination has undoubtably been very great, but before proceeding
actually to describe them it may be as well
to ask ourselves what we mean by “ intelligence.”’

WHAT IS INTELLIGENCE ?

Intelligence is a matter of a sufficiency of
normal healthy neurons or brain cells correctly linked together into arcs and chains.
Education, on the other hand, is largely a
matter of environment and of suitable opportunities for the development of the neurons
possessed. One of the commonest errors is
to confuse intelligence and education, and
to attribute the apparent lack of intelligence
to a defective education. ‘‘ It is probably
true,’’ says Goddard, ‘‘ that most people
whose shortcomings we account for on the
ground of lack of education are really lacking in intelligence.’? Those who have the
intelligence, that is, the necessary brain
neurons for the purpose, usually acquire the
education in one way or another—if not
through schools, colleges, and universities,
then by travel, business, and contact with
the world and its affairs. Conversely, the
individual who is lacking in intelligence,
that is, again, the necessary neurons, can
never become educated in any wide sense.
He may have a memory for facts and accumulate a large amount of non-correlated information, but he makes little or no practical use of it, and shows little or no judgment and good sense in the ordinary affairs
of life. .

It is not easy to define intelligence, but
however it may be defined, it is certain that
the mentally defective have not got it, and
it is equally certain that the reason why
they have not, is because they are lacking
in a sufficiency of normal cerebral neurons
to give it. If, for example, intelligence be
defined as an “‘ ability to adapt one’s self
to one’s environment or to new situations ”’
it is certain that the feeble-minded are lacking in such abilities. If Stern’s definition
of intelligence be accepted as ‘‘ the general

177

capacity of an individual consciously to adjust his thinking to new requirements ’’—
the feeble-minded have no such capacity.
Again, intelligence may be regarded as consisting ‘‘ of a general adaptability to new
problems and the conditions of life and environment,’’ which appears to be a good
working rough measure of intelligence, because those people who are best able to adapt
their thinking and their actions to the most
elaborate situations are the most intelligent ;
while those of less intelligence, although
able to adapt themselves to the ordinary
conditions of life, are confused and rendered
helpless by the more complex situations.
Still lower are those whom James says are
““nonplussed by all but the very simplest
situations.’’ Now the ability to live an independent existence, to make a living, and
to conduct one’s self with reasonable propriety in a modern community involves a
certain amount of this power of adaptation,
and there is a minimum below which one
cannot succeed. That point is usually
taken as marking the line between the normal and the feeble-minded. (Goddard.)

Most school teachers and educationists of
to-day are familiar with the well-known
Binet tests, or some modification of them,
and employ them as a means of estimating
the child’s intelligence. Some even go
farther and attempt by means of these tests
alone to establish a diagnosis of feeblemindedness. This seems to be neither
legally correct nor scientifically sound.
English law insists on the certification of a
mental defective by a fully qualified medical
practitioner, and very properly refuses to
sign away a child’s liberty on the results
of a single test or a single opinion.

The method now to be outlined, devised
some years ago by Professor Porteus and
myself, complies with the foregoing legal
and scientific conditions. It seeks throughout to associate the observed clinical facts
with the state of development of the brain
cortex. It is correlated with the cortical
investigations of Bolton, Watson, Mott,
Wilson, and others. It is founded on an
examination of some 10,000 normal children
and nearly 2,000 abnormal children; on the
178

physical examination of Doll, Smedley, and
others on both children and adults, and on
the many thousands of examinations made
in almost all parts of the world by the Binet
and Porteus tests, and lastly on clinical experience gained in hospitals, juvenile and
criminal courts, children’s welfare departments, and the like.

- This method is equally applicable to the
normal as well as to the abnormal and is at
least worth a trial in child guidance clinics
and those dealing with the so-called problem
child, who as often as not is either a potential genius misunderstood by his less gifted
parents, or more probably an unstable high
grade feeble-minded person. Differences of
mentality are, of course, fruitful sources of
human misunderstanding.

That any diagnosis of mental deficiency
in a child should be made early seems to me
a national necessity, because the high grade
feeble-minded child seldom reacts normally
to his surroundings, and may develop, consequent on his mal-developed brain and in
accordance with his environment, anti-social
reactions, which may lead him or her to
crime, prostitution, and strife—and thus to
become a social menace and a nuisance.

ELIMINATING THE PERSONAL FACTOR

It is commonly stated and believed that
figures can be made to prove anything.
When wrongly used, as they mostly are,
this is doubtless true, but we forget there
is a science of statistics; and the figures
used by Porteus and myself are the results
of a double scientific check and are calculated from the true means with their standard deviations and probable errors, and
Sir Francis Galton’s percentile methods.
These last are clinically of much value, as
thev enable us to establish a direct biological comparison between the child to be
examined and the known normal standards
for normal children of the patient’s own
age, sex, and social standing. Thus Nature
is made to tell her own story, and the
examiner’s personal beliefs, opinions, fads,
and theories, are cut clean out and do not
enter into the problem at all. From the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

observed facts it only remains for the expert
to interpret them in accordance with known
medical and neurological science.

I now propose to illustrate the methods I
employ for the diagnosis of cerebral insuffciency or for the normal and intelligent
child by working them out on a concrete
case, a woman aged 32 years 6 months, and
an inmate of Stoke Park Colony (No. 926).
She is the eldest of a tainted family of nine
with a family history of mental deficiency on
both the father’s and the mother’s sides.
Let us now, in imagination, follow her into
the testing laboratory. I first have her head
measured, and find that her length of head
is 177 mm.; or only that of a normal child
of ro years. Her maximum head breadth
is 136 mm. or that of a normal child of 6
years, whilst her head height is 121 mm. or
that of a normal child of 4 years. From
these figures and the use of the Pearson-Lee
mathematical formule, her cubic capacity
of skull and brain comes out at 1141 cc.
which is only that of a normal six-year-old
child. She is, therefore, distinctly microcephalic, and already a danger signal has
been held out to the examiner, who knows
that at least two-thirds of all mentally defectives tend to be microcephalic. But the
examiner also knows, or should do, that
small-headedness is not necessarily associated with feeble-mindedness, and so, at the
moment, he only regards the facts elicited
as a warning to look carefully at all those to
follow.

Before passing on to these facts yet to be
discovered on the patient under discussion,
a few words of explanation may be given on
two points which may make what is to follow still clearer.

As a brain of the mentally defective person is always under-developed to a greater
or less degree, there are naturally fewer
brain cells than in the normal, and even
many of these remain and persist in a small,
rudimentary condition, as can be seen under
the microscope. The brain weight thus
tends, as Professor Bolton says, to be less
than normal, and the brain smaller. As
we cannot weigh the brain of the living subject, we are compelled to resort to measureTHE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

ment arid calculation to ascertain its approximate size and state of development,
and the information so gained is then correlated with known facts about the minute
structure and functions of the supra- and
infra-granular layers of the brain. It is
sufficiently obvious that the smaller brain
of the mentally defective will not require
such a large box—the skull—to contain it,
and hence about two-thirds of all defectives
and mentally abnormal people have small,
microcephalic heads and brains. ‘That all
have not, is due to complications from other
factors, most of which are, however, well
established and known.

As regards Galton’s percentile methods
for statistics and comparative biology, the
recorded observations, whatever they may
be, are divided into tenths, with the lowest
observation at zero, and the highest at roo.
This at once affords the range of the dispersal of the series of observations. The
50 percentile, or half-way mark, gives the
median or average of the observations,
whilst those falling at the two extreme ends
of the percentile scale are obviously the
potentially abnormal ones—either abnormally small or big, according to their place
at the respective ends of the scale. In the
patient before us the cubic capacity of brain
is so small that she falls at the — 10 percentile, which means that she has a smaller
head, by ten places, than those previously
recorded. We thus now know that she falls
quite below previously recorded figures for
head measurement for females of her own
age and social standing, and, as she has only
the head size of a normal six-year-old child,
it may be said that, on this count, she is
some fourteen years retarded.

Reverting now to the patient, as the correlation of brain weight or size with bodily
physique is of some importance and clinical
significance, I proceed next to ascertain her
stature, both standing and sitting, and her
weight—all measurements being recorded in
the metric system. She shows a retardation of six years for stature, and four years
for weight, the respective percentile figures
being 9, 8, and 21—all of which, it will be
noted, are distinctly subnormal. Differently

179

expressed, this woman is only as tall as a
normal 14-year-old girl, and as heavy as a
normal 16-year-old girl.

NEURONS AND VITALITY

One of the great functions of a properly
developed nervous system is the generation of energy, but mentally defective
persons are known to be lacking in a
sufficiency of normally developed neurons,
consequently one of their great clinical
characteristics is defective vitality. There
are not enough neurons to generate a sufficiency of energy, and the feeble-minded display this in many ways. Langdon-Down,
for example, has shown that many Mongolian imbeciles lose a large amount of the
little intellectual energy they ever possess
in the winter, and go, in short, through a
species of winter hibernation. Again, low
grade defectives, though they can easily
manage to wheel heavily loaded barrows, or
to lift heavy weights, almost invariably fail
badly when asked to grip the dynamometer,
“In the former case they are using the
powerful muscles of the back and legs, in
the latter they are asked to concentrate their
nerve energy on a particular effect, and this
the under-neuroned defective is usually unable todo. Strength of grip has, therefore,
a high diagnostic value inasmuch as 84 per
cent of all mentally defective persons fail
to reach the normal average’? (Berry). In
the rough and ready test of asking a feebleminded person to grip one’s hand as tightly
as possible, this defective vitality or lack of
energy is equally obvious. For almost precisely the same reason, the defective usually
fails equally badly at the wet spirometer
test, where he is asked to blow into the instrument as though he were expanding a
miniature gasometer, and at least 85 per cent.
of defectives fail to reach normal standards
with this physical test. Professor Dryer
of Oxford has also pointed out the great
medical significance of this test as an assessment of physical fitness. But the mentally
defective person shows his defective vitality
in still other non-measurable ways. He
has an increased predisposition to illness,
180

readily contracts disease, is an unfavourable
subject for anzesthetics and surgical operations, and his physiological powers of resistance are so much below par that disease
usually quickly proves fatal.

Let us now apply these tests to the
woman before us. Her grip with both hands
is distinctly subnormal, showing a retardation of four years with percentiles of 15 for
each hand. We therefore see that, as she is
equally strong with both hands, she is presumably ambidextrous or could be. Her
spirometer test, on the other hand, is above
the normal average, giving a percentile
figure of 85, which, as stated, is the exception rather than the rule of the defective—
though, curiously enough, Stoke Park inmates are giving a better reading with this
vital) capacity test than did a series of
Australian defectives. Of more importance,
however, than these observations is the fact
that the patient’s grip tests are corrobotative of the lack of energy consequent on
an under-developed brain and nervous
system, and are absolutely confirmatory of
the suspicions already aroused by her pronounced microcephaly.

We next proceed to apply to her the Binet
and Porteus tests. Psychologists, especially educational ones, have invented and
devised an extraordinary number of these
so-called ‘ intelligence tests,’ and in the
United States their names and numbers are
almost fabulous. We do not use them, because they are not standardized. It is
easier to invent new tests than to standardize them, for this means a lot of laborious work without the kindly glamour of
the limelight. | Non-standardized psychological or other tests are useless for medical
purposes, for the first consideration is that
the performances with the proposed tests of
the normal child must be known before they
can be used for the comparative examination
of a patient. If the latter cannot be directly
compared with the normal child of his own
age, sex, and social standing, these tests are
useless. This is not the case with the wellknown Binet and Porteus tests, commonly
referred to as ‘ intelligence tests ’—a term,
personally, I have always disliked, for I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

regard, and indeed use, these tests not as
intelligence tests at all, but as an indication
to me, as a mental physiologist, of what has
gone into the child’s brain over its receptor
or sense neurons, and of what comes out on
the other or effector side. To me, and to
those who think with me, these Binet and
Porteus tests, when so regarded, are much
more illuminating than any ‘ intelligence ’
test. When so tested, the present patient
shows a Binet I.Q. of 70; a Porteus I.Q. of
52, with corresponding percentiles of 10 and
1. This gives her a psychological mental
age of 11 years by the Binet, and 8% by the
Porteus.

As I was actually collaborating with Porteus when he was perfecting his now wellknown maze puzzle tests, I can express my
entire agreement with him when he says,
‘‘ a Binet I.Q. of 70 or less may be regarded
as the first presumptive evidence of feeblemindedness, but by no means as a final
diagnostic proof. This is almost universally conceded, yet we find study after
study, presumably directed towards the
problem of what does and does not constitute
feeble-mindedness, quoting a Stanford-Binet
I.Q. as if it were adequate to determine the
status of the subjects of the investigation.
The practice appears to be on all hands to
repudiate such a method by diagnosis and
just as generally to adopt it.’’ Porteus is of
the further opinion, with which again I
agree, that a combined Binet-Porteus intelligence quotient is of more significance than
either taken separately, and that all those
who register a combined Binet-Porteus I.Q.
below 75 may be said to be at feeble-minded
levels. In the patient now before us this
combined I.Q. has the significant reading
of 61.

As we now have all the facts elicited by
these cerebral, physical, neurological, and
psychological tests and measurements of this
patient, the medical expert is in a position
to proceed to their interpretation. But
before doing so let us recapitulate what
nature has told us about this patient.

Her head is very microcephalic, only as
big as that of a normal child of six
years.
THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND

In physique she has only attained the
level of about the normal girl of fourteen
years of age.

In nervous energy she is deficient and can
only register to about the level of a 16-yearold girl.

Her mental age by the Binet test is 11
years, and by the Porteus, 8%.

On every possible count, except one-—the
spirometer test—she is markedly sub-normal. Her percentile figures bring out her
sub-normality even more strikingly, for
they are naturally more accurate than this
estimate from chronological years.

Here then is an adult woman of 32 years
of age, with a brain only as large as that of
a girl-child of 6 years, and the mental capacity of one of 11 years. Physically, her
bodily growth has proceeded a little farther,
to somewhere about the 14-year level. Sexually, she is at the adult level. Here, therefore, is a striking example of that inequality
of cerebral, physical, and sexual growth
which is so characteristic of the feebleminded and makes them such a social
menace when at liberty to exercise their uncontrolled animal instincts.

But to the trained neurologist this
examination has revealed something more.
It has made it perfectly clear—because
every fact fits in like the pieces of a puzzle
—that her brain is lacking in a sufficiency
of neurons, and that this insufficiency must
chiefly affect the pyramidal cells of the controlling supra-granular cortex. In the
normal individual, it is this layer which,
according to Watson, Shaw Bolton, and the
late Sir Frederick Mott, controls the instinctive animal reflexes of the infra-granular
brain. In this patient that control is largely
lacking and is certainly inefficient physiologically, consequently it is to be expected,
at least by the expert, that with the sexual
passions of the adult and the insufficient
control of a child of six, there will be trouble
in one or other or both of two directions—
that is, unless a beneficent control is exercised by somebody. Every living human
individual, no matter who or with what
brains, must conform, during life, to the
two great laws of nature—that of self-preser
181

vation, and of the reproduction of the
species. Almost every crime on the Statute
book will be found, on careful examination,
to be an offence against one or other of these
natural laws ; but at long last we are slowly,
but surely, beginning to understand that
there are many unfortunate, under-developed human beings so lacking in the numbers and efficiency of their controlling brain
cells as to be quite unable to comply with
the laws laid down by their more normal
fellows for the regulation of civilized society,
or to understand the importance of their so
complying.

The diagnosis of this case is now quite
certain. The patient is a microcephalic or
small-headed low-grade feeble-minded person. The prognosis is that, left to herself,
she will, given the environment of ordinary
city or rural life, become a thief and a prostitute, or at least the mother of many legitimate or illegitimate feeble-minded children.
That she will conform to one or both of the
two great laws of nature is absolutely certain. Nature will not be denied.

THE FAMILY HISTORY

But members of my own profession may
say, as indeed may others, this is all very
well, but you have told us nothing about
her family or previous history. Exactly,
because that is precisely the position in
which English law puts the expert to-day,
and many of us are compelled to furnish our
diagnosis without such family history. So
perhaps my readers will now better appreciate the reasons for all this attempted scientific accuracy in eliciting facts about the
patient which cannot be controverted.

Though I am still not in possession of all
the details about the patient’s family history which one would like to have, we can
fortunately produce sufficient to satisfy us
of the accuracy of both diagnosis and prognosis—established, be it remembered, on
nature’s facts without any family history.
There is mental deficiency on both sides.
Her paternal grandfather and uncle were
both defectives and several on the mother’s
side have been sexually immoral. The
182

patient was late in acquiring speech, but
now speaks clearly with a limited vocabulary. By those in daily attendance she is
described as dishonest, untruthful, restless,
fidgety, and vain. She is markedly immoral and addicted to many sex practices,
and even her parents refused to keep her
at home on account of her behaviour with
her brothers. It is surely unnecessary to
pursue the family history further. It. must
be evident to even the most biased that we
now have to hand methods capable of
* spotting ’ juvenile criminals in advance of
their crimes, and hence the importance of
early diagnosis. As regards the present
patient it is of some interest to note that
she was originally returned as a ‘‘ moral
imbecile,’’ though the fact that the so-called
moral imbecility results from low-grade
feeble-mindedness with the consequent reversion to the primitive laws of nature,
rather than the more artificial ones of man,
seems to have been missed—but then many
of the laws of civilized human society are
at variance with those of nature.

THE OUTLOOK—AND THE ODDS

I may conclude on two notes—one of
pessimism, the other of optimism.

No one who has studied the problem of
mental deficiency can fail to realize the
gravity of the position into which we are
rapidly drifting. | Personally, I entirely

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

agree with a distinguished member of this
Society, Professor MacBride, when he
says, ‘‘ the outlook for the nation is black
indeed,’’ for ‘‘ unless the birth-rate of these
people is restricted the British nation as a
virile people is doomed.’’ But this notwithstanding, modern British democracy
appears to be backing the wrong horse, for
I understand here in England we are laying odds of 93 to 12 against the fit—that
is, this country is spending £93 per head
per annum on the defectives, and only £12
per head per annum on the normal child,
and the former are breeding freely, whilst
the latter are becoming more restricted.
Surely it does not need another Cassandra
to warn us of our fate?

Despite all that I have here said, no student of the human brain can be altogether
a pessimist, for notwithstanding the manifold follies of mankind, there is a greater
even than man, and that greater power is
slowly, but surely, fashioning a mighty
implement—the human brain and mind.
With the passage of a few more geological
ages, that work will doubtless be perfected,
and then we shall cease to talk nonsense
about mind and seek only the truth, which
is, that mind is the product of brain, and
the better the brain the better the mind.
Remove that brain, even in its present imperfect state, and the soul of man is but the
dust of the fields.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.
