WELFARE AND POPULATION*®
By the Right Rev. E. W. BARNES, Sc.D., F.R.S.

Bishop of Birmingham

E have created the Welfare State.

It is a great achievement. For the

first time in our history the whole
population of the country is in a position to
get adequate medical attention. Everyone
should be able to receive care of general
health, together with provision for defective
teeth and eyesight. There is also available
expert care for infant and child welfare. So
far as possible, life will be made tolerable for
the aged. In no other country does such
large-scale provision exist, though doubtless
our lead will, in due course, be followed
elsewhere.

As regards the individual citizen the policy
which has thus created the Welfare State is
right. It deserves and has received almost
universal Christian and humanist approval.
But social reforms create new situations in
which new and sometimes very troublesome
problems arise. Some such problems now
emerging are worth our careful attention. I
give examples.

Many a West Indian island is to-day a
crowded slum. Children born survive if they
are vigorous ; each one that dies relieves
congestion. Naturally such inhabitants as
can claim British citizenship are coming
here in large numbers to avoid such congestion and to enjoy the benefits of the Welfare
State.

Other peoples come here ; Eastern pedlars
throng our street markets; our fame has
gone out into all the world.

Three months ago my wife and I were at a
city in central France. The chambermaid at
the hotel had a daughter learning hotel work
in England. She told us of her. I sum up the
story in isolated words and phrases. Appendicitis ; an operation with the best surgical

_ * Address by the Bishop of Birmingham at a luncheon
of the Rotary Club, Birmingham.

93

skill; a convalescent home. All free of
charge. To the joyful mother the record
seemed too good to be true.

Now for the other side of the picture.

In the great days of Elizabeth the population of England and Wales was probably
rather more than 4 million. In 1811 it had
risen to 10 million. By I9g00 it was over
30 million. It is now estimated to be more
than 44 million.

We are over-populated. We cannot produce enough food for our people, even though
the fertility of our land has been artificially
increased. We have to buy large, and ever
larger, quantities of food from abroad. As
we all know, the task, for a virtually bankrupt country, is most difficult.

Malthus, a Cambridge don, saw a century
and a half ago what could be the result of an
unrestricted increase of population. The
crisis which he foresaw was averted by
emigration. There were still large empty
spaces of the earth ready to receive our
people, especially in North America and
Australasia. Also a vast industrial development took place in Britain. By good fortune
we were ahead of other peoples. We sold the
goods we made in increasing amounts and
consequently could buy _ ever-increasing
quantities of food. The nineteenth century
was our golden age. Now the vacant spaces
of the world are nearly full. The competition
of other countries is formidable. We look
like being permanently the paupers of the
English-speaking world. We need to restrict
our population.

The instinct that population-increase is
good—be it of a family, of a city, or of a
nation—is so strong as to be all-prevailing.
It is embedded in the religious traditions of
most races. Despots use it to increase their
armies. Politicians, to whom patriotism is a
valuable asset, point proudly to increased
94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

numbers. And yet our population is now too
large, and must be diminished.

Will it fall under the working of the Welfare State ? Obviously not, without teaching
which will be unpopular, coupled with practical measures which will arouse indignant
opposition.

In reducing the population we must
preserve the better stocks in the population
and hinder the increase of the worse.

Now I do mot mean preserve the rich and
get rid of the poor. We need to preserve the
good-living, honest, hard-working classes in
our people, whether they be rich or poor.
But we need to get rid of the slovenly,
vicious, idle wasters of the community.
Unfortunately the Welfare State is only too
likely to encourage their increase.

A challenge will come from those who do
not believe that good and bad qualities are
alike inherited. Such people say that if you
mate members of a bad stock and put them
to live in a first-class housing area sound
citizens will be produced. I wish it were true ;
it would make our social problems so much
easier. But all our leading eugenists in the
Western world assert that it is untrue.
Analysis of facts in the light of the fundamental discoveries of Mendel and Morgan
shows that bad stocks propagate bad stocks.
At least go per cent of feeble-mindedness is
inherited. A time is quickly coming when
sterilization of the unfit will have to be
essential in our social organization. Such
sterilization may well be, in fact, the complement of the Welfare State.

I know that there are those who say that

bad stocks evolve in slums where dirt and
disease are rife. I have met two or three
Members of Parliament who believe it. In
Russia the belief is orthodox Soviet genetics,
associated with the name of Lysenko. But
even I, in spite of the beliefs attributed to
me, do not think that the Soviet leaders are
always right! We must get rid of our slums ;
we must give all possible help to the poor
and unfortunate ; but we must not let the
Welfare State spoil, rather than improve, the
quality of our population. You cannot
‘ gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles,”’
as was said by a very great Teacher.

What is to be done? I merely put the
problem : I cannot give a solution. We must
limit immigration, whether from India,
South Africa, the West Indies or East Europe.
We must educate our citizens to have smaller
families. We must have medically controlled
sterilization of the unfit on a large scale.

Many are beginning to think that medically - controlled euthanasia for defective
infants should be an element in our social
policy. I have met mothers of such children
who have been thankful when death has
brought release. What should be the Christian attitude to these questions, what the
attitude of the humanist ?

All over the world population is now
increasing dangerously. Our moral prestige
is still so high that other peoples tend to
follow our example. Are populations to
increase everywhere till an explosion comes
and the miseries of atomic warfare end for a
time the anxieties of starvation. Think on
these things.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

‘* For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation In different countries, more particularly In the several
parts

rts of His Majesty’s

Dominions, and in the United States.”

President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice COHEN

Editors : Professor F. H. LAWSON, D.C.L.

Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,

assisted by
Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C., and Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.
Honorary Secretary : E. H. WALL, Esq.

Annual Subscription 
Address :

i8, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE,

 

ONE GUINEA

LONDON, W.C.2

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 2
