HEREDITY AND EUGENICS, ©
By R. RUGGLES Gates, PH.D., F.L.S.

THE central problem of evolution is still the nature and causes of variation, while the practical problems of eugenics centre about heredity.
Variation in past ages has already endowed the human race with an
almost infinite variety of types and characters, many of the latter alternative in their inheritance. We have only to compare those we know best
with their relatives and ancestors to realise how minute are the
resemblances and differences which may be handed on to descendants
and collateral lines. These are no doubt chiefly a matter of biological
inheritance, though similarity of environment may play a part in certain
cases. Probably in no other species of animal or plant does the number
of differences between individuals approach the number to be observed in
man. This is to be expected because of the mental and physical complexity of the human organism, but it does not imply greater intrinsic
variability than in other animals or plants.

Before proceeding further, it may be well to point out that whereas
heredity was formerly defined or measured by the degree of resemblance
between parents and offspring, this treatment of the subject will no longer
suffice. Thus Brooks (1906) says: ‘ So far as the word is used inductively
in biology, heredity is the resemblance of child to parent, of offspring to
ancestor, while the difference between parent and child is called variation.”
The study of alternative inheritance, which appears to be the most usual
form of heredity, has made it necessary to revise such a definition of
heredity, as well as our outlook with regard to its incidence. It has now
become a commonplace of observation that the differences between
organisms, as well as their resemblances, are often inherited. If a tall
is crossed with a dwarf variety, we know that usually the second generation will inherit tallness and dwarfness—the grandparental differentiating
characters—in a definite proportion, and that certain of the tall individuals will go on transmitting dwarfness. We may even cross two white
varieties of plants or two albino animals, externally alike, and obtain
coloured offspring. Yet we know that the colour in this case is not the
result of variation. One of the necessary elements in its production has
beer inherited from each parent, though neither possesses both. In such
instances invisible (probably nuclear) differences have ‘been inherited
which, when combined, produce a striking externalised difference. Hence
it is necessary, in speaking of inheritance, to recognise that both similarities and differences may be inherited, the one quite as truly as the other.
Some of the differences which appear in offspring may, then, be the result
of variation, but many of them will be the result of inheritance.

The Mendelian differences appear to have originated in the first
instance as mutations,! probably through an alteration in one area of a.

1 This subject is discussed elsewhere (Gates, 1915, Chap. IX.).
194 EUGENICS REVIEW.

chromosome. That they are inherited as Mendelian factors results, then,
from the manner of distribution of the chromosomes in the reduction
divisions, It may be that some of the fundamental resemblances between
related organisms are inherited in a different way. Since in experimental
breeding it is only possible to study directly the inheritance of differences,
evidence concerning the process of inheritance of resemblances must
necessarily be indirect and closely wrapped up with development itself.

The biological characters or differences observable in the human race
and for the most part inherited, include not merely the more striking racial
divergences, but also the innumerable structural and mental or temperamental differences that we see in the individuals of any population, however “pure” the race. Colour of hair and eyes, height and size of various
parts of the body (for there is some evidence that these are independently
inherited for different parts or segments), conformation of the head and
features, size and shape of eyes, ears, nose, mouth, hands and feet—there
is good reason to believe that the element of inheritance enters largely
into the perpetuation of a host of such differences, as well as others more
minute. Everyone can cite, from his own experience, cases of such
essentially physiological traits as longevity and early baldmess! or grayness ‘‘ running in families.” Differences in reactions to serums and to
various diseases, as well as other evidence, indicates the existence of
corresponding chemical and constitutional differences between individuals.
The inheritance of such differences is now commonly recognised. Only a
few years ago, in the Law Courts, the disposal of a large estate turned
upon a peculiar conformation of the ear occurring in the father and the
supposed son.?

A considerable body of detailed evidence concerning heredity in man
has accumulated in recent years. It is not my purpose to attempt anything like a complete citation of this work here, but it may be of interest
to enumerate some of the studies which have been made on this subject.
For our knowledge of the inheritance both of normal and abnormal traits
in man must always form the chief basis for eugenic action.

1 In an interesting study of the inheritance of baldness, by Dorothy Osborn
(1916), she tabulated the results for 22 families and reached definite conclusions.
Baldness is found to be a sex-limited trait, being inherited as a dominant character
from father to son. In the woman it acts as a recessive, and may be transmitted
as such, only appearing as baldness when present in the duplex condition. This
explains the greater rarity of baldness in women.

It is interesting to note in this connection that Duerden (1918, 1919) has shown
that in crosses between the North African and South African ostrich, the bald
spot of the former behaves as a simple dominant character not sex-linked. In the
chicks the head is covered with bristly down, but in the North African birds this
gradually falls out during the first few months and is not replaced by feathers.

2 On the other hand, a case is cited (Jenks, 1916), with some evidence of
authenticity, in which a girl of Swedish ancestry whose ancestors of both sexes
had been accustomed for many generations to wear earrings, was born with a hole
in the proper position in each ear-lobe. That such cases of inheritance of a
mutilation are admittedly rare does not necessarily prove that they are nonexistent.
HEREDITY AND EUGENICS. 195

PHYSICAL CHARACTERS.

Two of the earliest subjects studied in connection with human
heredity were naturally enough stature and eye-colour. Galton dealt with
these traits in his Natural Inheritance. I have pointed out elsewhere
(1914) that Galton was a believer both in continuity and discontinuity in
variation, and also in alternative as well as blended inheritance. His
point of view with regard to the inheritance of these two characters may
be well illustrated by a quotation from Natural Inheritance (p. 138):
“‘ Stature and eye-colour are not different as qualities, but they are more
contrasted in hereditary behaviour than perhaps any other common
qualities. Parents of different statures usually transmit a blended heritage
to their children, but parents of different eye-colour usually transmit an
alternative heritage.” He also remarks (p. 139): ‘“‘ The blending in
stature Is due to its being the aggregate of the quasi-independent inheritance of many separate parts, while eye-colour appears to be much less
various in its origin.” Instead of Galton’s conception of particulate inheritance we now think in terms of such abstractions as multiple allelomorphs. But this conclusion of his concerning stature has been substantiated by Davenport (1917), who concludes from a considerable aggregation
of carefully analysed data that the correlation between ‘ knee height ”
and ‘‘ pubic arch minus knee height,” or length of thigh, is only 24 per
cent. Knee height includes height of ankle, which is an independent
variable. The correlation between the supra-pubic and sub-pubic portions
of stature is found to be 30 per cent., and striking differences in the
relative lengths of these portions of the body occur in different races of
man. Thus Eskimo, Mongolords and some American Indian tribes have
a long trunk and short legs, while the Australian Aborigines and some
negro groups have a short trunk and long legs. Of the supra-pubic
region, the supra-sternal or head and neck, and sub-sternal or trunk
portion are independent variables as regards length, with a correlation
between them of only g per cent.

Thus while inherited general growth factors, such as differences in
the amount of secretion of various glands, are concerned in determining
the adult stature as a whole, other factors control independently the length
of the various segments that go to make up stature. Hence an individual
may be tall because of the presence of general growth factors, or because
he happens to have inherited length in each segment of his stature. Of
the four segments that combine to form the total stature, any individual
may be relatively long im some and short in others. It is a common
experience that certain families have predominantly long trunks and short
legs, while others may have short, stocky trunks combined with long or
short legs. A child may happen to inherit all the relatively long or short
segment-lengths of its two parents, and may thus be considerably taller
or shorter than either parent.

As regards dwarfs, they may be achondroplastic—having short legs
and long trunk—or ateliotic, with normal proportions and reduced size
(miniatures). The former condition frequently skips a generation and its
heredity is uncertain, but it appears to be connected with derangements
196 _ EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the internal secretions. A number of pedigrees of both types of dwarfs
are described in the 7reasury of Human Inheritance (Pearson). Ateliosis
appears to correspond more nearly to many of the dwarf varieties of
plants and amimals, though Davenport concludes that it is due to
dominant inhibiting factors. A well-known pedigree of this type of
dwarfism occurs in two families in the Tyrol which have intermarried, and
Pearson suggests that it may here be inherited as a recessive from an
ancestral stock. Davenport is inclined to conclude that ‘an both ateliosis
and achondroplasia there are multiple dominant (growth-inhibiting)
factors, whose actions are also often obscured by opposing epigenetic
growth factors, and which are probably of a different sort in ateliosis than
in achondroplasia, for achondroplasia affects chiefly or exclusively the
appendages.”

The data of inheritance of gigantism include some interesting cases in
the tall Scotch population of North Carolina and Kentucky. It is concluded that excessively tall stature is the result of inherited excessive
activity of the pituitary gland, the factors for tallness being mostly
recessive, due to absence of inhibition to prolonged growth. It is clear
that gigantism and dwarfism are not merely the extreme terms in a single
series, but they are conditioned in inheritance by entirely different physiological and developmental processes.

The Mendelian studies of eye-colour up to 1912 were summarised by
Hurst (1912) in this journal, and are too well-known to require comment
here. Pearson and others have also studied some of the more detailed
differences in eye pigmentation which are important for a complete
analysis. A recent paper (Boas, 1919) presents statistics of eye-colour
which, it is claimed, do not support the Mendelian contention that two
blue-eyed individuals have only blue-eyed offspring. But the writer
admits that in collecting these data persons with a certain amount of
brown in their eyes may have been classed as blue-eyed. Hurst has
summarised the studies on hair and skin-colour in man, and added some
observations of his own. The main points with regard to hair-colour are:
(1) That the shades of colour appear to be continuous from white (albino)
hair to jet black; (2) the reds form a separate series due to a lipochrome,
while the brown is a melanin pigment; and (3) the generalisation of
the Davenports that (with rare exceptions) children never have darker hair
than their darker parent. This “‘ non-transgressibility of the upper limit ”
applies also to skin-colour or complexion in the white races. Davenport
(1913), from a study of mulatto families in Bermuda, Jamaica and the
United States, concluded that there are probably two segregating Mendelian factors for black, and that other negroid features, such as kinky
hair and thick lips, segregate independently. The same would appear to
be true for mental characters, since mulattoes sometimes display high
intellectual ability, but never pure negroes so far as is known.

The monograph on albinism in man, by Pearson, Nettleship and Usher
(1911-13) is a very elaborate and detailed treatment, which will serve as
a basis for all future studies on this subject. It gives not only an
elaborately illustrated description of the external features and the histology of skin and eye pigmentation in albinotic individuals, but also
HEREDITY AND EUGENICS. 197

deals with the history of the subject. Pure albinism is a_ recessive
character,! but the condition exists in varying degrees and its inheritance,
like that of so many human qualities, frequently shows complications.
Complete albinism occurs in both white and coloured races of man.
Pearson divides albinotics into six classes. Several cases of white spotting
in negroes, similar to the classical types seen in paintings of the 18th
century, have been described in modern times. The evidence certainly,
as Pearson (1913) contends, favours the hypothesis that spotting arises
de novo where a white-black cross or mixed race is crossed back with a
pure white or black. In other words, spotting may be considered to arise
in certain cases as a somatic segregation, repulsion or dilution effect, and
not to be due to an inherited invisible spotting factor. Striping in various
flowers is generally believed to have originated in the same way. A
similar case occurs in certain Oenothera hybrids (Gates, 1915). When
Oe. rubricalyx having dark red buds is crossed with Oe. grandiflora
having green buds, the F1 is paler red. If this F1 generation is crossed
back with Oe. grandiflora, the colour is further diluted, becoming very
pale; and in some families the pattern breaks up into spots, a condition
which is inherited. Once the spotted condition has arisen, it appears then
to be fairly stable. Cases of human albinotic spotting are on record which
have been transmitted for two to five generations (Stannus, 1913). The
condition of spotting has in some way become stabilised in the germplasm,
and should therefore probably be looked upon as a mutation following
crossing. Moreover, the spotting in man often follows a characteristic
pattern, beginning as a blaze in the forehead, with spotting of the arms,
the back largely black, as well as the extremities. Curiously enough,
photographs of the Honduras piebald (Pearson, 1913) seem to show an
extension of some of the coloured spots as the child develops. The
sporadic manrer in which spotting appears in all such cases remains to
be accounted for. The Honduras piebald had five siblings, all normal
mulattoes. His mother combined Mexican and negro blood, while the
father was a pure negro.

Another interesting case first recorded by Simpson and Castle (1913)
originated as a novelty—a spotted woman born from ordinary mulatto
parents in Louisiana in 1853. No case of spotting had previously been
known in that part of the country. She married a normal black negro
and their children numbered 15, eight spotted like the mother, and seven
normal, but varying in depth of colour as is usual in mulattoes. Three
of the normal children and three spotted married normal negro mates.
The normals had in all seven children, all normal. The spotted had in
all nine spotted and two normal. This indicates that all the spotted
individuals, male and female, behave as heterozygotes, and that complete
segregation occurs between spotting and non-spotting. The fact that
spotting appears rarely and sporadically among the innumerable mulatto
crosses tells strongly against it being the result of an inherited spotting
factor.

1 A recent case in which two complete albino “‘ white’ parents had an albino
son is illustrated by Davenport (1916).
198 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The Pearson monograph includes also a study of peculiarities of
vision such as night-blindness, as well as the hair, of albinotics, and also
albinism in various animals. Complete albinoes with pink eyes are known
to occur in “‘ pure” races of man, just as they occur in many mammals,
birds and plants (white petals). The monograph above mentioned also includes a study of seasonal variation in animals that are white in winter,
such as Lepus variabilis in Scotland. Crosses of white and black Pekinese
dogs also are believed to furnish evidence of the de novo origin of
spotting and blends. It is well known, of course, that in certain breeds,
as the Dalmatian, particular types of spotting have become a fixed
characteristic of the breed. Numerous Mendelian studies of spotting in
mammals have been made in recent years, especially in rabbits and mice,
and complicated theories of the inheritance of spotting have been formulated. The subject is complex and far from settled, but whereas the
evidence indicates, I think, the sporadic de movo origin of spotting mm
man, it does not follow that the same is necessarily true for dogs. In
some breeds spotting has already attained the status of a germinal factor,
and the regularity with which white-black crosses of Pekinese yield
definite patterns, would seem to indicate another mode of hereditary
behaviour, 7.¢., that a spotting or pattern factor is present.

Civilisation has often been credited with the production of the
numerous congenital deformities that appear in man. But various studies,
such as that of Stannus (1914) on the Bantus of Nyasaland, show that the
same abnormalities continue to appear, probably with equal frequency, in
native races, even though the more marked of them are _ ruthlessly
eliminated by infanticide. It is evident that the conditions of civilisation
tend rather to preserve than to originate abnormalities, and that natural
selection in native races, as in wild animals, tends to eliminate individuals possessing characters which place them at a disadvantage in the
struggle for existence.

Another innocuous feature whose inheritance is well known is lefthandedness, which the results of Jordan (1911) and of Hurst (1912) indicate is inherited as a simple Mendelian recessive character, at least in
some families. It bears some resemblance as a character to reversed
symmetry in certain Gastropods. This reversal has been shown by
Conklin to begin in development with the cleavage of the egg, but its
inheritance is unknown. Ambidextrous individuals in man appear to
have inherited left-handedness and acquired dexterity with the right hand.
There are apparent exceptions, however (see Compton, 1912, where a number of references will be found), as in a family quoted by D. J. Cunningham in The Journal of the Anthropological Institute, XXXII., 1902, from
Aimé Péré, where a left-handed mother and a right-handed father had
eight sons and six daughters, all left-handed. If the father were
heterozygous, this result would be possible, though very improbable, with
left-handedness remaining recessive. It would seem more probable that
in such a case the dominance has been reversed.

The manner of clasping the hands, whether right-handed or lefthanded, i.e., with the right thumb over the left or vice versa, although
characteristic enough for the individual, apparently bears no relation to
HEREDITY AND EUGENICS. 199

right- or left-handedness. It does not follow any known rule of inheritance, but appears nevertheless to be partially imherited, for when both
parents show a right- or left-handed clasp the majority of the children
will be of the same type. Statistics show that em masse the two methods
usually occur with equal frequency, but neither condition breeds true.
Compton (1912) has studied the right- and left-handed seedlings (as
regards the manner of folding of the first leaf), which occur in various
cereals, but the condition 1s not inherited. Thus the seeds from a lefthanded (LH) plant produce the same ratio of LH and RH plants as do
the seeds from a right-handed (RH) plant. In two-rowed barley this ratio
LH/RH was shown to be constant for three generations, and therefore
inherited. In a total of 19,165 seedlings the percentage of LH seedlings = 58.362. Seeds planted from the odd and even rows separately also
gave the same preponderance of left-handed plants. Six-rowed barley
gave a similar excess of LH plants. In oats, however, there is regularly
an excess of RH plants (LH = 44.88 per cent.). This difference may have
some connection with the fact that the leaf-blades of barley “ are
generally slightly twisted into a right-handed screw, while in oats the
torsion is in the reverse direction.” In maize, again, there is no inheritance of left-handedness or right-handedness as such, but the seeds in odd
rows give an excess of RH, those from even rows an equal excess of LH
seedlings. The ratios were 54.22 per cent. and 46.16 per cent. LH respectively. Thus the total numbers of LH and RH seedlings from a cob are
practically equal. Compton suggests that the differences between rows in
this regard may perhaps be accounted for by unequal pressure on the
embryos. In any case it is a relief to find something which is definitely
not inherited. The question of the limits of human inheritance will be
discussed later.

In 1908 a list of normal and abnormal features in man whose inheritance had been studied was published by Hurst, and Bateson (1909) devoted
a chapter to this subject. Davenport (1912) also considered many Cases,
and Biometrika contains masses of statistical data on the inheritance of
various features. Abnormalities are frequently inherited as dominants,
and they probably originated as mutations. Such are hexadactyly
brachydactyly, ‘ lobster claw,” some forms of cataract, keratosis, congenital stationary night-blindness, and many others. Brittleness of bones
or osteopsathyrosis (Conard and Davenport, 1915) is a remarkable congenital weakness which appears to be inherited as a dominant character.
In one recorded case a boy suffered at least 12 fractures of his limbs before
reaching the age of three years, being born with both thighs broken. Later
this extreme liability to fracture began to diminish, but that it may still
remain a serious defect in the adult is shown by the fact that the mere
tension of the muscles or weight of the body, as in dancing, may be
sufficient to cause a fracture. Twins may be born in families having the
peculiarity, one showing the defect and the other normal.

In the mountains of Georgia a family is found (Stuckey, 1916), some
of whose members for four generations have had constricted eyelids. The
sight is normal, yet owing to this constriction it is necessary for them to
200 EUGENICS REVIEW.

avert their heads in order to see. The manner of inheritance indicates a
segregating dominant character.

Another peculiar case, of hereditary nose bleed, is recorded (Lane,
1916), members of a family in Maine showing the trait through three
generations. It is not, like hemophilia, sex-linked. It manifests itself
by spontaneous bleeding at the nose almost daily, beginning at the period
of adolescence and continuing until 18 or 20. Individuals showing it are
vigorous in health and grow rapidly, often feeling discomfort if the
bleeding does not take place.

Diseases such as hemophilia, Gower’s disease and colour-blindness
are well krown to be sex-limited in their inheritance, but with complications in the last instance. Among recessive conditions are alkaptonuria
and albinism. The most extensive pedigrees of cataract have been those
collected by Nettleship (c/. Bateson, 1909). They show that various forms
of cataract are usually transmitted as dominants. The indications of the
de novo origin of hereditary congenital cataract are clearly substantiated
by the pedigree of a family whose history is described by Danforth (1914).

Among family peculiarities which are known to be inherited, one of
the most notable is the large lower lip and prognathous jaw of the Hapsburgs. Bateson (1909) first suggested that this peculiarity was a Mendelian dominant, and Haecker (1911), from a study of numerous portraits,
confirms this conclusion. The peculiarity dates back at least to Duke
Ernst the Iron, who died in 1424, and it has been handed down continuously to the present time, hence for a period of probably more than 500
years, or 15 to 20 generations. The condition is less marked in the
women, and Haecker interprets it as the result of the loss of an inhibiting
factor which normally regulates in Europeans the development of the
lower lip and jaw. At least one other sporadic case of prognathism is
known to me, but I am not aware of any other data concerning its inheritance. In this case the father has the peculiarity slightly, while one
of four children has it in an extreme degree. This type of prognathism
suggests a mild form of the condition seen in the bull-dog—a variation
which also occurs in cattle, foxes and other mammals.

The Jewish racial physiognomy, which has been characteristic for
over 2,000 years, is believed by Salaman (1911) to show in marriages with
Gentiles incomplete or variable dominance, and segregation. Thus from
such marriages 328 children were classed as Gentile in facial expression,
26 as Jew, and eight intermediate. The subject is one which invites
more detailed study. Salaman points out two other inherited peculiarities
of the Jewish race: (1) Amaurotic family idiocy, a disease whose victims
die in early childhood and which is known only in Jews; (2) absence of
alcoholism.

As our knowledge of the physiological controls of development in
the human individual increases, a deeper analysis of many physical
characters will become possible. Various abnormalities in man, such as
brittle bones and blue sclerotics, are already believed to be due to an
hereditary inferiority of mesenchyme. And the glands of internal secretion, such as the pituitary, pineal and thyroid, are already known to
control growth and to produce, by their presence in excess or defect,
HEREDITY AND EUGENICS. 201

various characteristic conditions of the features or the limbs. Inherited
differences in these glands may thus account for a whole series of changes,
not only in physical conformation. but in temperament as well.

A remarkable feature of human inheritance, which is observed also
and made use of in horse and cattle breeding (Hover, 1916), is the
occurrence of “* prepotency.” Although an undoubted fact, prepotency
has not yet received a satisfactory biological explanation. It is believed
to be increased by inbreeding, and differences in vigour or energy are also
believed to be involved (Popenoe, 1916). Mere dominance does not appear
to be sufficient to explain it, and the interactions of factors may be concerned. The term should be used with great care, as no case of individual
prepotency has yet been proved. Perhaps the most striking case in man
is to be found in the offspring of the Mormon, Brigham Young (see
Journal of Heredity, January, 1916). In a photograph of some 11 of his
daughters by eight different wives, each one seems to have been stamped,
as it were, with the father’s own image, though the resemblance is stronger
in some cases than in others. This is particularly striking as regards the
strong, firm mouth, the ears, and the nose. But all are said, by one who
knew the family, to be also musical, amiable, adaptable, genuine, sincere,
warm-hearted, generous, attractive, magnetic and sympathetic, and temperamentai yet reasonable. Moreover, all were good mimics and excellent
cooks and housewives, having also their father’s voice and temperament.
This remarkable catalogue of qualities is very well substantiated by an
accompanying photograph, which shows a group of motherly, kind-hearted
women with remarkable similarity of features, although the mother’s
inflwence is also clear in the differences which appear between half-sisters.
This resemblance is perpetuated in the grand-children, especially the
girls, and may be partly attributable to assortative mating.

Another aspect of heredity which I have not touched upon hese is the
vexed question of functional inheritance, which has been fully discussed
by MacBride (1917) in an earlier number of this journal.

1 For a discussion of the racial differences in man in relation to internal
secretions, see, Keith, ‘‘ The Differentiation of Mankind into Racial Types,’
Presidential Address, Anthropological Section, British Association, Bournemouth,

1919.
