ENGLAND TO-DAY—AND YESTERDAY*
By M. C. BUER, D.Sc.

Whether or not readers agree that “‘ a high death-rate is always accompanied by a
high sickness and disablement rate,’’ they cannot but be impressed by the solidity and
reliability of Miss Buer’s statistical work. We greatly need the facts she brings out.—Ed.

NE of the chief difficulties of the

economic and social historian is that

contemporary records naturally tend
to deal with the unusual and the abnormal.
The most difficult question to answer about
any past age is, ‘‘ How did the ordinary
man live ?’’

Biography, memoirs, and fiction throw
some light on the everyday lives of the educated few, but tell us little, and that little
often of doubtful reliability, as to the inarticulate majority. It is from this point
of view that social statistics are so valuable,
since all of us, however humble and ordinary we may be, have our place in the census.
In statistical returns the socially undistinguished, either by success or failure, are
revealed in their battalions, bringing into
perspective the feeble companies which
attain the notoriety of the newspaper paragraph.

How poor a guide contemporary popular
opinion may be is illustrated by the general
belief that crimes of violence have increased
in this country since 1913, for which supposed increase a facile explanation is found
in the cheapening of human life and values
engendered by war experience. But cold
statistical fact reveals that the annual average of crimes against the person was smaller
(despite an increased population) in the
years 1919-23 than in the years 1909-13. A
similar fall in crimes against the person

* A Survey of the Social Structure of England and
Wales as illustrated by Statistics, by A. M. CarrSaunders and D. Caradog-Jones. (Oxford University
Press, 1927, 10S.).

Population Problems of the Age of Malthus, by G.
Talbot Griffith, B.A. (Cambridge University Press,
1926.

mA History of Factory Legislation, by B. UL.
Hutchins and H. Harrison (Mrs. F. H. Spencer),
D.Se. Third edition. (P. S. King & Son Ltd.,

1926, 98.).

occurred in the period following the Napoleonic Wars. In neither period was the fall
necessarily the effect of war; in both it was
probably associated with a decreased consumption of alcohol and with a rising social
standard. But the facts show that the
opinion that war experience would lead to
crime in civil life was based on false psychology.

The useful corrective of statistical information is, of course, only available for
very recent history. Interest in the subject
of social and vital statistics began as early
as the mid-seventeenth century; but early
inquirers were terribly hampered by the
extreme paucity of the available statistical
material. There was no census in this
country until 1801, and no civil registration
of births and deaths until 1836. ‘There was,
however, fairly complete registration of baptisms in the Established Church, of marriages, the celebration of which, from 1754
onwards, was not legal unless performed
according to the rites of the Established
Church, and, lastly, of interments in burial
grounds attached to the Established Church.

In 1801 a return was made of the entries
in the parish registers for every decennial
year from 1700 to 1780, and for every year
from 1780 to 1800. By assuming the baptismal rate to be a constant it was then
possible to calculate the size of the population at every decennial year of the eighteenth century. Several different calculations were made with various modifications
of this method with differing, but not widely
differing, results. The details will be found
in the first chapter of Population Problems
of the Age of Malthus.

The disadvantage of all the methods was
that they were based on the baptism rate,
and therefore precluded any calculation of
the birth-rate. Mr. Griffith, therefore, has
ENGLAND TO-DAY—AND YESTERDAY 2

boldly ventured upon another method. Assuming that the births exceeded the baptisms
by 15 per cent. and the deaths the registered
burials by 10 per cent., he has calculated by
deduction the population of the eighteenth
century. Since the figures for baptisms
and burials prior to 1780 are only available
for the decennial years, he has been forced
to take these years as typical of their
respective decades. There are two grave
possibilities of error in Mr. Griffith’s calculations. Firstly, his corrections for obtaining the number of births and deaths may
not be sufficient.

The registered births for the year in which
civil registration was introduced (1836) show
an excess of 15 per cent. over the baptisms
registered in the previous -year—hence
the percentage chosen by Mr. Griffith.
But though civil registration was introdiced in 1836, it was not compulsory and
no penalties attached to non-compliance until the Act of 1874. Farr estimated the
average deficiency in the registration of
births between 1836-76 at 5 per cent. Sir
Arthur Newsholme considers that no importance can be attached to the apparent rise in
the birth-rate up to 1876, since it was probably due to an increasingly efficient registration. Rickman estimated in 1831 that at
least I9 per cent., and probably more,
should be added to the baptisms of that time
to obtain the births.

It would seem, therefore, that a 15 per
cent. addition is unduly small; and, as Mr.
Griffith himself points out, by his method of
calculation a very small error in the original
adjustment, by accumulation, would lead to
a large error in the final results. No doubt
it is this consideration that prevented the
use of his method by earlier calculators,
since it is an obvious one to adopt provided
the correction from baptisms to births and
from interments to deaths can be made with
any degree of exactitude. It is probable
that the correction of 10 per cent. to obtain
the deaths is also too small; if so, the error
from the point of view of calculating the
population is to some degree neutralized.

It is, of course, unlikely that a flat-rate
correction for the whole period is accurate,

but this objection applies equally to all
calculations based upon the Parish Registers. More serious is the possibility that
the decennial years may not present the
average of the decade; in this connection it
must be remembered that in the eighteenth
century annual fluctuations in birth and
death-rates were very much larger than they
are in modern times. Mr. Griffith himself
is well aware of these possibilities of error
and calls attention to them. Nevertheless,
in spite of them, his calculations as to the
size of the population of England and
Wales in the eighteenth century seem well
worth the making. When, however, he
proceeds to the calculation of birth and
death-rates, with their double possibility of
error, setting them out to one (in the later
period to two) place of decimals, it appears
likely that the ordinary reader will be given
a very false sense of security.

If Mr. Griffith had omitted the decimal
places and added ‘“‘ plus or minus ”’ to his
figures it would have given a truer presentment of their value—not, be it understood,
owing to any fault in the method of manipulation, but owing to the nature of the
material with which he has had to deal.
But not only are the rates set out in a
manner which gives a false idea of their
exactitude, but Mr. Griffiths, while in one
place pointing out the large possibilities
of error, in other parts of his text comments
on the figures as if they possessed a high
degree of reliability and as if relatively
‘small movements were significant. It is
perhaps better to admit that, however much
the historian may desire exact vital statistics, we are not likely to obtain them for the
period prior to 1780 by any ingenious
juggling with published figures.

A careful survey of parish registers by
well selected sample may yield something to
the future researcher. At present we must
be content with estimates of population,
which are admittedly open to a wide margin
of error. This, however, is not in itself
of much importance ; but it does vitiate any
attempt to make exact calculations of birth
and death-rates. By 1780 we are on firmer
ground, though the margin of error is still
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wide ; and from this date onwards it is possible to be in substantial agreement with
Mr. Griffith’s figures, though not with the
degree of exactitude which he appears to
claim, but perhaps does not.

Sometimes one is tempted to envy the
future historian of the twentieth century,
who will not be reduced, as is the student of
the eighteenth century, to attempting to
make bricks without straw. The poor
fellow will probably rather be inclined to
lament the plethora of his material, and he
will rejoice when he comes across a survey
of social statistics giving him a good ground
upon which to build a picture of the social
structure of England and Wales circa
1926. Contemporaries even more owe a
debt of thanks to the authors for giving in
such a clear and interesting form the main
statistical facts of their own times.

‘The authors’ comments, too, are enlightening and enlivening. And yet, perhaps, the result is not so informing as it
ought tobe. ‘The reason is that the picture
is mainly static: if the past is mentioned
it is only the recent past, and there is no
comparison with other countries. This is
probably not the authors’ fault: it is due
to the absence of strictly comparable statistics and possibly also to exigencies of space
and cost of production. However, in the
figures of the growth of population, the
authors do go back to 1801 and even, following Professor Bowley, venture into the
future. .

Being strict statisticians they do not venture into the past further than the first
census year. But this strictness causes the
table showing the growth of population between 1801 and 1921 and the hypothetical
lack of growth after 1941, to give a somewhat false impression. It leads the reader
to infer that rapid growth was normal until
the present time, but that now a new and
abnormal period is setting in. Had the
estimated population of previous centuries
been added, the growth between 1801 and
1901 would have been seen in truer perspective, and the return to stability would have
appeared as neither new nor strange. After
all, a hundred years is a very short time in

the history of a nation. It is true, however,
that the low birth and death-rates of the
present day are new phenomena; but these
also are brought into clearer relief by comparison with the past.

Dealing summarily with the vital statistics of the last 150 years, it may be said
that prior to 1870 the alterations in the
birth-rate are relatively small and show an
absence of long period tendencies in either
direction. The apparent changes may, in
fact, be quite illusory. In 1870 the period
with a falling rate commences. Circa 1780
the birth-rate was about 36 per 1,000; in
1870-5 it was 35.5, but in 1926 it was only
18.3. In the death-rate a period of fall
occurs between 1780-1815, probably from
about 28 per 1,000 to 20, then follows a
period with a slight rise up to 1825 (22.5 per
1,000). A static period follows until 1870,
when a further period with a falling rate
begins. The figure for 1926 was 12.2.

It is interesting to note that the natural
increase was approximately the same in 1924
as in the second half of the eighteenth century, but that astonishingly different rates
yielded the same result in growth—in the
first period 36 births and 28 deaths, in the
latter 19 births and 11 deaths (to the nearest
unit). Have we sufficient imagination to
clothe these dry bones with living flesh and
to visualize the saving in unavailing travail,
in infant suffering, in physical and mental
pain? If so, let us in future silence idle
talk about the good old days with an argument that cannot be controverted.

There are many, however, who view
modern birth and death-rates far from optimistically. From two points of view there
is felt to be cause for anxiety. Firstly,
there is the fact that the poorer sections of
the community are contributing a proportionately greater number of recruits to the
population. There is a great deal of
difference of opinion as to whether the
poorest members of the community are an
inferior stock biologically, but it is certainly
true that the children of the poorest classes
are brought up in an inferior environment.
This is particularly the case among members of large families. This inferiority of
environment continues in spite of our
ENGLAND TO-DAY—AND YESTERDAY 23

numerous social services, and would remain
even if these services were much further
increased.

It is probable, however, that the differential birth-rate among classes is a temporary phenomenon. Figures presented last
year to the World Population Conference
at Geneva showed that in Stockholm the
upper-class birth-rate is now actually higher
than that of the working-class. Figures
quoted in a recently published study of
Australia* show that in that country the
difference in the birth-rate between different
social classes is inappreciable. The working-class birth-rate in England and Wales
has fallen rapidly in recent years. This fall
was at first mainly confined to certain
skilled trades, but it has now become much
more general. .

Many persons view the falling birth-rate
with apprehension because of its effect upon
the age composition of the population. A
prospect of more old people and fewer children in the population does not, indeed, at
first sight seem very pleasing; many of us
feel that there are too few children among
our acquaintance already. The lower birthrate will not, however, mean fewer children
among the relatively well off. It is unlikely
that the birth-rate among the upper and
middle-classes and the skilled working-class
will be still further reduced. Indeed it
quite conceivably might be slightly increased by more liberal taxation allowances
for children and by cheaper facilities for
higher education. A future further reduction of the number of children in the population would mean fewer underfed children
reared amid bad housing conditions—a by
no means alarming outlook.

In the same way, more old people will not
mean more elderly persons than at present
among the better-off classes, but fewer
workers prematurely worn out. And though
the age composition in future years in itself
may be less favourable from the economic
standpoint when there will be proportionately fewer young adults, yet this factor

may be more than compensated by the

* The Prosperity of Australia. F. C. Benham.

superior health and efficiency of the working
population, due to better nurture.

Since 1900 the effect of the falling birthrate upon the age composition of the population has been to some degree neutralized by
the fall in the infantile death-rate. The
fall in the death-rate in the period 18701900 did not include a fall in the infantile
mortality. In this it differed from the fall
during the period 1780-1815, which appears
to have been mainly due to a saving of
infantile and child life. Before 1780 the
age composition may not have been
markedly different from that of the present
day except for the greater number of infants
and very young children, a large proportion
of them doomed to an early death.

It was estimated that in north-western
Europe about 1780 one half of the children
born died before reaching the age of ten
years. ‘This figure had been reduced to onethird by 1815. It has been calculated that
in eighteenth-century London threequarters
of those born died before reaching the age of
five years. Therefore the proportion of older
children and young adults in the population
was very likely not much greater than at
present. Farr considered that the youthful
age composition of the English people about
1830 was a new phenomenon.

Possibly part of the push and enterprise
of the nineteenth century was due to its predominant youthfulness and to the fact that
members of large middle-class families had
to make their own way in the world. It is,
however, to cry for the moon to hope for
Victorian families in the future among the
better-off sections of the community, and it
is a strange mentality, obscured by old shibboleths, that can desire them to be continued
among the very poor. A very slowly increasing or a stationary population seems
highly probable in the near future, even a
diminishing one is a possibility. We can
only hope that quality will replace quantity, and all our efforts should be directed
to that end.

There are those who will be sceptical as to
the possibility of improving the quality of
the population owing to the lessening of the
vigour of natural selection. It is not pro24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

posed to enter into the controversy between
heredity and environment ; but the historical
facts, so far as they can be ascertained, do
not support a pessimistic view. ‘There are,
of course, no statistical data for a comparison in regard to quality of population between the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries and the present day; but a knowledge of the earlier period leads to the conviction that the present day has nothing to
fear in the comparison.

A high death-rate is always accompanied
by a high sickness and disablement rate.
Further, there is no evidence that the
diseases which have been conquered, smallpox, typhus, typhoid, and cholera were
beneficially selective. Even if they were,
they left the survivors so weakened and injured that any beneficially selective action
was more than counteracted. And, of
course, even in the eighteenth century the
Poor Law and private charity were doing
much to prevent the working of ‘ natural
selection ’’ and already the cry was being
raised that the unfit were being kept alive.

The fact is that to rely on “‘ natural selection’? amid civilized conditions is impossible. The sentiments of civilized man will
not allow starvation and disease to complete
the work of selection, so that any reliance
on the principle results in a number of survivors injured by wunder-nutrition and
disease. Quality must be obtained by some
less self-defeating method than high birth
and death-rates.

Those who are interested in the subject
of this article will do well to study the two
books more especially under review. . Mr.
Griffth’s book is not very easy to read;
he has much to learn in method of presentation, and the writer of the review has not
found it possible to agree with all his conclusions. But his book contains valuable
material. For one thing he seems to have
disposed of the hoary legend that the Speenhamland system of family allowances led toa
higher birth-rate. His chapter on Ireland
brings together facts which are not readily
accessible elsewhere, and that on early
medical reform contains much fascinating
material.

Professor Carr-Saunders and Mr. Caradog Jones cover a much wider field than is
indicated in this article. Their book is one
to be read by all students of social subjects. In spite of its subject matter it is
very easy to read, and the method of presentment reveals the practised hand.

If some of the figures and facts in Social
Structure might lead us to pessimism we can
re-read, as an antidote, the first chapters of
Factory Legislation, which valuable standard work it is pleasant to see in a third
edition. If the study of the present day,
as revealed in Social Statistics, shows us the
long road still ahead in the journey of social
progress, the History of Factory Legislation and Population Problems in the Age of
Malthus cheer us with the reminder of the
arduous pilgrimage already achieved.
