HEREDITY AND MORTALITY

Family History in Connection with Life Assurance

  

N May 16th, 1904, Francis Galton

gave a lecture before the Sociological

> Society in the School of Economics
id Political Science (London University)
B “Eugenics: Its definition, scope, and
Bns.”’ All sorts of important people sent
Kitten communications or spoke, and, for
Bme reason that I have never known, I was
Ryited to be there. I was asked to speak—
Bssibly because Professor Pearson whom I
Mew was in the Chair—and I made a few
marks about the effect of heredity in life
Murance and suggested that it might be
Bsible to throw light on the relation, if
BY, between specific diseases and fertility
ith the help of information obtained from
fe archives of life assurance companies.
Fis some time back in my life; but those
ag value Galton’s memory will understand
#” wish to refer to the incident and will
Bic understand my joy over a kind remark
B made about my little speech in his reply
F-the end of the discussion and over the
agement he gave me when he came up
wtalk to me when the meeting was over.
trhaps it is not inappropriate to take up

pe subject again and to see what insurance
i tistics have been made available since

    
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
 
      
  
 
  
   
  
 
   
 
  
  
   
   
  

aa
U

F Perhaps the easiest way to begin is to say
Sew words about life assurance practice to
fable the reader to follow more easily the
Btistics and my remarks on them. When a
wson—usually a man, so when I require
pt onoun I shall use the masculine—wishes
pobtain life assurance, he has to give parE s about himself to satisfy the insure company that his life can properly be
t tired. According to the law of the land,
Etust disclose any information that might
Buence their decision, and either because
= p knowledge of the law, or from a general

By W. PALIN ELDERTON, C.B.E., FILA.

standard of honesty, or possibly from a dislike of being found out when defence is impossible, it is our general experience that
correct information reaches the insurance
company so far as it is within the proposer’s
own knowledge. ‘The information he gives
is, inter alia,

Age.

Occupation.

Personal history (illnesses, etc.).

Family history—i.e. a statement of the
ages at and causes of death of his father
and mother, brothers and sisters, or, if
alive, a note of their state of health.

A general statement as to whether certain
diseases are in the family.

Most of the proposers are examined by a
doctor, but medical examinations are now
regarded as less important than they were
thirty years ago, and many offices dispense
with them for people under forty-five for
small cases, or for certain kinds of life
assurance, provided the information given
in the proposal is regarded as satisfactory.

SELECTION OF PROPOSERS

Now, before we go into anything else let
us set down the reasons why insurances are
effected :

(a) To provide for wife,
dependants.

(b) To provide money for death duties,
etc.

(c) To provide pensions

(d) As a convenient method of saving.

(e) To secure loans.

children, or

Except for (e) the objects are such as
appeal to the thrifty, thoughtful part of the
community; and broadly speaking the
* ne’er-do-weels ’ and the derelicts, mental
and physical, do not seek life assurance. In

129
130

other words the part of the population seeking life assurance is not what statisticians
call a random sample of the population : the
part that actually obtains life assurance is
still less a random sample, because the insurance offices eliminate the worst cases. Of
recent years the proportion eliminated has
been less than of old. Offices quote special
terms for invalid lives more readily than in
the past, and some offices try to quote terms
for almost all the cases that come to them.
In a sense, everyone is insurable, on terms :
the difhculty is to assess terms that are fair
both to the under-average life himself and
to the healthy lives assured on ordinary
terms. It would not be eugenic to admit to
insurance the unhealthy or damaged on the
same terms as the healthy or undamaged.

This brings us to the way cases are considered when they come for assurance. A
fair proportion (I should estimate it at a
half) of the cases provide us with no record
of past illness likely to shorten life, with
satisfactory family histories fin which the
collaterals are alive and the parents are
healthy or died at ages over sixty, or under
that age from accident] and with no special
occupational risks.

Then there is a proportion (say onefourth) that has had some illness that may
have been important from the insurance
point of view (a severe operation, ear
trouble, rheumatic fever, etc.), and many of
these, after being examined, are taken at
the ordinary rates.

‘There is perhaps one-fifth of the whole
where there have been some early deaths, or
tuberculosis, or insanity in the family that
require special consideration, and some of
these again are taken. About 5 per cent.
of the whole will raise some question owing
to occupation, residence, etc. Probably
about nine-tenths are taken at ordinary
rates.

Imagine for a moment the position of the
insurance man deciding on a case that comes
to him with some doubt as to family history.

Naturally, if he starts with information
showing that there is a defect in the family
history, and finds on examination a similar
defect in the individual or another defect

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which may affect the duration of life, he wi
regard the case as requiring special treat:
ment, or, in extreme cases, as having to be
declined. ‘The consequence of this attitude
has been that a large proportion of the caseg
with a bad family history, already showing
a defect, never appear in the life assuranc
statistics.

We will now look at the statistics tha
have been obtained in recent years and se
what can be concluded from them. Th
principal investigations have been those a
the Prudential Assurance Company* ig
England and the Medico-Actuarialt Ing
vestigation of the American and Canadiag
Companies.

THE TUBERCULAR GROUP

We may begin by taking the Prudential
experience of all the lives assured which ha¢
any family history of a death from tuber,
cular disease,} whether in father, mothe
brother, or sister or in more than one. Thi
method adopted was to calculate the numbe
of deaths that would have been expected
among those at risk according to the ther
standard table (O™!). This table was
formed from ‘‘ with profit’’ ‘‘ whole-life
assurances’? in the years 1863-93 (say;
1878) and over-estimated the normal mor
tality because :

(x) The Prudential experience was from
1893-1910 (say 1902) or twenty-fo
years later, and mortality had been
jmproving among assured lives dur
ing that period : a 20 per cent. or 30
per cent. reduction in mortality would}
not be an unreasonable assumption.

* EK. A. Rusher and C. W. Kenchington. An
Investigation into the effects of Family and Personal
History upon the Rates of Mortality, etc. J.I.A.,:

XLVII, 433 etc. (J.1.A. is written for Journal of
the Institute of Actuaries.)

+ Abstracts of these reports can be seen convenis
ently J.I.A., see especially Vol. XLVIII, 186, ete:
Ue 158.

‘Childbirth ” was assumed to be “ Consumpi
tion. »» Experience has shown that a large propor
tion of deaths honestly stated by laymen as “ child
birth ’? should be described as ‘‘ consumption.’§
The cause of death is only known from hearsay
and the decline in health that preceded or followed
the birth is attributed, naturally but incorrectly
to the birth of the child.

    
   
   
   
  
HEREDITY AND MORTALITY

(2) The endowment assurance experience
1863-93 showed only about 75 per
cent. of the mortality of the O™:
partly because it entered on the average at a later date, and partly because
the ‘‘ better ’’ lives were more likely
to take insurances of that kind.

Further, the Prudential ‘‘normal’’
experience may have differed from
that of the offices generally.

Logically we should have for comparison
a normal Prudential experience for the same
term: in the absence of this we might not
unreasonably take 75 per cent. of the
O™! figures for the normal whole life mortality, and 55 per cent. of the O™! figures
for the normal endowment assurance
mortality.

With these figures in mind we may
examine Table I, in which are shown the
actual deaths, the expected deaths by the
O™] table as given by Rusher and Kenchington, and the roughly adjusted expected
deaths to allow for the probable change in
mortality.

The table is divided into the first ten

131

years after the assurances were effected and
the subsequent period. The idea being that
owing to the selection of the lives by the
office, the mortality at any age is lowest in
the first year of assurance and gradually
works up to a rate of mortality almost, if
not absolutely, independent of duration.*

It will be noticed that in the endowment
cases and the whole life cases in certain
groups the Prudential lives assured with
tubercular family history showed lighter
mortality than the then standard table. The
altered view when we make the arbitrary
adjustments that I have already explained
is interesting.

SUBDIVISION BY KINSHIP

The cases included in this table were subdivided according to the members of the
family who had died of the disease, and the

* This theory of ‘selection’ in life assurance
mortality data is unproved. In common with many
other actuaries, I doubt if the interpretation implied by the tables based on the 1863-93 experience
is satisfactory. For our purpose here, the statistical
rates and not their interpretation are all with
which we need concern ourselves.

Table 1.—Number of Deaths with Family History of Tuberculosis (Prudential Experience) .

 

Whole Life Assurances.

| Endowment Assurances.

 

Age at entry. First ten years of assurance.
Expected. Expected.
————__——_—_—____—_—__———_|_ Actual ——_———____—_—_—_—___ ———————_|_ Actual.
By OM] Adjusted. By O[M] Adjusted.
37 167 145 216 1,630 896 1,222
38-52 284 213 324 725 398 458
53-62 50 38 46 — — —
Ages attained. After first ten years.
30 and 35 13 9 16 147 80 97
40 and 45 123 92 125 450 247 274
50 and 55 287 215 263 403 222 276
60 and over 407 305 423 105 58 93
132

results as regards parents are worth mentioning in general terms. When only the
father had tuberculosis, the mortality was
heaviest. The next heaviest mortality was
mother, when the mother had died of childbirth; then, continuing down the scale,
when only the mother had tuberculosis, and
the lightest—though the numbers are very
small—was when both parents had the
disease. The differences between the groups
were not significant, but a priori one would
have expected the heaviest mortality when
both parents were affected. The explanation
is that the office would be particularly careful in such cases, and would only pick those
in which it was satisfied that the proposer
for assurance was not tubercular.

Among other information given by the
Prudential experience was the mortality of
those with various personal blemishes—e.g.
tuberculosis, rheumatic fever, and a group
that might be called ‘‘ doubtful habits,’’ including the obese, gouty, and formerly intemperate. All these groups showed a high
mortality—appreciably higher than that of
the tubercular family history group. But
in all these groups we are not dealing with
the real mortality of the class to which they
relate, but with the mortality of a selected
part of that class.

The American and Canadian Life Assurance experience was arranged on rather
different lines. The tubercular family history cases were divided into seven classes,
but three of these proved too small to be
of value. These involved the more extreme
tubercular family histories. Any case re
Table II.

 

Underweight Groups.

North American Experience.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

garded as sub-standard for physical condition or personal history was excluded, but
cases sub-standard for family history alone
were included. It-was thought that the
weight of the proposer was important, so
the data were sub-divided in this way.

Table II gives an abridged example of
the result of one group.

The expected deaths are based on the
American experience and may be taken as
properly comparable with the actual deaths.

The lighter mortality at the older ages
at entry, except in the overweight class, is
noticeable. It is probable that this was
largely due to severe selection on account of
family history.

Similar tables were given for other degrees of family history and, without subdividing, according to weight. ‘The results
are given in Table III.

The results are not comparable with those
of the Prudential because of the exclusion of
cases regarded as sub-standard for some
reason other than family history. The
variations in America according to class of
policy seem to be negligible.

Are we to conclude from these statements
that tuberculosis in the family betokens.
little effect on mortality except perhaps at
the early ages? I think all we can say is
that there is an extra mortality even in the
cases that come before a life office but that
the insurance companies have succeeded by
medical examination and otherwise in eliminating the worst cases. Moreover, a person
actually suffering from the disease would be
unlikely to try to obtain life assurance.

Deaths: Tuberculosis in One Parent

Overweight Groups.

Age at

entry Over 20 lbs. Less than 20 lbs. Less than 20 lbs. Over 20 lbs.
Expected.| Actual. | Expected.| Actual. | Expected.| Actual. | Expected.| Actual.

15-29 47 59 532 658 475 63 71

30-44 282 302 1,001 QII 670 216 216

45- 222 156 465 357 359 145 171

 

| |

 
HEREDITY AND MORTALITY

 

Table HI.

North American Experience.

133

Deaths: Tuberculosis in—

 

   
   
   

One parent and

Two or more One brother or

| brothers or sisters.

 

One parent. brother or sister. sister.
Age at
entry.
Expected.| Actual. | Expected.| Actual. | Expected.| Actual. | Expected.| Actual.
15-29 1,096 54 94 995 1,312
30-44 2,260 266 301 457 3,096 2,947
45- 1,282 246 242 412 2,482 2,056

 

 

 

MORTALITY AND HABITS

When discussing the Prudential experience I mentioned the ‘ habits’ type of
case, and in the American-Canadian investigation the statistics of the mortality of cases
with syphilis was examined. A summary is
as follows :

Table IV
Expected Actual
deaths. deaths.
Syphilis surely :
Thoroughly treated.
Two years’ continuous
treatment.
_QOne year’s freedom from
symptoms Se eee 53 100
Syphilis surely :
Not thoroughly treated
or no details of treatment wee wee wee 100 174
Syphilis doubtful : io 49 67

The Gotha Insurance Company in an
experience (1852-1904) found a similar high
mortality, and other published data agree.

In the study of alcoholic habits, the following table is interesting :

Table V
Expected. Actual.
Occasional excessive use of
alcohol vee we vee 190 289
* / Steady, free, but moderate users bee .-- 1,460 1,725
Steady, free, but not immoderate users ’ 374 698
Reformed from intemperance
without treatment . 286 377
Took cure—total abstainer
since — oni wee 58 79

The death rate in these cases was generally

high from cirrhosis of liver, Bright’s
disease, pneumonia, and suicide, and in
some groups from diabetes.

In studying defective family history the
American Canadian investigation gave the
following :

Table VI

Family defect of two or more

deaths from Expected. Actual.
1. Apoplexy or Paralysis 347 374
2. Heart Disease 207 233
3. Insanity... i wee 39 29
4. Cancer eee am sa 87 69

The death rate from cerebral heemorrhage, apoplexy, and suicide was twice the
normal in group (i); and in (ii) the deaths
from heart disease were distinctly above the
normal, The figures in (iii) indicate a very
careful selection by the offices, especially as
a note 1s made that the “‘ death rate from
suicide was high.” It is interesting to
remark that there were only four cancer
deaths among the 69 in group (iv).

Another type of extra mortality in which
a special risk may arise in connection with
family history is in respect of diabetes, but
statistics are specially difficult to get.

There is little doubt that, in the past,
cases of diabetes or cases with the early
signs of diabetic tendency which could be
detected by medical examination (e.g. glyco
 

* “Steady free use’’ was subdivided into the
two groups indicated. In the ‘‘ not immoderate
users ’’ section were placed the risks of those companies which used a standard as high as or higher
than Anstie’s limit of two ounces of alcohol a day,
while the ‘‘ moderate ’’ included the risks of those
companies that used a lower limit.
134

suria) were excluded wholesale. In modern
conditions a few offices have tried to find
methods of accepting such cases, but those
accepted have been the best of their kind,
and this implies that cases with a bad family
history and early signs of diabetic trouble
are ruled out altogether. We are left, therefore, with cases with a diabetic family history showing at the moment of éxamination
no physical signs of the disease. A study
of the inheritance of diabetic tendency would
be valuable, but I do not remember seeing
any statistics from life assurance work that
can be of help in this study.

THE VALUE OF INSURANCE FIGURES

The summary of the matter is that the
offices eliminate the doubtful cases. If they
find a bad family history they are specially
careful; and the experience of the offices
does not really show, and can never I think
show, the intensity of heredity in the same
way as a random sample of the population
will show it. It can indicate that even with
a careful selection of the lives there is an
extra mortality and that such cases need to
be charged something different from those
which do not show a similar defect.

There is another difficulty, because if
people insure in early manhood their
parents may not have reached the age when
a particular disease is likely to show itself.
In a few cases it may be possible to obtain
information about grandparents ; but anyone
who has taken the trouble to ask people the
cause of their grandparents’ deaths, must
be aware of their lack of knowledge, and it
is clear that as a matter of business no useful purpose is served by pressing for information that may create difficulty and
even cause irritation.

MORTALITY FROM CANCER

Another practical difficulty arises in dealing with a disease such as cancer, when,
broadly speaking, the disease attacks people
after the age of fifty-five. Now let us
assume, merely for argument, that it is inherited and that the offspring will die at the
same age as their parents who suffered from
the disease.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A proposal is made for life assurance by a
person aged thirty and the family history
discloses that both parents died of cancer
between fifty-five and sixty. The proposal
is for an endowment assurance payable at
age sixty or at death before, or perhaps at
age fifty-five or at death before. Now these
assurances are of the kind most commonly
effected in life offices. An investigation into
the heredity of cancer would in such circumstances be meaningless. These policies
would never throw up sufficient cancer
deaths to help in such an investigation.
Again, from the mere insurance point of
view deaths from cancer above sixty for any
young entrant are relatively unimportant
even for a whole life policy, and if a man
die of cancer at a still older age the importance to a life office is still less. I do not
mean to say that if cancer could be eliminated altogether and everybody could be
relied on to live to an older age, that the
premiums for a whole life assurance could
not be reduced—of course they could—but
it does mean that the premiums for endowment assurances would not be in any way
modified, and, as I have already said, this
is the major part of the business.

It must not be inferred from these remarks that I believe cancer in man to be
inherited : I have not seen statistics that
appear to me to be convincing. On the other
hand, in excluding the importance of cancer
from the life assurance point of view, I do
not wish it to be supposed that an office
would ignore the possible implication of a
weakness if a large proportion of the family
died at early ages—some of the causes being
cancer. A large proportion of early deaths
in a family may, and generally does, betoken something weak in the stock, and I
think every insurance company would be
careful in such cases.

It will have become clear that an insurance office has to deal with various kinds of
sub-standard risks, and that it does not
accept those cases on the same terms as standard cases, but on special terms which are
arranged either by an increase in the premium or by a temporary deduction from the
sum assured. These deductions are most
HEREDITY AND MORTALITY

suitable when the extra risk is such as to
be heaviest in the early years of the assurance and to tend to run off later. In any
cases in which we know the mortality, we
can calculate a deduction from the sum assured or an increase in the premium with
almost equal ease ; though it is possible that
when the calculation has been made, a result may be useless either because the
figures are too unattractive or because the
initial risk is so large that a level premium
does not cover it. The difficulty in practice
is that there are so many kinds of special
risk that several cases have to be treated
as isolated examples.

Some years ago The Institute of Actuaries
and the Faculty of Actuaries in Scotland
had in hand a scheme for making a general
investigation of the effects of various
diseases upon mortality, but unfortunately
before it could be put in train the war inter
135

vened, and at the present time the two
actuarial bodies have been devoting their
energies to the examination of the general
mortality of annuitants and insured lives
without detailed sub-division such as had
been attempted in North America. Possibly
some day something similar to the American
work may be done on this side, but the
experiences to which I have referred make
me think that the examination of the
diseases and their effect may have to be approached in some new way, if results of
general interest are to be obtained from life
assurance.

In the meantime the insurance offices will
continue to be cautious about cases with a
bad family history, and this caution implies
a belief in inheritance, even though the
actuary may not be able to give a measure
of that inheritance from the statistics of life

assurance.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.
