RACE BETTERMENT: THE NATION’S DUTY

By WiviiaM Hitt-Cuimo, M.D.
(Lieut.-Colonel, Army Medical Staff, retired)

THE responsibility of the State for national health, so far as it is
at present enforced, relates to environment and the notification
of infectious diseases, to employment including poor law relief,
and, partially, to the care of children during school life. In all
other respects, excepting criminal offences, and the custody and
treatment of the insane, the individual is subject to no supervision.
In brief, the intervention of the State is to secure protection from
the external and material causes of disease, while the constitutional defects, hereditary and acquired, from which a large moiety
of the population suffer, are left without remedy, partly through
ignorance, but in a still greater degree through a reluctance to
interfere with the liberty of the subject. In this cult it
is forgotten that a community may be protected from local
insanitary conditions, and its hours of employment may be
legally fixed, and dangerous trades may be regulated or prohibited,
while at the same time there may be in the people themselves
potent causes, which tend to their physical and moral impairment. The solution of this question is an urgent social problem.

The conditions, which have to be faced, are similar to those
which existed in the later days of the Roman Empire, and grow
out of a civilisation which is divorced from personal obligation,
and which is fostered and aggravated by political exigencies.
For the British nation the peril is great, for, protected as it has
been from foreign aggression, each generation has become more
and more intolerant of control and less willing to make any
personal sacrifice for the commonwealth, while it extols ‘ the
gospel of a good time” as the object of its highest ambition.
To teach the nation the truth, and thus to lead it to a better
way, by giving it a higher sense of the dignity of manhood, is the
RACE BETTERMENT: THE NATION’S DUTY 195

chief object of the ‘“‘ Eugenics Education Society,” in this work
we wish it God speed. For without the help of a neutral body
working for the general good, and with no personal aims to
serve, no progress is possible. Hitherto both political parties
have failed to put the whole truth before the nation. Each side,
when in power, dreads to act lest it should become unpopular,
and only does so when compelled by public opinion.

So little attention has been given by the State to the physical
development of the people that, unlike those continental nations
which have adopted universal military service, it has at the
present time no physical standard whereby the male youth, of
corresponding ages, could be compared. If it were a question of
money no doubt it would receive that serious consideration
which is given to financial affairs, yet human life is our most
valuable asset and national efficiency is both the source of
national wealth and our best security. Fortunately in the
Report of the Anthropometric Committee of 1883, and in the
Army Medical Reports of Recruiting and of the Health of the
Army, there are reliable data from which this comparison can be
made.

In quoting from medico-military reports it may be inferred
that the object of the writer is to encourage some form of compulsory service, that is not so, there is no such ulterior object in
view. What is aimed at is the physical, mental and moral
improvement of the people, as the following quotation will
show! :

“Tf the male youth of the nation were all able-bodied, the only difficulty
which the Secretary of State for War would be called upon to meet in
carrying out his proposal would be to convince the nation of its necessity,
but if they are not, conscription, though it would give an army numerically
sufficient for the Empire’s needs, would be injurious to its best interests,
for in that case it is not compulsion to make a man a soldier which is
required, but the physical education and the moral training of the young,
so that they may become good citizens and efficient soldiers, for a good
citizen should be both the creator and protector of the nation’s wealth. In
brief, the creation of a National Army depends upon national efficiency,

which can only be secured by developing the physical, mental and moral
qualities of the rising generation. Without this being done, a National

1 See article: ‘‘ National Efficiency and a National Army,” in The Broad
Arrow of 23rd March, 1907.
196 | W. Hill-Climo:

Army is an impossibility, for a National Army should be representative of
the whole manhood of the nation, but if a large proportion be excluded
because of physical or other unfitness, it cannot be so considered. Mr.
Haldane’s scheme, therefore, should be preceded by an enquiry into the
nature and extent of this unfitness, its causes, and the measures which
should be taken for its prevention, which the Government ought to initiate—
it is their duty. But as the fault does not lie with a department, but with
the nation itself, successive Governments have failed to take the necessary
action.”

The statistics to which attention is invited relate to physical
development, to diseases of the digestive system, and to cardiac
diseases; they are inter-dependent, and they form a combination
of health infirmities which are produced by the people themselves,
though consequent upon modern economic and social conditions.
The rejections, under these headings, of candidates for enlistment,
year after year, indicate how grave the case is. The Army
Medical Report for the year 1907 gives the total number,
medically inspected, as being 59,393, of whom 17,513 were found
unfit on inspection and within three months of enlistment,
making the rejection ratio 294°87 per 1,000. Of which, defective
development, including malformations, furnished 4,726 rejections, the equivalent being 79°83 per 1,000 examined. In this
ealculation no account is taken of candidates who were so
manifestly unfit that they were not submitted by the recruiting
officials to the medical staff for examination; also defects of the
upper and lower extremities are not included, for the causes of
these disabilities, whether the result of accident or otherwise, are
not discriminated.

Notwithstanding this large proportion of rejections the
quality of the recruits who joined the regular army in 1907 is
inferior to youths of the same age of the general population.
Their average age was 19°2 years, their average height 656 inches,
and their average weight 122°2lbs., while the average height of
males of the general population, between 18 and 19 years of age,
is 674th inches, and their average weight is 1384]bs. But these
figures do not convey the whole truth, for the average height and
weight of males of the strata from which the recruits are drawn
are still lower. Hence it hac been well said that the recruit is
“the fittest of the unfit of the people.” In this sense also it
RACE BETTERMENT: THE NATION’S DUTY 197

must be remembered that there is no longer a standard of weight
for enlistment, which permits the acceptance by the medical
examiners of men who, if previous regulations were in force,
would have been rejected.

But these statistics are still more significant when it is
considered that the Anthropometric Committee’s report was
made in 1883. If twenty-four years afterwards so great an
inferiority be found in the physique of male youths of certain
classes of the population, and if during that time there has been
a marked improvement in the general sanitary environment,
surely the conclusion is inevitable that there are other factors at
work, which are of the people’s own making, and of which the
State should take cognisance by enforcing individual responsibility,
or, if that be impossible, by undertaking it itself.

It would be unreasonable to expect that the rejections for
diseases of the digestive system should be proportionate to their
actual state, partly because, when these diseases are active, men
do not offer themselves for enlistment, and, when chronic, they are
not easily recognisable; yet for the loss or decay of many teeth,
which is so closely associated with disorders of the digestive
system, there were 2,885 rejections in 1907, being a ratio of 48°57
per I,000 examined. But it is from the admissions of young
soldiers, after enlistment, into hospital for these diseases that an
insight is obtained into the conditions which are so productive of
defective development and of constitutional diseases. In 1907
the admissions for diseases of the digestive group in the Home
Army gave the highest ratio of all diseases, the aggregate being
8,438 admissions with 33 deaths and 124 invalids discharged the
service, a striking proof of domestic failure and want of care of
the young.

Of all diseases there is none more intimately associated with
impaired nutrition and with lowered vitality than heart disease,
which, therefore, with other circulatory diseases, affords an index
of national health and of racial quality which is not otherwise
obtainable. In 1907 the total number of rejections, on enlistment, for these diseases was 2,337, being a ratio of 39°35 per
1,000 medically examined: this is the third highest ratio of all
the causes of rejection. But that is not the worst feature, for,
198 W. Hill-Climo:

notwithstanding the strictness of the medical examination on
enlistment, the number of admissions into hospital for these
diseases in 1907 was 1,106, of whom 48 died and 352 were
invalided. It must be remembered that this sickness and
mortality occur in young men, who are living in healthier
conditions than they would have had in civil life, but they are
called upon to undertake a greater amount and a different kind of
work than they were accustomed to. All experience proves that
to healthy men these exercises are beneficial, as evidenced by
increase of weight and of girth of chest. But if youths are
exposed to this wear and tear, who are immature, or ill-nourished
and subject to disorders of the digestive system, not only does
repair not overtake decay but disease is lighted up, for the
elements of decay are retained in the system and lower the
vitality; the heart fails because it is unable to respond to this
extra work, and, as just shown, this predisposition already
exists.

In this sense it will be helpful to make a comparison of the
incidence of heart disease and of other diseases of the circulatory
system, in the armies of different nations. With this object the
following table has been compiled from the Army Medical
Department Report of 1907, it gives the admission and death
rates of cardiac affections in our Home Army and in certain
foreign countries.

CARDIAC AFFECTIONS RATIOS PER 1,000 OF STRENGTH

United Austro- United States,
Kingdom. France. Germany. Hungary. America. Russia.
1907 1905 1904-5 1906 1906 1905
Admissions 8'1 3°5 3°6 3°9 3°37 3°5
Deaths "37 "05 05 nil "24 06

The two important facts, which this table presents, are the
phenomenally high admission and death ratios in the British
Army in comparison with these ratios in the four continental
armies,’ and the uniformity of incidence of both ratios in the

1 In this comparison the United States, America, is not included for the
reasons which are given in thearticle: ‘‘ National Decadence and Military Service,”
Empire Review, May 1909. The statistics in the present paper are the latest

published ; they corroborate those of previous years, which prove the permanency
of the conditions on which they depend.
RACE BETITERMENT: THE NATION’S DUTY IQQ

latter. These high ratios in the British Army are associated
with defective development and mal-nutrition, which is a proof
that the fault is in the people themselves, 7.¢., in racial quality ;
it is impossible to believe that so great a disparity could be
caused by different conditions of service or of environment.
The Army Medical Report for 1907 is instinct with proof, and
almost pathetic in its apologies for the state of health and the
physical inferiority of the recruit, as the following extracts will
show. |

‘It must be remembered that most of the men will not be capable of
doing the work of a mature soldier for two years.”

‘Speaking generally, the recruits raised in 1907 may be considered at
least equal to the standard of those enlisted during preceding years.”

“Immaturity has.always been the outstanding defect of our recruits,
and, in this respect, little or no improvement was shown during the year
under review.”

““The figures for the year 1907 relating to the number of recruits
rejected on inspection cannot be accurately compared with similar figures
for previous years, as many men were passed fit in 1907 who would be
rejected in other years.”

It is no wonder, therefore, that the health of the British
Army contrasts so unfavourably with that of foreign armies; itis
a humiliating picture. The uniformity of incidence of both
ratios in the four continental armies indicates a similarity of
health conditions and an equality of physical capacity for
military service of their respective countries.

These are the only vital statistics which are available for an
international comparison of racial quality ; they are necessarily
partial, and should be extended to the entire population, male
and female, of each country. The Registrar General’s annual
reports give the total deaths in different countries, under separate
headings, for zymotic diseases, including cancer; valuable information is thus obtained of their respective sanitary conditions
but not of racial quality. This information in relation to
racial quality is more valuable than a comparison of differences
of physique which result from accommodation to environment
and to climate. The tall and spare highlander naturally differs
in appearance from the short and stout lowlander, but he has
not necessarily the greater vitality. When it is considered that
200 W. Hill-Clino:

the mortality from diseases of the heart and of the blood-vessels
of the civil population in England and Wales in 1907 was more
than one-seventh of all the deaths, the importance of this question
cannot be over-rated.

With the object of obtaining more certain information on
the various points raised in this paper the adoption of fixed
Standards of physical development is suggested, not of the
population in bulk only, but of the various classes, so as to
determine the effect which differences of social and other
conditions have upon racial quality. Also that the Local
Government Board should extend the scope of “ International
Vital Statistics’ so as to include the death ratios from constitutional and general diseases, especially cardiac affections and
other diseases of the blood-vessels. Is not the health of the
nation as important as its trade? If so, why not take the trouble
and go to the expense of getting as reliable data about the one
as about the other.

The responsibility rests with the state, and it has the remedy
ready to hand in the education of the rising generation, which
must be conducted on different lines to that which is now given
under the authority of the Board of National Education. In this
sense the education of girls is of supreme importance. The
present system unsettles girls’ minds and creates desires which
can never be gratified, it is unsuitable to their present conditions
and to their future needs, and it neglects those domestic qualities
which, if cultivated, would be of practical value in after life and a
present help in their homes. The education of girls, both
superintendence and instruction, should be in the hands of
women, for they have the aptitude that almost by intuition,
certainly with sympathy, they can so direct their work as to
bring out their better qualities. The control of girls’ schools by
men is an anachronism.

Apart from the parents’ ignorance or carelessness, to use no
harsher term, the care of young children is not conducted on
rational lines, to which our education system has contributed.
There are three periods of life to be considered, infancy, childhood and adolescence. In the first five years of a child’s life
growth is most active, then it slows down, with occasional
RACE BETTERMENT: THE NATION’S DUTY 20I

spurts, up to the thirteenth year, and from the fourteenth to the
eighteenth year it is again active. Mental growth is in sympathy
with physical development, and frequently mental dulness
corresponds with increased growth. Each period requires
different health management, the physiological reasons are
obvious, but in school life they have been persistently neglected.

The first period is the one of greatest growth, when interstitial changes are most active, it is now that a mother’s care is
all important to safeguard health. The mind responds quickly
to external impressions, for the young are emotional. Their
attention should be directed to interesting objects, and their
intellect developed by observation and sympathetic explanation.
At the same time physical and moral education is essential, for
mental activity depends upon good health. In the poorer
districts women medical inspectors should be employed to advise
mothers and to examine the young for physical defects, etc. In
this period and up to the seventh year education should be by
observation of external objects and should be conducted as much
as possible out of doors.

The second period corresponds to the school life of the
child, which it is suggested should extend from the eighth to the
sixteenth year, both inclusive. Dr. Warre, late Head Master of
Eton, parcelled out the school-boy’s time as follows, work seven
hours, meals and play seven hours, and rest ten hours. If that
be a necessary division to secure the health of a well-fed publicschool boy, it is not the less necessary for the children of the
poor. Wherever there are signs of brain fatigue all mental work
should be stopped. The employment of children in textile and
non-textile factories and in domestic workshops, up to the age of
sixteen, should be prohibited. It stunts growth and in various.
other ways has a deteriorating influence on health. This isa
plastic age, when character can be favourably moulded, but
under present conditions the want of continuity of supervision
makes it difficult to prevent exposure to corrupting influences.

The third period, adolescence, is a time of increased growth
and of functional activity, when regular and moderate exercise is.
conducive to health, provided that nutrition is sufficient, and
that the sanitary environment is satisfactory. It is the time
202 W. Hill-Climo:

when growth, under favourable conditions, corrects the deformities which have been contracted in childhood, and when
the effects of mal-nutrition can be mitigated, if not altogether
removed. But it is also the time when moral training is most
required, therefore physical exercises, drill and games, in which
obedience to authority is inculcated, should be complementary to
school education. Besides good health the young people thereby
would acquire habits of order, of punctuality, and of self-control,
which are powerful factors of success in every walk of life.

It is evident that to combat successfully the deteriorating
influences to which a large moiety of the people are exposed,
the measures which will be most effective are those which relate
to infancy and childhood. It is in consequence that the education of girls is considered of supreme importance, but it is not
possible, within the limits of this paper, to discuss the question
in all its bearings, much less to explain why it is that most of this
work must devolve upon women; it is, however, here mentioned
with the hope that it will be seriously considered by responsible
authority.
