THE

EUGENICS, REVIEW ~

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE
| IN FRANCE DURING THE WAR.

By Lucien MARCH.

NEXT to unfortunate and heroic Belgium, France is the country upon
which the War falls most heavily, eleven of her most populous and richest
departments having suffered invasion and its accompanying atrocities,
not to speak of those which have been subjected only to bombardment.
In these departments, one part of the population has fallen under the
yoke of the enemy, and the other has been driven out, often at a moment’s
warning. Who has’ not seen this lamentable exodus of families filing
along the roads or arriving at the stations, carrying some remnant
of their worldly goods—often in their haste having seized upon the most
useless instead of the most necessary articles—obliged to sell the cattle
they have driven, for lack of fodder, passing tragically from easy circumstances to misery, or, what is worse, compelled sometimes to fly again
after having returned and resumed their occupations in the hope of
having seen the last of such horrors! .... No one who has not witnessed’
these tragic scenes, and who does not realise the attachment of the French
peasant to his farm, can grasp the full measure of the suffering of these
families, forced to abandon what they hold most dear, to forsake the
home which has always sheltered them and the goods they have amassed
with such slow care.

In what state do these families arrive in the localities ready to
welcome them, where every endeavour is made to soften their loss? In
what state have the 1,200,000 refugees from the invaded districts (not
including the military) returned, and the 400,000 repatriated, after crossing the country of the enemy? And what conditions obtain in those
ever-growing communities in districts, formerly almost entirely rural,
those enormous concentrations of people of the most diverse races, some
from abroad, some from the Colonies, some from the Far Edst, which fill
the factories hastily erected to supply the necessities of war?

It may readily be imagined that the sanitary state of regions, in which
the population has been so profoundly transformed, is open to serious
dangers. The devotion and skill of local authorities, under the enlightened guidance of the central administration of the ministry of Interior,
have prevented these shiftings of the population from giving rise to
epidemics or even to excessive mortality. The generous co-operation of
the Allies has also contributed in equal share to warding off disaster.
196 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In spite of the peculiarly unfavourable circumstances just
enumerated, the population of the regions exposed to the attacks of the
enemy has preserved normal conditions of health, as compared with
those which have been recorded in other belligerent countries.

Naturally, mo exact numerical comparison is possible betweem the
general condition of the population of France before the War and the present one, since part of the territory has been seized by the enemy and the
population scattered for four years. One can, however, bring forward
some terms of comparison in order to show the weak points and describe
the efforts which have been made towards racial hygiene. This is what
I propose to do in this article, with reference to the general mortality
rates, alcoholism, tuberculosis, venereal disease, and depopulation.

These are at the moment the principal points on which eugenic
action should be taken, action which, it must be confessed, has only just
begun. GENERAL MORTALITY.

As stated before, it is mot easy to compare the general mortality
rates in France during the War and before, on account of the reduction in territory on which the observations must be made and also
because the changes in the numbers of inhabitants within the territorial
divisions have not been verified by any census returns. We must limit
ourselves to considering the death curve in the uninvaded regions or
in those in which one may suppose the shifting of' the population to have
been negligible.

In the belligerent countries the general mortality of the civil copa
tion was on the whole higher in 1914 than in 1913. It increased considerably in I9QI5s, returned to a lower rate in 1916, and rose again
in I9gI7.

Thus, if one takes 100 as representing the number of deaths in. 1913,
in each of the countries specified below (not including combatants), the
numbers proportionately applicable to the successive years! would be :—

1913 1914 1915 1916 1917

England and Wales ... 1.5 100 102 114 105 105
Scotland ... eas _ w+ 100 IOI II! 97 95
Ireland _... ama 100 95 102 95 99
Germany (towns of more than

15,000 inhabitants)... ws 100 1162, 140 ,° 130 ~=—-1468
Framce* (76 departments) ... 100 112 108 102 106

In Germany the deaths of soldiers in the interior of the country are
included with those of the civil population. The same is true of France,
where the death curve appears to be comparable to that of other countries,
viz., rising from 1913 to 1915, and falling im the following years. In the
countries ‘quoted (with the exception of Ireland) the increase of civilian
mortality may be attributed to the fact that a great number of men

1 Bulletin de la Statistique générale de la France, juillet, 1918.

? From Bulletin No. 3 of Selskabet for Social fot ker af krigers folger.

S$ Calculated from the figures of the first half-year.

# Rates of mortality calculated according to the number of inhabitants, estimated on the 30th of June yearly.
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 197

between the ages of 19 and 50 are at the front; on the other hand, in
France the migration of populations from the invaded districts, including many old people and young children, has been an important factor
in the increase of mortality in 1917. Thus in spite of particularly
unfavourable circumstances among the civilian population, the mortality
does mot seem excessive when one compares it with that of the other
belligerents. Im short, there has been no epidemic, and the food conditions, in spite of restrictions, have not caused any undue privation.

_In all the belligerent countries, deaths occurring among fighting soldiers
are added tothe returns in territories beyond the fighting zone. It may be
reckoned that each year of war has resulted in a loss to each of the
countries engaged of 7 per cent. of its effectives, z.¢., an increase of
about 6 per cent. beyond the normal rate. This would amount after five
years of war to an additional loss of human life which, for all the
belligerents, would amount to between nine and ten millions. If one
adids to this the increase of deaths among the civilian population, as compared with the normal rate, the total loss for the five years would reach
twelve millions.

Now if we reckon the populations engaged in actual war, omitting
neutral countries, it may be estimated that they represent more than
1,400 million inhabitants, among whom in five normal years 200 million
deaths would occur. The surplus attributable to the War would not
exceed the variations which are observable from one year to another as
the result of climacteric causes.

But this surplus is superimposed on others, and, what is most
important, it falls upon the most active, the most intelligent, and the
most advanced sections of the populations under consideration.

To the loss occasioned by mortality must also be added the decrease
in the birth-rate, which will be dealt with later. Nor is this all, for the
losses by death are not the only ones which the War involves. The
wounded do not recover the full use of their faculties, the possibilities
of work are reduced in the case of the crippled, the blind, and the
invalided to a varying extent. To these victims of war must be added those
who, although unwounded, have suffered seriously in general health,
owing to war conditions, e.g., the neurotic, the tuberculous, etc., the
total number of these representing perhaps three-quarters, if not more,
of the number of the dead.

The loss to humanity is therefore a heavy one, but humanity
possesses resources for its reparation, and this will be the work of peace,
if indeed the trial has really fortified our spinit. It is always the case
that side by side, with the most lofty sentiments and the noblest human
qualities, which are to be found among those most richly endowed, war
brings out, in many ways, a return to low and unrestrained instincts.
Not to speak of cruelty, of which one category of the belligerents has
had the monopoly, the lust of pillage, or at least the obliteration of the
respect for rights; the temptations to drink and licentiousness have
often been the result of the strain upon everyone of the one absorbing
idea of war and its necessities; changes of fortune have occurred in all
198 "EUGENICS REVIEW.

classes of society and often to the individuals least prepared and least
likely to make a good use of the favourable opportunities afforded.

Nevertheless, it does not seem evident that, in making allowance for
the upspringing of fine qualities, the general level of the mass of the
population has fallen during the War.

To use a phrase much favoured by the founder of this REVIEW, war
increases the expansion of the curve, or the pyramid, of human qualities,
widening it both at the summit and the base. Undoubtedly the lengthening of the summit exceeds the lessening in depth. Then again, social
restraint has weakened in face of the necessities of the moment; when
the social stays are solidly timbered, useful reactions arise from time to
time. In this connection, one may note a certain progress in France
in public action with regard to three fatal enemies of eugenics and race
hygiene, viz., alcoholism, tuberculosis, and venereal diseases.

ALCOHOLISM.

France is a great producer both of wine and agricultural commodities. Distillation is one means of extracting profit from these commodities and in spite of the taxes, alcohol for consumption finds a more ready
market and at more remumerative prices than commercial alcohol. There
is, therefore, antagonism between the interests of public health or the
welfare of the race, and those of a considerable number of manufacturers
and middlemen. Much of the difficulty of the struggle against alcoholism
in France is due to the fact that the opposition is often masked under
declarations of unimpeachable principles.

Thus the efforts of the public authorities and administrative bodies,
although not very vigorous, are still praiseworthy.

The fact has frequently been verified that if one estimates the
amount of alcohol contained in wine and other fermented drinks, France
before the War was the country which consumed the largest quantity of
alcohol per head. It also ranked among the largest consumers of
distilled alcohol. It has been justly remarked that the action of alcohol
varies very considerably according to the nature of the drink—1o centilitres of alcohol at 100° taken in 1 litre of wine, or in the form. of brandy,
or absolute, will not have the same physiological effects upom the
organism, and these effects will be very different according to the nature
of the essences and the impurities which are mixed with the alcohol.

The quantity and the regularity of the habit, however, also play an
important réle apart from the quality, more especially in the permanent
effect of alcohol on the constitution of the individual and so ultimately
upon the race. It may be admitted that the habit of taking a small
quantity of wine, or even of good alcohol, is advantageous to the mental
activity and the development of the organism. It seems established that
the absorption of very large quantities upsets the nervous system and
gives rise to troubles from which the offspring are not immune. Is it
perhaps for this reason that in the districts of Southern France, which are
almost exclusively vine-growing, where drunkenness is hardly ever seen,
but where the men drink freely every day, the women are accustomed to
abstain almost entirely? Unfortunately, the reverse is the case in the
West, where alcoholism is due to the distilled product.
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. ‘I9Q9Q

For twenty years the official consumption of distilled alcohol has,
however, somewhat lessened in France, though to a smaller extent than
in many other countries. Thus from 1891-3 to 1911-13, it has decreased
from 44 litres per head to rather less than 4 litres in France, while in
the United Kingdom the decrease has been from 22 litres to 17 litres
per head.

Since the War the fight against alcoholism has been carried on more
persistently than ever by temperance societies founded before the War;
petitions have been circulated, posters have been placarded, and deputations to authorities have been organised.

The most efficacious measures, many of which, however, it has not
been possible to enforce, were first taken by the military authorities, who,
either in virtue of powers conferred on them by a state of war, have
regulated the sale of liquors, or in virtue of their own essential powers
have forbidden the frequenting of certain public-houses or hindered the
consumption of alcohol by the soldiers by prohibiting the use of cafés and
restaurants except at meal times. The Minister of War im 1911 and 1916
made a similar regulation in the case of mobilised men and those engaged
in national war work of any kind, as well as soldiers on leave. A law
passed on February 19th, 1917, ratified these injunctions.

Mention should also be made of the circulars issued by the Ministry
of Munitions as to disciplinary measures necessary to put a stop to the
increase of alcoholism in the arsenals. For the rest, alcohol being a
mecesSary ingredient in works connected with national defence, the military authorities have arranged for powers of requisition; some use has
already been made of these powers and this has affected the price of
alcohol. In the same way the raising of the duty on alcohol, which has
increased since the War to 400 francs per hectolitre, has naturally formed
a barrier to its consumption.

A circular of the Minister of Public Instruction drawing teachers
into the struggle against alcoholism, and a circular from the Minister of
the Interior, asking the prefects to forbid the retail sale of spirits, either
to everyone at certain hours of the day or to women and children at all
hours, have had a certain amount of influence, but it must not be forgotten that the regulation of the sale of drink depends first of all upon
the municipal authorities elected.

As 'a matter of fact, pre-war legislation would have been to some
extent effective if the law of January 23rd, 1873, which allows of the
punishment of drunkards, as well as of the retailers who supply drink
to men already intoxicated, or to minors, had been conscientiously carried
out, but as its application was left in the hands of the local police, it
was never enforced with any energy. A law of October 1st, 1917, repealing it has strengthened its chief clauses; in addition, it forbids the
employment of women under 18 for the sale of drinks and punishes
retailers who offer facilities for prostitution. Another law, passed on
August 6th, 1917, forbids the introduction of alcoholic drinks other than
wine, beer, etc., in commercial establishments and forbids persons in a
state of intoxication to remain on the premises. A decree of October 23rd,
200 EUGENICS REVIEW.

1917, completes these measures by ordering business managers to limit
the supply of drinks sent in for meals taken on the premises.

It now only remains to mention two laws affecting trade and the
production of alcohol. The first, of November goth, 1915, has imposed
various restrictions in place of those of the law of 1880, with reference
to the opening of new liquor shops. The same law forbids the opening
of new houses for alcoholic drinks to be consumed on the premises except
liquors with a basis of wine of less than 230. Every retail business
which has been closed for more than a year is suppressed, and the
removal of an old one is only authorised within a radius of 150 metres
and during the year following the closing.

In the second place, a law of June 30th, 1916, has put an end provtstonally! to the privilege in virtue of which landowners with vineyards
or orchards escape to a certain extent the control of distillation. This
should put an end to illicit distilling, at least, during the War; the fact
that the growers have always the right to 10 litres of alcohol free of
taxation has left the way open to certain abuses. There is nevertheless
ground for hoping that after the War the new regulation will be “consolidated.” For the rest, the clause of the law under discussion at the
moment tends towards vesting a monopoly of the distillation of industrial
alcohol in the State.

The numerous and varied laws, of which we have selected the most
important, show how well intentioned are the public authorities in their
struggle with the complexities of the question, for on the one hand it is
very difficult to differentiate between use and abuse, and on the other
the interests involved are both numerous and powerful.

In spite of that, the fight against alcoholism will be continued in
view of the damage which alcohol causes, not only to the present generar
tion but to posterity.

Speaking of the work of the English Government in its fifht against
opium, M. Clemenceau concluded: “ Will the French do less for France
than the English have done for India? ”?

TUBERCULOSIS.

The fight against tuberculosis had begun in France long before the
War; but the means put in operation were clearly not effectual. The
prevalence of the malady may be best apprehended by a few figures.

In 1911-12 the proportion per 10,000 inhabitants of deaths certified
as due to tuberculosis in one or other of its forms was 21.7 in France,
as compared with 14.4 in England and Wales; 15.7 in the United States
(in districts where it was registered); 15.4 in Belgium; 16.1 in Italy;
18.8 in Denmark. In Paris during this period 31 deaths per 10,000 were
returned, while in New York (Manhattan and Bronx) the corresponding proportion was reduced to 18.

It is by no means sure that these proportions are strictly comparable.
Medical statistics are only of value as far as diagnoses amd certificates
are concerned. Particularly in the case of pulmonary tuberculosis, the

* Till the end of year follescing the cessation of the hostilities.

* Preface to “Alcohol,” by Louis Jacquet (Masson, 1912). M. Jacquet quetes the
words of Galien, valuable in present conditions,  Plures occidit gula quam gladius,”’
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 20I

symptoms are sometimes confused with those of other maladies, such as
chronic bronchitis; in the matter of diseases, the purely medical
symptoms are often contradicted by physiological examination.!

The changes in the mortality rate are more significant than its
definite numbers. Now, from the period 1891-95 to the period
IgiI-12, there was a decrease in the death-rate from tuberculosis which
reached 32 per cent. at least in England and Germany, 54 per cent. in
Belgium, 25 per cent. in French towns of more than 500 inhabitants,
and 17 per cent. in Italy. The reduction was from 49 per cent. in Paris
and from 34 per cent. in New York.

It will be seen that if the decrease obtained in the capital of France
is satisfactory (taking into account the make-up of the population) it is
not so in other French towns where the decrease has been very slight.
Before the War the fight against tuberculosis had given rise to various
schemes, to some reforms, and to heated discussions, notably on the
question of compulsory notification. The practical recommendations
emanating from the writings of various specialists and important commissions brought about certain partial reforms, especially in hospitals,
workshops, institutions and schools, and with reference to sanitary conditions in dwellings.

More than a dozen sanatoria, with a thousand beds and 50 antituberculosis dispensaries (30 of which were in the department of the
Seine) were started—a small effort when one compares it with what has
been accomplished in other countries.

The War and the call to arms of all healthy adults caused the
problem to assume a new aspect. The calling-up of the young recruits,
those most exposed to risks, the life at the front of men with weak constitutions under peculiarly trying conditions, forced the War Ministry to
send back a large number of proved cases of tubercular trouble, and
these men, plunged abruptly into civil life and left to themselves, constituted a danger to the civil population by their inability to take proper
care of themselves. As the result of a resolution in the Chamber of
Deputies, numerous instructions from the Ministry of War provided for
a certain amount of attention to these discharged tuberculous soldiers.

But the most effective solution of the difficulty was the proposal put
forward by the leaders of the anti-tuberculosis campaign in France, such
as M. Leon Bourgeois and Professor Landouzy, for the establishment of
a number of well-equipped sanatoria and sanitary stations where these
soldiers could receive the necessary treatment. Funds were accordingly
appropriated for this purpose by Parliament on October 18th, 1915,
and by degrees sanatoria were opened in various districts. In addition,
in the majority of departments, committees were organised for the assistance of soldiers discharged from the samatoria when the cure had
to be completed in their own homes. These committees attended to the
provision of the necessary nursing, etc., the ensuring of prophylactic

t According to the /talian Journal of Military Medicine, of 924 soldiers sent back from
the Italian Front as tuberculous in 1916-17, 394 have been found not to be so, according to

the verification of the diagnosis, not including 110 cases of arrested tuberculosis. Even
greater divergencies have been observed 1n France.
202 EUGENICS REVIEW.

~

measures in the home, of suitable nourishment, and the rest essential to
their restoration to health.

A law passed on April rsth, 1916, regulated the organisation of
public dispensaries in connection with social hygiene and the prevention
of consumption. These were intended especially for consultations and
included a laboratory for analysis, medical aid, visiting hospital attendants capable of giving hygiene instruction to families, etc., while the
hospitals and the sanatoria received the soldiers as in-patients for treatment for a period of three months,

At the end of 1917 there were 17 of these sanatoria with nearly 1,200
beds, 50 hospitals or their equivalents, all under military control and
with accommodation for more than 8,ooo. In addition, there were 40
sanatoria under the Minister of the Interior, accommodating 4,000
patients, intended for the use of discharged soldiers.

In short, the committees, which were at work in nearly all the
departments, completed the task of looking after these soldiers and discharged soldiers stricken with tuberculosis. They formed themselves
into an association, known as the National Committee for the Care of
Tuberculous Soldiers, with a Central Committee, which was created on
April rst, 1916, and which links up the committees of the departments
with all the other anti-tuberculosis societies. Civilians repatriated in the
invaded districts, who are recognised as tubercular on their journey to
the frontier, are admitted under the same conditions as the military.

Independently of this organisation, which, in spite of its rapid
development, still requires to be greatly extended in order to meet the
growing need, the co-operation of the American Red Cross has also been
at our service as well as a commission organised by the Rockefeller
campaign. The former has given its assistance to hospitals and sanatoria, already in existence, has facilitated the creation of new hospitals"
for the refugees, and finally, in conjunction with the Rockefeller commission, it has instituted a campaign of public education which should
prove of the greatest assistance in the fight against tuberculosis.

These efforts on the part of public authorities and charitable institutions are, however, not the only ones which deserve mention. It is
certain that the organisation, the activities of which we have just been
describing, will not restrict its supervision to the military and the
victims of war. At the conclusion of hostilities, if sufficiently developed,
it will be ready to take the whole population under its wing.

Great industrial unions have already realised that the economic
future of a country is partly dependent upon stamping out, or at least
reducing the incidence of diseases which cause deterioration in the race.

A special association has been formed for the administration of antituberculosis regulations in the metal and mining industries, and also
in the building trades. Thus, after the War, a whole series of antituberculosis institutions, which have arisen to meet the needs of war,
will be at the service of the civil population.

In addition, a project is on foot and has been put before Parliament
to give a new impulse to the erection of public sanatoria, subsidised by
- SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 203

the State, and to bring the private sanatoria to a certain extent under
State control. All these measures inspire one with the hope that after
the War France will be dowered with a network of institutions, which
formerly only existed in a rudimentary stage, where all tubercular complaints may be systematically treated.

This organisation has also a certain prophylactic value since it tends
to the isolation of the more serious cases, and above all, to spread the
knowledge and the practical application of hygiemic measures for the
prevention of infection. But it is to be feared that it will be difficult to
put these measures into practice as long as tuberculosis is not compulsorily notifiable, as in other countries; that is to say, under the
control of doctors working in well-equipped laboratories and with the
necessary means for discovering and treating the disease at its first inception. The Academy of Medicine has expressed itself as in favour of
compulsory notification, but it has met with keen opposition, and the
medical profession are, generally speaking, hostile to such notification,
at least, in the present state of sanitary organisation.

VENEREAL DISEASE.

Owing to the fact that venereal diseases are only certified as the
cause of death under exceptional circumstances, no conclusions as to their
incidence can be arrived at from a study of the death rates. All that can
be done is to note their occurrence in certain sections of the population, in
the Army for example, since in France no data exist as to their prevalence
among the general population. But on the other hand, the figures for the
Army, in France at any rate, may be considered as giving a fair estimate
for those of the civil population also, since the disease is chiefly contracted
at the age of military service.

Before the War venereal diseases were not very prevalent im France.
For the period of 1903-7 there were 671 cases of syphilis among 100,000
soldiers, as compared with 444 in the German Ammy, while in England the
proportion exceeded 3,000, and the specific mortality was also higher in
other countries, in Italy and Austria-Hungary for example, than in France.

In the case of gonorrhoea and soft chancre, there were. 2,200 cases
among 100,000 soldiers as compared with 1,800 in Germany, and nearly
6,500 in England.

Moreover, during the last 25 years there has been a decrease in all these
countries, and notably in England. ,

The War has naturally led to a recrudescence of venereal diseases,
both in the Army and the civil population, more especially the latter, and
particularly in industrial centres, for the absence of the heads of families,
night work, the presence of colonial and foreign workers are all contributory
causes to sexual irregularities.

The Minister of Interior has issued various recommendations to the
Prefects during the course of 1914, 1916 and 1917, urging the local
authorities to take precautionary measures against the spread of venereal
diseases, more especially by enforcing the registration of lodging-house
keepers, retail wine shops, prostitutes, etc.

t The figures for disease among soldiers can only be compared with many reservations,
owing to the varying conditions of recruiting and the customary billeting system of the troops,
204 EUGENICS REVIEW.

A new and more efficient organisation was set on foot by the Minister
of the Interior.! In important centres (at least one in each department) a special out-patient department was to be created and attached
either to an ordinary hospital or some welfare institution, where free consultations could be obtained, preferably with medical specialists in localities
with the necessary facilities. Towards the end of.1917, there were already
65 of these centres distributed among 50 departments.?

In addition, in 1918, Parliament voted, on the proposition of Dr.
Merlin, an annual credit of 800,000 francs for the installation in the large
towns, for the use of soldiers, of centres for the prophylactic treatment of
venereal disease as practised in the American Army and founded on the
researches of Metchmikoff.

The incidence of venereal disease is coincident with the increase in
prostitution, and with regard to this no new measure has been taken in
France since the War; the system of regulation, and of registering the
prostitutes and the licensed brothels, have remained as before the War.
An extra-parliamentary Commission has issued a Report condemning the
present system of regulation, but the Administration seems to consider it
essential to the national health, and the policing of the streets, in spite of
its alleged inadequacy.

It is indeed, when freed from the discretionary powers of the municipalities, often carried out under deplorable conditions, while on the other hand,
it is of little efficacy. In Paris, for example, among 100,000 inhabitants,
the number of prostitutes known to the police reached 300 in 1855, and
more than 4o per cent. of them were from licensed brothels. In 1890 the
number fell to 200, of whom only 15 per cent. were in licensed brothels. In
1911 there were still 200, but less than 7 per cent. in licensed brothels. A
corresponding decrease occurred in the number of registered prostitutes
subject to periodical medical examination. $

As for the infected prostitutes, their number calculated proportionally to the total number known in Paris, had decreased at the
end of the 19th century; it has now risen again, and more especially since
the War. It is, too, a matter of observation that venereal infection seems
to proceed in cycles.

To justify the system of regulation practised in France, one might
quote the greater prevalence of syphilis in the English as compared
with the French Army, since prostitution is not under a similar system of
control in England. But the argument falls to the ground on the reflection
that, from the suppression of regulation in English garrison towns in
1886, the incidence has steadily decreased from nearly 300 cases of
venereal diseases per 1,000 in 1881, to 100 1N 1900.5

If war has not modified the system of prostitution in France, it
has increased the number of those infected with venereal diseases among

* Circular of February 4th and June sth, 1917.
2 Revue d’Hygiene et de Police Sanitaire. Sept.-Nov., 1917, p. 666. (Article by Dr. Faivre.)

3 However, in the brothels, the frequency of venereal diseases is less than among prostitutes of the street. (See Art. of Miss Rout in “ Public Health,’’ September, 1918.

4 Observations made at Copenhagen (Handwérterbuck der Sozial Hygiene.)
Handworterbuck der Sozial Hygiene.
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 205

prostitutes under police supervision in Paris, the proportion having been
nearly doubled between 1913 amd 1917.

It would therefore be an opportune moment for a vigorous reformation
of the “7ébime des meurs,” amd the public control of venereal diseases.
But it is difficult to deal with the problems of prophylaxis, and of prostitution, when medical opinion is opposed to notification in any form.

DEPOPULATION.

The fourth scourge, which in some aspects includes all others which
may fall upon a nation, is depopulation.

Before the War, there was no depopulation strictly speaking, at least
in the country taken as a whole, for the rural districts were emptied to
the profit of urban ones, so that what really occurred was that the population
came to a standstill.

In the 40 years between 1873 and 1913, the population had not increased
by 10 per cent., while in Italy the increase had reached nearly 30 per cent.,
in the United Kingdom 43 per cent., in Belgium 54 per cent., in Germany
55 per cent., in the United States nearly 140 per cent.

But war and invasion have now undoubtedly led to a real depopulation.
More than a tenth of the country is either in the temporary possession of the
enemy, or has been evacuated. Among civilians in the devastated territory
murders, accidents and disease have wrought havoc, while the exiled
families could not increase, nor could new families arise. On the territory
free from invasion, although the civilian mortality has not risen above
the normal rate, the heavy loss, among the defenders of our soil and our
national life, has created voids which cannot be filled by a compensating
birthrate. Many families that might have increased are deprived of their
heads. On the other hand, the public would scarcely condemn a man for
avoiding procreation during the War, in his desire to save his wife from
the burden of these children in case of his death, instead of thinking that
the void created by his death should' be filled. Thus the reduced birthrate,
and the increased mortality—this balance-sheet of all the belligerents,
brings im its fatal train that depopulation which, before the War, was only
just warded off.

At the very least, we must strengthen every measure for infant welfare,
and for the building up of the future population ; and the principal measures
will now be enumerated, which have either been already taken or are
under way, dealing in turn with the campaign against mortality, against
abortion, and against the limitation of births.

Infant Mortality.—A comparison of the number of children who die
during their first year, with the number of children borm living, shows
that during the period between 1876-80, the number of deaths per 1,000
births was 145 in England and Wales, 155 in Belgium, 205 in Prussia,
209 in Italy, and 166 in France. Thirty years later these numbers had
become 117 in England, 141 in Belgium, 168 in Prussia, 152 in Italy, and
126 in France. |

France, therefore, has not done badly during these last 30 years, taking
into account her climate, and the fact that the decrease in infant mortality
has been really considerable.
206 . EUGENICS REVIEW.

Since the War the infant mortality rate has varied in different countries,
thus, in the course of 1914-15-16,/ it increased from 109 to 115, and then
fell to g5 in the urban districts of England, while in German towns of more
than 15,000 inhabitants it steadily decreased (155—144—133). In France the
variation is comparable to that which occurred in England, for example :—

Environs of Paris ... 8 .. :147—160—152.
Seine-et-Oise wes wee ws 130—143—126.
Rhone was wee vee .»  106—145—106.
Seine Inferieure_... 173—206—174.

In 1917 infantile mortality was greater ham in 1916 in the three first
departments.

To sum up, the War has not had that effect upon infant mortality which
might have been anticipated, partly owing to the decline in the birthrate,
since there is always a certain correlation between the birthrate and infant
mortality. In the case of France the fact must be taken into account
that the refugees from the invaded districts often arrive in other departments either with newly-born infants, or about to give birth to children,
and under disastrous conditions.

In spite of this, the institutions started before the War for infant
welfare—milk centres, maternity centres, créches, etc.—have continued
their work in the towns where they.were already in existence, notwithstanding interruptions due to lack of medical assistants. The rationing
of milk has been organised in such a way as to guarantee a regular
supply. Shortly before the War a law of June 17th, 1913, had provided
for a period of rest both before and after confinement, by financial help
equivalent to a salary being given to these women, either in the factories
or at home. This law was altered a few months later (January 23rd,
1917) to include women in receipt of military allowances, even if they
had no salaried occupation, as well as the women driven out from the
invaded districts, and finally (December 2nd, 1917) every woman lacking
sufficient means of support.

Since the War the employment of women in industrial occupations has
been greatly increased, and it has been found necessary to take further
hygienic steps for the improvement of the factories. Regulations have been
promulgated in favour of women who are pregnant, and apart from the
question of rest and assistance as just stated, a law of August 5th, 1917,
compels employers to give facilities to mothers for suckling their children,
and to provide rooms for this purpose in works sufficiently large to render
it necessary. Many manufacturers and some municipalities, such as at
Lyons, have of course, through their inspiration, érganised efficient imstitutions for maternal and infant welfare.

These rather tardy measures are intended to benefit mothers and newlyborn infants and to encourage maternal nursing, which, unfortunately,
has not yet received, as in other countries, special and direct allowances,
for the fact remains that infant mortality is still very high in France.

Still-births and Miscarriages.—Natural miscarriages include children
dead before having drawn breath, or more accurately, dead before

* From Local Government Board Report : Infant Welfare in Germany,
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 207

registration, which is compulsory within three days after birth. Failing
more exact legislation on this poimt, a foetus of six months’ development
is registered as still-born.

New hygienic conditions have a great influence upon the frequency of
still-births ; it would not, therefore, be surprising if, during the present
War, as under similar conditions on previous occasions, notably during
the siege of Paris in 1871, the relative number of still-births had
increased in France since 1914.

However, in 1914 and 1915, they were fewer, in comparison with the
number of births, than in 1913. In 1916, however, there was a considerable
increase, which was especially marked in industrial districts, and was
doubtless due to the rapid increase in the ranks of female labour; but
in 1917 there was again a decrease.

Insufficient figures would be of little interest in regard to this matter,
and no comparison of international figures of still-births would be of
value until a similarity of definitions and methods has been arrived at.

The frequency of premature confinements and miscarriages in certain
Parisian lying-in hospitals appears to have been coincident with that of
still-births, reaching a maximum in 1916.

In the case of abortions there are of course no official figures. In
many districts doctors have notified a recrudescence of criminal abortions.

The Academy ot Medicine and other Societies have urged stronger
legislation against this form of murder, but of this we shall speak later.

Birthrate.—For a long time France has had the melancholy privilege
of being quoted, with Ireland, as the country with the lowest birthrate.

From 1906-10, for every 10,000 inhabitants there were 263 living children
born in England and Wales, 247 in Belgium, 327 in Italy, 316
in the German Empire, 337 in Austria, as against 199 in France.
It is true that for 4o years the fall in the birthrate has been
universal, and no greater in France than in many other countries, but as
our level was already the lowest, our relative position has remained the

same.
Since the War the dangers dealt with above have led to a fresh

decrease. The same phenomenon has occurred in the other belligerent
countries, but the extent of the decrease has varied, being less in the
colonies than elsewhere.

In France, during the War, the fall in the birthrate was considerable.
If one represents the number of births in 1913 by 100, the corresponding
number for the uninvaded departments is decreased to 94 in 1914, 60
in 1915, 50 in 1916, 55 in 1917. The reduction was less marked in Germany, and much less in the United Kingdom. The reduction is much
more marked among the legitimate than the illegitimate births. The
former was due in great part to the lowering of the marriage rate, which
was very considerable in 1915, but since then it has tended to increase.

The slight fall in the number of illegitimate births cannot be regarded
as a sign of improvement in the general morality, for there is much
evidence to show that the voluntary limitation of births has played a very
important part.

This is indeed very probable in the case of legitimate births; for if
a calculation is made of the number of births in one year, and the number
208 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of marriages celebrated two years previously, there is a certain correlation
which is relatively fixed, but this was very slight in 1915, and considerably
lowered in 1916 in the great majority of departments.

The voluntary limitation of births which has been prevalent for a
long time in France, appears to have increased still more during the
War, and this has been brought about in two ways, by abortion and
by contraceptive measures.

It is obviously impossible to make allowance for abortion, which ‘s
a crime punishable by law. But the evidence of doctors reveals a
recrudescence of this criminal practice.

Let us now summarise what has been done to try and remedy the
lamentable situation which menaces the future of France.

In order to increase the birthrate it 1s obviously necessary first to
facilitate marriage. Although before the War the formalities had been
simplified, yet im certain respects they still remained intricate. It
is true that marriage should be regarded as a serious business, not to be
lightly entered upon, and in which, up to a certain age, the young people
stand in need of the advice and support of their relatives. It should never
become a simple field for experiment, from which one may escape by the
gate of divorce ; but on the other hand it should not be unduly hampered
by legal formalities; and it is on this point that simplification is possible.
Since the War this difficulty however has been considered in the case of
soldiers on active service. A law of April 4th, 1915, authorised, for
soldiers only, marriages by proxy, 7.e:, without the husband being present.
It is probable that this law has affected the marriage rate.

Nothing more has been done in the case of illegal unions. Before the
War a law of 1907 had facilitated legitimisation and increased the rights
of illegitimate children. During the War it has only been possible to call
attention to the administrative measures qualifying the mistresses of
mobilised soldiers and their illegitimate children to receive, under certain
conditions, the allowances due to families whose breadwinner is a soldier
(Circular of August 23rd, 1914).

Mention might be made here of the rather fantastic theories launched
by the Press, although not to such an extent in France as in other countries,
in order to obtain, by an increase in the illegitimate birthrate, some compensation for the diminishing legitimate one. If it is a fact that everything possible has been done to facilitate marriage, then-the greater part
of any imcrease in the illegitimate birthrate would occur by the diisorganisation of legal marriages; the dreams of compensation would therefore be illusory, apart from the general lowering of the moral tone
resultant upon this form of polygamy which has been advocated by certain
theorists.

Now the increase in the birthrate can be obtained bv the normal
means of the fertility of marriage. A hundred years ago, when the population was chiefly rural, there were more than 4oo living children born to
every hundred marriages, while in the years preceding the War, there
were scarcely 220.

If we admit that the number of heads of families will be reduced as the
result of war to two-thirds of the pre-war figures, the customary number of
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 209

children, a hundred years ago, in these families, would give rise to a
birthrate considerably higher than the pre-war one, and sufficient, allied to
further hygienic progress, to restore the population to its normal level.

Again, it is universally recognised to-day that the reduction of the
birthrate during the course of this present century has been voluntary, that
the limitation of offspring has been brought about by contraceptive
measures and by abortion, and that the principal motive at work has been
the fear of parental responsibility.

Numerous discussions have taken place both before and during the
War with reference to the suppression of criminal methods. Reference has
been made above to the suggestions put forward by the Academy of
Medicine during the latter part of 1917. The French Penal Code contains
an article! which inflicts heavy penalties on the woman who practises
abortion, and those who furnish her with the means of doing so. But just
because the penalty is extreme, and the nature of the crime leaves this
penalty to the verdict of a jury, the law is often not carried out. One of
the chief necessary reforms is to bring criminal abortion within the range
of the police magistrate.

The necessity for more efficacious supervision of midwives and nursing
homes must also be recognised, and the need for censoring advertisements
and all incitements to abortion.

Following on the proposition of a law brought forward by Professor
Lannelongue in 1910, the French Senate received a report and a legislative draft covering the points just dealt with. But this draft has not yet
come up for discussion in the Assembly itself.

It enforces the notification of all miscarriages at whatever stage,
while at present no notification is ‘compulsory, unless the fetus is
in a stage of development at which it can be described as a still-born
child. It also makes it obligatory for doctors and midwives to give evidence
under oath when they have any proof of abortion having taken place.

Finally, suppression of contraceptive propaganda, and the distribution
or sale of articles furthering this propaganda is advocated. Unfortunately
the proposed law has not yet come up for discussion.

The same fact holds good with reference to the more numerous proposals
for a law aiming at lightening the financial burden imposed on parents by
the upbringing of children. Everyone nowadays is agreed as to the necessity
of such a measure. A law of 1913 provided for monthly allowances up to
the age of 13 for all children born after the third. But these allowances
are only payable to families whose resources are considered insufficient, and
they are paid by the Bureau d’assistance, so that they are thus tarred by
the brush of charity. But the question of a public contribution to the cost
of children has no connection with charity. Such a contribution is already
made in the case of elementary education (in some countries, ¢.g., the
United States, for secondary education also). It is essential at the present
moment to take a wide view and at the same time to be strictly practical.

When it is stated that the birthrate is under voluntary control, the
psychological factor is implied and also the motive power of an idea. At
all times the will in this connection is itself determined by the responsi
* Art. 317.
210 EUGENICS REVIEW.

bilities involved in the upbringing of a family, and the results of a campaign
of ideas will be very small if it does not offer materia] advantages.

History and observation of people of various civilisations both go to
prove that the number of children in a family is dependent upon whether
they represent a profit or a burden. And, since modern civilisation tends
to prevent parents from benefiting bv their children, it is only just that
society, which itself reaps the benefit, should also, to a certain extent, share
the burden. There is some show of reason in H. G. Wells’ assertion that
maternity is tending to become a social function.

This principle, now almost universally admitted, brings the following
consequence in its train: Society, having need for a certain number of
children at the least expense, should fix the rate of compensation by the cost
of those which can be most economically and healthily reared. That is to
say, social action should especially favour children born in rural surroundings, from the double point of view of health and economy. And _ this
result might be obtained if the allowance per head was uniform for all,
wherever the place of abode, and whatever the number in the family, as
long as the child lives on up to the age when the law permits it to become
of economic value.

Among the numerous proposals brought forward in Parliament, both
before and during the War, there is one, that of M. L. J. Breton, which
embraces these and other eugenic questions. It has been favourably
reported upon by the Parliamentary Commission appointed to examine into
it, but it, too, has not yet come up for discussion.

If nothing has been done since the War in the sense of direct allowances for lightening the burdens of large families; if indeed financial
measures have been passed which increase that burden, such as raising
the duty on sugar, on the other hand, the increase of the income-tax and
death duties have been rescinded in such a way as to benefit large families
or at least those which are liable to these taxes.

So far as the taxes and the supertax are concerned, the income on
which the tax is based not only admits of an abatement at the lower end
of the scale, increasing with the number of persons liable to pay it,
but also of an abatement on the estimated tax, which increases automatically
with the number of these people, until it reaches half of the tax.

With regard to the death duties, the law of December 31st, 1917, first
fixed a progressive tax on the net capital inherited, where the deceased did
not leave at least four children living or represented by their heirs. This
tax is progressive, both in proportion to the amount of the inheritance and
to the number of children as this decreases from four to none.

Finally, the duty on the net portion is reduced proportionally to the
number of children beyond the third which each heir has at the moment
of succeeding to the inheritance.

The allowances granted to the families of the mobilised men include
a daily sum for each child, the advantages granted to soldiers who are
heads of families (quicker discharge, employment outside the fighting area,
more frequent leave) may be considered as favourable to large families and
as indications of an admirable spirit which tends to look upon each
child as a unit among the charges which it is the duty of the nation to
support.
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 211

The same rule holds good with reference to the allowances for the
increased cost of living to officials whose salary does not reach a certain
figure, allowances which are increased according to the number of children.
It is to be regretted that the same consideration has not always been
extended to the decisions in the case of employees and workmen in private
firms, with regard to bonuses for the same purposes. However, many
private firms or industrial associations, like the Chamber of Commerce of
Nancy, have voluntarily undertaken to pay allowances (maternity, confinement, infant welfare) to the employees, and these measures are, aS
stated, an indication of a certain change of outlook upon the question
of large families, a change which is consonant with simple justice.

Will correspondingly practical measures be taken in order that the
birthrate of France may rise to the extent essential for the future of the
race?

There is room for doubt. In the first place, among the measures
likely to take immediate effect, the right of the family vote in the elections,
has been taken away.

And, secondly, the other measure likely to have a universal and
immediate result, z.e., the direct compensation for family expenses! has
not yet been the subject of a debate in Parliament.

Thus the financial arrangements of which mention has been made,
only affect a small section of families, and in many cases, those who under
no circumstances would have many children, so that the sacrifices made by
the State in their favour cause it to refrain from coming as liberally as it
should to the aid of those more likely to rear large families, that is to say,
the rural population.

The protagonists of large families have perhaps a certain responsibility for this state of things, first, because, as a rule they form part of
the section of the population which is to be benefited and, secondly, because
they give a ready welcome to theories which are a przort unverifiable, for
example, it is asserted that the limitation of births is influenced by
example, and that it would be sufficient for certain families to set a
good example, for a general imitation of their conduct to follow. Or else
it is urged that every encouragement should be given to obtain a
uniform number of children in each family, say three or four, and that
this solution of the question is more satisfactory than that which dwells
upon larger families. Briefly, the value of religious belief is exaggerated
in a country where the religious spirit has never been very strong; it is
ignoring also the fact that the religious spirit has risen to its
greatest heights, when it has been associated with tendencies bearing on
the welfare of the majority.

In conclusion, although France may be one of the countries in which
the War has wrought the greatest havoc, and, at the same time, the country
in which for a long time past, the population problem has been most
serious, it does not appear that the efforts made to improve the situation,
to remedy the ills which threaten the vitality of the country and of the
race, have been on a sufficiently large scale when one reflects on the voids

*In his report to the Academy of Medicine Professor Richet said : “ There are neither

pathological nor physiological reasons for our falling birth-rate ; there is only one reason—
the economic. But that is all-powerful and decisive.’’
212 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to be filled, and, above all, when one knows the measures taken in other
countries less stricken.

Except in the question of tuberculosis, perhaps, and even there great
progress is still necessary, especially with regard to prophylaxis and home
treatment-—professional interests, theoretical discussions, and financial
considerations, have erected barriers against those practical solutions
which should have been dealt with first of all.

Umder varying forms, is it the principle of the least effort which,
where sustained and persevering action is above all essential, has too
often intervened to arrest efficient action? However, one may believe
that the necessary means will not be lacking in a country capable of
strong reactions and of heroism and generosity.

October, 1918
