84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

“‘T cannot but feel that this is a small and
most inadequate tribute to one of the greatest
and most beloved figures of our tre. May I
add the hope that in the honour, reverence

and love in which he was held by all who
knew and worked with him, Lady Rolleston
will find some compensation for her great
loss.”’

THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS
AND THEIR KINDRED*
By B. S. BRAMWELL, M.A., LL.B., ER.S.E.

Y subject deals with a small research
M in positive eugenics. Demography

has naturally bulked largely in our
recent proceedings. It is well to remember,
however, that our primary concern is quality
and not quantity. One Lister may be worth
much more to humanity than many ordinary
medical practitioners, and one ordinary practitioner than many members of the social
problem group. :

The Order was founded in 1902 to reward
exceptionally meritorious service in the Navy
and Army or in the advancement of Art,
Literature and Science. The number of
awards is very small—I think seventy to
date. In his great work, Hereditary Genius,
Galton had to select his eminent people. In
his study of British Genius, Havelock Ellis
tried to avoid personal selection by taking
only names given a definite amount of space
in the Dictionary of National Biography ; but
he had to abandon this system and supplement it with personal selection, as he found
that much greater space was given to people
of recent date. We here have our material
given to us; it is fresh material, not that
appearing in the two works mentioned, and
it all concerns people still alive or who were
alive in this twentieth century.

The Order is confined to twenty-four
holders. The civil branch outnumbers the

* The substance of a lecture at a Members’ Meeting
of the Eugenics Soctety on February 22nd, 1944.

military by more than three to one. It is
given a high place in the scale of precedence,
ranking directly after the Grand Cross of
the Bath and before the Grand Cross of the
five lower orders of knighthood. Vacancies
are not filled up as they occur. At present
there are only fourteen living holders. This
must enhance its prestige. No one by holding
office has a vested expectation to be appointed
to it. Lord Salisbury, when someone asked
him why he had appointed Alfred Austin to
succeed Lord Tennyson as Poet Laureate, is
said to have answered, “‘ I don’t think anyone
else applied.”” Application has to date been
foreign to the Order of Merit. : |
No doubt many of us will say “‘ So-and-so ”’
should have had it. Kipling is a name often
mentioned. But I don’t think any of us can

Jay a finger on any one name and say, “‘ That

was a job.” In the forty years of its existence
we have had Conservative, Liberal, Labour
and Coalition Governments ; so in this small
matter our democracy seems to have worked
well. As between the different branches of
learning, the scientists probably rank highest
in world reputation. It is difficult to imagine
the name of Lister dropping out of the history
of medicine. J. J. Thomson and Rutherford
took us a great step forward in our knowledge of the constitution of matter—a subject
which had been under discussion for over
2,000 years—when they showed that matter
was only a balanced system of energy. The
THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED 85

names of Bragg and Gowland Hopkins will
also live. In literature, two works stand
out as having an influence far beyond our
shores. In The Golden Bough, Frazer has set
all religions much to ponder over; in The
American Commonwealth, Bryce introduced
to many Americans for the first time the
intricacies of their own system of government. As regards the arts, can we say more
than that the holders will have a creditable
reputation in the much narrower field of
Britain? Florence Nightingale is the only
woman holder.

Personal Characteristics

From what sort of families do they spring ?
As regards size, the answer is easy : normalsized Victorian families averaging, where I
can trace, about 5-75 children. The details
are set out in Table r.

TABLE I
FAMILIES OF FATHERS OF HOLDERS
Children in Family Milstary Civil Total

Only child one oo

Two wee ees -_

Three

Four

Five

Six

Seven

Eight

Nine

Ten

Eleven ...

Twelve ..

Thirteen ...

Many

At least two

Only son

Unttaced bee

Only son with sisters... 4

The rather large entry (13) of ‘at least
two ” should be noticed. This simply means
that the D.N.B. describes the holder as
eldest son or second son. It throws no light
on the possibility of other brothers and is
silent as to sisters. There is no reason to
suppose that these families fell below the
average. I found no trace of the phenomenon
Dr. Fraser Roberts found at Bath, of exceptionally able children coming from very small

families.

Table 2 shows the holder’s position in the
family, where I could trace it.

ln] we wuuwranu en |

=
mw ey

Pepe toe 1a] ak Wr oe 8 |
w

dS

re

H™lall | | lalsewonsen|

TABLE 2
POSITION OF HOLDER IN THE FAMILY
Birth order Number of Holders.
Only son ... wee wee 4
Eldest ie ie wii 25
Second bie or _ Io
Third sus aa bese 2
Fourth ‘ aa I
Fifth I
Sixth 3
Ninth I
Youngest ... I

Undoubtedly, eldest sons easily head the
list, being more than one-half of the number
traced. Unfortunately, we do not know how
many were the eldest children : it would not
be an unfair inference to say one-half.
Second sons easily take second place. We
must remember, as regards the remainder,
that third, fourth and later sons are far fewer
in number. Our findings are in accordance
with those of Havelock Ellis, who found that |
eldest sons and younger sons in large families
most often exhibited talent. He put it down
to variation from the mean, as they also
more often exhibit imbecility and idiocy.

As regards longevity, holders of the order
live to a good old age. But in such a selected
group this is not surprising. Galton said that
no man under 50 would be tegarded as
eminent. I do not know that anyone has
been appointed to the Order under this age.
The holders have, therefore, successfully
passed or avoided the dangers of youth. I
think, however, they survive to a greater
age than one would anticipate from expectation of life tables for a group of the age of 50.
The median age in the military branch is 77
and in the civil branch 81. This difference is
not surprising, looking to the rigours of life
on active service.

Bodily activity is perhaps best indicated
by addiction to sport and athletics. The
military branch indulged in these, physical
fitness being essential in the services; but
they did not do so to excess, or with outstanding prowess. In the civil branch the
only outstanding performance I know is
that of Lord Kelvin, who won the Colquhoun
Sculls at Cambridge. Arthur Balfour won
the Parliamentary golf tournament, but I
think this was played on handicap. Lord
Bryce ascended Mount Ararat, which is
86

higher than Mont Blanc, and Lord Haldane
and G. M. Trevelyan were great walkers in
their youth. But as a group I think it fairly
safe to say that they were probably below
the average.
Table 3 gives details as to the marriage
and the offspring of holders.
TABLE 3
FAMILIES OF HOLDERS
Civil statusand Military Civil Total Fathers’
no. of offspring families ( for
comparison)
Unmarried ..
Married but childless
One child ... ‘
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six ...
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten...
Eleven
Twelve
Thirteen
Untraced ... 21

It will be seen ‘that ten, a ‘large proportion,
‘were unmarried. In the military branch all
the marriages (14) resulted in offspring.
As a group they were replacing themselves.
In the civil branch things were far otherwise. Fifteen marriages were childless, in
five cases there was one child, and in eleven
two children. The only large family, one of
eight, was that of an original holder, born so
long ago as 1817. Three-fourths were far
from reproducing themselves. The average
family of the civil group was only about
1:5, one child less than the military. The
average family of all holders was certainly
four children less than that of their fathers.

Why all these childless marriages? The
reason is certainly not economic. John
Morley left over £70,000 ; he was in a much
better financial position than his father, the
Burnley doctor who had four children ;
Lord Kelvin left just under this amount ; his
father, the Glasgow professor, had seven
children ; Steer, the artist, left over £80,000.
According to the Evening Standard, Barrie
left £170,000, Hardy £90,000, and Galsworthy £80,000. It is idle to suggest that
Arthur Balfour and R. B. Haldane refrained
from matrimony for economic reasons.

10
15

7
I3
12

PTT TT TP Lenn bes
plalrwrunuwrvun i | |

ell ll lalwwe

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Is the reason physiological ? We can rule
out such causes of male infertility as gonorrhea and mumps. There is another physiological theory sometimes put forward. The
blood has to carry nourishment to the internal
organs, the skeletal muscles, the brain, and
the reproductive organs. If one demands too
much, the others suffer. Dr. Zuckerman*
told us that when the number of sperms per
c.c. falls below a certain concentration the
result is generally sterility. So there may be
a certain measure of truth in this theory.

What of the fifteen wives ? Did they desire
offspring ? I think we need a large research
carried out exclusively by women, in all
classes, at all ages and in all religions, to
find out what proportions of women desire
no children, a few children, and a large
family.

But probably the matter is largely psychological. Havelock Ellis took this view : in
his British Genius he refers to two groups, an
abnormally infertile group and another group
rather more fertile than the normal. Among
the former, he mentions Dalton the chemist
as typical. He often talked of getting
married but never found time for it. In
later times the more fertile group has disappeared, probably owing to artificial
restraint.

As regards the families of two or three
children, which seem to be three times more
numerous than larger families, I think it is
a very fair inference to say that these able
people, after weighing up all the factors,
such as age, health of mother, prospects of
the children (though these should weigh less
with them than with less able people), size of
house, economics, companionship, have concluded that these are the most satisfactory
and comfortable numbers to have. |

To sum up: The holders come of normal
sized Victorian families ; they are long lived ;
they probably take less bodily exercise than
the average; their families are woefully
small. The comparatively low fertility of the
group may be to some extent physiological
but is probably far more psychological ; it is
certainly not economic.

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 28, 47.
THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED

Inheritance of Intelligence

We may now turn to something quite
different—the inheritance of intelligence. I
have not tried to delve into the past. Four
of the holders come of well-known, intellectual strains. These are Balfour, Cromer,
Haldane and Trevelyan. I must refer those
interested to Mr. Gun’s excellent book,
Studies in Hereditary Ability. I confine myself
to a review of fathers, brothers and sons.
This, unfortunately, leaves out inheritance
from the mother’s side. The fathers of
Balfour and Haldane were not particularly
distinguished, though they had distinguished
ancestry. Their mothers’ ancestry was very
notable. Kitchener’s and Rayleigh’s maternal
grandfathers are in the D.N.B. Herbert
Fisher’s grandfather and William Wordsworth were first cousins. —

We want some standard of ability corresponding to Galton’s “ eminence”’ for the
fathers of the holders. It is impossible to get
an exact measure, but one standard not very
different is “‘ Mention in the D.N.B.”’ Table 4
sets out, in brief, some facts bearing on the
abilities of fathers of fifteen of the holders—
i.e. their professions, outstanding academic
qualifications, and whether or not they had
a place in the D.N.B.

TABLE 4
FATHERS OF HOLDERS

Holder Profession, etc., of Father

Lord Roberts General; D.N.B.

Lord Jellicoe Commodore & Director, R.M.S.P.

Lord Kelvin Professor; F.R.S.; D.N.B.

Lord Lister Business; F.R.S.; D.N.B.

Lord Cromer M.P.

Lord Bryce .. Schoolmaster ; Geologist ; D.N.B.

Sir W. Hooker ... Director of Kew; F.R.S. ; D.N.B.

Sir G.O. Trevelyan Governor of Madras : D.N.B.

F. H. Bradley ... Parson; D.N.B.

G. A. Grierson ... LL.D.

G. M. Trevelyan.., O.M.; D.N.B.

H. A. Fisher . Tutor to Edward VII

Dr. Adrian Local Government Board; C.B.;
K.C.

Gilbert Murray ..

President Legislative Council,
N.S.W.

Lord Baden Powell Professor; F.R.S.; D.N.B.

Lord Roberts’s father is the only instance
of “Mention in D.N.B.” in the military
branch. Eleven holders were the sons of
naval and military officers. The only other
father of interest was Lord Jellicoe’s. He
was in the Merchant Marine and rose to be

87

Commodore and Director of the R.M.S.P.
Line. On the civilian side, no fewer than
eight had fathers with a place in the
D.N.B. I have notes of five other cases of
interest. So about one in four seems to have
had a father of eminence. Galton found that
two out of every eleven of his eminent men
had fathers of eminence, that is I in 5°5.
Of course the holders of the Order of Merit
are of a higher degree of talent or ability
than his eminent men. But after all, exact
measurement is impossible.

When one comes to brothers I have a note
of 21, and of one sister, Mrs. Sidgwick, Head
of Newnham, who achieved marked success
in their careers (see Table 5).

. TABLE 5
SIBS OF HOLDERS
Holder Profession, etc., of eminent alls
Admiral Sir G. O. Keppel D.N.B.
Lord Fisher ar Admiral
Lord Roberts Major-General

Lord Kitchener... Lieut.-General
Lord Chetwode Admiral; K.C.B.

Lord Kelvin Professor ; F.R.S.
Lord Cromer Created Peer
H. Jackson won ... Canon; Wrangler
Lord Haldane ... .. I. F.RS.
2. Crown Agent for Scotland
Lord Balfour... ... I. Fellow of Trinity, President, Board of Trade
2. Fellow of Trinity, F.R.S.
3. Head of Newnham
Sir A. Geikie “ Professor of Geology, F.R,S.
F. H. Bradley ... . I. Headmaster, Marlborough,
and Dean of Westminster
2. Professor English Literature, Glasgow and
Professor of Poetry, Oxford
M. James si Headmaster of Malvern
G. M. Trevelyan — President of Board of Education
H. A. Fisher ... 1. Admiral
2. Tutor, Christ Church
3. Chairman of Barclays
Bank
Lord Baden Powell Traveller ; M.P. ; D.N.B.

It is difficult to state what proportion this
is. Seventy families of six would give some
210 sons. Deducting the 70 holders, this
leaves 140. But what proportion of these
died young? A very considerable number
before the age of 50. I took down two
biographies of holders at random ; one does
not get these details in the D.N.B. In one,
three brothers had died in childhood ; in the
other, one had died at the age of 20. And
how many dying young, had given promise
88 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of success? I know that one, a Bradley, a
scholar of New College, was drowned in the
Cherwell as an undergraduate. So probably
we have to compare the 21 with some total
between 70 and 100.

Only thirty-five, one-half of the holders,
had sons. In five or six cases the sons are too
young for any reliable estimate to be made of
their talent, but Table 6 sets out what data I
have been able to assemble.

TABLE 6
SONS OF HOLDERS

Holder Profession, etc., of eminent sons
Admiral Sir G. O.
Keppel Admiral; G.C.V.O.

Sir G. O. Trevelyan
Lord Rayleigh .

Sir J. J. Thomson
Sir William Bragg

Master of Trinity ; O.M.

Fellow of Trinity ; F.R.S.; R.S.
medallist

Professor ; Nobel Prize; F.R.S.;
R.S. medallist

Professor ; Nobel Prize; Head of
Cavendish Laboratory, R.S.
medallist

Lord Cromer . G.C.B.; G.C.LE.; G.C.V.O.

Sir G. M. Trevelyan President of Board of Education

.David Lloyd George Fuel Controller

Lord Fisher I.C.S.

Earl Jellicoe Scholar of Trinity ; D.S.O.
Earl Beatty M.P.

Lord Roberts V.C.*

Sir A. Geikie Home Civil Service*

Sir W. Houldsworth Post Graduate law Studentship,
Christ Church ; stroke of Oxford
Boat*

These show some very remarkable achievements. First, the present Master of Trinity,
himself an O.M. Then Sir Laurence Bragg,
Nobel Prize winner, Royal Society Medallist
and Head of the Cavendish Laboratory ; and
two other Royal Society Medallists, one of
whom is also a Nobel Prize winner. I think
there are eight sons of holders who will
certainly appear in the D.N.B., and others
who may do so, such as the present Lord
Jellicoe, a scholar of Trinity and a D.S.O. in
this War. Death at an early age has removed
another three of promise.

With regard to fathers, brothers and sons,
exact measurement of intelligence is impossible. The following test might be tried.
The holders were all selected for their own
meritorious service, not for that of their
families. Let us take seventy consecutive
names, say, of parsons from Crockford,

 

* All these showed promise of a fine career, cut short
by death.

doctors from the medical directory, baronets,
stockbrokers and members of the T.U.C., and
find out what their fathers, brothers and sons
have achieved.

There is an interesting point with regard to
the arts, including the lighter side of literature, such as poetry, fiction and playwriting :
holders eminent in these fields, about a
quarter of our total, do not seem to have
eminent fathers or brothers. So far as sons
are concerned, there are hardly any to be
eminent. Poeta nascitur non fit. But is a
poet not only not made but not bred? We
can trace sometimes an origin for the career
but not for the eminence. Watt’s father was
a skilled maker of musical instruments,
Elgar’s an organist, and Lutyens’s an artist.
But whence came the creative inspiration ?

Education
The data are set out in Table 7.

TABLE 7 |
EDUCATION OF HOLDERS
UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER

EDUCATION
Military Cutt
Oxford ses as «CU Cambridge ... 18
Dublin _ 2
Edinburgh ... 3
Glasgow 3
London 2
Manchester 2
Oxford 10
R.M.A., Woolwich I
R.M.C., Sandhurst .- I
Art Schools . 4
No university II
SCHOOLS
Military Civil Total
Bedford ... ‘4 I — +I
Charterhouse — 3 3
Cheltenham sos — 4* 4*
City of London . — I I
Clifton ws I — I
Dulwich .. — I I
Eton 2 4 6
Harrow ... — 3 3
Marlborough ‘ — 1* 1*
Merchant Taylors — 2 2
Rugby ... om I _ I
Shrewsbury — I I
Westminster — I. I
Winchester . — t I
K.W. College, I. of M. — Ir. I
Dumfries Academy — I —
Edinburgh . vee — I —_
Glasgow High School ... — 2 —

* F. H. Bradley at Cheltenham and Marlborough
THE ORDER
Military Civil Total
Larchfield Academy ... oo I
R.H.S., Edinburgh o.oo I —
5 29 34
Colonial Schools 2
Abroad ... . I
Britannia, etc. .. 8
Grammar School I
Private School . I
Educated privately 12
Not traced 10
EDUCATION
Military Art Litera- Science Unclasture sified
University ... I. I 21 12 2
Public School 5 I 18 7 3

_ As regards the military branch little need
be said. The services provide their own
higher education. When we come to the
civil branch, a university education is nearly
always essential in literature and science
but not in art.

As regards schools, the table gives a brief
abstract. The intake of the public schools is
only about 1 per cent of the total number
of boys. Yet they have provided over 50 per
cent of the holders of the O.M. This is most
pronounced in literature, where they have
produced over two-thirds of the holders ; in
science, where they have produced about
one-third ; whereas in the arts they have
produced only one holder. I show a table
of the schools.

The L.C.C. says that the independent
public day and boarding schools are in the
widest sense educationally (mark the word)
undesirable. They would have some difficulty in establishing that case. They apparently want a uniform State system controlled
by politicians. This surely is a mistake.
The greatness of Britain in Elizabethan times
was, of course, not built up on our present
public schools. Sir Wasey Sterry has shown,
in his recent volume on the first 250 years of
Eton, that only eighty sons of peers were
pupils, one every three years. The aristocracy
were then educated privately, and very well
educated too. Lords Wolseley, Kitchener,
Cromer and Sir Charles Parsons in our list
were so educated. But this is the antithesis
of what the L.C.C. suggest. We are at present
all discussing how to undo ten years of Nazi
education of the young; what guarantee

OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED 89

have the L.C.C. that in fifteen years’ time
their uniform system might not be dictated
by a Moseley? We have heard that science
must be Bolshevist science or Nazi science.

_Five hundred years ago it had to be Vatican

science and you might be liquidated for
saying the earth went round the sun. Biological progress and evolution are based on
variation, and so is intellectual progress. Let
us not barter away that small measure of
intellectual freedom we won by the Reformation.

Inspired Teaching

How do we account for high ability when
there is nothing remarkable in the ancestry ?
It may be just a favourable selection from
the ancestral repertoire ? If I toss ten pennies
into the air I am not likely to toss ten heads.
But the chance is still there, one in 1,024. If
I do it a million times I will toss ten heads
nearly a thousand times. Now if nine of my
pennies have heads on both sides (very
favourable ancestry) I will toss ten heads
every second time.

Another possibility, but this is hardly
eugenics, is inspiration of the teacher. We
hear much of educational reform, of curriculum, of years which should be spent at
school, occasionally of the high moral
qualities of headmasters, but little of the
zest and enthusiasm for the subject occasionally implanted by the teacher in his
pupils. This is something other than the
communication of facts which can be got
from books. It opens up the spirit of inquiry.
Some of the old Scotch professors had it
and easily held the interest of their very
large classes. It is perhaps more recognized
in the teaching of medicine.

A friend of mine wrote to me on this
subject : “ Kilkenny (celebrated for its cats)
has also a little grammar school. Jonathan
Swift, Bishop Berkeley, Farquhar. the dramatist, and William Cosgrave, were all boys
there together.”’ Swift was, of course, a
cousin of Dryden. Of the others’ relatives I
know nothing. The Anglo-Irish are often of
high intellectual ability, but this group
suggests inspired teaching.

A trio of the holders of the order had the
go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

same schoolmaster: Lecky, Morley and
Jackson. Their fathers were a barrister and
two doctors of no particular eminence. They
went to three different universities. R. E.
Francillon in Mid-Victorian Memories has
left some record of their teacher, William
Dobson. He was educated at Charterhouse
and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he
was third classic and a Fellow of Trinity.
When he came to Cheltenham he had no
previous experience of teaching boys. He
chose his subordinates well and left them
entirely alone. He devoted himself entirely
to one task, to train his first form for university scholarships, 15 boys out of 600. He
was unsociable though his daughters were
not ; in orders, but he never preached. He
was indifferent to games. He spent his leisure
in solitary country walks. Four years in
succession his top boy won a Balliol Scholarship when only one, or possibly two, were
given. In Francillon’s time Henry Jackson
was top; he became third classic, Fellow of
Trinity and Vice-Master and Regius Professor of Greek ; Frederick Myers, a queer
fellow, was second. A poet in his early youth,
second Classic at Cambridge and Fellow of
Trinity, and devoted in later life to Psychical
Research, he wrote Human Personality and
ats Survival after Bodily Death, rather a
classic in its way. Third came F. Brandt,
the only one of the group who played games,
which he did to some purpose, becoming
captain of the Oxford XI. He was a scholar
of Brasenose, got a first in Moderations, went
into the I.C.S., and on retiring was Professor
of Oriental Languages at Cambridge. In
spite of his cricket he married Dobson’s
daughter. F. W. Raper, Fellow and VicePrincipal of Trinity, Oxford, came fourth in
the list.

To train boys to win scholarships doesn’t
sound very inspiring, but Dobson must have
passed on something more valuable than
facts. I don’t think his boys were prigs,
witness Henry Jackson’s criticism of De
Maupassant’s Bel Amz: ‘‘ Written by a cad
about a cad for cads to read, but devilish
good reading all the same.”

Dobson transmitted some of his intelligence to his offspring. His eldest boy won

the classical medal and then, instead of going
to the University, switched to Woolwich,
where he won the prize for mathematics ; he
died, unfortunately, at the age of 32, a sapper
major. Dobson’s great grandson, Antony
Dobson, recently passed in first into Woolwich, where they still placed people in order
of marks. Dobson does not appear in the
D.N.B.

There seems something catalytic or like a
primer in inspired teaching which releases
latent forces. I do not know how far it can
be studied with advantage, or communicated
to others. One might have called this study
“‘ psychical research,’ but that term has
become involved with the question of survival after death, which the Royal Society
do not include in their subjects of study,
although certainly two of their Presidents
and several of their members have been
keenly interested. I gathered from Sherrington’s Gifford lectures that mere thought
as opposed to thought and action cannot be
traced as liberating energy and therefore falls
outside the scope of science as generally
understood. But one cannot conceive of
intelligence without thought, and intelligence
seems to be governed by the ordinary laws
of inheritance.

Perhaps we have something here akin to
those bursts of intellectual activity which at
times overtake cities and communities, only
to die away later. Here come to mind Athens
at its peak, Florence of the Renaissance,
Elizabethan England, and Edinburgh at the
end of the eighteenth and the beginning of
the nineteenth century. To take the last and
the least, there was no corresponding burst
of intelligence in Scotland in Elizabethan
times. Outside politics, which were certainly
very rife and active, I can think of only two
names, George Buchanan and John Napier.
Two centuries later, when the full activity of
Edinburgh appeared, the English universities
were very much in the doldrums. Matriculations at Cambridge were rarely one-half
of what they had been 150 years earlier. As
in such previous periods, the wideness of the
range is one of the striking features. To
mention a few names: in art Raeburn, in
architecture Adam, in history Robertson, in
THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED gr

literature Scott, in law the Dundas family
and G. F. Bell at home, not to mention two
Lord Chancellors given to England, in medicine Bell, in science Hutton, in philosophy
Hume and Dugald Stewart, Palmerston’s
mentor, who partook of the omniscience of

Whewell. And some of their work lasts, the
Raeburn portraits, the Waverley novels, and
the new town of Edinburgh, by far the largest
and finest work of town planning in the
country. Ex nthilo, nihil fit. Whence came
this ?

C. B.C.

CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SocIETY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. MARIE STOPEs IN 1921

The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the. first to establish Birth Control
Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,

spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
in sterile women, and general marital help.

THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.
TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION

First Thursday each month

Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
106 Whitfield Street, W.1

 
