THE POPULATION UNION

Its Formation, Scheme, and Future Work

Mallet appeared in The Times of
September 18th:

** Sir,—Questions connected with population, its growth or decline, whether in
numbers or in efficiency, mental or physical, are attracting less serious attention in
this country—the country of Malthus and
the pioneer in vital statistics—than in many
others, notably the United States. For us,
however, with an alleged over-population in
Great Britain, coupled with an undoubted
lack of suitable population of British stock
in most parts of the Empire, the problems
presented for study are at least as various
and practical as those confronting the
United States. For the world as a whole
the problem is not less urgent if there is any
probability of the increase of population
continuing in the future at anything like
the scale of the past 100 years, with the implications of such increase of pressure upon
food supplies and of consequent possibilities
of national and racial conflict.

“It was in response to the growing conviction of the need for organized study of
these questions that an ‘ International Union
for the Scientific Investigation of Population
Problems ’ was formally constituted in Paris
last July, at a meeting of scientific representatives of most of the leading countries
of the world, as the direct outcome of the
World Population Conference held at
Geneva in August, 1927. The establishment
of this new International Union is therefore
a fact of significance and importance, to
which I should be glad to be allowed to draw
the attention of your readers, especially
with reference to its bearing on the study of
our own domestic and Imperial problems.

“* Professor Raymond Pearl, of the Johns
Hopkins University, the distinguished
Director of the Institute for Biological Research at Baltimore, was elected the first
President of the Union, and it is confidently
hoped to begin practical work with the

"| following letter from Sir Bernard

appointment of a General Secretary and the
opening of an office in Paris early in the
coming year. The objects of the Union
are, briefly, to organize and encourage research, whether depending on international
co-operation or within the separate national
units ; to co-ordinate such researches, and to
hold a ‘General Assembly’ every three
years. The Union is bound to ‘ confine
itself strictly to scientific investigations,’
and to ‘refuse to enter upon religious,
moral, or political discussions, or, as a
Union, to support a policy regarding population of any sort whatever, particularly in
the direction either of increased or of
diminished population ’—a provision which
will appeal to all those who are aware of the
multiplicity and intricacy of the questions,
whether statistical or biological, upon which
accurate knowledge is required before sound
opinions upon policy can be formed.

RESEARCH COMMISSIONS

“* Meanwhile the Union has made a start
by appointing three Commissions to deal
with certain fundamental aspects of the
population question. ‘The first, on ‘ Population and Food Supply,’ with Professor
E. M. East (U.S.A.) as chairman and Sir
Henry Rew as a British member, will be
concerned with a number of questions of the
greatest importance to this country, questions only touched upon at the Geneva Conference, such as biology of population
growth, the ‘ optimum’ density of population, the part played by artificial limitation
of families, and the actual and potential food
resources of the world, a matter upon which
the utmost diversity of opinion at present
exists. The second Commission, presided
over by Dr. F. A. E. Crew, of Edinburgh,
with Professor Carr-Saunders among its
British members, will deal with ‘ Differential Fertility, Fecundity, and Sterility,’ on
which I need only note that, although the
effect of the differing fertility. of social
classes in this country on the character of

179
180

our population has been clearly indicated
by the work of the Eugenics Society based
on the official vital statistics, much remains
to be done before definite conclusions can be
reached. The third Commission, with Professor Corrado Gini, of Rome, as chairman
and Professor Malinowski and Captain PittRivers as the British representatives, is
to deal with the ‘ Vital Statistics of Primitive Races.’ Much attention has of late
years been given to such questions as the
causes of the de-population of the Pacific
Islands, and the effects of their repopulation
by immigrant races; and to Great Britain
and the British Dominions, who are responsible for the existence of native races, they
are of the greatest practical and political
importance.

AVOIDING OVERLAPPING

‘* Finally, I should like to say a word on
the part which it is hoped this country may
take in the work of the new International
Union, of which a leading feature is that it
is based on and supported by national committees now in process of formation in each
of the countries represented in it. These
national committees ‘ will promote and coordinate in their respective countries the investigation of the various scientific questions
pertaining to their population, more especially in relation to their international
needs.’ Just as in the case of the International Union, a primary duty of the
national committees will be to focus the
activity of the various institutes and workers
on cognate subjects. The founders of the
Union are strongly impressed by the necessity of avoiding duplication and overlapping,
and will aim at establishing working relations with existing powerful institutions,
such as the International Statistical Institute, the International Institute of Agriculture in Rome, and the International
Labour Office with its immense documentation on, and active interest in, questions of
migration. Similarly a British Population
Committee will have to consider the possibility of affiliation or co-operation with other
established institutions whose interests
touch on some aspect of the population ques
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion. The Eugenics Society, for instance,
whose sphere is mainly educational, might
probably welcome close association with a
Population Committee which could assist
and encourage research essential to their
work. The Royal Anthropological Institute, to quote another example is, I understand, contemplating an appeal for funds
in order to carry out, in conjunction with
Dominion scientists, a programme of extended research among primitive races, an
object vitally interesting to the third Commission of the International Union above
described; and it is possible that their
appeal might be strengthened if it could be
linked up with the wider activities of the
International Union through its British
Committee.

ENGLISH AND FOREIGN FINANCES

‘* National committees composed of leading economists and scientists have already
been formed in France, Holland, Belgium,
Spain, Switzerland, Scandinavia, Italy,
and the United States. The American
Committee, which has taken the leading
part from the first, is backed by the two
great American Research Councils ; and the
Italian Committee is magnificently supported by bankers, associations of industrial
employers and labour, and agriculturists,
and both are therefore able to give substantial support both to the International Union
and to research within their own borders.
As regards the British Committee, I have
during the past year obtained encouraging
support for its formation from leading members of the Royal Statistical and Geographical Societies, the London School of Economics, the Royal Anthropological Institute,
the Royal Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons, and from men eminent in biology
and other kindred sciences. It is intended
early in the autumn to proceed to the formal
constitution of a British National Population
Committee, which will have to promote similar Committees in India and the Dominions.
We shall then have to appeal for support
and recognition to all who are interested in
the question I have outlined above. The
British Committee will be second to none
POPULATION UNION

in the scientific standing of its members;
but without the support of many members
of the general public it cannot hope to make
substantial progress; nor will it be able to
take its proper place in the business of the
Union without adequate financial backing.
We cannot, perhaps, vie with the United
States in this respect, but it is not too much
to hope that a question of such great
national importance will excite as much intelligent and public-spirited interest in this
country as in America or Italy.

‘TI may add that I write as an ex-President of the Royal Statistical Society, a
Vice-Chairman of the Eugenics Society, and
a Vice-President of the new International
Population Union.

““ I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

‘* BERNARD MALLET.

‘8, Eccleston Square, S.W.1.”’

THE BRITISH COMMITTEE

There is little to add to Sir Bernard’s
letter and to what has already been said in
Notes of the Quarter. A meeting of the
British Committee will be held at the rooms
of this Society towards the end of the month,
when it is hoped to enlarge the membership
of the Committee, to discuss means of raising funds, and to arrange for co-operation
with other bodies.

The temporary address of the British
Committee is c/o the Eugenics Society, 20
Grosvenor Gardens, S.W.1, and Mr. Eldon
Moore will act as Hon. Secretary.

We give below the names of the Executive
Committee of the International Union:

President: Professor Raymond Pearl

(U.S.A.).
Vice-Presidents :
Professor Léon Bernard (France)

Professor Corrado Gini (Italy)
Sir Bernard Mallet (Great Britain).

Sir Bernard was also elected Honorary
Treasurer.

The Statutes of the Union agreed upon in
Paris will in due course be published and
communicated to the national committees.
It is provided that the self-governing Domi
181

nions, Australia, Canada, Dutch East
Indies, India, Irish Free State, Newfoundland, and New Zealand shall have separate
committees and representatives.

THE NATIONAL COMMITTEES

A few of the national committees, those
for Belgium, France, Holland, Italy, Spain,
and Switzerland have been completely constituted, though their full membership has
not yet been reported to us. Many committees still remain to be formed.

BELGIUM : Prof. Ernest Mahaim (Chairman), Prof.
Eugene Dupréel, Le Pére Valére Fallon.

BRITISH Dominions: Dr. Charles H. Wickens
(for Australasia).

DENMARK : Prof. S6ren Hansen.

FRANCE: Prof. Léon Bernard (Chairman), Prof.
Caullery, Prof. Huber, Prof. Jordan, Prof.
Landry, M. Lucien March, Prof. Georges Risler,
M. André Siegfried.

GERMANY: Provisional names—Profs.
Bauer, A. Grotjahn, and Zahn.

GREAT BRITAIN.

Among those who are being invited to become

members are :

Sir William Beveridge, K.C.B., Prof. A. L.
Bowley, Prof. A. M. Carr-Saunders, Sir
Charles Close, K.B.E., F.R.S., Dr. F. A. E.
Crew, Lord Dawson of Penn, Dr. R. A. Fisher,
Prof. J. W. Gregory, F.R.S., Dr. David Heron,
Prof. Julian Huxley, Sir Arthur Keith, Mr.
J. Maynard Keynes, C.B., Prof. B. Malinowski,
Sir Bernard Mallet, K.C.B., Prof. J. L. Myres,
Capt. G. H. Pitt-Rivers, Sir Henry Rew,
K.C.B., Sir Humphry Rolleston, Bart., K.C.B.,
M.D., Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, C.B.E., M.D.,
Mr. Udny Yule, C.B.E., F.R.S.

GREECE: Dr. Stavros Zurukzoglu-Kunz.

HoLiaNnpD : Dr. H. W. Methorst (Chairman), Dr.
G. P. Frets, Dr. M. A. van Herwerden.

Itaiy : Prof. Corrado Gini (Chairman), Prof. Marcello Boldrini, Vincenzo Castrilli, Franco
Savorgnan, Signor Carlo Valenziani (Sec.).

Japan : Prof. Kiyo Sue Inui.

Norway : Prof. Lundborg.

Russia: Prof. V. Bunah.

SourtH AMERICA: Prof. J. H. de Paula Souza.

Spain: Prof. Severino Aznar, Dr. Joaquin
Espinosa.

SweEvDEN : Césta Bagge, Dr. K. A. Edin.

SWITZERLAND: Prof. W. E. Rappard, Prof. O.
Schlaginhaufen.

U.S.A.: Prof. Raymond Pearl (Chairman), Prof.

E. M. East.

Erwin

The members of the commissions, which
follow, may likewise be enlarged.
182

COMMISSION I: POPULATION AND Foop SUPPLY

Chairman: E. M. East (U.S.A.)

Vice-Chairman : Lucien March (France).

Members : Sir Henry Rew (Great Britain), Prof.
Brize (Italy), Albert Henry (Belgium), O. E.
Baker (U.S.A.), Erwin Baur (Germany).

COMMISSION 2: DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY,
FECUNDITY, AND STERILITY

Chairman : F. A. E. Crew (Great Britain).

Vice-Chairman : Severino Aznar (Spain).

Members : Raymond Pearl (U.S.A.), W. W. Willcox (U.S.A.), A. Mahaim (Belgium), T. H. C.
Stevenson (Great Britain), A. M. Carr-Saunders (Great Britain), Lucien March (France),
A. Grotjahn (Germany), H. W. Methorst
(Netherlands), Corrado Gini (Italy), F. Savorg
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nan (Italy), S. Zurukzoglu-Kunz (Greece),
K. A. Edin (Sweden), Eldon Moore, Sec. (Great
Britain).

VITAL STATISTICS OF PRIMITIVE
RAcES

Chairman : Corrado Gini (Italy).

Vice-Chairman : B. Malinowski (Great Britain).

Members: G. H. Pitt-Rivers (Great Britain), —
Schmidt (Austria), Roquetto Pinto (Brazil),
Schlaginhaufen (Switzerland), Ales Hrdlicka
(U.S.A.), Carlo Valenziani, Sec. (Italy).

COMMISSION 3:

Commissions 2 and 3, if not also Commission I, have made some progress in sketching out lines of research.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.
