REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 367

the other side, we think the verdict must be that the alleged Mendelian
transmission of the defects considered is unproven, and that various
popular writers have been much too hasty in the statements they have made
on this point. |

We now turn to the form in which Dr. Heron’s criticisms
are cast. Dr. Heron and his colleagues have frequently expressed their
distaste for controversy, but they have never allowed this reluctance to
deter them from expressing their opinions with the utmost frankness.
Our criticism ought not to fall below this standard of controversial
honesty, and we therefore record our deliberate conviction that the manner
in which Dr, Heron’s paper is written is unworthy of his scientific reputation, and our hope that he will live to regret some of the sentences he has
penned. The extraordinary acrimony which characterises the controversial
and semi-controversial papers emanating from the Galton Laboratory has
long been a matter of comment. In the case of the illustrious head of that
laboratory, when we remember the torrent of ignorant abuse and misrepresentation to which he has been almost continuously exposed for
more than ten years, we may regret that he has not displayed the
magnanimity which characterised Charles Darwin and Francis Galton,
with whom in other respects he might so fitly be ranked, but we cannot
pretend to be surprised. Dr. Heron, however, can plead no such excuse;
he is a comparatively young man discussing questions respecting which
much honest difference of opinion is possible. One would therefore
expect him to formulate his conclusions in studiously moderate terms.
On the contrary, he permits himself to employ childish buffoonery, such
as the following, “ Mendel defectiveness seems for these American investigators to be a far more serious problem than mental defectiveness,” and
personal insolence, such as “we are not prepared to dissent from the
view that the citation of a pedigree by Dr. Davenport is a disqualification
for its further use.” Dr. Heron says that “a very grave responsibility
rests at present upon those who have at heart the best interests of
Eugenics.” It does, indeed, and we only wish that a sense of that responsibility had restrained his pen. We shall, perhaps, be told that many
others have written almost abusively as Dr. Heron about those with
whom they disagree. The statement is only too true, but it is no excuse.

Dr. Heron has done distinguished scientific work, and anything which
hurts his reputation #70 tanto hurts the common cause. We have no
sort of doubt that if some skilled literary champion of the anti-eugenists
bearing a name likely to attract readers singled out Dr. Heron’s paper
and served up extracts, with appropriate comments, under the title “ An
eminent eugenist upon other eminent eugenists,” considerably more
harm would be done than by all the mistakes of all the Americans who
ever existed. As Dr. Heron says, the public has some common sense and
adopts the principle that abuse is not argument. The abusive parts of
Dr. Heron’s criticism are intelligible to all; the operative portions only
appeal to a few.

These apprehensions have tempted us to refer at length to this latest
example of a method sure to injure gravely the cause of eugenics. The
Warburtonian style of controversy ought to find no imitators in the
year 1913. M. GREENWOOD, JUN.

Buttel-Reepen, H. von. Man and his Forerunners. London. Longmans, Green and Co.; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 96.
SEVERAL small books have been written recently by Englishmen on pre:
historic man, and the appearance of a new book is a sign that publishers
recognise that the subject is one that appeals to the public. Under
the circumstances it is a gain that we are offered a translation of a
German work, as it gives the point of view of a foreign savant. The
book is written brightly in non-technical language, and has been admirably translated by Mr. A. G. Thacker. In human palzontology and
368 EUGENICS REVIEW.

prehistoric archeology there is room for much diversity of opinion, and
it is not to be expected that an author and reviewer should agree upon
all points. Nevertheless, the present writer can cordially recommend
the book to those who desire an introduction to these fascinating subjects,
indeed, he has already done so with happy results. As was to be
expected, the author has followed Penck in his co-ordination of certain
flint industries with particular phases of the glacial period, and has
adopted his estimated chronology. The reader should remember that
most French archzologists make a _ different co-ordination—making
palzolithic man appear somewhat later—and are satisfied with a considerably less antiquity. The author rejects the oligocene flints, but
accepts “eoliths” from the Upper Miocene at Aurillac, which, by the
way, are very different in type from the Kentish “eoliths.” A brief
account is given of Klaatsch’s ingenious plan of the origin and dispersal
of human races and apes, and it wisely concludes with the statement,
“It would be well, however, to take the theory, cum grano salis.” The
book forms an excellent, short, popular, and up-to-date introduction to
our knowledge of palzolithic man, and is adequately illustrated with
capital figures. A. C. HADDON.

Giuffrida-Ruggeri, Dr. V. Homo Sapiens, Einlettung au einem Kurse
der Anthropologie. Wien u. Leipzig. A Hartleben; 1912; price
5 marks; pp. 198. |
THE author points out that zoologists seeking to explain the various processes which have led to differentiation have found it advantageous to
draw their material from the greater divisions or families of the animal
kingdom. These processes are not manifested only in crude differences between relatively remote species, but rather persist throughout the
genealogical tree even to its ultimate ramifications. Hence the justifica~
tion for the examination of the differentiation of the primates from the
standpoint of their influence on the production of the forms of man, fossil
and living, as we know them at the present day.

Having set this ideal before him, Professor Giuffrida-Ruggeri seeks
to carry it out with the most painstaking thoroughness, with the result
that the volume ably summarises our knowledge up to last year, though it
must be admitted that the author’s scholarship and immense special
knowledge, combined with an extremely condensed style, make the book
difficult reading.

It is only possible to touch on a few points which appear to be of
special interest in this country at the present time. The modern mathematical school of biologists is perhaps treated rather summarily; it is,
however, all to the good that its exponents should be reminded of the
necessity that the factors which they introduce into their equations should
have been determined by previous biological analysis.

A good deal is said concerning the newer forms of polygenism which
have been promulgated recently by the author’s countryman Sergi as well
as by Klaatch in Germany. With these views the Neapolitan professor
has no sympathy. Not only does he consider the derivation of the different
early stocks of mankind from gorilla-like and orang-like ancestors absurd,
but he refers to Keith’s conclusions that there is nothing orang-like in the
Combe-Capelle (Aurignacian) skull, and substantially agrees with the
views set forth by von Luschan in a paper read at the Peace Congress. in
London two years ago. It is not then surprising that Tetraprothomo
and Diprothomo are not accepted, and it is impossible to avoid a feeling
of regret that Eoanthropus was dicovered too late to come in for the
author’s careful, if sometimes caustic, discussion. C. G. S.

Walling, Wm. E. The Larger Aspects of Socialism. London.
Macmillan and Co.; 1913; price 6s. 6d.; pp. 406.

MR. WALLING’S earlier book on “ Socialism as It Is” aimed at giving a

descriptive account of a movement which has attained large proportions
