EUGENICS AND THE POOR LAW

THE MINORITY REPORT!
By SIDNEY WEBB

THE existing Poor Law operates almost exclusively as an antieugenic influence ; notably in the laxity of its provision for
feeble-minded maternity, in the opportunities for undesirable
acquaintanceship afforded by the General Mixed Workhouse, in
its inability to search out defectives and wastrels who do not apply
for relief, and in its failure to provide any practical alternative to
the Outdoor Relief now afforded to tens of thousands of feebleminded or physically defective parents. To deal with one aspect
only of the present system—as things stand at present the Poor
Law Authorities cannot even try to check the continued procreation of uncertified mentally defective persons. Indeed,
such influence as they exercise in the granting of relief to such
persons is all the other way. It is not generally known that
some fifteen thousand babies are born in the workhouse
every year. To the feeble-minded woman, or to the woman
who is mentally and morally degenerate without being actually
imbecile, the Poor Law offers free and unconditional medical
assistance at the time of her confinement. Thousands of
these ‘unfit’? mothers treat the local workhouse or Poor Law
infirmary simply as a free maternity hospital. They come in
year after year throughout their child-bearing period; and having
received, at the expense of the rates, the most skilful care that
modern medical science can provide, they go out again, taking
their infants with them, only to return as a matter of course
and of right when their next confinement draws near.

This abuse of the system of public provision for the destitute
not only is not but cannot be prevented by the Poor Law
Authorities. They are bound by law to provide the necessaries

1 An extended précis of a lecture delivered to the Eugenics Society at
Denison House, Vauxhall Bridge Road, S.W., on December 15th, 1909.
234 | S. Webb:

of life for all who are destitute, and they are equally bound to
discharge their patients as soon as they wish to leave. Their
one weapon is “‘ deterrence’; that is to say, they may try to
deter people from applying for relief by making the conditions
as disgraceful and unpleasant as possible. The treatment of a
woman during her confinement cannot in the nature of the case
be made actively distasteful to her, so that the disgrace of
pauperism is the only deterrent influence available. Needless to
say, the class of women of whom I am speaking are quite
impervious to any such immaterial influence, and so the abuse
goeson. Such indeed are our present arrangements that the
only necessitous persons who are effectively deterred from
accepting public assistance at these crises are the very persons
whom as eugenists we should like to encourage to increase and
multiply. Public subsidy without selection is bad enough, but
here we have the Poor Law actually selecting, in practice, the
inferior stocks for its subsidies. To quote the Minority Report
of the Poor Law Commission: ‘If the State had desired to
maximise both feeble-minded procreation and birth out of wedlock there could not have been suggested a more apt device than
the provision, throughout the country, of General Mixed Workhouses, organised as they now are, to serve as unconditional
Maternity Hospitals.”

But the inference from these facts is not, as some persons
seem to imagine, that we had better make no public provision at
all. The policy of ‘ Laisser faire’’ is, necessarily, to a eugenist
the worst of all policies, because it implies the definite abandonment of intelligently purposeful selection. Even if we were
agreed that the rigorous selection of the ‘‘ state of nature ” were
the sort of selection best suited to the needs of a modern highlycivilised community, it would not be practicable or possible to
let that ‘“‘ natural ’’ selection take itscourse. If for a moment we,
as a nation, forswore our humanitarian principles, and decided
to abolish collective provision for the weak and the unfit, there
would, inevitably follow an outburst of the most sentimental
private charity. It is characteristic of such charity that it not
only neglects all eugenic principles, but that in so far as it has
any discrimination it often discriminates the wrong way. That
EUGENICS AND THE POOR LAW 235

is to say, it tends to maintain, without any pessibility of segregation, exactly the worst, 7.¢., the weakest, the most afflicted, and
therefore the most appealing, cases.

But suppose it were possible to suppress private charity
altogether, as well as collective provision, even then the eugenist
could not, without abandoning his whole argument, leave things
to the anarchy of unrestricted competition. For his object is
not merely to produce fine babies but to ensure the ultimate
production of fine adults. No matter how perfect the stock
from which an infant is born, if it be exposed to sufficiently
adverse conditions it will grow up a stunted weakling. To
quote a scientific expert on the diseases of children, writing
about excessive infant mortality: ‘“‘ By far the more serious
matter affecting the commonwealth in every possible way at the
present time is the condition of babies who do not die, but who are
reared in a condition of hopeless malnutrition. Let us consider,
for instance, one disease—rickets. Its effects on the nervous
system are of the most far-reaching character. Of the ‘convulsions’ which cause the death of babies at about twelve months
of age, rickets is practically the sole cause. At a later stage of
life the manifestations of the injuries caused by this disease are
seen in epilepsy and in insanity. The Lunatic Asylums are
largely occupied at the present time by cases of insanity arising
from injuries of the nervous system by rickets. Adenoid growths
one of the common troubles of childhood, are practically caused
entirely by deformed structure due to rickets. If you go to the
chest hospitals and select the patients whoare under treatment
for pulmonary tuberculosis, you will find the majority of them
are suffering from deformities of the chest due to rickets. The
pulmonary disease is simply a secondary result of the injuries to
the chest and of the injuries to the tissues arising from rickets.
All sorts of deformities which go to make up the number of
cripples that we are acquainted with are caused by the same
disease, and in addition to specific disease and deformities,
rickets is responsible for a general and permanent enfeeblement
of mind and body.” And rickets is a disease which, though
widespread enough, is practically confined to the children of the
slums and is caused by malnutrition. It is the outcome not of
230 S. Webb:

bad stock but of bad environment, and if we aim at the production of a fine adult race we cannot afford to leave that bad
environment alone.

To put the case more generally, we cannot afford to leave
unchecked the influences that produce, not death alone, but even
more widely, slums and disease, physical starvation, mental perversion, demoralisation of character and actual crime, however
convinced we may be that the evil characters acquired in such an
environment are not and will not be inherited. After all, it
would not be of much use to have all babies born from good
stocks, if generation after generation they were made to grow up
into bad men and women. A world of well-born, but physically
and morally perverted adults is not attractive! The irreparable
damage done, generation after generation, to individual survivors
would be too high a price to pay for the hypothetical improvement
of the stock at birth.

For it must be remembered that the improvement in the
stocks is quite hypothetical in any case; nay, it is, under the
supposed conditions of absolutely unrestricted individual struggle
for existence and “natural” selection, actually improbable.
‘‘Nature”’ is not intelligently purposeful, and knows nothing of
the standards of civilised man. If let alone, ‘‘ Nature’’ neither
breeds from the best stock—as we estimate it—nor selects the
best individuals for survival. There is no reason why those who
are eliminated in the struggle of unrestricted competition should
coincide with those whom we deem the unfit, nor the “survivingest’? with those whom we, as civilised men, would most wish
to survive. The question, who is to survive, is determined by
the conditions of the struggle, the rules of the ring. Where the
rules of the ring favour a low type, the low type will survive, and
vice versé. The survivors of an unregulated epidemic of scarlet
fever or typhus may owe their escape to constitutional peculiarities which are otherwise perfectly valueless, and which may even
perhaps only be found amongst persons whom, from every other
point of view, we should call unfit. If, for example, it were possible for an epidemic of malarial fever to spread unchecked all
over the United States of America it is highly probable that the
whites would be eliminated and the blacks would survive. There
EUGENICS AND THE POOR LAW 237

is, indeed, always a general presumption that the unregulated,
unpurposeful struggle will distinctly favour the less individually
developed and more prolific organisms as against the more highly
developed and less fertile. In short, the “survival of the
fittest’? in an environment unfavourable to progress may—as
every biologist knows—mean the survival of the lowest parasite.

It is accordingly our business, as eugenists, deliberately to
manipulate the environment so that the survivors may be of the
type which we regard as the highest. Our judgment may conceivably be wrong, but if we are to do anything we can only follow
it. Now, the deliberate manipulation of the environment of the
individual amidst the complex conditions of a modern industrial
community involves collective regulation and a highly developed
social machinery. No consistent eugenist can be a “ Laisser
Faire ” individualist unless he throws up the game in despair.
He must interfere, interfere, interfere !

With regard to the public provision for birth, infancy and
childhood here is the dilemma which the eugenist has to face
to-day. On the one hand there is the policy of making no
public provision at all. That, as I have pointed out, is an impracticable policy, and would in any case afford no sort of guarantee
against the rapid degeneration of the race. On the other hand
there is the policy of offering public provision on disgraceful or
“deterrent ’’ terms. But that, as again I have shown, results
in the subsidising of unfitness. The way out of the dilemma is
pointed by the Minority Report. We must make proper and
adequate provision for all mothers, infants and children who
stand in need of it, (because we cannot afford to let anyone go
without it), and such provision must carry with it no more disgrace or unpleasantness of any kind than does the public provision
of education to day (because otherwise we may make the provision anti-eugenic by ‘‘ deterring” the best). Moreover it must
not only be offered on honourable terms, but must, in order to
reach all who need it, be actively pressed upon all those
who require it from whatever cause, subject only to the subsequent recovery of the cost from those who can afford to pay, on
a definite, uniform and well-understood scale, graduated according to the family income and the number of persons who have
238 S. Webb:

to be supported on it. At the same time we must take steps to
prevent the continued procreation of feeble-minded and degenerate stocks at the public expense; by handing the care of the
whole of this class, certified and uncertified, to a separate
authority for the Mentally Defective, whose method of provision
will be mainly, if not exclusively ‘‘ indoor” and to whom may be
given powers of compulsory segregation which could never safely
be granted toa body, like the present Board of Guardians, having
charge of all classes of necessitous persons. In these ways we
shall be doing something to redress the balance between the fit
and the unfit stocks, which, under the present Poor Law system,
so clearly favours the latter.

The problem we have to face is becoming all the more important and urgent by reason of the volitional restriction of
births, which is now rapidly spreading over the civilised world.
This restriction is clearly differential, it certainly is not taking
place equally amongst all classes, and there is great reason to
suppose that it 1s resulting in fewer births from our best stocks.
That is to say, the unfit are surviving. What seems indispensable and urgent is to'alter the economic incidence of childbearing. Under present social conditions the birth of children
in households maintained on less than three pounds a week (and
these form four-fifths of the nation) is attended by almost penal
consequences. The central problem of all practical eugenics is,
as Prof. Karl Pearson has suggested, to make the well-born child
a valuable economic asset. This is the ideal which we should all
like to see carried out. At present we have no practical scheme
to bring it about ; and in the meantime the best we can do is to
make the well-born child less of a burden to its parents.

Consider the position of a thrifty, temperate, and capable
working-man earning Say 30s. to 35s. a week, a man of the type
which we should choose for survival if the choice were in our
hands. That man, as all statisticians tell us, is yielding to the
State in taxes a larger proportion of his income than the men
with incomes, of one, ten or a hundred thousand a year. Consider what he has to face when he undertakes the responsibility
of parentage. In the first place he has to bear the cost of having
his children brought into the world under favourable conditions.
EUGENICS AND THE POOR LAW 239

Then he has to bear the cost of rearing them. He is now
relieved of the cost of their elementary schooling, but to pay for
their food and clothes and the inevitable medical attendance will
mean the careful expenditure of every penny of his income
for many years to come, if not an actual lowering of his
standard of life. And all through those years he will have to
face the possibility of his own break-down or death, which would
mean that his children would become paupers and would never
have a good chance or even a fair start in life. For it may be
taken as an axiom, beyond dispute, that practically no manual
worker, and very few in the class just above them, can, however
thrifty, possibly afford to make sufficient provision for his
children in case of his premature death. They are bound in
such a case to come on to the rates or else to be reared in an
underfed and underclothed condition upon the miserably small
pittance which is all a widow can generally earn. Can it be
doubted that the frequently inadequate and always disgraceful
provision which the community makes through the present Poor
Law for such unfortunate children is an important factor in
keeping down the birth-rate amongst the most thrifty, selfrespecting and far-sighted of the working classes ?

Under the Minority Report scheme some at least of these
obstacles to fit parentage will be removed. Every man who
does his duty by the community in bringing into the world and
rearing healthy children in decent surroundings will have no
difficulty in obtaining from the Public Health Authority proper
medical care for his wife and children whenever and of whatever
kind needed. If he has anything at all above the family subsistence level, he will have to pay according to his ability, but
the cost will not be allowed to cripple him, and the whole transaction will be without any sort of disgrace. Only if he fails in
his duty as a parent will he find himself in difficulties with the
authorities. If he should die his children will not go to the
General Workhouse but will be adequately maintained, reared
and started in life by the Education Authority without any
stigma of pauperism or other artificial handicap. If he has
created a good home it will not be broken up; and his widow
will be rewarded for her services to the community in bearing
240 S. Webb:

healthy children by being retained and paid by the community
to devote herself exclusively to the care of the family and home.
Everything in short will be done to encourage the production of
well-born children from good stocks. The reforms proposed in
the Minority Report in the direction of lightening some of the
burdens of parentage will no doubt be deprecated by the ignorant
and unthinking as calculated to encourage the idle and the
thriftless, the drunken and the profligate to increase and
multiply. But you cannot increase what is already at a
maximum. The grave fact that we have to face is that under our
existing social arrangements it 1s exactly these people, and practically
these only, who at present make full use of their reproductive powers.
For such degenerates the responsibility of parentage has no
terrors to-day, its burdens are already lifted from their shoulders
by the demoralising unconditional doles of the Poor Law or of
Charity. Their standard of life cannot be lowered and it is
sufficient for them to know—if indeed they care at all—that
their children are not likely to be allowed actually to die of
starvation.

Tosum up. There is considerable evidence that as a nation
we are breeding largely from our inferior stocks. The action of
the present Poor Law in subsidising the reproduction of mental,
moral and physical defectives and in discouraging the thrifty
from undertaking the responsibilities of parentage, is one of the
most important factors in this process, and one of the most easily
dealt with. Our first duty, therefore, as eugenists is to bring
about a drastic revolution in the prevailing methods of the Poor
Law system.

The Minority Report is drawn on strictly eugenic lines. Its
authors claim (and their claim has so far evolved no serious
denial from eugenists) that it contains absolutely no recommendation contrary to true eugenic principles. It was, indeed, drafted
in constant consideration of the eugenic argument, and it may
therefore be considered actually as an outcome of the educational
work of this Society. It puts forward a policy of:

(1) Deliberately altering the social environment so as
to render impossible (or at least more difficult) the present
prolific life below the National Minimun, or the continuance
EUGENICS AND THE POOR LAW 241

at large of persons of either sex who are unable or unwilling

to come up to the Minimum Standard of Life;

(2) ‘* Searching out” every person in default irrespective of his destitution or his application for relief ;

(3) Medical and other inspection of all infants, school
children, sick or mentally defective persons, and all who are

‘‘ unemployed,” or who otherwise need public help, so as to

discover the unfit, as well as to remedy their defects;

(4) Segregation, permanent or temporary, of many
defective persons now at large;
(5) Enforcement of the responsibilities of parenthood at

a high standard, and hence discouragement of marriage

among those unable or unwilling to fulfil them; and

(6) Taking care that no one sincerely desirous of
fulfilling his social responsibilities shall, by lack of
opportunity, be prevented from doing so.

What we as eugenists have got to do is to “scrap” the old
Poor Law, with its indiscriminate relief of the destitute as such;
and replace it by an intelligent policy of so altering the social
environment as to discourage or prevent the multiplication of
those irrevocably below the National Minimum of fitness;
whilst at the same time increasing the opportunities of those
more prudent and thrifty classes, who alone are discouraged by
our present system from undertaking the responsibilities of
parenthood. Thus (and, as it seems to me, thus only), may we
hope to make the ‘survivingest’’ individual and the ‘“survivingest ’’ stock increasingly coincide with the ‘more than
average fit.”
