172 EUGENICS REVIEW.

you are. Occasionally we are told something worth hearing, for instance,
that poverty is largely due to “the inordinate diversion of labour to
the production of comparatively useless and undesirable things” (p. 108):

but the book is not all equally valuable.
A. W. COCKBURN.

Green, C. E., F.R.S.E. Zhe Cancer Problem: A Statistical Study. 3rd
Edition. Edinburgh. Green; 1914; price 5s. net; pp. 98.

In the first chapter of this work Mr. Green describes certain diseases of
plants caused by mycetozoa, and argues that some analogy exists between
these conditions and cancer in man. In the next chapter he quotes evidence to the effect that the occurrence of one of the plant diseases referred
to is favoured by the use of manures which have been dissolved in sulphuric acid, and then examines the occupational incidence of cancer
suggesting that those occupations in which the use or formation of sulphur
compounds occur exhibit high cancer rates, but that on the other hand
trades, such as those of tanners and papermakers, in which lime is greatly
employed, are relatively immune from cancer. In the following chapter
the geographical distribution of cancer is considered, and in chapter IV.
arguments are adduced in favour of a belief that the combustion of coal
leads to the development of cancer, the principal evidence being derived
from contrasts between the proportion of deaths from cancer to deaths
from all causes in coal burning and peat burning districts. In the last
chapter, Mr. Green suggests that calcium salts may have some curative
value in the treatment of cancer. The book is only of interest to eugenists
in so far as, the real cause of cancer being unknown, the possibility of an
inherited constitutional predisposition cannot be ignored. It is therefore
unnecessary to review it at length, and we would merely remark that few
readers are likely to be convinced by the evidence presented. To take
only a single point, the proportion of cancer deaths to deaths from all
causes, cannot be compared in different districts unless the age constitutions of the populations are approximately the same, a fact which Mr.
Green does not appear to have realised. M. GREENWOOD.

Pyeraft, W. P. Zhe Courtship of Animals. London. Hutchinson; 1913;
price 6s.; pp. 318 and 40 plates.
THE title of this book does not suggest any close relation between its
subject and eugenics, but the author, in the preface and introductory
chapter, shows that he regards the two subjects as closely connected. He
writes: “Such facts [the sexual behaviour of animals] have a vitally
important bearing on the very problems of social well-being which now
loom so largely among us. ‘Reform’ is in the air. Its protagonists are
busy amongst us with schemes for our regeneration, among which ‘ sexproblems’ are made to occupy a very conspicuous place. But no good
can come of their cogitations so long as they fail to realise the springs of
behaviour in this regard. The facts herein set down will, it is hoped,
help much towards this end.” The facts given in the book are full of
interest; many of them are little known, and, especially when dealing with
vertebrate animals, the author is clearly a master of his subject. He is
strongly convinced that the realisation of the intensity of the sexual
instincts in animals is of importance to would-be reformers of human
affairs—“ it is idle to speak of an equality between the sexes in this
matter, in regard to the human race. Dogmatism, and the frequent repetition of pretty platitudes, will not alter what Nature has ordained.” As a
collection of facts of the greatest interest the book is admirable, and the
descriptions are generally clear and graphic. In his speculations the
author is less convincing, and when dealing with the facts of sex in
invertebrate animals, is occasionally inaccurate. His contention that
sexual selection acts, not by the conscious choice by the female of the
most brilliant male, but by the success of the male which most completely
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 173

arouses the female’s sexual instincts, has much to recommend it, but he
throws no new light on the difficult problem of sexual dimorphism in
those insects in which experiment shows that the female readily accepts
any male. In our opinion, he attaches far more weight to the “ hormone ”
theory than it will bear, as is shown by the existence of gynandromorphs
in insects and birds; and the discussion of parthenogenesis is unsatisfactory. These defects arise, however, only where the author strays beyond
the proper subject of the book; when dealing with sexual behaviour itself, especially in the vertebrates, his account is excellent, and our only
criticism is that the style is marred by rather frequent carelessness of
expression, with occasional lapses into “journalese,” and that in the
later chapters some misprints in names have escaped correction.
L. DONCASTER.

Davenport, C. B. and Rosanoff, A. J. Reply to the Criticism of Recent
American Work by Dr. Heron, of the Galton Laboratory, by C. B.
Davenport and A. ]. Rosanoff. Eugenics Record Office, Bulletin
No. 11; pp. 43; price ten cents. Cold Spring Harbour; February,

1914.

THIS pamphlet is a reply to one by Dr. David Heron recently noticed in
this journal. It will be remembered that Dr. Heron accused the writers
of inaccuracy, incompetence and bias, and stigmatised their publications
as harmful to the cause of eugenics. The arrangement of the reply is
not very convenient, since it consists of two independent papers, one by
Dr. Davenport, the other by Dr. Rosanoff, which tend to overlap, and it is
somewhat difficult to summarise the case presented. So far as the question of bias is concerned, we think Dr. Heron’s charges are fully met,
although differences of opinion are possible as to the expediency of some
directions cited by Dr. Heron on page 13 of his pamphlet. With respect to
the charges of inaccuracy, Dr. Davenport is able to show that a considerable number of the alleged blunders are due to misinterpretation on the
part of his critic. We think that on this count of the indictment also,
Drs. Davenport and Rosanoff are entitled to acquittal at the hands of their
scientific colleagues, although some of Dr. Heron’s misunderstandings
would have been guarded against had a few notes been added to the
original papers.

Finally, as to the general charges of incompetence, we do not think
that Dr. Davenport and his co-workers were called upon for any defence,
and’ need make no further reference to that branch of the discussion.
There are, however, two points as to which we find Drs. Davenport and
Rosanoff’s reply unsatisfactory. They energetically repudiate the charge
that they were unacquainted with the proper statistical method of allowing
for the difficulty introduced into the computation of Mendelian ratios
when all the fraternities contain at least one affected member, and we
willingly accept their statement. We think, however, they would have
been well advised to adopt the method of correction employed by Lundborg (on Weinberg’s authority) in a memoir actually cited by Dr. Davenport on page 23 of his reply.

The second point is that Dr. Davenport’s explanation (pp. 20-21) of
his use of the phrase that “strength may be mated with weakness,” does
not seem to us adequate and we retain our original opinion that it was
injudicious.

Passing from the specific points dealt with, we must observe that one
of the evils to be anticipated from Dr. Heron’s methods of controversy
finds expression in Drs. Davenport and Rosanoff’s reply. The language in
which Dr. Heron’s criticism was expressed has naturally irritated Drs.
Davenport and Rosanoff and their irritation has betrayed them into
making general charges which, although more courteously phrased, are
nearly as foolish as those of Dr. Heron. To argue that because the
analysis of massed data by statistical methods cannot solve all the
