POPULATION IN AUSTRALIA
By JOHN STILL

Under-Secretary for the Dominions,

made a speech at an official luncheon
at Canberra on November 27th, 1936, and
two of his statements were reported by cable.
The first was that: ‘‘ The defence of Australia
was linked with the need for a larger population,” the second that: “‘ Within two or three
generations the Empire should be so large,
prosperous, and powerful that the risk of
war would be for ever removed. This would
follow the inevitable growth of the population of the Dominions.”

One heard much the same in the middle
of the Great War ; and in 1934 Mr. Malcolm
MacDonald, then Secretary of State for
the Dominions, said that Australia’s population would within a reasonably short period
reach 40 or 50 millions. But let us examine
Lord Hartington’s two statements more
objectively.

| ORD HARTINGTON, Parliamentary

Population Density in Australia and Japan

First, the need of a larger population to
defend Australia. With recent history in
mind, and therefore without apology, we
may assume that one of the dangers in the
Under-Secretary’s mind was Japan. On
June 30th, 1935, Australia’s population was
estimated to be 6,784,305, but this included
more than 80,000 aboriginals and 29,000
others, as well as white Australians. The
population from which a defence force can be
formed is about 6-67 millions. In 1933
Japan’s population was 67-5 millions, and
is growing so fast that by 1950 it is expected
to reach 78 millions. In Australia, the
density of population is 2-2 persons per
square mile, or if one allows for the deserts,
it is 3-8 persons per habitable square mile.
In Japan, the density is 439 per square mile,
habitable or not, and much of Japan is
mountainous. Of these two virile peoples,
one is ten times as numerous as the other,
and at the same time is 115 times as closely
crowded.

Cc 285

It would be almost impossible to conceive
a situation where Lord Hartington’s first
statement could be more evidently true.

Present Reproductive Trends

It is the very truth of the first statement
that makes the second so appallingly misleading, but let us examine it carefully and
dispassionately. From what source is Australia to draw the population she so evidently requires? There are three possibilities :
the population might be bred in Australia ;
it might be provided by immigrants from
Great Britain ; or it might come from outside
countries other than Great Britain. There
are also the permutations of these, but they
do not add a fourth possibility. We will look
into them. First, will Australia breed the
men? At present, Australia’s net reproduction rate is 0:97, which means that if this
rate remains constant, the trend of population will be downwards, each thousand
women of child-bearing age being replaced
after a generation by 970 such women. At
this rate, after the three generations the
statesman contemplated, Australia’s white
population (apart from immigrants) would
have sunk to 6:2 millions. But the fertility
rate might alter, it might rise, or it might
fall. In 1920, Australia’s rate was 1-319, and
if that rate were recovered she would have,
in A.D. 2025 over 15 million white inhabitants, say a quarter of Japan’s present
number. But 1-319 is not the highest rate
possible; Australia might go better. The
highest net reproduction rate recorded of
any European nation in the last 65 years is
1-88, in Bulgaria, at the beginning of this
century. If Australia equalled that rate,
jumped to the full rate at once, and held it
until 2025, she would have nearly 43 millions
of white. people, and could be accounted
safe. What, then, is the probability of this
sudden, vital rise? Let me answer by
quoting some figures. Between 1870 and
1890, Australia’s birth-rate was above 35
286

per 1,000 ; between 1900 and 1920, it ranged
between 28 and 26; by 1930 it was 21;
since then it has not been above 19, and now
it is a little below 16. A change from a
steady fall to a sudden and startling rise
seems utterly improbable, so one cannot
justly suppose that the Under-Secretary had
this possibility in view, for statesmen do not
bet on miracles.

Immigration from Great Britain

Turn to possibility number two, immigrants from Great Britain. But Great
Britain is already less fertile even than
Australia. Her swarming period seems
definitely over, and not from her surplus
millions will her Dominions be filled. It is
more likely that England herself will grow
empty, for her net reproduction rate is now
0:73. The fall of England’s birth-rate has
been even steeper than the fall in Australia.
In the ’nineties it was 30, in the ’seventies it
was 35, and now it is 14 and a fraction, and
still falling. Briefly, the situation is this:
fifty years ago the north-western Europeans
were doubling their populations every two
generations, with net reproduction rates
between 1-4 and 1:5; now, with rates of
o-7 and thereabouts, all those nations called
Nordic, Germanic, and such like proud
names, are in reverse gear, and every two
generations their populations will decrease
by at least half unless a complete and rapid
change comes in a process that has slowly
gathered momentum for fifty years past,
and is now rushing forward. The white man
is becoming sterile.

So this possibility too must be eliminated,
for the Dominions Office could never have
neglected to read the evidence. There are
three well-known calculations which concern
the future population of England and Wales.
Each is founded upon a different surmise
and then logically worked out. One assumes
for its base that we will go back to the 1931
level of fertility, and yet keep on reducing
mortality as at present ; if this were done,
England and Wales would only lose 7
millions of population in the next three
generations ; no one expects the clock to
run backwards like this, and the calculation

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is academic. The second base is the assumption that fertility and mortality both will
return to the 1933 level and stay there;
this too is little more than an exercise, but
it shows a loss in three generations of II
millions. The third assumes that the present
trend downwards will not be arrested wholly
for another fifty years, and then the loss by
2025, the three generations of the speech,
will be 334 millions.

Immigration from Non-British Sources

These figures are too well known for
neglect, and we are driven to the third of
the original three possibilities. Immigration
is to come from elsewhere than Great Britain.
Obviously not from the other nations who
are in like plight, or from the other Dominions
who also share the decline. No, it must be
the nations with redundant populations
that the Under-Secretary had in mind. We
will look at this more closely.

A list before me shows certain European
nations as still in possession of net reproduction rates that increase their numbers. They
have fallen recently, but are still above
unity. The nations are: Bulgaria, Italy,
Poland, Portugal, and the Soviet Republics,
Russia and Ukraine. Italy actively discourages emigration except under her own
flag. The Soviets firmly prevent it. There
remain in Europe only Bulgaria, Poland and
Portugal. Portugal, with a population of
some 7 millions, has her own immense territories in Africa to fill before she can help
Australia ; so Poland and Bulgaria are left.

There are also left Asia and Africa, still
fecund. And in addition there are the unfortunate people to whom their native land
has grown unhappy, Jews in Germany and
in Poland, Assyrians in Iraq, and either the
gentry of Spain or its anarchists, according
to the fortunes of the war now raging. If
these be rejected, then we must suppose one
of two things: either Lord Hartington has
some knowledge of a fount of population
that is invisible to the expert statisticians

‘who write books on demography, or his

brief is fifty years out of date.
If this is really so, if the mouthpiece of
the British Government, speaking in a great
POPULATION IN AUSTRALIA 287

Dominion, has been so deplorably ill-served
by his department, then the case is bad
indeed. It is better to turn and face a danger
than to be an ostrich. Even now there are
things that can be done—can be tried

anyhow; but they are of a nature the
people of Australia will not brook, will not
permit to be discussed even, until they are
told the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth.

THE GALTON ANNIVERSARY DINNER, 1937

will be held at
THE WALDORF HOTEL
ALDWYCH, W.C.2
On Tuesday, February 16th, at 7.30 (for 7.45)

The Galton Lecture

“SOME ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF A DECLINING
POPULATION ”

will be given by
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, M.A., C.B.

Chairman: The Lord Horder, K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

A vote of thanks to the Lecturer will be proposed by
Sir Walter Layton, M.A., C.B.E., C.H., LL.D.
and seconded by H. D. Henderson, M.A.
Tickets, 7/6, may be obtained from the Business Secretary, The Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square,

London. S.W.1. Please purchase as early as possible, as it may not be easy to increase the number
arranged for at the last moment.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 4.
