WILTON MARION KROGMAN

Professor and Chairman, Department of Physical Anthropology
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania

The Role of Genetic Factors in
the Human Face, Jaws and Teeth:

A Review

Foreword

When the Reptilia evolved into the Mammalia there were several profound changes
that occurred in face, jaws and teeth, but especially in the latter. The dentition went from
polyphyodont—many sets of teeth—to diphyodont—but two sets of teeth, deciduous and
permanent; it went from homodont—all teeth alike—to heterodont—different types of
teeth, i.e. incisors, canine, premolars, molars. With this arose timing—when each set and
each tooth appeared—and sequence—the order of tooth appearance within each set.
There arose a developmental patterning in the sense that teeth and bone must develop
synchronously in order that functional dental interrelationships—occlusion—be facilitated ;
there arose also the concept of “dental age”’ as a biological impulse, to be possibly equated
with the more basic biological framework of growth-time, “skeletal age”. Dental and
skeletal age thus partake of a common element in organic growth: progressive and
cumulative maturation.

The supporting bony structures of the teeth—the rostrum, the snout, the face—did,
of course, change too, but not so radically. The anterior teeth (now the incisors) still were
related to a transverse vector of force and of growth; the canine (still a haplodont tooth)
remained laterally as a corner-tooth, marking the transition between vectors of transversality and sagittality; the posterior teeth (now the milk molars or the premolars and
the molars) still were related to a sagittal vector of force and of growth.

In addition to the foregoing changes another was set in motion, that of anisomerism,
or the reduction in number of bone or tooth elements either by direct loss or by fusion.
The number of discrete cranial and facial bones was reduced, and dentally there was

147 to a generalized Mammalian 134
apa #8 7132

(from 66 to 44 to 32 teeth in, say, 200 million years).

 

 

progression from the Mammal-like Reptiles

2—1-2-3
2-1-2-3

Homo sapiens is the heritor of all this: our face, jaws and teeth are, as it were, the
battle-grounds upon which this evolutionary war is still being waged. The changes of
ontogeny are no less entrenched than those of phylogeny. The human embryonic, foetal
and post-natal organism may not traverse the incredible distances of evolutionary change,
but in ten lunar pre-natal months, and in twenty post-natal years, a species-linked (and,
hence, genetic) pattern unfolds.

It is, therefore, almost fore-ordained that the “Field Theory” enunciated by Butler 12
should be expounded: the tooth genes just about must have a morphogenetic gradient
that presides over development, position within a quadrant of like teeth, the shape and

to a generalized Primate

 

ER—M 165
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

size of individiual teeth and of a group of like teeth, and an over-all “‘ patterning” for
the functional behaviour of a tooth within a quadrant, a quadrant and its antimere and
its functional opposite (e.g. lower incisors vs. upper incisors), and, finally, the reciprocal
functional reaction of grouped quadrants, as in total maxillary arch vs. total mandibular
arch.

The basic morpho-functional characters of the teeth may, over evolutionary time,
show what Moorrees 194 calls intensification, simplification and retention. Examples of
the first are shovel-shaped incisors, a large Carabelli’s cusp, and hypertaurodontism; of
the second are transition from the ““Y5” Dryopithecus pattern to the “+4” human pattern,

__ MI1-3
reduction of cusp number in P2 and in ML’ and reduction in tooth number, per se.

As we translate all of this into genetic terms in the human facio-dental complex,
we shall probably not encounter one-gene substitutions. Instead, we shall cope with polygenic traits, those which, as Witkop 141 says, “‘are influenced to a great extent by environmental factors”, e.g. as in many aspects of growth and development, dental caries, and
in “common varieties of periodontal disease”. Griineberg 64: 65 has introduced the concept
of “‘quasi-continuous variation’, or “threshold characters” into developmental studies
of polymorphism. The term is applicable to certain “‘all-or-none” traits which may occur
in a given percentage of the population. When the trait is present it means 79 “that the
individual carries a major gene in the homozygous or heterozygous state, or an appropriate
polygenic complex”. Hunt calls this system a “‘ dystrophic genotype”. In addition there
is an “epigenetic endowment’. This mediates the threshold above which the dystrophic
system is penetrant. The dystrophic genotypes probably are a continuous variation in the
total population; but in development they show up as all-or-none entities.

It is now pertinent to consider the actual evidence of what is known, or surmised,
about the phenotypic expression of facio-dental traits in Man. The stage is set, so to
speak, by Gabriel 35 who observed that there ‘“‘can be no doubt of a genetic pattern for
tooth morphology” which extends “‘to every minute detail”, even into root formation.

The Teeth as a Whole
Kraus 85 has summarized apparent hereditary traits in the human dentition as
follows:
DEVELOPMENTAL TRAITS
Crown calcification; Time of molar-cusp coalescence; Age and sequence of
eruption in deciduous and permanent teeth.
MENSURATIONAL TRAITS
Cusp number; Crown dimensions; relative molar size; Root length: number
of roots.
MORPHOLOGICAL TRAITS
Crown patterns: cuspules, crenations, ridges, grooves, pits; total shape; Carabelli’s
cusp; Shovel-shaped incisors; Fused and/or curved roots; Enamel extensions
and nodules; Taurodontism.
ANOMALOUS TRAITS
Supernumerary teeth and/or roots; Congenitally absent teeth; Peg-shaped teeth;
Paramolar tubercle of Bolk.

166
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

STRUCTORO-FUNCTIONAL TRAITS
Diastemata and/or tremata; Over-bite, over-jet, prodontism; Arch shape and
size, upper and lower; Malpositioned and/or rotated teeth.

Since this list was published evidence has accumulated concerning the inheritance
mode of many of the traits. The evidence will be scanned as this review moves along.

In addition to the foregoing, Kraus also listed what he considered the heritable traits
of the mandibular first premolar (Pm1 or P1):

External lingual groove: scored as absent, one, two grooves.

Sagittal sulcus, mesio-distally between the protoconid and metaconid: scored as
interrupted or uninterrupted.

Deuteroconid a—p position: scored as mesial, distal, median.

Lingual cusps, each with independent apex: scored one to five.

Mesial protoconid margin: scored as absent or present.

Central protoconid ridge: scored as bifurcated or non-bifurcated.

Accessory occlusal protoconid ridges: scored as none or as one to five.

Deuteroconid-protoconid relationship: scored as joined and separate or independent
deuteroconid.

Horowitz and Osborne 74 studied the teeth of fifty-four pairs of like-sexed adult white
American twins. They concluded that “‘genetically conditioned variations of a highly
significant nature occur in eight of the 12 anterior teeth studied. The canine teeth demonstrate a relatively low hereditary component of variability.” It was further observed that
“‘sex and symmetry factors appear to play a part in the variation observed in the maxillary
left central incisor and the mandibular left canine and lateral teeth”’.

Dahlberg 18 and Hanihara 67 have studied certain dental traits from a racial viewpoint, suggesting hereditary transmission via racially-entrenched gene complexes.
Dahlberg 18 reports on the incidence of rotated maxillary permanent central incisors:
lingual rotation is defined as bilateral or unilateral “winging” and straight; labial rotation
as unilateral or bilateral ‘“‘counterwinging”. These rotations occur in 22-38 per cent of
American Indians of the Southwest, 10 per cent of Japanese, and 3 per cent of American
whites of Chicago. Hanihara studied the deciduous crown traits in Japanese-American
hybrids and found the Japanese-white, in tooth morphology generally, to be midway
between the parental norms, while Japanese-Negro were closer to Japanese norms. Both
the Japanese-white and Japanese-Negro are close to Japanese norms in the cusp development of the maxillary first permanent molar, but are nearer the white Americans in
Carabelli’s cusp development on the maxillary second deciduous molar.

Garn 36 has studied sibling resemblances in deciduous tooth composition as follows:

NO. PAIRS MEASUREMENT CORRELATIONS
a ,

r Se

12 Ash/dry weight 0°14-+-0°28

12 Calcium/dry weight 0°46-L0°23

12 Calcium/ash weight 0°42-++0°24

After observing that “tooth size and mineral mass are largely inherited” he concludes
that “the percentage of mineral appears to be inherited too”, and that “the calcium/
phosphorus ratio is not quite constant, but rather a genetically determined limited
variable”’.

167
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Garn et al.45 report on a study of family-line determinants of dental development.
Their findings may be summarized as follows:

1. Buccolingual tooth dimensions show a greater mean percentage of sexual
dimorphism than mesiodistal, together with a different rank order of dimorphism
percent.

2. The degree of brother-sister dimorphism in canine size shows a higher r
with dimorphism in adjacent teeth (12, Pl) than with Il, P2, in both maxilla and
mandible.

3. Cusp number and mesiodistal diameters are inter-acting polymorphisms in
both sexes; this is true of relative cusp number and relative tooth size on M1, M2.

4. Cusp number does not depend on groove pattern (X, Y, +), nor on the
strength of expression of Carabelli’s cusp.

5. Although they are genetically independent, groove pattern and cusp number
“show evidence of simultaneous selection in recent populations”.

Tooth Size

With respect to this category, the outstanding researches by far have been carried
out by Garn and his colleagues at the Fels Research Institute, Yellow Springs, Ohio,
largely on familial and sib-series. Garn, Lewis and Kerewsky 46 studied the X-linked
inheritance of tooth size (mesiodistal diameter) in siblings as follows:

SISTER-SISTER BROTHER-BROTHER SISTER-BROTHER

TOOTH CORRELATION CORRELATION CORRELATION RANKING
a _— a

Maxilla N r N r N r
]1 13 0°52 46 0°44 70 0°18 SS>BB>SB
[2 12 0°65 45 0°06 67 0°14 SS>SB>BB
Cc 10 0°53 26 0°67 43 0°28 BB>SS>SB
pl 10 0°66 43 0°59 62 0°19 SS>BB>SB
pz 7 0°72 39 0°49 49 0°10 SS>BB>SB
Ml 13 0°63 43 0°26 65 0°06 SS>BB>SB
M2 7 0°82 17 0°19 35 0°27 SS>SB>BB
Mandible
I; 13 0°76 42 0°48 65 0°20 SS>BB>SB

2 13 0°71 46 0°33 70 0°36 SS>SB>BB
C 9 0°74 38 0°35 62 0°40 SS>SB>BB
Pi 10 0°61 37 0°57 60 0°19 SS>BB>SB
P2 9 0°55 31 0°46 49 0°27 SS>BB>SB
M, 10 0°46 45 0°22 60 0°22 SS>BB—SB
M2 4 0°70 17 0°33 25 0°04 SS>BB>SB
Weighted r 0°64 0°38 0°21

In the foregoing tabulation sister-sister correlations are seen to be highest, followed
by brother-brother and sister-brother in order. In thirteen of fourteen teeth compared
sister r’s exceeded brother r’s, and in nine of fourteen brother-brother r’s exceeded crosssex r’s. It seems likely that sisters, having the paternal X chromosome in common, “are
necessarily more alike in tooth size than brother-brother or sister-brother pairings’’.

168
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

The same authors 47 have studied the size interrelationships of the mesial and distal
teeth as shown below (mean r’s are given):

CORRELATION WITH CORRELATION WITH CORRELATION WITH
ALL OTHER TEETH* OTHER MORPHOLOGICAL LIKE-NUMBERED
TOOTH CLASSES TEETH f
(1) (2) (3)
Maxillary, Left
[1 0°53 0°51 0°54
J2 0°49 0°45 0°41
pl 0°59 0°55 0°55
p2 0°55 0°50 0°45
M! 0°52 0°51 0°54
M2 0°50 0°47 0°43
Mandible, Left
I; 0°58 0°52 0°53
I2 0°60 0°54 0°45
P; 0°59 0°55 0°54
P» 0°58 0°53 0°50
Mi 0°52 0°52 0°50
M2 0°43 0°41 0°39

* Isomeres 1| with| 1, 2| with | 2, etc., are excluded.
T 1, with P; and M;; I2 with P2 and Mg, etc.

The more distal teeth show lower communalities than the more mesial teeth, within
each morphological class. This was also the case with r’s involving the remaining teeth
(excluding isomeric pairs), with intraclass r’s excluded, so that I’s were compared only
to P’s and M’s, and, finally, where like-numbered teeth are compared exclusively intra se
(columns 1, 2, 3, respectively), in the above tabulation.

Garn, Lewis and Kerewsky 46 have reported on sex differences in tooth size (mesiodistal crown diameter in 243 American white children). The sex size difference is 4 per cent,
greatest for permanent canine (6 per cent), least for the permanent incisor group (3 per
cent). ““The sex difference in tooth size may be taken as an estimate of the magnitude of
the chromosomally-determined and presumably Y-influenced size difference, where steroid
mediation is not additionally involved.”

In an analysis of fields of tooth size the foregoing authors 44 report on various size
correlations as follows:

UPPER-LOWER SIZE CORRECTIONS

Right Left
Il 0°75 0°72
12 0°59 0°61
C 0°75 0°74
Pl 0°75 0°76
P2 0°71 0°64
M1 0°70 0°69
M2 0°58 0°64

169
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

INTRA-QUADRANT SIZE CORRELATIONS

I; Ip C P; P2 M; M2
Il — 0-61 0°61 0°57 0°48 0°53 0°40
12 — — 0°54 0°50 0°45 0°40 0°36
Cc — — — 0°63 0°58 0°54 0°51
Pil — —_— — —_— 0°74 0°55 0°53
P2 — — — — — 0°52 0°51
Ml — — — — — —_— 0°52
M2 — — — — — — —
LEFT-RIGHT SIZE CORRELATIONS
Maxilla Mandible

Il 0°92 0°92

12 0°91 0°94

Cc 0°91 0°92

Pl 0°92 0°93

P2 0°89 0°90

MI 0°90 0°91

M2 0°83 0°82

Moorrees and Reed 107 have also reported on correlations among the crown diameters
of human teeth. Especially important are their observations on deciduous teeth as related
to their permanent successors. The correlation between the sum of c, ml, m2 and C, Pl,
P2 is 0-50 in the maxilla, 0-57 in the mandible. The correlation between I1—2, C and Pl,
P2, is 0-50 in the maxilla, 0-58 in the mandible. The r between the combined crown diameters
of the maxillary and mandibular teeth (dm,-d; and P2-I1) is 0-85. The authors conclude
that the high r of all deciduous and permanent teeth within each jaw (0-57 and 0-61, upper
and lower respectively) and between jaws (0-77) “suggest the existence of an over-all
[genetic] factor influencing tooth size’’. It is interesting to note here that the high 7 between
upper M1 and m2 (0:51) and lower M1 and m2 (0-53) tends in Moorrees’ opinion, to
support Bok’s contention that M1 belongs to the deciduous dentition.

In a twin study Horowitz, Osborne and De George 74 emphasize that “‘a comparison
of the average of the differences for monozygotic and dizygotic twins will provide a test
of the observed effect of a difference in one-half the total hereditary constitution”. They
studied tooth dimensions in 54 pairs of like-sexed white American adult twins (33 monozygotic, 21 female, 12 male) and 21 dizygotic (16 female, five male); measured were the
CRHIMNC
Cl2HnIMNWC

In monozygotic twins the upper and lower left I1 had the smallest mean difference,
while the upper left I2 and the lower left C had the greatest mean difference. In dizygotic
twins the upper left C and the lower left I2 had the smallest mean difference, while upper
right I2 and lower right C had the greatest mean difference. Analysis of variance shows a
“strong genetic component of variability” in the four upper and four lower incisor teeth.
The canines show much less genetic variability. Environmental variation is twice as great
in upper I1—2 as in lower I1-2.

The data to this point serve admirably in support of the “Field Concept”. In each
morphological group the “‘ key” tooth is the more mesial, i.e. for incisors it is Il, for
premolars P1, and for molars M1. These, along with C, are genetically the more stable;
by contrast, I2, P2, M2-3, are genetically more variable. There is a sort of “distance
gradient” with group mesiality elected as a focal site of stability. Whether this is negatively
related to phylogenetic anisomerism is not demonstrable, but one may venture a guess
that it is.

170

maximum mesiodistal diameters of
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

Structural Defects in the Teeth

According to Finn 24 there are two classes of hereditary defects in enamel and dentin:
(1) those affecting the development and calcification of the teeth either as a separate entity
or as part of a syndrome involving other calcifying structures of the body; (2) those
involving hereditary metabolic blood disorders or blood antigen, i.e. antibody reactions
which cause visible changes in enamel and/or dentin. Witkop 149 makes the categorical
statement that “there are five or more distinct genetic entities causing enamel
defects”.

Finn 24 feels that enamel hypoplasia is due to an autosomal dominant gene, an
opinion shared by Shear 13! and Dreyer and Shear.2! Rushton 125 distinguishes between
enamel hypoplasia (enamel agenesis) inherited as a dominant trait, and enamel hypocalcification, also dominant, with no sex difference. Tobias,137 however, feels that defective
enamel may be transmitted either as a simple dominant or as sex-linked. Finn (following
Witkop) divides enamel hypocalcification into hypomaturation, a sex-linked trait, and
pigmented hypomaturation, possibly an autosomal recessive trait. Witkop 149 reports
that in children with cerebral disorders 54 per cent showed enamel hypoplasia, as compared
to only 9 per cent in controls.

Dentinogenesis imperfecta, according to Finn, is a simple autosomal recessive trait,
with modifying factors but with good penetrance. Hursey et a/.89 studied a “‘racial isolate”’
of 4,000—-5,000 persons (Caucasoid, Negroid, Amerind) and concluded that it “appears
to be transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait”, but that “‘wide variations in the
manifestation of this trait were observed in patients heterozygous for the dominant gene”’.
Dentinal dysplasia is an autosomal dominant (Finn 24).

Heys, Blattner and Robinson 7! observed osteogenesis imperfecta and odontogenesis
imperfecta in eighteen families, and reported the syndrome to be “genetically dominant,
but variable in the degree of expression’’. Finn also regards the complex as an autosomal
dominant. An associated defect here, with normal but incompletely calcified enamel,
is opalescent dentine, which Rushton 125 and Tobias 137 regard as a dominant
trait. .
Other defects, listed by Finn, which may shape up in the teeth, are involved in the
following: hereditary vitamin D-resistant rickets, a sex-linked dominant; Fanconis’ syndrome, a rare recessive gene (low plasma level of inorganic phosphate, amino acid, glucose
phosphate, bicarbonate, and (?) potassium); hypophosphotasia, a recessive trait, with (?)
more than one gene (teeth are hypoplastic and tend to exfoliate prematurely); Rh incompatibility, with RH antigen a dominant gene, and a negative individual a homozygous
recessive genotype; congenital porphyria (cf. porphyria imperfecta), due to an autosomal
dominant gene (teeth, bones pigmented).

Anodontia is part of a syndrome of ectodermal dysplasia (anhidrotic). Greene 60
regards it as a sex-linked recessive, predominantly male. Rushton 125 agrees, but cites
B66k who calls it a simple autosomal dominant when associated with absence of P1, P2,
prematurely white hair, and excessive sweating of palms and soles. In association with
absence of [2 it behaves as a simple dominant with no sex limitation. McDonald 98 holds

that anodontia in hereditary ectodermal dysplasia is incompletely recessive.

Absence of Teeth

Whether or not congenitally absent teeth to-day is a reflection and carry-on of a
phylogenetic anisomerism is a moot point. It certainly is a possibility. Dahlberg !7 suggests

171
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a loss tendency—as measured by eruptive variability—in Man as follows (S = stable,
V = variable, in terms of an appearance/absence dichotomy; there is no R/L side difference)

S V+ 8S S V S Vi V++
MN 2 C Pl P2 Ml M2 M3
Th J2 C Pl P2 Mi M2 M3
Ves S S Vv S Vi V++

The genetics of missing teeth is probably quite complex, for it is apparently tied-in
with general systemic development. For example, Keene 84 points out that children with very
high or very low birth weight more frequently have missing teeth, and so do twins.

Here it is obvious that ut is the single tooth most frequently absent, with mandibular
M3 possibly absent more often than maxillary. Then follows maxillary 12.

Rushton 125 feels that absence of I2 is a simple dominant, with no sex limitations.
Other students feel that the problem is more complex. Lasker 93 notes that I2 may be

peg-shaped, it alone may be absent or it may be accompanied by missing I1, or in some
cases nearly one-half of the other teeth may be absent (oligodontia). Tobias 137 points
out that where both I2 and I1 are absent it may be of moment that each is at contiguous
bony margins (premaxillary-maxillary and mandibular symphysis, resp.). Thomsen 136
reports on her studies on Tristan da Cunha, and finds that missing I2 is associated with
other genetic factors, apparently behaving differentially as dominant, as recessive, as
sex-linked. Rantenen 118 observed nine variable patterns of missing and/or peg-shaped 12
in 2 per cent of 2218 Finns, with no sex differences. Lasker,93 in commenting upon variability in missing I2, feels that ‘‘the genes responsible . . . are apparently different, despite
the fact that the anomalies tend to grade into each other’. Schultz 128 merely concludes
that there is a “hereditary tendency” for the absence of I2, with “different genetic modes
in different families”’.

Missing M3 seems to be most common in Mongoloids (Chinese 17-32 per cent,
Eskimo 25-28 per cent, Amerind 13 per cent), next in Caucasoids (7-26 per cent, for M3)
and least in Negroids (Amernegro 11 per cent, African Negro 0 per cent, 7: 16. 55» 70 According
to the third-cited authors there are upper/lower, R/L differences as seen in an Ohio sample
(figures are percentages):

ORTHODONTIC SERIES FELS SERIES
Missing M3 e—_—_——_ NT, COMBINED f
Boys Girls Pop.* Boys Girls  Pop.*
(214) (262) (91) (82)
Maxillary, R 571 9:2 71 — — — —
Maxillary, L 56 72 6°4 — — — —
Mandibular, R 8°4 11°4 9°9 — — — —
Mandibular, L 6°5 12°6 9°5 14:3 11:0 12°7 11°1

* A 103:100 sex ratio is assumed.
+ Not weighted for sample size.

It is apparent from the above that M3 is absent more often than M3, both absent
more often in females, and that side difference is equivocal. Adler 2 is in only partial
agreement. In eighteen to twenty-one-year-old Germans he found M3 absence in 27°5
per cent males, 27-7 per cent females; in the maxilla the total frequency was 19 per cent,
in the mandible 17-4 per cent with maxillary bilaterality 42:86 per cent, mandibular bilaterality 56-31 per cent.

172
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

Garn and his associates,39: 42, 43, 53, 54.55 have made both intensive and extensive
studies of M3 agenesis. When M3 is absent the other teeth are delayed in their calcification
and movement, they are often smaller in size, and they are more frequently themselves
absent. In M3 agenesis the formation sequence “‘tends disproportionately” to be P2, M2;
where M3 is present the sequence remains M2, P2; further, in the sibs of an M3 agenetic
propositus the M3 is delayed in its calcification timing.

The percentage incidence of other missing teeth in conjunction with M3 agenesis,
is as follows 39:

TOOTH M3 AGENESIS NORMAL
Il 3°0 —
I2 12:0 1°5
C 1:0 —
P1 1:0 —
P2 11:0 1°5
Mi _ —_
M2 3°0 —

The association between presence/absence of M3 and the presence/absence of other
teeth gives an X2 value of 157-1.

The following summary by Garn, Lewis and Vicinus 54 places M3 agenesis in a
genetic context:

Third molar agenesis is a relatively common polymorphism occurring in 16 per
cent of the southwestern Ohio white population. Though previously treated as an
independent anomaly, this number reduction is unquestionably related to agenesis
of other teeth, to delayed formation timing of the remaining posterior teeth, to differences in tooth sequence polymorphisms, and to delayed timing and movement of the
third molar tooth itself in the siblings of affected individuals. The association between
third molar agenesis and reduction in the number of other teeth fits the hypothesis
of a field of variable intensity, which, in its greatest degree of expression, eliminates
all four third molar teeth and a maximum number of other teeth. The association
between third molar reduction and developmental delay in the dentition is susceptible
to at least two hypotheses, one involving pleiotropic manifestations of a single gene
and the other involving two independent genes, the first favouring developmental
suppression and the second affecting formation timing. While the degree of independence between these two phenomena may show which hypothesis is correct,
the possibility of closely linked genes must also be considered. In this latter event,
the monogenic and polygenic hypotheses would be operationally identical.

The oft-advanced hypothesis that tooth absence is a correlate of jaw-size reduction
is rejected by Brothwell, Carbonell and Goose 19: “‘There are certainly no good grounds
for believing that an increase in hypodontia in Homo sapiens is purely associated with the
trend toward smaller jaws’’.

Tooth Calcification and Eruption

Here we shall adopt the generally accepted stages: calcification: (a) initial; (b) beginning
of root formation; (c) apical closure; eruption: (a) alveolar, (6) attainment of occlusal
level.

Kraus 86 has studied the four deciduous molars and reports that each ‘“‘shows clearcut distinctions in both sequence and patterns of calcification”, and that ‘‘together they

173
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

form a quite integrated pattern of molar development.” He observes that it “‘would...
appear reasonable to assume that the molar calcification process is under rather rigid
genetic control’, but that “how this control is mediated can not yet be answered”.

Moorrees 195 and Moorrees and Reed 197 have evaluated tooth emergence and
eruption in relation to dental arch growth. It was found for 184 individuals (observed
between three to five and sixteen to eighteen years) that ‘tooth emergence and eruption
are more suitable as parameters of dental development than chronologic age in defining
the changes in arch dimension .. .”. In this sense, therefore, tooth eruption becomes a
measure of biologic age.

Garn and Lewis 38 have analysed the relationship between the sequences of calcification
and of eruption in lower premolars and molars. Their sample was sixteen boys, twenty
girls, who were either P2M2 or M2P2 in calcification sequence and either P2M2 or M2P2
in eruption sequence:

FORMATION SEQUENCE ERUPTION SEQUENCE
P2M2 M2P2
P2M2 22 21 1
M2P2 14 7 7

From the above tabulation it is seen that twenty-one of the twenty-two with P2M2
formation sequence went on to P2M2 eruption sequence; seven of the fourteen M2P2
formation sequence shifted to the P2M2 eruption sequence.

Agenesis of M3 has a noticeable effect on the timing of tooth formation, according to
Garn, Lewis and Bonne.4!:

Pl P2 Mi M2 M3
ee, en, a men, een
Group N T N T N T N T N T
Affected 21 53 20 54 18 52 21 59 _- —
Sibs 22 56 20 53 17 52 24 52 24 57
Control 111 48 118 49 81 48 126 48 125 49

T = normalized sex-specific T-scores for beginning tooth formation, especially cusp formation.

Where M3 is absent P and M show late formation in both affected and in sibs. In
M3 agenesis the formation sequence was P2M2 = 60 per cent, but in controls only 22 per
cent. Hence M3 agenesis and P2M2/M2P2 sequence polymorphisms are in positive
association, and the M3 polymorphism “may be viewed as the extreme degree of expression
of factors delaying tooth formation over a long developmental period’’, ranging from the
first month of life (M1) to the eighth year or beyond (M3).

Sibling relationships have been more intensively studied by Garn, Lewis and Polachek,49
in sixty-two nuclear Ohio families, with 175 sibling pairings (which includes two sets of
triplets). Members of a sibship are more alike than by chance alone. For fifty-three correlations twenty-three differed significantly from zero at the 5 per cent level. In boys sib
r’s averaged 0-29 in girls 0-51; all pairings (B-B, S-S, B-S) for all stages of tooth development had a pooled r of 0-28. There was no difference in the r for calcification and the r
for movement, nor did the r differ in earlier or later calcification stages. In the triplets
(two monozygotic, one dizygotic) the r in the pair was 0-95, in the single 0-25. ““The rate
of tooth development is largely, though not entirely, under genetic control, in the absence
of endocrinopathy or chromosomal aberration.”

174
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

In another study the same authors 5° present interrelationships within the dentition:

GROUPING NUMBER OF CORRELATIONS CORRELATIONS
Tooth calcif./tooth calcif. 145 0°46
Tooth move./tooth move. 52 0°56
Tooth calcif./tooth move. 104 0°30
Intratooth 11 0°60
Intertooth 67 0°45
Intraclass 36 0°55
Interclass 42 0-40
Intrastage 22 0°57
Interstage 56 0°42

The timing of the formation of M3 has some bearing on its emergence (Garn et al.42).
If it forms early then it emerges early and without trouble to the occlusal plane; if /ate
then its emergence is slow and troubled (often “‘impacted”’).

Gren 62 reported on the prediction of tooth emergence in 874 healthy white American
children (434 M, 440 F). The Greulich and Pyle hand X-ray film Atlas was used. Tooth
formation stages (P2) were 1/4, 1/2, 3/4, 4/4 root length with open apex. Most teeth
observed had 3/4 root formation at the time of clinical emergence. It was concluded that
“tooth emergence is more closely associated with the stage of root formation than with
chronological age (C.A.) or skeletal age (S.A.)””.

Dental Development and Bodily Growth and Maturation

It is generally accepted that tooth formation and eruption are evidences of, and are
governed by, growth-timing, i.e. they are basic biologic phenomena, just as are all traits
of skeletal development. It is customary, then, to speak of “‘skeletal age’’ and “dental age”
as biological concepts and, hence, as biological correlates. Tanner 135 states this succinctly:

Evidently there is some general factor of bodily maturity throughout growth,
creating a tendency for a child to be advanced or retarded as a whole; in the percentage attained of his eventual size, in his skeletal ossification, in at least some
elements of his permanent dentition. ...

Garn and Rohmann 5! present general data on X-linked inheritance of developmental
timing in Man:

SISTER-SISTER BROTHER-BROTHER BROTHER-SISTER
aimee ny (aT
CHARACTER N r N r N r
Ossification rate 494 0°62 688 0°39 1223 0°40
Ossification timing 854 0°54 1200 0°40 2171 0°47
Tooth calcification 140 0-41 246 0°22 486 0°24

The relation between these biological measures has been investigated by Garn, Lewis
and Bonne.42 (See also Garn Lewis and Kerewsky 44; Garn and Rohmann.52 In the
first-named study results are as on p. 176.

For M> the r’s average 0:3 higher than r’s for M3. Of this, the authors conclude that
“interrelationships with somatic growth and sexual maturation were low and rarely
significant, thus emphasizing the developmental autonomy of the third molar tooth”.
The 1965 study permitted a more general conclusion: ‘“‘Correlations between maturational
status and tooth formation and movement timing are in the expected direction, though

175
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

low, rising to moderate levels of r at the time of puberty, suggesting direct influence of
steroidal hormones on tooth movement of P2 and M2”.

M2 M3

a Ft
CORRELATED PHENOMENA N r N r
Menarche, beginning root 63 0°34 38 0°05
Menarche, alveolar eruption 35 0°62 33 0°20
Menarche, cusp level 35 0°61 75 0°06
Menarche, apical completion 15 0°29 12 0°13
Tibial union,* beginning root 101 0:27 48 0°39
Tibial union, alveolar eruption 45 0°51 63 0:28
Tibial union, cusp level 26 0°54 39 —0°07
Tibial union, apical completion 28 0°34 26 —0°01
Hand union,f beginning root 82 0°52 35 0°27
Hand union, alveolar eruption 30 0°57 49 0°17
Hand union, cusp level 17 0°52 29 0°01
Hand union, apical completion 20 0°34 23 —0°21

* Age at completion prox. tibial epiphysis
tf Age at complete union digital epiphyses.

Cleft Palate (+ Cleft Lip)

The total frequency of this condition per 1,000 births is higher in whites (American,
European, 0-80—1-66, av. 1-27) than in Negroes (American, 0-55) (Snodgrasse 133), Gorlin
and Pindborg 57 give an over-all incidence of cleft lip (--cleft palate) of 1:1,000. The
incidence is higher in Japanese, lower in American Negro, compared to whites. Cleft
palate alone, they say, has a frequency as in cleft lip.

There are several rather extensive earlier studies of the inheritance of lip- and palateclefting: Fogh-Anderson 26 on Danes, Oldfield 111 on English, Snodgrasse 133 on American
whites. Fogh-Anderson held in 1942 26 that clefting of lip and palate is genetically independent of the isolated cleft palate, and that the first two are heritable anomalies. He
stated that there is conditioned or incomplete dominance, with sex limitations to males,
and reduced penetrance. In most genetic milieus the gene responsible behaves as a recessive.
Isolated cleft palate is rarely inherited as a simple dominant, with sex limitation to the
female and reduced penetrance. Snodgrasse suggests a simple recessive heredity with variable
expressivity. In a later report Fogh-Anderson 27 stated that cleft lip (with or without
associated cleft palate) occurs more often in males; it is most frequently inherited as a
recessive trait, so-called “‘conditioned dominance”: cleft palate, alone, is most frequently
found in females, inherited in ‘‘a smaller number of cases and then as a dominant character
with failing manifestation” [reduced penetrance].*

Carter 14 felt that cleft palate is due to “‘a dominant gene of incomplete manifestation”.
In speaking of cleft lip (--cleft palate) he felt that ‘‘a recessive major gene might be concerned in the etiology”. In tabular form may be observed the proportion affected among

* In this review I have not gone into comparative data, but here I make an exception. Fraser 3° feels
that the genetic constitution is a factor where, in mice, the pregnant female is given cortisone (standard
dose, beginning eleven days after insemination). Cleft palate was produced in almost all embryos of the
A/Jax strain, but in only 17 per cent of strain CS7BL/6 embryos. ‘‘Thus even when a specific environmental
agent can be shown to cause malformation, whether it actually does so in a particular case depends partly
on the genetic constitution.” In further experiments A/Jax female x C57BL/6 male was similarly given
cortisone: 43 per cent of the offspring had cleft palate. Then, he tested C57BL/6 female X A/Jax male;
only 4 per cent of the offspring had cleft palate. Hence, both maternal and foetal genotypes are factors in
cortisone-induced cleft palate.

176
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

relatives of 291 index patients with cleft lip (cleft palate), compared with the incidence
in the population generally:

FREQUENCY
RELATIONSHIP Absolute Per cent. RATIO
1° Brother+ Sister 27/774 3°5(+0°7) X35
Sons+ Daughters 21/563 3°7(+0°8) X35
29 Uncles+ Aunts 15/2504 0°6(0°2) X6
Nephews-+ Nieces 7/1205 0°7(+-0°3) X6
39 First Cousins 7/3517 0°2(-L0°1) X2

The decrease from X35 to X6, from 1° to 29, is a “necessary consequence of a multifactorial hypothesis”. The mode of action, says Carter, of a genetic predisposing factor
is that there is reduced what Waddington calls “‘the canalization of development”; as a
result the embryo is more susceptible to minor and even haphazard swings in the intrauterine environment.

Fukuhara and Saito 32: 33 feel that cleft palate with cleft lip “may be presumed the
most likely manner of ‘dominant inheritance’ in about more than 50 per cent of the cases’’.
Of palate cleft (“bone cleft’) alone they feel that it is “transmitted in the way of dominant
inheritance”. Their findings are only tentative, for sample sizes are very small.

Lip/palate clefting is often part of a more generalized syndromic defect-pattern, either
localized (associated facio-dental structures) or generalized (other bodily organs/systems).
Fukuhara and Saito 33 note “microforms” of cleft lip/palate: rotation and crowding of
upper anterior teeth; congenital absence of upper I2, I1; asymmetric shape of nose; raphe
in upper lip. Kraus, Kitamura and Ooe 99 and Kitamura and Kraus 82 reported on malformations associated with cleft lip and palate in human embryos and foetuses. In the
sixty cleft specimens 61-7 per cent had associated malformations, as compared to an average
of 25 per cent “reported in the literature”. The most common associated malformations
were brachydactyly (30 per cent) and syndactyly (25 per cent); other “quite frequently
found” malformations are club feet/hands, imperforate anus, absence of genitals and
‘various skeletal dysplasias”.

There is a direct and significant relation between type of clefting and associated
malformations:

WITH ASSOC. WITHOUT ASSOC.
CLEFT TYPE MALFORMATIONS MALFORMATIONS NO.
I 5 1 6
II 19 19 38
Til 14 2 16

(X2 = 0902; P = <0°02, >0°01.)

In a study of dental models of 105 cleft and 87 non-cleft individuals, plus the tooth
buds in ten human foetuses, Jordan, Kraus and Neptune 8! have noted the dental and
bodily defects occurring in cases of clefting. It is concluded that “neither the cleft itself
nor the type of cleft is an etiological factor in the occurrence of morphological abnormalities in the individual dental units. It would appear that the development of the dentition
along with that of the other organs and structures of the body may be affected by the
same etiological factor or factors that are responsible for the cleft lip and/or palate’’.
The factor(s) operate in an “apparent haphazard manner” and “‘it is quite obvious that the
picture is not that of an hereditary syndrome”’.

177
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Woolf, Woolf and Broadbent 145 do not agree. In a study of 10,000 live births in Salt
Lake City they felt that both cleft lip and cleft lip with cleft palate have a genetic component in common.

Other studies 39 suggest that cleft lip and cleft of the primary bony palate (in front
of the nasopalatine formation) may be genetically mediated, while cleft of the secondary
bony palate (behind the nasopalatine foramen) is most often associated with a teratogenic
agent during the first trimester. However, it is perhaps better to err on the conservative
side and conclude that the dichotomy between primary and secondary cleft palate is not
clear-cut. Both may be mediated by genetic factors; less clearly, teratogenic agents may
likewise play a role in both, but certainly in secondary.

Dental Caries

Rushton 125 very conservatively says that “‘there is no satisfactory evidence that
susceptibility to dental caries in Man is affected by genetic factors, although it is likely
that that is the case”. * Grahnen 59 set up two family-groups: A (caries-free propositi);
and C (control propositi). He reports that parents and sibs in the A group have a lower
DMF index. There was no correlation between fathers and mothers in either the A or C
group, nor was there a correlation between parents and children. Between sibs in C, but
not in A, there was a significant correlation. Grahnen feels that twin studies demonstrate
that genetic factors contribute to individual variability in caries susceptibility. Identical
twins are not identical in the distribution of dental caries, but they have fewer differences
than fraternal twins, and fraternal twins than siblings or unrelated. Caries susceptibility
is concluded to be polygenic.

Tooth-Bone Structure and Function

Under this rubric I shall cover two main classes of data: (1) Morphological traits in
the teeth and in the jaws; (2) Inter-related facio-dental “‘patterns”’.

In the teeth must be noted “shovel-shaped” incisors, so-called because of an extra
marginal enamel ridge on the lingual surface of the incisors, notably upper I1 and/or I2.
Accompanying the shovel shaping may be labial lateral ridges, labial axial grooves, and
rounding of I2. The condition occurs most frequently among the Mongoloids.13: 16. 76
Abrahams! reported on shovel-shaping in S. Africa, and stated to the condition to be
recessive. Riesenfeld 121 surveyed shovel-shaping as follows:

A previously assumed Mongoloid cline from Indonesia, through Micronesia,
to Polynesia, is confirmed by a west-to-east cline in the frequency of shovel-shaped
incisors and rounded laterals. Such a cline, and the fact that shovel-shaped incisors

* Caries susceptibility/resistance is almost certainly hereditary in infra-human Mammalia. Rosen,
Hunt and Hoppert 122 have demonstrated this in rats. Newly born caries—resistant rats were fostered by
caries-susceptible females and vice versa. There was no change in the birth caries-status of the young rats.
“The foster mothers did not affect the caries experience of the young they nursed. It may be. . . in these
animals the genotype played a role in their resistance or susceptibility to dental caries.”

CARIES AGE (DAYS)

NEWBORN NURSE pe Erg

STRAIN STRAIN NO. M S.D. Range
Susceptible Susceptible 38 65 2°3 45-111
Susceptible Resistant 45 64 1:2 55— 84
Resistant Resistant 37 297 15 176-535
Resistant Susceptible 39 341 17 164-651

178
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

are much more frequent among American Indians than even in the western Pacific,
is incompatible with Heyerdahl’s claim of an American origin for the Polynesians.

Carabelli’s (fifth) cusp, fifth lobe, mesiolingual elevation, Carabelli’s tubercle on the
upper M1 (though Shapiro 139 says it may be found on m1—2 and M2-3) is another dental

trait which has been studied. It is an enamel elevation on the lingual side of the mesiolingual cusp, about halfway between its summit and the neck of the tooth. Its size and the
groove that delineates it are extremely variable. Pedersen 114 has summarized its ethnic
frequency, ranging on M1 from about 14 per cent in Caucasoids to 23 per cent in Oceanic

peoples. In a sample of 200 molars in Iowa children aged nine years, Meredith and Hixon 101
found the cusp to be moderate to large in 60 per cent, absent in 16 per cent. In 70 per cent
there was an R/L side difference. Kraus 84 studied eight family histories of the trait, and
postulated ‘‘a genetic interpretation, based upon the assumption of two allelic autosomal
genes without dominance, or, in other words, with ‘intermediate’ dominance in heterozygotes”. He set up three phenotypes: cc, complete absence of the trait; CC, full expression
of the trait; Cc, variable and less expression of the trait.

The paramolar tubercle of Bolk, also called by Dahlberg 1° “‘protostylid’”’ in lower
molars, “‘parastyle’’ in upper molars, and “upper paramolar structures” by Kustaloglu, 92
is derived from the cingulum. It is found on the buccal surface of upper and lower molars,
and is most frequently unilateral. It is essentially a Mongoloid trait.

In the maxilla and especially the mandible are tori, respectively torus palatinus and
torus mandibularis. Lasker 93 regards the former as possibly due to an autosomal dominant
gene. The mandibular torus—a bony outgrowth on the lingual surface of corpus
mandibularis—has been intensively investigated by Drennan,20 Grimm,6! Hooton,73
Schreiner,!27 and Weidenreich.139 Drennan, on 100 mandibles, locates the a-p position
of the torus as follows:

 

 

|
|

ii T2 Cc PI P2 Mi M2 M3
Ant. limit 1 4 38 24 7 1 3 2
Post. limit = — — 9 43 25 10 13

The trait is by far more frequent in Mongoloids. It may be either a rounded or an
elongated (striated) elevation.

Garn, Lewis and Vicinus 54 studied the inheritance of mandibular symphyseal size
during growth of Ohio children (sample = 258 adults, 177 children followed serially from
eight to sixteen years of age). The symphysis was measured on lateral X-ray films of the
jaws. There were set up two categories each of height (high = over 33-1 mm. in M, 29-1
mm. in F, low = below these dimensions in M and F) and thickness (thick = over
14-2 mm. in M, 13-1 mm. in F, thin = below these dimensions in M and F). It was found
that mandibular symphyseal height and thickness were independent of bodily height,
bodily size and build, tooth size, arch width, and each other. If H = height, h = low,
T = thick, t = thin, children of Hx H, Hxh, hxh matings were “consistently different”
during growth; this was also true in T x T, T xt, tx t matings. ‘““The data suggested genetic
simplicity for both symphyseal height and thickness and the possibility of Mendelian
inheritance of symphyseal thickness.”

For over-all face dimensions the best data are those by Osborne and De George.113
For facial breadth (bizygomatic) there was found a weak hereditary component of variability in males, while in females it was a good measure of hereditary variability. For
mandibular breadth (bigonial) the “inheritance factor is good in both sexes’. For mouth

179
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

breadth there is a “greater hereditary component of variability in females than in males”.
A resume of these and a few other dimensions is as follows:

Sex Size
G+E G only E only influence difference
DIMENSION —— hee _—. —_—.
$ g é 3 g MZ DZ 3 g
Total face height —- x _- — — = —- — —_- —
Upper face height _- — x x — — —_- — —_ —
Nose height _- — x x —_- — —- -— —- —
Face breadth - — — x x — x — —_- —
Nose breadth x x — —_ — x —
Mand. breadth = x x - — —_- — — x
Mouth width —- x - - - = - — x x
G = genetic. x == present as factor.
E = environment. — = absent as factor.

Meredith 1909 studied the age-prediction in nose height and bigonial breadth. He
found that incremental growth in nose height from five to seven years was not correlated
with increment from eight to twelve years. Bigonial breadth showed an equally poor
correlation. Hunt 79 and Moorrees, Fanning and Hunt 108, 109 studied mid-facial dimensions during growth in Boston children. They found that the a-p (depth) growth of the
face has some individual predictability in middle childhood, but breadths and heights
do not. Genes which preside over facial development, form, and funtion are independent.
‘The poorer control of the dentition, and of facial heights and breadths, may well account
for the frequency with which occlusion deteriorates in middle childhood”.

Gaard 34 feels that hypertelorism (incidence 1/100,000) may represent an hereditary
factor. The condition is very broad interocular width due to excessive growth of ala parva
sphenoidalis. It is, he says, primary—and not a secondary—to facial or nasal clefts, frontal
meningocoele, encephalocoele, “or any cranial dysostosis”, (See Gorlin and Pindborg 57.)

Cranio-facial Features

Turning now to morphology rather than morphometry of the face, we may first note
a seven-generation study by Lebow and Sawin,°4 who noted long vs. round faces, ear
prominence, traits of the nose, and cleft of the chin. It was felt that long faces were
dominant, due to the “fortuitous recombination” of many genes. The most thorough study
of facial features is that Pfannenstiel 115 in Swiss, of three Cantons (203 M, 208 F, aged
five to sixty-eight years). Observations are: (1) Chin height, integumental upper and
lower lip height, and upper and lower mucous (vermilion) height are due to multiple genes,
with no dominance; (2) A thick “swollen” integumental lower lip (often everted) is
dominant (“the Hapsburg lip”) and there is some relation to prodontia; (3) A median
depression of the integumental lower lip (a vertical sulcus, or “cleft chin’’), and a horizontal
chin groove (sulcus mentolabialis) are simple dominants; (4) In the integumental lower
lip (on the chin) there is often a rounded eminence, plus bilateral tubercles, which are
genetically related, probably via an autosomal gene with reduced penetrance; (5) In twin
studies smaller chin grooves—vertical and horizontal—are simple autosomal dominants,
the former with 100 per cent penetrance, the latter with reduced penetrance; (6) Philtrum
size and shape (narrow/broad, deep/shallow) seem to be genetically controlled (recessive ?);
(7) Mouth breadth, as proportionate to total lip height, to total face height, and to bigonal
breadth, evinces no definite evidence of genetic mediation.

In the 1940s rather extravagant claims for genetic specificity in the dentofacial

180
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

complex were made by Hughes,77 Hughes and Moore,78 Moore 102 and Moore and
Hughes.103 Familial heredity was asserted for jaw ‘“‘displacements”, tooth inclination,
asymmetry or lateral displacement of chin or gonial area, asymmetry in orbital level, in
a-p malar position, in dental arches, in ramal height, in corporal length, and in upper
and lower dental heights, differences in absolute size of ramus, corpus, palate height
and width, and Frankfort Horizontal/occlusal plane angle. In the 1941 article it is stated
that “probably 85-90 per cent of the variability in both the deciduous and permanent
dentitions can be ascribed to heredity”. Hughes takes himself ‘‘off the hook’? somewhat
when he observes that “most of the cranio-facial features, attribute as well as measurement, appear to be multiple factor traits. Single genes segregating normally seem to be
the exception rather than the rule. Likewise, completely dominant genes and their recessive
alleles are poorly represented.” Rubbrecht 123 stated that mandibular prognathism and
maxillary retrognathism are inherited as irregular dominants, and that “the shape and
size of the jaws are in great measure determined by heredity”.

In 1888 Kingsley (cited by Horowitz, Osborne and De George),74 observed that
“the cause of irregularities of the teeth is . . . sometimes due to the inheritance of large
teeth out of all proportions to the size of the inherited jaw’. This early statement is
sufficient to set the stage for a current look at what is known about facio-dental relationships as a whole. Goodman 56 feels that “‘from the study of twins, pedigrees, and populations [there is] ample evidence to support the generalization that genetic factors participate
in every aspect of dentofacial development”’.

This conclusion is buffered not only by studies of normal individuals (as in twins,
family-lines, and so on) but even more clearly in syndromes of facio-dental defect. Thus,
Gorlin, Redman and Shapiro 58 (see also Gorlin and Pindborg 57) have studied the effect
of X-chromosome aneuploidy on jaw growth. The number of X chromosomes influences
palatal form, “the palate becoming progressively shallower with the addition of each X
chromosome’”’. The Y chromosome has a similar effect, though less marked. The XXY
subject has a prognathic profile, with teeth in Class I occlusion. The XO subjects tend to
have a retrognathic mid and lower face, while the XXY subject has a prognathic mid and
lower face. In the XXXXY syndrome there is marked prognathism, heightened at
puberty.

Ruess, Pruzansky and Lis 124 and Aduss and Pruzansky 3 have studied the “oralfacial-digital” Syndrome (OFD) which is a multiple congenital condition in females with
associated chromosomal anomalies. Pertinent to this review are: (1) Facial traits, as
shortened alar cartilage and columella, median defect of upper lip, through the vermilion
border, frequent hypertelorism; (2) Oral cavity traits, as submucous bilateral cleft of the
primary and secondary palate, asymmetrical cleft of the soft palate, enamel hypoplasia of
varying degrees, tendency to high caries rate. The condition is due to partial trisomy
“for a specific chromosomal segment” (two OFD patients, mother and daughter, “have
an insertion in one No. 1 chromosome”). In OFD children the cranial base angle (basion
to sella to nasion *) is greater than normal, i.e. it increases; the mandible is dysplastic, the
position of the hyoid relative to the mandibular symphysis is altered and in OFD total
facial height is less.

Altemus 4 studied the incidence of cephalo-facial birth defects generally and found
racial (American Negroes and Whites) and geographic differences. The probable underlying variable is the socio-economic milieu.

Crigler, Cohen and Wittenborg !5 point to the hypoplasia of maxilla and mandible
found in the Treacher-Collins Syndrome. They note also that ‘“dental maturation” (dental

* Basion is in midline of anterior margin of foramen magnum, sella is midpoint of outline of sella
turcica, nasion is midline junction of internasal and naso-frontal suture.

ER—N 181
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

age) seems to be independent of accelerant or decelerant changes (usually endocrinic)
in ‘‘skeletal maturation” (skeletal age).

The problem of Syndromes must now be considered. Some congenital syndromes are
non-genetic, e.g. thalidomide and rubella. Others are genetic and it is these that are worthy

TABLE 1
Aberrations of cranio-facial skeleton and of the teeth in syndromes
(from Falls 23)
SYNDROME SKULL FACE TEETH
Aperts 1 Acrobrachycephaly Hypertelorism Hypoplastic
Hypoplastic maxilla Malocclusion
Bifid uvula, post cleft Crowded teeth
palate in 25 per cent
Crouzon 2 Premature sutural Hypoplastic maxilla Malocclusion
synostosis, resulting Hypertelorism Abnormal spacing
in anomalous cranial Shallow orbits
shapes Mandibular prognathism
Ogival palate
Franceschetti 3 — Hypoplastic malars Malposition
Hypoplastic mandible Accessory teeth
Abnormal TMJ Partial anodontia
Caries
Malocclusion, and often il
at birth
Otomandibular — (Most often unilateral) Irregularities in position
Dyostosis Mandibular agenesis- Abnormalities in size and
angle and ramus shape
Malformed TMJ
Asymmetry
Cleft palate
Facial clefts
Hallerman-Streif Brachyscaphocephaly Mandibular hypoplasia § Accessory teeth
Fontanelles close late, Maxillary hypoplasia Often il at birth
or remain open Ogival palate Malocclusion
Caries
Pierre Robin 4 Frequent platybasia Mandibular hypoplasia §Malocclusion
Cleft palate Malposition
Cleidocranial Prominent frontal and Partial aplasia, bones of | Eruption late
Dyostosis parietal bosses face Malposition in 50 per cent
Membranous bones Maxillae aplastic Caries
poorly ossified Ogival palate Exfoliation deciduous
Fontanelles close late delayed
or remain open
Marshall Frontals thick Hypoplastic nasals Partial anodontia
Frontal bossing Hypoplastic maxillae
Frontals large Hypertelorism (mild)
Thick, curved lips
Arrhinocephaly Frontal defective Defective nasals, Maxillary teeth
Unilateralis > Cribriform plate absent ethmoid malposed
Cleft palate

1 Acrocephalosyndactylia.
2 Craniofacial Dysostosis.
3 Manidbulofacial Dysostosis.
4 Also called Micrognathia, Glossoptosis Syndrome; is part of first visceral arch syndrome.

5 Basically a disturbance in the closure of the maxillary and nasolacrimal processes; Cyclopia is a more
severe degree of this failure.

of note. McKusick 99 states that there are “at least four types of genetic change producing
syndromes”; (1) Mutation in a single structural gene; (2) Mutation in two or more closely
linked genes, not yet separated by crossing-over (“no convincing example in Man is
known’); (3) Mutation in an operator gene “controlling the function of the structure

182
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

genes in the operon” (an operon is “two or more closely linked structure genes’’); (4)
Chromosomal aberrations.

A useful tabulation of dento-facial traits in various syndromes is that of Falls.23
Pertinent osteo-dental aberrations have been selected by me and are in Table 1. Falls feels
that Apert’s Syndrome is an irregular dominant with recessive transmission of the trait;
Crouzon’s Syndrome is an irregular and regular autosomal dominant trait, --recessive
autosomal trait; Franceschettis Syndrome is an irregular dominant trait; the genetics of
Otomandibular Dyostosis is not known, as is true of Hallerman-Streiff’s Syndrome; a
genetic basis for Pierre Robin’s Syndrome is “not proven’’; Cleidocranial Dyostosis is an
autosomal dominant trait with “‘excellent penetrance”; Marshall’s syndrome is a dominant
autosomal trait, with “good penetrance”; the genetics of Arrhinencephaly Unilateralis is
unknown (may be tied-in with heart, anal and visceral defects).

By far the most complete study of syndromic involvement of cephalo-facial-orodental structures is that of Gorlin and Pindborg.57 In Table 2 is outlined the more common
such Syndromes. As in Table 1, I have selected only osteo-odontological traits of skull,
face and teeth. The authors do not, for the majority of Syndromes, assay a definitive
statement on hereditary mechanism. The syndromic association may imply a timingcomplex, i.e. embryogenetic timing, or may imply the possibility of genic and/or chromosomal involvement. For the purposes of this review it is sufficient that there is an
involvement of jaws and teeth as part of a more general syndrome of effect.

TABLE 2

Aberrations of cranio-facial skeleton and the teeth in syndromes

(from Gorlin and Pindborg 57)

SYNDROME SKULL FACE TEETH
Bird-headed Small cranial circ. Small mandible Occ. hypodontia
Dwarf (Seckel) 1 Occ. high-arch palate Mal-alignment
Enamel hypoplasia
Maloccl. (II, 1)
Ellis-Van Crevold — — Natal teeth 25 per cent
Syndrome 2 Hypodontia, espec. lower

Trisomy 21 3

Freq. brachycephaly

Depressed nasal root

anteriors
Microdontia
Irreg. spacing
Late eruption
Molar crowns irreg. shape
Occ. enamel hypoplasia
12 aes 25 per cent, or peg
shaped
Hypodontia in 50 per cent
Late eruption in 75 per cent

XO Syndrome 4 Asymmetry Asymmetry Premature eruption
Crowding
Short roots
XXY Syndrome 5 — Mand. prognathism + + —
Palate wide, flat
Lateral Facial Cleft — Micrognathia Supernumerary occ.
Medial Facial Cleft — Hypertelorism —
(Pierre) Robin Occ. hydro- or Micrognathia —
Syndrome 6 microcephaly Palate high arch
Occ. cleft palate up to
1/3 hard palate
Cleidocranial Brachycephalic, large — —
Dyostosis skull ;
Prominent bossing
Fontanelles close late
Craniocarpotarsal Steep ant. cranial base High, arched palate —
Dystrophy 7

183
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 2—continued

SYNDROME SKULL FACE
Craniofacial Frontal bosses + + Hypertelorism
Dyostosis 8 Brachycephalic Hypoplastic maxilla
Tendency to C, S, L Palate V-shaped
early closure Palate high, short
Sturge-Weber —_— Occ. high arch palate
Syndrome 9 Hypoplastic jaw on
affected side
Hurler’s Syndrome 1° TMJ less mobile —
Hypertelorism 11 Brachycephalic High arch palate
Often cleft palate-+ cleft
lip
Canthal Index == “sal canthus diam. | s99

(CI)

lateral canthic diam.

TEETH

Crowding

Cross-bite + +

Partial anodontia

Peg teeth common

Eruption of perm. irreg.
(early or late)

Microdontia
Short

Peg-shaped

Wide spaced
Malocclusion

I2 often absent
Occ. microdontia
Occ. amelogenesis

Gi ference-interorbital Index = interorbital diam. (med. canthic/ x 100

(Ci)

Hypodontia
Mesoectodermal 12

Hypohydrotic
Ectodermal
Dysplasia 13 (Xlinked recessive)

Klippel-Feil
Syndrome 14

Mandibulofacial
Dyostosis 15
(structures from Ist
branchial arch,
groove, pouch)

Marfan’s Syndrome 16
(autosomal
dominant)

Morquio-Ullrich
Syndrome 17

Oculomandibulo
dycephaly with
Hypotrichosis 18

Orodigito-facial
Syndrome 19

184

head circumference

CONDITION CI CII
Upper limit, normal 38— 6°8Europia 38-42 6°8-8°0
Hypertelorism 42+ 8°0+

Pal. occ. high ++
Premaxilla rel. small

Resembles inverted
triangle
Frontal bosses large

Alv. proce. absent
Nasal root very
depressed
— Cleft uvula or cleft palate
High palate arch ‘
Malar very small often
incompl.
Hypoplastic mandible
Palate high or cleft
40 per cent
Face long, thin
Palate vault high
Occ. cleft palate
Nasal bridge depressed
Mild hypertelorism
Palate high, long
Hypoplastic mand.
Face small
Hypoplastic malar

(Fairly normal)

Dolichocephalic
Frontal bosses large

Dycephaly, bulging skull
Brachycephaly

Prom. bosses

Occ. platybasia

Frontal bossing Thin nose
Steep ant. cranial base “Cleft” assoc. with
Occ. basilar kyphosis hyperplasia of frenum

Palate cleft laterally

Hypodontia (anodontia
rare)

Enamel hypoplasia

Occ. conical crowns

Occ. maloocl. (open-bite)

Hypo- to anodontia

Teeth present tend to be
conical

Maloccl. freq.
Occ. hypoplasia
Space +-++
Open bite freq.

Maloccl. frequent
Teeth long, narrow

Teeth have thin enamel
Cusps flat, small

Many teeth absent

Malocclusion (open-bite)

Occ. natal and
supernumerary

Occ. enamel hypoplasia

Malposed C

Supernum. C and P1-2

Aplastic 12
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

TABLE 2—continued

SYNDROME SKULL FACE TEETH
Osteogenesis Skull disproport. large — Dentin hit in 80 per cent
Imperfecta and Parietal bosses large decid., 35 per cent perm.

Dentinogenesis Crown small
Imperfecta, Occ. premature
Clear (Blue) Sclerae, eruption
Otosclerosis, and Roots short, thin
Loose Ligg.29 (as_
“*hered. opalesc.
dentin’’ is auto
somal dom.)
Progeria 21 Head rel. large Face small, espec. Microdontia
Prom. bosses mid-face Eruption late
Mand. hypoplasia Occ. hypodontia
Palate high, vault
Progressive Hemi- — Asymmetrical face Occ. late eruption on
facial Atrophy 22 Corpus, ramus of mand. affected side

smaller on aff. side

1 Nanocephalic Dwarfism, Primordial Dwarfism, Ateliosis, Low-birth-weight Dwarfism, Intrauterine
Growth Retardation.

2 Mesoectodermal Dysplasia.

3 Down’s Syndrome, G Trisomy, Mongolism.

4 Turner's Syndrome, Gonadal Dysgenesis or Agenesis, Ovarian-Short Stature Syndrome, Genital

warfism.

5 **Chromatin-Positive Syndrome”, Klinefelter’s Syndrome, Gonadal Dysgenesis, Seminiferous Tubular
Hyalinization with Gynecomastia, + Related Syndromes.

6 Cleft Palate, Micrognathia and Glossoptosis.

7 Freeman-Sheldon Syndrome, ‘“‘Whistling-face”? Syndrome.

8 Crouzon’s Syndrome, Hereditary Cranio-facial Dyostosis, Dyostosis Craniofacial (Crouzon), Maladie
de Crouzon 1912, Morbus Crouzon 1912?

9 Encephalofacial Angiomatosis, Encephalotrigeminal Angiomatosis, Meningofacial Angiomatosis,
Sturge-Kalischer-Weber Syndrome, Sturge-Weber-Krabbe Syndrome, Congenital Neuroectodermal
Dysplasia, Cutaneous Cerebral angioma, Angioma Capillare et Venosum Calcificans, Nevus Flammeus
with Angiomatosis and Encephalosis Calcificans.

10 Mucopolysaccharidosis I, Gargoylism, Hunter-Hurler-Pfaundler Syndrome, Dyostosis Multiplex.

11 Grieg’s Syndrome, Ocular Hypertelorism of Grieg, Hypertelorism (Grieg), Hypertelorismus Ocularis,
Primary Embryonic Hypertelorism.

12 Dysgenesis of Iris and Cornea, and Myotonic Dystrophy.

13 Anhidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia, Christ-Giemens-Touraine Syndrome, Weech’s Syndrome.

14 Brevicollis, Congenital Synostosis of Cervicothoracic Vertebrae, Congenital Osseous Torticollis.

15 Treacher Collins’ Syndrome, Franceschetti-Zwahlen-Klein Syndrome, Bilateral Facial Agenesis.

16 Dolichostenomelia, Arachnodactyly, Dystrophia Mesodermalis Congenita.

17 Osteochondrodystrophia Deformans, Morquio-Brailsford Syndrome, Hereditary Polytopic Enchondral
Dysostosis, Infantile Hereditary Chondrodysplasia, Mucopolysacchardosis IT.

18 Dycephaly with Congenital Cataract and Hypotrichosis, Hallerman-Streiff Syndrome, Ullrich and
Fremerey-Dohna Syndrome.

19 Dysplasia Linguofacialis, OFD Syndrome.

20 Ekman’s Syndrome, Lobstein’s Syndrome, Vrolik’s Syndrome, Eddowe’s Syndrome, Spurway’s Syndrome,
Adair-Dighton Syndrome, Fragilitas Ossium Syndrome, Osteopsathyrosis, Brittle Bones Syndrome.

21 Hutchinson-Gilford Syndrome, Progeronanism.

22 Romber’s Syndrome, Parry-Romberg Syndrome, Progressive Facial Hemiatrophy, Facial Tropho
neurosis.

Roentgenographic Cephalometer

For some thirty-five years the post-natal growth of the head, face and jaws has
proceeded on a longitudinal basis via standard lateral head X-ray films, taken in a cephalostat (most often a Broadbent-Bolton Roentgenographic Cephalometer). The successive
films are, by virtue of the standardized X-ray technique, so directly comparable that craniofacial details—both skeletal and soft tissue—may be traced, the tracings superposed,
and by means of linear and angular relationships the serial tracings may be “‘analysed”

185
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for growth and typological details. It is obvious that such a technique may lend itself to
“patterning” and to family-line studies, and, in this manner to an evaluation of the transmissibility of possible heritable traits, be they dimensional (size) or angular (proportion),
or a combination of both.

Wylie 146 made an early attempt in this direction. For parents and children he constructed on the lateral X-ray head films certain “facial polygons”, the linear and gularan
details of which were then compared. It was concluded as follows:

None of the angles studied bears a relationship to any other angle in the craniofacial complex that is precise enough to be preuictable. Furthermore, no definite
relationship between any particular angle and any particular side of the polygon can
be said to exist, and, finally, knowing that one particular side is relatively long or
relatively short does not permit one to predict even roughly the length of the other
side.

Lundstrom 97 also worked with lateral X-ray films, in MZ and DZ twins. He analysed
the variance of cranio-facial linear and angular dimensions and relationships and demonstrated that the variability in DZ is twice as great as that in MZ. Sarnas 126 employed a
similar technique in the analysis of inter- and intra-family variation in the facial profile.
(Brown,!1 also did a parent-child study.) Analysis of variance showed, for example, “a
higher degree of sib-likeness in the habitual rest position of the mandible with reference
to the lower lip’’, while “upper and lower lip changes”, while inter-correlated, have a
lower degree of sib-likeness. Interestingly, Sarnas found that cranial base angles did not
show “any mutual influence on the variation’, while two corporo-ramal angles of the
mandible were found to “influence the variation of each other’. Similarly, the variability
of anterior lower face height was influenced by the variability of the (vertical) over-bite.

Kraus, Wise and Frei 89 employed both lateral and frontal (p-a) X-ray head films.
From these tracings they set up sixteen morphological “units” in the lateral X-ray film,
one in the frontal X-ray film. The “hypothesis of genetic determination of the craniofacial
complex” was tested on six sets of same-sex triplets, analysed into monovular and diovular pairs. From this study the authors concluded “that the morphology of all the
bones of the craniofacial complex are under the rather rigid control of hereditary forces”.
Degrees of discordance are explained by the statement which follows: “It would seem
that heredity governs morphology, but environment in its multitudinous facets has much
to say about how these bony elements shall combine to achieve . . . the harmonious (or
unharmonious) head and face”’.

Horowitz, Osborne and De George 75 studied the lateral X-ray head films of fifty-six
pairs of like-sexed twins and found “‘very significant hereditary variations” in the anterior
cranial base, mandibular corporal length, and total and lower face heights (P<0-001).
Upper face height is a more stable element in the facial profile, since it contributes little
to the genetic variability of the face as a whole.

Prorok 116 used twenty-nine pairs of lateral X-ray head films as an aid to the determination of monozygosity in twins. He took, on the tracings, thirty-seven angular measurements and sixteen linear measurements. For the sixteen linear measurements ‘“‘t” = 3-65,
a significant difference between MZ and DZ pairs. The intra-pair error was 31 per cent.,
in differentiating MZ and DZ. For the angular measurements Prorok set up three groups
of eleven each, according to cranial base lines of superposition (basion-nasion, Boltonnasion, sella-nasion, resp.). The first eleven had a “t” = 4-16, error = 20°6 per cent;
the second eleven a “‘t” = 4-42, error = 31 per cent; the third eleven a “t” = 4-89, error =
27-6 per cent. All thirty-seven angular measurements had a “‘t” = 5-36, error = 13-8 per
cent. When the sixteen linear and the thirty-seven angular measurements were pooled the

186
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

TABLE 3
Resumé of hereditary traits
TRAIT DOMINANT RECESSIVE SEX-LINKED
TEETH AND MOUTH
1. Teeth
Rate tooth develops X(?) — —
Ant. teeth (11-2) X(?) — —
Very large i-11 x — —
Absence II Inc. X —— —
Absence 12 x 4 x
Absence Pm’s », 4 — —
Absence M’s xX — —
Anodontia (w. hydrod.) xX — —
(w. anhydrod.) — — X(R)
Carabelli’s cusp Intermed. X — —
Caries X(?) — —
Defective enamel
agenesis — — XD
hypocalc. xX — —
hypomat. — — XR
pig. hypomat. — xX —
loc. hypopl. X — —
Dentin hypopl. xX — —_—
Dentinogen. imperf. xX — _—
Diastemata xX — —
Shovel-shaped I — 4 —
Supernum. teeth xX — —
Tooth size xX — —_
2. Oral cavity
Ankylgossia X — —
Chondroect. dyspl. — xX —
Eruption pattern xX — —
Fibrous swell. jaws X(?) — —
Ging. hyperplas. — —
Malocclusion (-++ access. factors) X(?) X(?) —_
Progenia x — —
Recessive chin X(?) — —
Shape, size jaws X(?) — (xX, D?)
Torus mand, pal. CX) — (XD)
JAWS AND FACE
Cleft lip (Inc.) (X) (Xx)
Cleft palate xX — —
Cleft palate+-cleft lip (Inc.) (Xx) =f
Cleidocran. dysos. x — _—
Craniofac. dysos. Irreg. X — —
Facial complex
Size, shape x x —
Dimensions — xX? —
Growth pattern x — —
Hemiat. — x —
Hemihypert. — xX —
Mand.-fac. dysos. Irreg. X — —
Physiognom. traits
Lip heights xX? — —
Thick upper ip X — —
Thick lower lip | X? — _
Lower lip groove x — —
Chin ‘‘clefts”’ xX — —

(N.B. This Table reflects both contradictory statements in the literature and recognition of a complexity that cannot yet be broken down. An example of the first is seen in ‘‘absence of I2”, where D, R,
and SL are all checked. An example of the second is malocclusion, where both D and R are checked, with
a ? in recognition that in the total malocclusal complex it is impossible to be specific.)

187
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

““t” = 5:66, error only 10-3 per cent. The means of the MZ twin intrapair difference were
only one-half those of the DZ twins intrapair differences.

Summary

1. The Reptilian-Mammalian evolutionary transition in face, jaws and teeth provides
a structural, functional, selective and genetic framework for the concept of “ fields” in
the dental arches and in the dentition.

2. Twin, family-line and racial studies have demonstrated the possibility of many
trait and trait-complexes in the human dentition which are under genetic control.

3. Similarly, tooth-size, whether considered individually, in functional quadrants,
and in intra- and inter-arch relations, shows evidence of genetic control.

4. Structural defects in the teeth, especially involving the enamel and the dentin, are
under genetic control.

5. The congenital absence of the teeth is mediated genetically. Especially is this true of

sees the agenesis of which has been shown to be a polymorphism; where M3 is absent
there is a more frequent hypodontia. microdontia, and a slowed calcification and eruption.
This polymorphic effect extends, in a degree, to the sibs of an affected child.

6. Tooth calcification and eruption, in sequence and in time, are under genetic
control.

7. There is strong evidence that dental development is moderated by the same genetic
mechanism that dictates maturation in general, and sex maturational differences in
particular.

8. It is at present not possible to dichotomize between genetic and teratogenic effects
in cleft lip and/or palate. It is likely that lip and primary palate cleft are largely genetic,
while secondary palate cleft is largely teratogenic.

9. Caries susceptibility/immunity is too complex an entity to conclude more than
that there may be (a) genetic factor(s).

10. The phenomena of tooth-bone inter-relationships during growth show evidence
of polygenetic “‘patterning”’, as well as of syndromic association. This is borne out by
serial analysis of facio-dental growth as observed roentgenographic cephalometrically.
There are two main approaches via serial radiographic data: (1) The attempt to elucidate
unit traits or functional loci; (2) An attempt to compare overall “‘pattern’”’, i.e. the total
cephalo-facial complex.

11. In Table 3 is presented a tabular summary of the data discussed in this review.
Traits are listed under several categories. No attempt, in this tabulation, has been made
to cite specific reference; for this the text must be carefully consulted.

REFERENCES

. Abrahams, L. C. 1949. Shovel-shaped incisors in the Cape Malays. J. Dent. Assoc. S. Af. 4, 7.

. Adler, P., and Adler-Hradecky, C. 1963. Die Agenesie des Weisheitszahnes. Deutsches Zahnartz.
Zeitschr. 18, 136.

. Aduss, H., and Pruzansky, S. 1964. Postnatal craniofacial development in children with the orofacial-digital syndrome. Arch. Oral Biol. 9, 193.

. Altemus, L. A. 1965. The incidence of cephalofacial birth defects. Angle Orthod. 35, 131.

. Asbell, M. H. 1957. A study of the family-line transmission of dental occlusion. Am. J. Orthod. 43,
265.

. Bachrach, F. H., and Young, M. 1927. A comparison of the degree of resemblance in dental char
acters shown in pairs of twins of identical and fraternal types. Brit. Dent. J. 21, 1293.

NS Ub WO NK

188
ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

. Barnicot, N. A. 1964. Biological variation in modern populations (pp. 189-298) in Harrison, Weiner,

Tanner, Barnicot, op. cit.).

. Barros, L., and Witkop, C. J. 1963. Oral and genetic study of Chileans, 1960. V. Factors that influence

the severity of periodontal disease. Arch. Ori Biol. 8, 765.

. Brothwell, D. (ed.) 1963. Dental Anthropology. Vol. V, Symposia of Soc. for Study Human Biol.

London: Macmillan.

. Brothwell, D. R., Carbonell, V. M., and Goose, D. H. 1963. Congenital absence of teeth in human

populations (pp. 179-190 in Brothwell, op cit.)

. Brown, W. A. B. 1961. A cephalometric study of parents and their children. Proc. Europ. Orthod.

Soc. pp. 409-418.

. Butler, P. M. 1963. Tooth morphology and primate evolution (pp. 1-14 in Brothwell, op cit.).
. Carbonnel, V. M. 1963. Variations in the frequency of shovel-shaped incisors in different populations

(pp. 211-234 in Brothwell, op cit.).

. Carter, C. O. 1964. The genetics of common malformations (pp. 306—313 in Fishbein, op cit.).
. Crigler, J. F., Cohen, M. I., and Wittenborg, M. H. 1962. Systemic disturbances in relation to general

and dentofacial growth and development in children. Am. J. Orthod. 48, 1.

. Dahlberg, A. A. 1945. The paramolar tubercle (Bolk). Am. J. Phys. Anth. n.s. 3, 97.
. Dahlberg, A. A. 1953. Concepts of occlusion in physical anthropology and comparative anatomy.

J. Am. Dent. Assoc. 46, 530.

. Dahlberg, A. A. 1963. Analysis of the American Indian dentition (pp. 149-177 in Brothwell, op cit.).
. Dahlberg, A. A. 1965. Evolutionary background of dental and facial growth. J. Dent. Res. 44, 151.
. Drennan, M. R. 1937. The torus mandibularis in the Bushman. J. Anat. 72, 66.

. Dreyer, C. J., and Shear, M. 1955. Defective growth of the mandibular condyles, associated with

imperfect enamel formation. J. Dent. Assoc. S. Africa, 10, 299.

. Falkner, F. (ed.). 1966. Human Development. Philadelphia: Saunders.

. Falls, H. F. 1962. Bone and connective tissue (pp. 265-274 in Witkop, op cit.).

. Finn, S. B. 1962. Dentin and enamel anomalies (pp. 219-245 in Witkop, op cit.).

. Fishbein, M. (ed.). 1964. Congenital Malformations; Proc. Second Internat. Conf. Congen. Malf.

New York: Medical Congress, Ltd.

. Fogh-Anderson, P. 1942. Inheritance of Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate. Copenhagen: Nyt. Nordisk Forlag.

Arnold Busck.

. Fogh-Anderson, P. 1961. Inheritance patterns for cleft lip and cleft palate (pp. 123-133, in Pruzansky,

op. cit.).

. Fogh-Anderson, P. 1964. Recent statistics of facial clefts frequency, heredity, mortality (in Holtz,

op. cit.).

. Fortuyn, A. B. D. 1935. Inheritance of harelip and cleft palate in man. Genetics, 17, 349.
. Fraser, F. C. 1961. Experimental induction of cleft palate (pp. 188-197 in Pruzansky, op. cit.)
. Fraser, F. C. 1964. Experimental teratogenesis in relation to congenital malformations in man (pp.

277-288, in Fishbein, op. cit.).

. Fukuhara, T., and Saito, S. 1962. Genetic considerations on the dysplasia of the nasopalatal segments

as a ‘‘Formes Frustes”’ radiologically found in parents of cleft children. Jap. J. Hum. Gen. 7, 234.

. Fukuhara, T., and Saito, S. 1963. Possible carrier status of hereditary cleft palate with cleft lip. Bull.

Tokyo Med. Dent. U. 10, 333.

. Gaard, R. A. 1961. Ocular hypertelorism of Grieg: A congenital craniofacial deformity. Am. J.

Orthod. 47, 205.

. Gabriel, A. C. 1948. Genetic Types in Teeth. Sidney: Austral. Med. Publ. Co.

Garn, S. M. 1963. Human biology and research in body composition. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 110, 429.

. Garn, S. M. (.d.). The genetics of normal human growth. De Genetica Medica. Pt. 2, pp. 414-434,

Rome.

. Garn, S. M., and Lewis, A. B. 1957. Relationship between the sequence of calcification and the

sequence of eruption of the mandibular molar and premolar teeth. J. Dent. Res. 36, 992.

. Garn, S. M., and Lewis, A. B. 1962. The relationship between third molar agenesis and reduction in

tooth number. Angle Orthod. 32, 14.

. Garn, S. M., and Lewis, A. B. 1963. Phylogenetic and intra-specific variations in tooth sequence.

Polymorphism (pp. 53-73 in Brothwell, op cit.).

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Bonné, B. 1961. Third molar polymorphism and the timing of tooth

formation. Nature, 192 (4806), 989.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Bonne, B. 1962. Third molar formation and its developmental course.

Angle Orthod. 32, 270.
Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Kerewsky, R. S. 1964. Third molar agenesis and size reduction of the
remaining teeth. Nature, 201, 839.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Kerewsky, R. S. 1964. Fields of tooth size (Mimeo). Fels Res. Inst.,

Yellow Springs, Ohio.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Kerewsky, R. S. 1964. Sex differences in tooth size. J. Dent. Res. 43,

306.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Kerewsky, R. S. 1965. X-linked inheritance of tooth size. J. Dent.

Res. 44, 439.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Kerewsky, R. S. 1965. Size interrelationships of the mesial and distal

teeth. J. Dent. Res. 44, 350.
189
8la.
82.
83.

84.
. Kraus, B. S. 1956. The Evidence for the Inheritance of Dental Characteristics (Mimeo). Denver.

86.
87.

190

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Kerewsky, R. S. 1965. Genetic, nutritional and maturational correlates

of dental development. J. Dent. Res. 44, 228.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Polachek, D. L. 1960. Sibling similarities in dental development. J.

Dent. Res. 39, 170.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Polachek, D. L. 1960. Interrelations in dental development. I. Inter
relationships within the dentition. J. Dent. Res. 39, 1049.
M., and Rohmann, C. G. 1962. X-linked inheritance of developmental timing in man. Nature,

. Garn, S.
196 (4855), 695.

Garn, S. M., and Rohmann, C. G. 1966. Interaction of nutrition and genetics in the timing of growth
and development. Ped. Clinics N. A. 13, 352.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Vicinus, J. H. 1962. Third molar agenesis and reduction in number

of other teeth. J. Dent. Res. 41, 717.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Vicinus, J. H. 1963. The inheritance of symphyseal size during growth.

Angle Orthod. 33, 222.

. Garn, S. M., Lewis, A. B., and Vicinus, J. H. 1963. Third molar polymorphism and its significance

to dental genetics. J. Dent. Res. 42 (6, Suppl.), 1344.

. Goodman, H. 1965. Genetic parameters of dentofacial development. J. Dent. Res. 44, 174.
. Gorlin, R. J., and Pindborg, J. J. 1964. Syndromes of the Head and Neck. New York: McGraw-Hill.
. Gorlin, R. J., Redman, R. S., and Shapiro, B. L. 1965. Effect of X-chromosome aneuploidy on jaw

growth. J. Dent. Res. 44, 269.

. Grahnen, H. 1962. Hereditary factors in relation to dental caries and congenitally missing teeth

(pp. 194—204 in Witkop, op cit.).

. Greene, G. W. 1962. Genetic factors in ectodermal dysplasia (pp. 161-170 in Witkop op. cit.).

. Grimm, H. 1938. Beobachtungen tiber den Torus Mandibularis. Z. Kinderheilk. 8, 337.

. Gron, P. 1962. Prediction of tooth emergence. J. Dent. Res. 41, 573.

. Griineberg, H. 1937. The relations of endogenous and exogenous factors in bone and teeth develop
ment: The teeth of the grey-lethal mouse. J. Anat. 71, 236.

. Griineberg, H. 1952. Genetical studies on the skeleton of the mouse: quasi-continuous variations.

J. Genetics, 51, 95.

. Griineberg, H. 1963. The Pathology of Development: A Study of Inherited Skeletal Disorders in Animals.

New York: Wiley.

. Griineberg, H. 1964. The genesis of skeletal abnormalities (pp. 210-223 in Fishbein, op cit.).
. Hanihara, K. 1963. Crown characters of the deciduous dentition of Japanese-American hybrids

(pp. 105-124 in Brothwell, op. cit.).

. Hanna, B. L., Turner, M., and Hughes, R. D. 1963. Family studies of the facial complex. J. Dent.

Res. 42 (Suppl.), 1322.

. Harrison, G. A., Weiner, J. S., Tanner, J. M., and Barnicot, N. A. 1964. Human Biology. Oxford

University Press.

. Hellman, M. 1936 (July). Our third molar teeth: Eruption, presence, absence. Dental Cosmos.
. Heys, F. M., Blattner, R. J., and Robinson, H. B. G. 1960. Osteogenesis imperfecta and odonto
genesis imperfecta. Clinical and genetic aspects in 18 families. J. Ped. 56, 234.

. Holtz, R. (ed.). 1964. Early Treatment of Cleft Lip and Palate. Internat. Symp. Berne: Huber.
. Hooton, E. A. 1918. On certain eskimoid characters in Icelandic skulls. Am. J. Phys. Anth. 1, 53.
. Horowitz, S. L., Osborne, R. H., and De George, F. V. 19581 Hereditary factors in tooth dimensions:

A study of the anterior teeth of twins. Angle Orthod. 28, 87.

. Horowtiz, S. L., Osborne, R. A., and De George, F. V. 1960. A cephalometric study of craniofacial

variation in adult twins. Angle Orthod. 30, 1.

. Hrdlicka, A. 1920. Shovel-shaped teeth. Am. J. Phys. Anth. 3, 429.
. Hughes, B. O. 1942. Heredity as a factor in cranial and facial development. Am. J. Orthod. Oral Surg.

28, 357.

. Hughes, B. O., and Moore, G. R. 1941. Heredity, growth and the dentofacial complex. Angle Orthod.

11, 217.

. Hunt, E. E., Jr. 1966. The developmental genetics in Man (pp. 76-122 in Falkner, op. cit.).
. Hursey, R. J., Witkop, C. J., Miklashek, D., and Sackett, L. M. 1956. Dentinogenesis imperfecta in

a racial isolate with multiple hereditary defects. Oral Surg., Oral Med. Oral Pathol. 9, 641.

. Jordan, R. E., Kraus, B. S., and Neptune, C. M. 1966. Dental abnormalities associated with cleft

lip and/or palate. C/. Pal. J. 3, 22. .

Keene, H. J. 1965. The relationships of maternal age, parity, and"birth weight to hypodontia in naval
recruits (Abst.) Am. J. Phys. Anth. n.s. 23, 330

Kitamura, H., and Kraus, B. S. 1964. Visceral variations and defects associated with cleft lip and
palate in human fetuses: a macroscopic description. Cl. Pal. J. 1, 99.

Korkhaus, G. 1957. Disturbances in the development of the upper jaw and the middle face: I,
Hereditary and developmental factors; II, Functional influences. Am. J. Orthod. 43, 848. Ibid. 43, 881.
Kraus, B. S. 1951. Carabelli’s anomaly of the maxillary molar teeth. J. hum. Genet. 3, 348.

Kraus, B. S. 1961. Hereditary aspects of calcification sequence and pattern in the deciduous molar
teeth. Proc. Second. Internat. Cong. Hum. Gen. pp. 419-425, Rome.

me S. 1963. Morphogenesis of deciduous molar pattern in Man (pp. 87-104 in Brothwell,
op. cit.
88.
89.
90.
91.

92.
93.

94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
in MckKusick, V. A. 1966. Heritable Disorders of Connective Tissue (3rd ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
101.

102.
103.

104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.

112.
113.

114.

115.
116.

117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.

ROLE OF GENETIC FACTORS IN THE HUMAN FACE, JAWS AND TEETH

Kraus, B. S., and Ahern, S. 1966. Deviations in the sequence of appearance of primary centers of

ossification in the feet of human fetuses with cleft lip and/or palate. Am. J. Anat. 118, 735.

Kraus, B. S., Wise, W. J., and Frei, R. H. 1959. Heredity and the craniofacial complex. Am. J. Orthod.

Kraus, B. S., Kitamura, H., and Ooe, T. 1963. Malformations associated with cleft lip and palate in

human embryos and foetuses. Am. J. Obst. Gynec. 86, 321.

Krogman, W. M. 1960. Oral structures genetically and anthropologically considered. Ann. N.Y.

Acad. Sci. 85, 17.

Kustaloglu, O. A. 1962. Paramolar structures of the upper dentition. J. Dent. Res. 41, 75.

re So 1950. Genetic analysis of racial traits of the teeth. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant.
iol. 15, 191.

tl M. R., and Sawin, P. B. 1941. Inheritance of human facial features. J. Hered. 32,
7.

Lewis A. B., and Garn, S. M. 1960. The relationship between tooth formation and other maturational

factors. Angle Orthod. 30, 70.

Lundstrom, A. 1948. Tooth Size and Occlusion in Twins. Uppsala: State Inst. Human Genetics and

Race Biology.

Lundstrom, A. 1955. The significance of genetic and non-genetic factors in the profile of the facial

skeleton. Am. J. Orthod. 12, 910.

McDonald, R. E. 1949. Anodontia in hereditary ectodermal dysplasia. J. Hered. 40, 95.

eth H. V. 1958. A time series analysis of growth in nose height during childhood. Child. Dev.

Meredith, H. V., and Hixon, E. H. 1954. Frequency, size, and bilateralism of Carabelli’s tubercle.

J. Dent. Res. 33, 435.

Moore, G. R. 1944. Heredity as a guide in dento-facial orthopaedics. Am. J. Orthod. 30, 549.

Moore, G. R., and Hughes, B. O. 1942. Familial factors in diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of

dento-facial disturbances. Am. J. Orthod. Oral Surg. 28, 603.

nr il C. F. A. 1962. Genetic considerations in dental anthropology (pp. 101-112 in Witkop,

op. cit.).

Moorrees, C. F. A. 1965. Normal variation in dental development, determined with reference to

tooth eruption status. J. Dent. Res. 44 (P. 2, Suppl. 1), 161

Moorrees, C. F. A., and Reed, R. B. 1964. Correlations among crown diameters of human teeth.

Arch. Oral. Biol. 9, 685.

Moorrees, C. F. A., and Reed, R. B. 1965. Changes in dental arch dimensions expressed on the basis

of tooth eruption as a measure of biologic age. J. Dent. Res. 44, 129.

Moorrees, C. F. A., Fanning, E. A., and Hunt, E. E., Jr. 1963. Age variation of formation stages for

10 permanent teeth. J. Dent. Res. 42, 1490.

Moorrees, C. F. A., Fanning, E. A., and Hunt, E. E., Jr. 1963. Formation and resorption of three

deciduous teeth in children. Am. J. Phys. Anth. n.s. 21, 205.

Niswander, J. D., and Sujaku, C. 1962. Relationship of enamel defects of permanent teeth to retention

of deciduous tooth fragments. J. Dent. Res. 41, 808.

Oldfield, M. C. 1949. Modern trends in harelip and cleft palate surgery, with a review of 500 cases.

Brit. J. Surg. 37, 178.

Osborne, R. H. 1962. Applications of twin studies to dental research (pp. 79-91 in Witkop, op cit.).

Osborne, R. H., and De George, F. V. 1959. Genetic Basis of Morphological Variations. Harvard

University Press.

Pedersen, P. O. 1949. The East Greenland Eskimo Dentition: Numerical Variations and Anatomy.

Copenhagen. Meddeleser om Gregnland, 142.

Pfannenstiel, D. 1951. Zur Morphologie und Genetik der Mund- und Kinnregion. Zurich. (Univ.)

Prorok E. S. 1963. Lateral cephalometric radiograms as an aid to the determination of monozygosity.

Angle Orthod. 33, 35.

Fruzansky, S. (ed.). 1961. Congenital Anomalies of the Face and Associated Structures. Springfield:
omas.

Rantanen, A. V. 1956. On the frequency of the missing and peg-shaped maxillary incisor among

Finnish students. Am. J. Phys. Anth. n.s. 14, 491.

Rattner, L. J., and Myers, H. M. 1962. Occurrence of enamel hypoplasia in children with congenital

allergies. J. Dent. Res. 41, 646.

Reddy, D. V., and Madenlioglu, M. 1967. Chondroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis van Creveld syndrome).

Clin. Pediat. 6, 51.

Riesenfeld, A. 1956. Shovel-shaped incisors and a few other dental features among the native peoples

of the Pacific. Am. J. Phys. Anth. n.s. 14, 505.

Rosen, S., Hunt, H. R., and Hoppert, C. A. 1961. The importance of the genotype in susceptiblity

to dental caries in the rat. J. Dent. Res. 40, 352.

Rubbrecht, O. 1939. A study of the heredity of the anomalies of the jaws. Am. J. Orthod. Oral Surg.

25, 751.

Ruess, A. L., Pruzansky, S., and Lis, E. F. 1962. The oral-facial-digital syndrome: a multiple con
genital condition in females with associated chromosomal anomalies. Pediatrics, 29, 985.

Rushton, M. A. 1953. Teeth (pp. 382-395 in Sorsby, op cit.).
191
126.
127.

128.
129.

130.
131.

132.
133.

134.
135.
136.

137.
138.

139.
140.
141.
a Witkop, C. J. 1962. Dental problems of a heritable nature (pp. 42-56 in Witkop, op. cit.).
144.

145.
146.

192

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Sarnas, Ke V. 1959. Inter- and intra-family variation in the facial profile. Odont. Revy. 10 (Suppl. 4),

, Lund.

Schreiner, K. E. 1935. Zur Osteologie der Lappen Inst. Sammenlignende Kulturforsk., Ser. B. 18 (1)

and 18 (2). Oslo.

Schultz, A. H. 1932. The hereditary tendency to eliminate the upper lateral incisors. Hum. Biol. 4, 34.

Shafer, G. W., Hine, M. K., and Levy, B. M. 1963. (2nd ed.) A Textbook of Pathology (see pp. 2-75,

** Developmental disturbances of oral and paraoral structures ”’) Philadelphia: Saunders.

apo, MM. J. 1949. The anatomy and morphology of the tubercle of Carabelli. J. Dent. Assoc.
. Afr. 4, .

Shear, M. i 79 OG Hereditary hypocalcification of the enamel: Report of three cases in one family. J. Dent.
ssoc. S.

Snodgrasse, R. Mt 71948, A family-line study of cephalo-facial growth. Am. J. Orthod. 34, 714.

Snodgrasse, R. M. 1954. Heredity and cephalo-facial growth in cleft lip and/or cleft palate children.

Bull. Am. Assoc. Cl. Pal. Rehabil. Monog. Suppl. No. 1.

Sorsby, A. (ed.). 1953. Clinical Genetics. St. Louis: Mosby.

Tanner, J. M. 1962. Growth at Adolescence (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell.

Thomsen, S. O. 1952. Missing teeth with special reference to the population of Tristan da Cunha.

Am. J. Phys. Anth. n.s. 10, 155.

Tobias, P. V. 1955. Teeth, jaws and genes. J. Dent. Assoc. S. Af. 10, 88.

Todd, T. W. 1932. Hereditary and environmental factors in facial development. Int. J. Orthod. Oral

Surg. ‘and Radiog. 18, 799.

Weidenreich, F. 1936. The mandibles of Sinanthropus pekinensis. Paleont. Sinica Ser. D. 7, 52.

Witkop, C. J. 1959. Dental genetics, 1959 (rev.). J. Am. Dent. Assoc. 60, 564. 1960.

Witkop, C. J. (ed.) 1962. Genetics and Dental Health. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Witkop, C. J. 1964. Genes, chromosomes and dentistry. J. Am. Dent. Assoc. 68, 845.

Witkop, C. J., and Barros, L. 1963. Oral and genetic studies of Childeans. I. Oral anomalies. Am. J.
Phys. Anth. 21, 15.

Woolf, C., Woolf, P., and Broadbent, T. 1963. A genetic study of cleft lip and palate i in Utah. Am.
J. Hum. Gen. 16, 209.

Wylie, W. L. 1944, A quantitative method for the comparison of Craniofacial patterns of different
individuals: its application to a study of parents and offspring. Am. J. Anat. 74, 39
