THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY*
By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A., M.D., D.Sc., F.R.C.P.

years since Francis Galton was born

and more than forty since he died it is
noteworthy how often workers in the most
diverse scientific fields refer to him as one of
the originators, or more often the originator,
of the theme they are developing. My
subject today is no exception. Writers like
Professor Burt, when dealing with mental
measurements, make frequent references to
him. Sir Godfrey Thomson, when he gave
this lecture six years ago, said: ‘‘In the
words of Karl Pearson, ‘ Galton created the
subject of correlation,’ and from correlation
has arisen that branch of psychology in which
I am most interested—I mean the factorial
analysis of human ability.”” Twin studies
take us straight back to his paper of 1875.
On the side of genetical theory I should like
to mention an important recent book—very
relevant to the subject of this lecture—Professor Mather’s Bzometrical Genetics.| Not
unnaturally Mendel’s name appears in the
first sentence; but Galton’s appears in
the third. Here is a short quotation from the
introductory chapter: ‘“‘ Neither the Galtonian nor the Mendelian method was of
itself capable of supplying the solution. The
understanding of continuous’ variation
awaited a fusion of the two methods of
approach, the genetical and the biometrical,
for each supplied what the other lacked.
The one gave us the principles on which the
analysis must be based ; the other showed
the way in which to handle continuous
variation, the way of representing it in a
form which made fruitful analysis possible.”

ALTHOUGH it is a hundred and thirty

The Hypothesis

The genetics of mental deficiency is a big
subject and one cannot cover a great deal of
it in one lecture, so I propose to devote the
time to discussing a particular hypothesis :

* The Galton Lecture delivered at a meeting of the
Eugenics Society on April 4th, 1952. |
t+ Methuen, 1949. .

71

namely, that from the point of view of
causation there are two kinds of mental
defectives. One kind shows the sort of
variation that interested Mendel: the sharp,
clear-cut difference. The other shows the
sort of variation that interested Galton:
continuous variation, by imperceptible steps,
from the very bright, through the average, to
the very dull, and finally to those whom we
classify as mentally defective. If there are
indeed two kinds a recognition of that fact
is quite the most important step in understanding how mental deficiency comes about.
If we mix them up together we shall never
get very far with our analysis. And the
practical consequences are of great importance: any hope of reducing the amount of
mental deficiency demands totally different
appreciations and totally different procedures.

Now the hypothesis is an hypothesis, and
not the kind of proposition which once it has
been pointed out is self-evident. It has gone
through the history of many useful scientific
hypotheses. First, there is too much resistance, or it is ignored ; then there is, perhaps,
too uncritical an acceptance. This view of
the causation of mental deficiency has been
widely accepted for a good many years ; but
it is in fact more than ever necessary to put
it to the test. Itcan be tested for, as with all
useful hypotheses, predictions to be verified
or disproved can be deduced from it. The
tests are straightforward enough in theory,
but difficult and expensive in practice. That
is why we are not farther ahead. Even now
it is conceivable that the hypothesis is, I will
not say wholly wrong, but only partially right.

Early Studies

The first Mendelians tried to make mental
deficiency a single-factor difference from the
normal. In the light of the knowledge that
existed then, this was a perfectly reasonable
thing to do; but it would not work. Meanwhile the genius of Binet and Simon had
72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

provided a means for measuring mental
ability. In 1912 the Swedish psychologist,
Jaederholm carried out a very fine survey
indeed. The great bulk of the mentally
defective children of Stockholm, excluding
idiots and imbeciles, were provided for in
“help classes’; the number at that time
was 320, of whom Jaederholm tested no fewer
than 301. He also tested a corresponding
sample of children from the general population. The data were analysed in collaboration with Karl Pearson and the results were
published in 1914.*

     
     

JAEDERHOLM'S DATA _[]
= 3200
1600
(27,068) S00
400
200
100
50
meN(g02) y |
_ eV YW oL
“1-6 -5 -4-3-—2-+4 01 234 5 6 7

INTELLIGENCE.(1=STAND. DEV.)
FIG. 1
Frequency distribution of Binet I.Q.s of high-grade
mental defectives and normal schoolchildren in Stockholm. Normals actually tested were 261. The vertical
scale is reduced continuously so as to show both groups
on the same graph. (From K. Pearson, ‘‘On the
Inheritance of Mental Disease,’ Annals of Eugenics,
1930-31, 4, 362-80

The distribution of intelligence test scores
conformed reasonably well to the familiar
normal curve and it will be seen from Fig. 1
that the children in the help classes belonged
to it. Pearson and Jaederholm showed that
the fit of the normal curve was three times
better if the help-class children were included
with the rest of the general population. They
recognised clearly that idiots and imbeciles

* Mendelism and the Problem of Mental Defect. On the

Continuity of Mental Defect. Cambridge University
ess.

could not be accommodated in the normal
curve. They also pointed out something else.
There was some excess of low I.Q.s above 50.
They considered two explanations for this.
First, it might be an artificial excess, due to
the accidents of small numbers and the
difficulty of making good estimates for the
constants of the curve. Secondly, it might be
a real excess, in which case, they said, some of
those above the level of intelligence of
imbeciles might not form part of the normal
distribution, but, like imbeciles, owe their
mental state to pathological causes. The
possible excess, they estimated, was not
likely to be more than one-third of the helpclass children. :

So here, as long ago as 1914, is our hypothesis in all its essentials: that the highergrade defectives, roughly the feeble-minded,
are the lowest part of the ordinary distribution, of intelligence in the population, no more
abnormal than the geniuses and _ neargeniuses at the other end of the scale. Below
that come the pathological variants, roughly
the idiots and imbeciles, owing their mental
state to some major accident of heredity or
environment. Furthermore, as I have mentioned, Pearson and Jaederholm posed the
question which is still open today: does
the feeble-minded fraction contain some
appreciable proportion of persons who owe
their state to the same kind of causes as those
which result in idiocy and imbecility ?

It was a misfortune that Pearson could
not resist the temptation of presenting this
work as a polemical fulmination against the
Mendelians ; and so its significance was
obscured and for a long time it made little
impression on workers in the field of mental
deficiency. The facts, or many of them, had
been displayed ; but the underlying genetical
explanation was wanting. It is true that the
concept of multifactorial inheritance, for ever
associated with the names of Johannsen,
Nilsson-Ehle and East, had begun to take
shape in 1909, but it was not until 1918 that
Fisher,* in 2 paper of immense importance
in genetics, showed that the results of the
biometricians accorded perfectly with multifactorial Mendelian inheritance. The fusion

* Trans. Roy. Soc., Edin. 52, 399.
THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY 73

of the two approaches to the problems of
heredity had been achieved.

Lewis’s Contribution

In the field of mental deficiency older ideas
tended to persist. But in 1929* came another
very important event—as you will see I am
just mentioning one or two of the highlights—when Lewis published the results of
his extensive survey in connection with the
Wood report. His observations had led him
to a conclusion very similar to that of
Pearson and Jaederholm, though his approach
was different. He distinguished between
“ sub-cultural_”’ defectives, to be regarded as

“normal” variants, and ‘‘ pathological ”
deféctives, to be regarded as “ abnormal ”’
variants. Broadly, the first kind were the
“Teeble-minded and the second the idiots and
imbeciles. He mentioned the normal curve,
but his argument was not biometrical. He
stated (this was in an amplification published
in 1933)T :

“The pathological group comprises all
those defectives whose condition is invariably
associated with and in most cases is due to
some definite lesion or abnormality. .. .
The sub-cultural group, on the other hand,
includes those cases of mental defect in
which no such alien factor is found.’’ These
were bold claims and up to the present at
least, whatever may happen in the future,
they have been only very partially realized.
A thorough test was made by Penrose¢ in his
Colchester survey. He classified his subjects
in the greatest possible detail. Many important differences did indeed emerge, but few
proved clear cut and there was much overlapping. In fact the separation of mental
defectives into groups by their physical and
mental abnormalities does not lead to the
most useful classification from the point of
view of genetics and of causation in general.
In particular many idiots and imbeciles, who
cannot possibly form part of the normal dis
* Report on an Investigation into the Incidence of
Mental Defect in Six Areas. 1925-1927. London. H.M.
Stationery Office.

{ Jour. Ment. Sci., '79, 298.

tA Clinical and Genetic Study of 1,280 cases of
Mental Defect. M.R.C. Sp. Report Series 229. London,
1938. H.M. Stationery Office.

G ®

tribution of intelligence do not display any
“definite lesion or abnormality.” On the
other hand, quite a proportion of the presumably normal feeble-minded variants do
so: sometimes undoubtedly as the result of
coincidence, for it is an important fact that
many physical and mental abnormalities
become progressively more common as we
descend in the scale of intelligence. Penrose
then turned to an entirely different method
of classification, namely by I.Q., and this
produced a clearer differentiation, as I shall
be mentioning shortly. It may be that some
day the two types of defectives may be
distinguished by observable qualitative differences—and an immense advance that
would be—but that day is not yet. I think
that Dr. Lewis felt this himself, even then,
for I can recall him saying to me about the
time my colleagues and I started work on
these problems in 1933: ‘Let us forget
about heredity and mental deficiency and
concentrate on heredity and Binet I.Q.”
That was certainly the main thought behind
our work, and I am glad to be able to make
some reference to the help and support that
Dr. Lewis has continued to give us over the
years, |

But though Lewis’s guess was in one
particular ahead of the available means of
investigation the consequences of his contribution have been very important indeed
in the field of mental deficiency. It is principally due to him that a rational and workable hypothesis has come to be generally
accepted and that it has been increasingly
realized that the problem of high-grade
mental deficiency is an affair of the population as a whole—not just a special problem
in one little corner of it.

The Consequences of the Hypothesis

Some mental deficiency is genetic; even
more is partially genetic. Let us first consider, then, the genetic differences between
our presumed two types. These types correspond to the most fundamental distinction
in human genetics: the major genes on the
one hand, the minor genes, or polygenes, on
the other ; single-factor inheritance with large
qualitative differences versus multifactorial
74

inheritance with continuous variation—
that is, a number of genes, each of small
effect individually, but additive in their
action, so that the end result depends upon
their combined influence. When heredity is
responsible for idiocy or imbecility—actually
some small part is due to recessive genes—it
will be a single major gene which is responsible—not, of course, always the same gene.
To the extent that feeble-mindedness is due
to heredity it will be the result of the combined action of many genes making for low
intelligence. I might interpolate here that a
person of quite low general intelligence need
not be mentally defective in the social and
legal sense ; it is the combination of inadequate mental endowment with unfavourable temperamental traits and adverse
environmental conditions which produces
that result. But without a relatively low
intelligence there is no mental deficiency, and
it is the determination of that low level that
is of most interest in connection with our
subject today.

Most idiocy and imbecility, however, is not
genetic, or at least only partly genetic. And
heredity accounts for only a part of the
variability of test intelligence in ‘the general
population. We need not stop to argue how
much. If we say something between one-half
and three-quarters of the variability that we
observe between human beings, we are
unlikely to offend anybody. The introduction of non-genetic factors into the analysis
need not complicate it unduly. When
environmental causes produce low-grade
deficiency, they will, like the major genes,
tend to be single big accidents of development. The non-genetic influences that affeet
the continuous variation of intelligence will
be the sum total of many individually small
influences just like the polygenes. Our
analysis will, in fact, quite reasonably
take care of both hereditary and nonhereditary variations, whether qualitative
or quantitative.

The First Test: The Normal Curve

The attempt to classify defectives efficiently by relying on associated pathological,
physical and mental factors fails us. So we

Percentage Frequency

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have to fall back on mental measurements.
Let us take the high-grade group first. (From
now on I will refer to the presumed highgrade group as the feeble-minded group and
to the other as the imbecile group. This is not
intended to prejudge the issue, but it should,
I think, help to avoid confusion.) In the
feeble-minded group, then, we are dealing
with multifactorial inheritance, or with
environmental influences acting in much the
same way. The-combined action of many
genes sounds complicated, but it is not really ;
at least to a first approximation. In fact we
need only a quite simple equation, involving
three constants to be determined fron
measurements, in order to specify the whole
thing for the general population, including
the feeble-minded group, which is part of it.

~~
a

 

35 45 85 6S 95

106 115 #125 #135 #145 155
“74 34 34 "104 -114 °124 "134 +144 +154 +164 TO,

Fic. 2

Frequency distribution of Stanford-Binet I.Q.s in a
complete sample of Scottish children. (From A. M.
Macmeeken, The Intelligence of a Representative Group
of Scottish Childven, University of London Press, 1939.)

The first thing to look at is the distribution
of I.0.s in the population. Here are the
frequency curves from a particularly fine
sample—that of MacMeeken.*. As you will
see, the curves are reasonably normal
—exactly how normal I will not go into—
that is one of the difficulties of the analysis—
but anyway reasonably normal. Now a

“44 54°64

normal curve is specified completely by two

figures. One is the mean and the other is the
standard deviation. Do the feeble-minded
form part of the curve as specified by these
two constants ?

-As I mentioned previously, Pearson and
Jaederholm found that at least two-thirds,
or perhaps al], the children in the help

* The Intelligence of a Representative Group of Scottish
Children. 1939. London Univ. Press.
\

classes of Stockholm belonged to the curve,
but that the idiots and imbeciles could not
possibly do so. It is.not easy to make a
better test than they did. One difficulty is
that relatively very large numbers are
required and a Binet test takes more than an
hour. Group tests, incidentally, cannot be
used, because they do not sort out mental
defectives efficiently. Another difficulty is
that it is very hard indeed to secure a good,
unbiased sample. There are also difficulties
about the precise form of the curve, exactly
how normal it is at very low levels. My
colleagues and I* made an attempt in connexion with our survey on the _ schoolchildren of Bath carried out in the ’thirties.
TABLE I

NORMALITY OF LOWER PART OF THE FREQUENCY CURVE
OF STANFORD BINET I.Q.S (BASED ON A COMPLETE
SAMPLE OF 3,361 CHILDREN)

Range of I.Q. Expected No. Observed No.
Above 73°78 ... 3,193°0 3,195°2
73°78-67°57 1008 94'9
67°57-44'97 66°5 584
Below 44°97 ... o-7 12°5

I think that we surmounted the difficulties
fairly well, though I am afraid there is not
time to go into the arguments. Table I shows
the result in very brief summary form. You
will see that the expected and observed
numbers down to an 1.Q. of 45 correspond
closely. Below this point we expect less than
one child, but in fact find eighteen times as
many—a, very big discrepancy. So it would
seem that Stanford 1.Q.s follow the normal
curve down to about I.Q. 45 (on such
numbers the point on the scale cannot be
determined very precisely), and that below
there is the anticipated excess of idiots and
imbeciles—just about the number expected
on the basis of Lewis’s survey.

The Second Test: The Regressions

I mentioned that there was a third figure
that we need in order to specify completely,
to a first approximation, not only the distribution of I.Q.s in the population but the
whole story of the average resemblance
between relatives. This is the regression coefficient. Needless to say, the term regression
goes back to Galton.

* The Genetics of Oligophrenia. Congres. Int. de
Ps ychiat. Paris, 1950. Hermann et Cie.

THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY | 75

It is found with many physical characters,
like stature, that the average resemblance
between relatives can be specified by the
figures you see in Fig. 3. If we
measure a number of subjects and then their
relatives, we find that the parents, the
children, and the brothers and sisters, that is,
the sibs, of the subjects are on the average
half-way between the subjects themselves
and the mean for the whole population. This
diagram is in terms of Binet I.Q., so if we
selected, say, 100 children of I.Q. 80 we should
expect their sibs to average 90. If we had
100 fathers of I.Q. 140, we should expect the
average 1.Q. of their sons to be 120, which is
why clever men cannot have sons who are,
on the average, as clever as themselves. But
it cuts both ways. Sons of I.Q. 140 will have
fathers who average 120, so it is equally
true that clever men cannot have fathers
who are as clever as themselves on the
average.

These figures were found empirically by
the biometricians for characters that are
practically entirely determined by heredity.
Now we know the reason. It is very simple
indeed. A pair of sibs, or a parent and child,
have half their genes in common, so with
multifactorial inheritance half the genes of
the sib make him or her like the subject ;
while the other half are different and are, on
the average, those of the general population.
Uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces share
a quarter of their genes in common with the
subject ; first cousins one-eighth.

The regressions in the diagram presuppose
complete hereditary determination, whereas
intelligence is by no means completely
determined in this way. Nevertheless the
regressions turn out in practice to be very
close to these values. One reason is that
husbands and wives tend strongly to resemble
each other in regard to intelligence : in fact,
to about the same extent as do brothers and
sisters. This makes relatives more alike than
they would otherwise be. Moreover, there
are doubtless non-genetic influences that
tend to make relatives alike and so increase
the regressions. The result is that we do not
have theoretica] values. They have to
be determined by observation; but all
76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REGRESSION OF 1.Q. OF RELATIVES ON
| Q. OF SUBJECTS

Average 1. Q. of Relatives
~ @ o Q
Oo oO O

go

70 60 90 IcO-—s «HO
1.Q. of Subjects

experience shows that they are in fact pretty
close to those shown in Fig. 3 and these
are the figures I shall use.

Let us see what we should expect in the
way of regressions rf our hypothesis is
correct. If we select a sample of defectives
belonging to the feeble-minded group and test
their sibs on the Binet scale, we should find a
regression of about 0-5. We can estimate it
in two ways. First, we can compare the
average I.Q. of our subjects taken as a whole
with their sibs taken as a whole. [f, say, the
mean I.Q. of subjects is 60, then the expected
mean I1.Q. of their sibs will be about 80.
Secondly, we can examine the regression
within the sample. Say our defectives range
from I.Q. 50 to I.Q. 70. As the I1.Q.s of
subjects rise by these 20 points, we shall
expect the I.Q. of their sibs to rise by about
half as much, that is, by about 10 points.

With the imbecile group the result is
totally different. We expect to find a few, a
very few, low-grade sibs like the subjects ;
but leaving these on one side, the average

120

O:5 Sibs, Parents, Children

Grandparents, Grandchildren,
oes {grandparents Nephews,Nieces

0-125 First Cousins

130 140

Fic. 3

I.Q. of their other sibs should be about the
same as in the general population—that is,
about 100. The regression is zero. Nor should
there be any regression within the group.
Here are some results: first those of our
Bath Survey.* We made a special study of
the 8 per cent of children having the lowest
I.Q.s, and tested all their sibs of school age.
There were only 13 idiots and imbeciles and
they had 17 sibs between them, whose
average I.Q. was, indeed, almost exactly roo.
There was little difficulty about where to
divide the two groups in this sample, for it
so happened that no child with an I.Q. of
from 44 to 53 inclusive happened to have
any sibs of school age. The number of
subjects in this second group, the very backward, was 269 and they had between them
367 sibs of school age. After making a necessary adjustment to allow for a difference in
age at test, the average I.Q. of the subjects
was 77-4 and of their sibs 88-1. So the
regression turned out to be 0-53, a figure

* Annals of Eugenics, 1940. 10, 293.
THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY a9

almost identical with that found for the
whole of the sibs of all intelligences included
in the main sample. Within the sample the
regression was again almost the same, 0-49.
Only one of the 367 sibs was an imbecile, so
as about one child of school age in 250 is an
idiot or imbecile, this sample of sibs of the
feeble-minded and the dull contained no
excess of imbeciles. So far then the evidence
supports our hypothesis.

At the same time as we were carrying out
this work, Penrose was conducting his
Colchester survey. He published in 1939*
a very similar analysis on those who had been
given a Binet test. I did not see his paper
till after ours had been published ; if I had,
I should have made the methods used more
strictly comparable. Still, they were very
similar. Taking first the defectives in his
group with I.0.s of 50 plus, his regression
was similar to ours, though a little lower,
namely 0-44. His sample of idiots and
imbeciles was, naturally, much larger than
ours and here we do get a marked departure
from hypothesis. It is true that there was
clear evidence that there were, as expected,
two kinds of sibs, the idiots and imbeciles
and the relatively normal. But the relatively
normal were definitely below 100 on the
average. The figure for all sibs was 87-4.
Even if we try to make the figures fit as well
as possible by omitting borderline subjects
and sibs, the mean I.Q. of the remaining sibs
is only 91-2.

Leaving this last result for the moment,
the correspondence between our findings and
those of Penrose is, I think, sufficiently
remarkable. Our sample was a complete
sample from the general population ; his
was composed of certified defectives only
—and many potential defectives are not
certified. His sample carries the group farther
into the .very tail of the distribution of
intelligence, but no new special factor seems
to emerge. Penrose also examined some other
relatives and again found a reasonable correspondence with the expected regressions.
His figure and ours for first cousins turned
out to be very similar.

* Brit. Jour. Psychol, 1939. 80, 1.

A New Survey: The Borderline

After the war we decided to carry out a
new survey, the main purpose of which was
to subject the hypothesis to a more searching
test, and I want to devote the rest of the
time to giving you the results of the analyses
carried out so far. We chose areas centred on
Bristol and on Colchester and tried to find
within those areas all the children with
Terman-Merrill I.Q.s ranging from 35 to 60.
We hoped in this way to cover more fully
the critical level at which the two groups
overlap. Once again, all the sibs of school age
were tested. The work was carried out by
my colleagues—at Colchester by Dr. Mellone,
Miss Newlyn and Miss Davidson ; at Bristol
by Mrs. Jenner and Mrs. Sedgley. The number
of defectives was 271 and the number of sibs
tested was 562. By selecting these particular
subjects we were, of course, making things as
difficult for ourselves as we could. This is the
very part of the range where the two groupsare
likely to be muddled up; thisistheregion where,
if anywhere, families will obstinately refuse
to fall neatly into one group or the other.

An Attempted Division: Frequency Distributions and Regressions

When we looked at the results we found
that we had succeeded only too well in
making things very complicated indeed.
We had rather hoped that the subjects of
I.Q. nearest 35 would fall clearly into the
imbecile group and those of I.Q. nearest 60
equally neatly into the feeble-minded group,
though leaving, of course, a mixed-up group
in the middle, for, to mention one point
alone, the errors of individual measurements
are considerable. But the overlap was much
greater than we had expected. A separation
by 1.Q. of subjects did indeed show that the
sample could not be homogeneous, but that
added little to what we knew before and it
was difficult to get any farther. My colleagues
and I were distinctly shaken. Was the hypothesis only very partially true after all? We
felt that this might indeed be so. No doubt
it is interesting and stimulating to find that
one has been wrong for twenty years, but it
takes a little effort to square the shoulders.

We then tried an experiment. Looking at
78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

DISTRIBUTION OF 1. Q's. OF 562 SIBS OF
MENTAL DEFECTIVES (OF 1. Q. 35-60)

uu
O

20

Frequency Percent

uw
O

Frequency Percent

    
    

ALL FAMILIES

FEEBLE MINDED

. FAMILIES

 

IMBECILE FAMILIES

 

FIG. 4

a two-way table showing the 271 subjects
arranged in order of I.Q., with the I.0.s of
their sibs alongside them, I divided the
families by brute force into two groups,
doing the job quickly and ruthlessly, with as
little juggling as possible. I should mention
that quite a number of families were ascertained through two defective children, and
two or three through three, and so both
subjects, or all three, had, of course, to be
allotted either to the imbecile group or to the
feeble-minded group.
TABLE II

I1.Q.s (ADJUSTED) OF SUBJECTS FALLING INTO THE
Two GROUPS

1.Q. Imbecile Feeble-minded
Group Group
Under 53 wae 66 , 21
53-60 ... ce 40 54
Over 60 one x 16 _74

122 149
Norte.—Effect of adjustment is to raise I.Q.s by about
6 points on the average.

Table II shows, very broadly, the result of
the division in terms of I.Q. of subjects. The
original I.Q.s, incidentally, as well as those
of the sibs, have had to be adjusted in order
to secure comparability at different ages at
test.* This has widened the range of I.Q.s of
subjects to 30 to 68 and raised them by an
average of about 6 points. On the whole the
lower I.Q.s do tend to fall into the imbecile
group and the higher I.Q.s into the feebleminded group, but there is considerable
modification and overlapping due to taking
the I.0.s of sibs into consideration also. |

Now what about the first test, the effect
on the distribution of I.0.s of the sibs ? This
is shown in Fig. 4.

The.top curve shows the total distribution
of sibs and is a very peculiar curve indeed.
It might do as a silhouette of the Matterhorn,

* Roberts and Mellone. British four. Psychol.
(Statistical Section). In the press.
THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY 79

but as the frequency distribution of a selfrespecting biological measurement it is quite
horrible. The lower curves show separately
the sibs of the two arbitrary groups. They
are very different and are in fact quite
reasonable. You will see that the arbitrary
feeble-minded group has sibs giving a fairly
normal curve centred on about I.Q. 80; the
imbecile group also yields a reasonably
normal curve, with the expected hump at the
lower end, which represents the sibs who are
also imbeciles.

Needless to say, the most difficult families
to classify were those with only one tested
sib. If these single sibs, 108 in number, are
omitted, the silhouette of the Matterhorn, as
would be expected, is practically unchanged,
but the lower curves are appreciably improved ;:in particular, the skewness, or
tilting, is reduced.

What about the regressions ? These are
shown in Fig. 5.

Taking the 562 sibs as a whole, once again
the regression is hopeless; it is not worth
while trying to fit a curve. But the two
arbitrary groups give very different results.
The feeble-minded group yields a regression
of 0-42, quite close to the expected figure, and
there is no significant departure from the
expected straight line. This is the regression
within the sample—that of 1.0. of sibs on
I.Q. of subjects. Taking the feeble-minded
subjects as a whole and their sibs as a whole,
the regression is 0-51, very close to expectation. The imbecile group yields the much
lower regression of 0:21, which does not
differ significantly from the expected figure
of zero. (If anyone should wonder how it is
possible to get two regressions which are
going up from one which seems to be going
down, the answer is that the numbers in the
arrays are very unequal).

_ Now it seems to me that this forcible
arbitrary separation must _ correspond
approximately to an underlying reality. I
have not mentioned certain other tests
—time does not allow it. The point is that
I do not think that it is possible to separate
a body of material into quite unreal groups
that will satisfy all the criteria. It is like
those exasperating puzzles: you get one

WHOLE GROUP

Average 1.Q. of Sibs

 

9 I MBECILE GROUP O-2!

Average 1. Q,of Sibs
@

~

 

50
\.Q. of Detectives

Both lower regressions are linear. Imbecile group
regression non-significant.

FIG. 5

thing right, then with an effort, a second
thing perhaps, but you cannot quite manage
the third, while the fourth and fifth obstinately
remain hopeless. You try again, but once
more you can only get one or two things ©
right at a time. In this sample, however,
everything came more or less nght at the
first attempt.

Tests Using Social Criteria

Some of you might say, however, that the
tests I have mentioned are not enough.
Even granting the difficulty of getting so
many things right all at once, nevertheless
the two groups were separated by looking at
the same figures which were subsequently
analysed. So I am glad to say that there is
some further evidence of a stronger. kind
which is quite independent of the method of
separation. It depends upon social data. If
our hypothesis is right there should be a big
difference in social background. The imbecile
group, by and large, should not differ greatly ©
80 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from the average of the general population,
whereas the families contributing the feebleminded subjects should fall much below that
average. First, occupation of father. This
was classified on a 7-point scale for which we
are indebted to Mr. Hall, of the London
School of Economics. There is indeed a big
difference between the two arbitrary groups,
whereas the division of subjects by I.Q.
alone yields a much smaller difference. The
mean figures for grade of father’s occupation
show this very clearly.

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF SOCIAL BACKGROUND
A. By Father's Occupation
Division by Groups Division by I.Q. of

Feeble- Subjects

Grade Imbecile minded 59—- 60+

% % % Yo
I-g4 wwe OSS 2 II 4
5 os 47 35 37 45
6 wee 2 19 12 15
7 “+ BE 44 40 36
Mean 5°41 6°02 5°72 5°79

B. By Assessment of Home

Grade % % % %
I .. = §0 30 41 36
2 ws = 30 23 29 22
3 aa 8 32 18 26
4 as <2 15 12 16
Mean .. 1°83 2°30 2°01 2°23
Notes: 1. 1 is highest grade.

2. Division at 1.Q. 59/60 is most favourable for
maximising difference.

Next, the condition of the home, assessed
on a 4-point scale. Here, for example, it will
be seen that 80 per cent of the imbecile
families fall into grades 1 and 2, but only
52 per cent of the feeble-minded families.
Turning to division by I.Q. the corresponding
figures are 70 and 58, a much smaller
difference.

The results of Table IV are, I think, even
more striking. Owing to the marked negative
association between intelligence and fertility,
and to a lesser degree between social class
and fertility, the fertility of mothers is a
very sensitive social index. One reason for
this is that it is a measurement which,
unlike many others, can be made with almost
complete accuracy. The difference between
the two arbitrary groups is remarkably large.

The mothers of the subjects in the feebleminded group are 40 per cent more fertile
than the mothers of those in the imbecile

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF FERTILITY OF MOTHERS
Diviston by Groups Division by I.Q. of
Feeble- Subjects
Imbecile minded 59— 60+
(Mean No.) (Mean No.) (Mean No.) (Mean No.)
Living... 2°61 3°31 2°93 3°08
Dead wes O24 0°45 0:31 O°41
Stillborn... 0°05 O15 O12 0:08
Miscarriage 016 0:39 0°23 0:37
Total preg- 3°06 4°30 3°59 3°94
nancies
Ratio ... I 1°41 I I*ro
Notes: 1. Ratio of total pregnancies will be unchanged

when all mothers have passed reproductive

age.

2. Mothers were ascertained by having subject
plus minimum of one tested sib: hence
these two children are omitted from all
calculations.

group. Once again, the difference is much
smaller when the separation is made in
terms of 1.0. of subjects ; it is only 10 per
cent.

Finally, for fertility there are fortunately
some excellent figures for the general population, with which ours can be compared
directly. They are those of the Scottish
survey, carried out in 1947,* just about the
time we were doing our survey and referring,
moreover, to subjects, and hence to mothers,
of just about the same mean age. The
figures for living children in our imbecile
group and for Scottish children of median
intelligence are very similar, which is what
ought to be found. The difference between
our two groups is 70 per cent of the difference
between average and dullest children in

Scotland.
TABLE V

COMPARISON WITH SCOTTISH SURVEY—NUMBER OF
LIvING SIBS

Present Survey Scottish Survey

Imbecile group ... 2°61 Median children ... 2-72
Feeble-minded group 3°31 Dullest children

(11%) - 3°72

Difference . 0-70 Difference . 1:00

Note : Present survey sibs calculated as _ before ;
subject through whom family was ascertained
omitted in Scottish figures.

* The Trend of Scottish Intelligence.
London Press.

1949. Univ. of
THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY _ 81

Conclusion and the Next Step
So I think that taking all the evidence
together, it is fairly safe to conclude that the
arbitrary separation has indeed hit off rather
closely an underlying reality ; and that it
was so easy to do shows that even at the most
difficult part of the range, the region of the
overlap, there are good indications that we
are dealing with two groups of families, even
if we cannot always decide from the I.Q. of
an individual defective, or indeed by any
further examination of him, or perhaps of
his family, which group he belongs to. There
is an overlap, due to errors of measurement
and to real overlapping of I.Q.s, including
occasional really high-grade deficiency due to
single major causes. The high-grade mongol
or phenylketonuric is very rare; nevertheless he exists; but it would seem that the
contribution of these single major causes to
the total bulk of feeble-mindedness is
probably relatively small. |

* I should like to end with a word on the one
anomalous finding : that the average I.Q. of
the relatively normal sibs of idiots and
imbeciles seems to be lower than 100. This
does not contradict the reality of the difference between the two groups, but it is a
complication and a result that would not be
foreseen on theoretical grounds. There are
a number of possibilities, some of which, I
hope, we can explore on the data we already
have. Part may be due to the inadvertent
inclusion of what are really high-grade
families. A small part is certainly due to
single causes now and then producing no
more than feeble-mindedness. Part is undoubtedly an artefact, due to bias, some of
which can, I think, be allowed for. But I hope
that some of it proves to be real; the more
the better ; and for this reason. If it is real
it is probably an indication that idiocy and

Ss

The most important single point in
attempting to unravel the causation of
mental deficiency is to determine whether
or not there are two kinds: first, those who
shade off into the very dull and represent the
tail of the normal curve of the distribution of
intelligence ; secondly, those who are qualitatively different from the normal. Broadly,
the first_kind are the feeble-minded and the
second the idiots and imbeciles. To the
extent that causation is genetic, inheritance
in the first kind is multifactorial and in the
second depends on single genes. Similarly,
with non-genetic causation the contrast is
between the combined action of many
influences on the one hand and single major
accidents of development on the other.

‘This hypothesis, in all essentials, was put
forward by Pearson and Jaederholm in 1914.
The genetic basis of the distinction was not,
however, formulated at that time ; it had to
wait for Fisher’s synthesis of the treatment
of quantitative and qualitative variation,
published in 1918. During the last twentyfive years many workers have contributed
evidence, the work of Lewis being especially
noteworthy as a turning-point in the history
of the subject. Nevertheless, the hypothesis
remains an hypothesis, and more @¥fdelice is
needed beforstEcan be accepted as fully
proved. One difficulty is that the presumed
two types cannot be separated efficiently on
clinical grounds, and so it is necessary to fall
back on mental tests. These measurements
are subject to considerable error, and even. if
they were not there is no reason why there
should not be a real overlapping. And human
families are small. So it is often impossible
to assign a defective unequivocally to one
group or the other, even after the fullest
examination of him and of his family.

imbecility are somewhat commoner under .« A review of the evidence shows that in

poorer social conditions. If this is so, there is
a hope of effecting some reduction. My own
guess is that the evidence may lead us to
birth injury and prematurity as causes of
considerable importance. Anyway it is a
‘possibility that is well worth examining ; and
this, if our plans go right, is to be the subject
of our next main survey.

D

general it is in favour of the hypothesis. The
frequency curve of the distribution of I.Q.s
is normal down to a level which includes most:
of the feeble-minded. The regressions are of
the expected order : thus, the sib regression
in the feeble-minded group-is abouto:5, which
is the Value found in the general population ;
with low-grade defectives it is sufficiently
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

close to zero (within the group), the sibs
tending to fall into two classes, a few of lowgrade like the subjects and the majority of
relatively normal intelligence. Nevertheless,
it is known that those major influences which
usually cause idiocy or imbecility may
occasionally produce no more than feeblemindedness, as is seen for example, though
rarely, in mongolism or phenylketonuria. An
important point is to discover whether such
families make any substantial contribution
numerically in the region of the overlap.

The results of a new survey designed to
cover this difficult region are briefly reported.
As complete an ascertainment as possible
was made of defectives within the I.Q. range
35-60 and all their brothers and sisters of
school age were also tested. Separating these
271 families by the_I.Q. of the defective
proved only moderately efficient. An attempt
to divide the families into two groups in a
somewhat arbitrary fashion, which is
described, gavé better results. An analysis
of independent social criteria in particular
did appear to indicate that the families were
indeed composed of two quite different
groups. Hence it seems Tikely that even in
the region of overlapping I.0.s there are still
two contrasting types of causation in the
great majority of instances, and that the
contribution of truly mixed families is
numerically small in relation to the total
amount of mental deficiency in the population.

Discussion

The lectute was followed by a short discussion
opened by Dr. ELioT SLATER, who said that if
Dr. Fraser Roberts’s theory, that there were two
qualitatively distinct classes of defectives, was
correct, it was a matter of the greatest importance.
To establish or rebut its truth he had made a
critical experiment. The terms of the experiment
had made the results rather difficult to handle, but
he thought that Dr. Roberts had received a fairly
clear and unequivocal answer that his theory was
right.

Some people might have doubts whether, in
investigating the heredity of mental deficiency, it
was justifiable to work with intelligence quotients,
which were an abstraction and only a partial
expression of the totality of what was meant by
mental defect. Some information was, no doubt,
lost by this procedure, but Dr. Slater thought that

it was essentially irrelevant information and that
its exclusion clarified the genetical problem.

Dr. Fraser Roberts had divided his material into
two classes “‘ by brute force’’; having made his
two groups by reference to certain criteria, it is not
surprising that they differed from one another in
these criteria after the division. There was an
element of circularity in the argument, but did this
really matter ? If aman, faced with a heap of jigSaw pieces, developed the theory that they were
pieces from two different puzzles, differing in a
colour tone, separated them according to his
theory, and then found not only two heaps of
different colour, but pieces which at last began to
fit into two distinct pictures, was his proceeding
circular ? Dr. Fraser Roberts’s two groups differed,
not only in the criteria by which he had separated
them but also in a number of quite different
qualities.

The significance of this theory, Dr. Slater continued, could not be overestimated, since problems
were raised by mental deficiency in the fields of
biology, sociology, the study of delinquency and,
finally, eugenics. The eugenic problems raised by
the idiots and imbeciles on one side, and by the
feeble-minded on the other, were quite different.
Eugenic measures were not likely to be of great
assistance with the first class, but offered much
stronger hopes with the second more numerous and
important class. But, he said, it was also a consequence of the theory that a eugenic programme
should be related to the whole population and not
concentrated on the feeble-minded.

SIR GODFREY THOMSON said that he was pleased
that Dr. Roberts had found the Scottish survey
results useful. In Scotland they were following up
the 1,200 children of the six-day sample, testing
sibs with individual Terman-Merrill tests as they
reached the age of eleven, thus avoiding any
adjustment for age, the same part of the test being
used for each child. The results, which were
accumulating slowly, would be helpful not only for
examining birth order effect but also for the further
study of Dr. Fraser Roberts’s hypothesis.

He added that he would like to ask Dr. Roberts
what was the nature of the ‘‘ brute force ”’ that he
used to separate his two groups.

PROFESSOR P. E. VERNON said that this study
showed all the clarity and statistical ingenuity we
had come to expect of Dr. Roberts. There were
two questions he would like to put. First, would
one not expect the amount of regression for firstdegree relatives to be greater than o-5 because of
assortative mating and a common environment ?
Second, how could it be determined whether
Mendelian inheritance was operating in the idiot
and imbecile group, or whether most of these cases
were not due to pathological conditions ?

Dr. C. D. DaRLtnetTon asked if he was right in
concluding that the least intelligent defectives have
the more intelligent mothers. The lecturer replied
in the affirmative.
THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY 83

' Dr. Darlington also said that an absolute distinction between major genes and polygenes was
not based on much experimental evidence. It was
possible that the genes themselves had a normal
distribution with relatively few having very large
or very small effects. Dr. Fraser Roberts’s observations had general significance. They favoured this
distinction since there was no intermediate group
and his observations provided evidence which is
not yet to be had from ordinary animal or plant
experiments.

Dr. H. J. EySENcK wished to make two points.
The first was that he thought that Thorndike,
shortly before his death, had shown that a regression
of children’s I.Q. on their parents’ I.Q. was o-7 and
not o-5 when adjustments were made for heterogeneity and so on. The second was that he did not
feel that the Binet test was a happy one to have
chosen, its ‘‘ g ’’ variance being only 40-50 per cent.
He thought that analysis had been made more
difficult by choosing this test, which measures
complex factors.

In replying to the discussion Dr. RoBErTs said
that he wished to thank Dr. Slater for making a
number of points clearer and to thank him and the
other speakers for their kind remarks, In reply to
Sir Godfrey Thomson, he said that the data of the
Scottish survey would be a gold mine for years to
come. He fully appreciated that some of the
argument about the separation of the two groups
appeared circular. The “‘ brute force ” consisted in
looking at a two-way table, down the left-hand
margin of which were arranged individually the
271 subjects in order of I.Q. and opposite to each
the I.Q.s of the tested sibs. He went quickly down
the table, assigning each family to one of the two
groups, giving weight to two things simultaneously
—namely, the subject’s I.Q. and the distribution
of the I.Q.s of its sibs. He realized that the division
was far from objective and so had applied other
tests, such as those based on social data.

He was grateful to Professor Vernon for mentioning points that had, perhaps, not been made
sufficiently clear in the lecture. He thought it a
coincidence that the regressions with first-degree
relatives should turn out to be about o°5 ; assortative mating and the effects of a similar environment
were in fact about balancing the lowering due to a
substantial fraction of non-hereditary determination. In reply to the second point, apart from
definite hereditary entities such as amaurotic
idiocy or phenylketonuria, the evidence for
Mendelian inheritance in a small proportion of
undifferentiated imbeciles and idiots depended on
such considerations as a raised consanguinity rate
in the parents and on detailed pedigree studies,
like those of Sjégren.

Dr. Roberts agreed with Dr. Eysenck that some
of Thorndike’s regressions were appreciably higher
than 0-5, but thought that some of this might be
due to the samples being selected rather than being
random samples of the whole population. The use
of the Binet test might, perhaps, be criticised, but
it had very great advantages. First, it was a wellstandardized single scale applicable to children of
of all school ages ; for in a survey of this kind tests
which applied to a narrower range were of little
use. Secondly, it was familiar to all educational
psychologists and so could be used in a co-operative
scheme by workers in different parts of the country.

Acknowledgments

The survey briefly reported in the lecture
was made possible by the generous cooperation of many individuals and official
bodies. My colleagues and I will make full
acknowledgments of the help we received
when we prepare a complete account for
publication. I am indebted to Mrs. M. G.
Young for drawing the figures.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 2
