THE EUGENICS REVIEW

BIOGRAPHY

Horder, Mervyn. The Little Genius: A memoir
of the first Lord Horder. London, 1966. Duckworth. Pp. xi+147. Price 25s.

SIR THOMAS HORDER, as he then was, began to
take an interest in our Society in 1928. He
became our President in 1935 and remained in
this office till 1949—a longer period than anyone
else before or since.

Our first contact with Horder was through
Clinton Chance, then our Treasurer. The
sequence of events which, several years earlier,
had brought these two together was unique in
Chance’s life, but a commonplace in Horder’s.
Chance had heavily overtaxed himself during the
last years of the 1914-18 War. When the war
suddenly ended he could not adjust himself to
the reduced tempo. An intractable insomnia
began for which he was unavailingly treated by a
world-famous continental psychiatrist then staying in London. Eventually someone suggested
that Horder had the reputation of being a
sensible, down-to-earth sort of man. Why not
consult him?

Chance used to tell the story of what happened.
“My wife met him downstairs and they conferred. She then showed him up to my bedroom.
He walked in alone and paid no attention at all
to me. He mooned about the room, looked at
some family photographs on the mantelpiece,
asked a few questions about the children who
figured in the photographs, made some comments about yachting, looked out of the window
and finally came up to the foot of my bed. He
looked straight at me humorously, as if he knew
enough about me for the time being. He then
said something like this: ‘Everyone tells me that
you are an intelligent man, Mr. Chance. But
you’ve certainly not behaved like one during the
last few months.’ ” Both then laughed and a lifelong friendship began.

B. S. Bramwell, the Society’s Chairman from
1933 to 1949, and Chance made, with Horder, a
happy trio. I look back with pleasure to the
early days of my secretaryship of the Society
when I used to meet them, usually at the Bath
club, once every few weeks. On these informal
occasions Horder would radiate geniality; it was
easy to understand how his patients became

98

devoted to him. Few men were busier, with more
numerous and diverse calls on their time. But
this you would never have guessed. Horder had
a remarkable gift for living in the moment. Never
was he pressed, preoccupied or in a hurry. He
seemed to have abundant time for everyone. He
had the “trick of propinquity’’: he quickly put
you at your ease, made you feel that he understood you, and gave you something you felt you
needed, so that you parted from him energized
and cheered.

What more of the man have I learned from
his son’s book? Insights are given into his early
life: we are told of his love of reading during
boyhood, of his quick assimilative power, of his
retentive memory, of his slowly maturing resolve
to break away from family precedents by
becoming a doctor, and of his academic
successes as a Student. In his early days scholarships and prizes abounded; and later honours.
Born in 1871, he was made a peer in 1933, aged
sixty-two; after which he became a presiding and
presidential figure. Demands on him multiplied,
among them from miscellaneous voluntary
societies like ours.

In successive chapters his biographer brings to
life his school days in Wiltshire, his medical
career at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, his
courtship and, in 1903, his marriage when aged
thirty-two. Likewise described is his establishment in Harley Street and the acquisition, in
1912, of a country house at Hemsby in Norfolk.
By this time he was a member of the staff of his
old hospital and had three growing children.
The narrative then abandons chronology. We
are discursively told of his interests, activities
and involvements: about his method of teaching
(many good anecdotes), his interest in motor
cars (he bought his first in 1904 and once owned
four at the same time), about his patients, about
Ashford Chase (a property near Petersfield in
which he spent his last thirty years), and about
his entanglement in medical politics.

A non-conforming streak coupled with an
individualistic philosophy caused him to oppose
state medicine. A clash in 1948 with Aneurin
Bevan, then Minister of Health and, earlier, a
patient, is tellingly described ; so is the formation
of the Fellowship for Freedom in Medicine
which has fought a courageous but retreating
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

battle, but whose principles may still be
vindicated by growing discontents within the
profession. |

Aphorisms and extracts from writings are
quoted in appendices. Several deal with the
insights which come to doctors: for example—

You will see men enervated by the intoxication of
success or stimulated to robust health by the smart
of failure. . . . You will often be able to interpret
men’s weaknesses, and your knowledge will make
you charitable; you will sometimes understand their
strength, and your insight will increase your
admiration.

Among the reflections on life and medicine,
none is quoted on eugenics. Yet those of us who
worked with Horder and know how much time
he gave to the Society’s affairs will be grateful to
his son for this piously conceived and wellwritten book.

Cc. P. BLACKER

GENETICS

Sharma, Arun Kumar and Sharma, Archana.
Chromosome Techniques: Theory and Practice.
London, 1965. Butterworth. Pp. x+474. Price
87s. 6d.

CHROMOSOME STUDIES HAVE become of such
importance in medicine as well as fundamental
biology that a comprehensive treatment of
chromosome techniques is now urgently needed.
The need is met by the present book. It deals
extensively with the chemical procedures as well
as with the biological application. It also deals
with the newest methods of autoradiography,
phase contrast microscopy and electron microscopy. There are forty-one useful photographic
plates. The bibliographies carry the work up
only to 1962. Not being as up-to-date as it should
be in this field is the book’s most serious shortcoming.
Cc. D. DARLINGTON

Whittinghill, M. Human Genetics and Its Foundations. New York, 1965. Reinhold. (London,
Chapman and Hall.) Pp. xvi+431. Price $8.95.

THIS BOOK SETS out to provide a textbook for
students “‘in the rapidly expanding subject of

human genetics’’. It easily succeeds in its aim.
The book is divided into four parts and is
written in a most refreshing and interesting
manner. It is profusely illustrated and contains
many original diagrams. As is expected with a
textbook, the earlier chapters are concerned with
the basic principles of genetics. The exposition
of such topics as the structure of DNA, the
cytogenetic basis of inheritance, the control of
genetic activity and the formation of normal and
abnormal tetramers of haemoglobin is clear and
concise. Regular chromosomal behaviour, sex
linked inheritance and the problems of linkage
studies are dealt with in Part II. The biochemical
pathways from gene to protein, marker genes,
and environmental influences are discussed in
Part III while the concluding chapters are
concerned with the many factors which have
affected and continue to influence the course of
human evolution. Spontaneous gene mutation,
structural and numerical chromosomal alterations, selection and random drift are presented
in a confident fashion.

The mathematics are kept simple. The author
introduces us with immense clarity into some
elementary statistical principles and even those
most allergic to mathematics cannot but be
impressed with the simplicity of the explanation
of x2, the conventional levels of significance and
the Hardy-Weinberg Equation.

The author, who is a Professor of Zoology, has
numerous interesting analogies drawn from
animal genetics, for example the male calico cat
which has a genotype XXY and is sterile is
equivalent to Klinefelter’s syndrome in man.
Several of the clinical sections are insufficient.
Pyloric stenosis is described as a “severe constriction of the valve between the stomach and
the intestine” and in considering the aetiology of
congenital dislocation of the hip, no mention is
made of the role of a generalized joint laxity.
One of the practical aspects of human genetics is
genetic counselling but this is not mentioned.
There would also be a case for enlarging the
section on the inheritance of common diseases
and on polygenic inheritance. Nonetheless, the
book has general value and may be recommended
to all those interested in human genetics.

NORMAN C. NEVIN
99
