THE MENTAL DEFICIENCY BILL.

THE essential difference between the Bill of this year and that of last is
that the criterion that appears to have been taken by which each provision of the measure is to be justified is the ultimate interest of the
individual defective. That this principle is to guide those entrusted
with the administration of the Act is explicitly laid down in several
places.

Special provisions as to which it might be open to question whether
they were primarily in the interest of the individual have been omitted,
as for example clause 50 in the earlier Bill, which prohibited marriage
with a defective. There is, however, an amendment proposed to reinstate
this clause in Committee, but the matter has not yet been reached.
Nevertheless, the powers that are desirable in the interests of the
individual defective are so similar to those which have been asked for
in the interests of the community from a Eugenic point of view that it
was hardly possible that any measure adequately meeting the former
requirements could fail at the same time to safeguard the community
from the multiplication of defectives. Hence the Eugenics Education
Society can heartily welcome the Bill now before Parliament.

It has been built up on the foundation of the seven clauses which
survived the very searching discussion in Committee last year. These
clauses concerned (1) the central and local authorities, (2) the definition
of the classes of defectives subject to be dealt with, and had been subjected to numerous changes, some of fundamental importance. The
definitions were greatly improved, and it was decided that the central
authority was to be a single body embracing the Commissioners in
Lunacy and dealing with lunatics, idiots, and imbeciles and defectives
of all sorts.

It was practically agreed by Mr. McKenna that he would abide by
the basis thus arrived at, and would accept no vital amendments in regard
to these clauses, and, in particular, would not extend the categories
of defectives subject to be dealt with.

For the rest the Bill has been rearranged and for the most part
simplified. Less has been left to the regulations, and throughout one
can trace evidence of an endeavour to conciliate the opposition of the
extreme individualists who so effectively delayed the proceedings in
Committee last year.

The second reading showed that this effort had only met with partial
success; nevertheless, the opponents of the measure were not in the same
position of vantage as last session, owing to the definitions and leading
principles having been practically agreed, and six meetings of the Committee have sufficed to deal with 63 out of the 66 clauses, and there seems
to be every prospect and intention of the Bill being read a third time
before the House rises for the autumn.

The principal novelty in the Bill as compared with the earlier
draft is the addition of “approved homes” to the other places of residence recognised by the Bill to provide for the case of voluntary
boarders who are defective but not subject to be dealt with under the
Act. Certificates will not be required, nor will there be powers of
detention. The provisions as regards “ approved homes” do not seem
to run on all fours with the other provisions of the Bill, and seem to
have been added after the main outlines of the Bill had been settled.
The result is that they are open to considerable doubt as to their
exact meaning or effect.
THE MENTAL DEFICIENCY BILL. 167

Turning to the amendments made in Committee, the first is of some
importance. The first category of defectives subject to be dealt with,
viz., those who are found neglected, abandoned, or cruelly treated, has
been extended to include those who are “ without visible means of support”; an obvious improvement from all standpoints. Next the notice
to be given by the local education authority in the case of defective
children is confined to those over seven instead of those over five.

The wording of 2 (2) (2) has been made more elastic, so that notice
has to be given by the education authority in regard to children leaving a
special school or class, before the child is actually discharged, and it
may be done at any age. This is an important safeguard to make the
provision effective.

In clause 6 it is now provided that an order under the Act shall not
be made without the consent of the parent or guardians, unless in the
opinion of the judicial authority such consent is unreasonably withheld.
This seems only just to the parent if one imagines oneself in his place.
A similar concession to the rights of the parent is made in clause 15 (1) in
regard to transfer, where the parent is given the option of taking the
necessary steps himself. The question of discharge is one of those now
dealt with more explicitly in the Bill and not left to the regulations.

A parent or guardian may withdraw a defective who has been
placed by him in an institution or under guardianship on giving notice
to the Board and if the Board is satisfied as to the future care of the
defective.

No provision was made for the.managers of a home discharging a
patient; this is now provided for on their giving seven days’ notice to
the Board.

It is now provided that in the case of those defectives who are placed
in a home by a parent or guardian two medical certificates shall be
required instead of one, and one of these shall be signed by a practitioner approved for the purpose by a local authority. Generally, the
right of women to places in the various bodies administering the Act
has been conceded.

Paragraphs have also been inserted in clauses 23 and 38 recognising
the importance of training and treatment and the study of improved
methods of treatment. For the rest the amendments deal with financial
or administrative matters or are of minor importance.

Several clauses have been postponed or withdrawn for further consideration, and new clauses have been proposed.

It will be seen from this survey that the changes effected in Committee are neither numerous nor of a far-reaching character. So far as
they go they would appear to command general assent and to be likely to
facilitate the progress of the Bill through its final stages.

Looking back, one may say that the key of the position aimed at by
the Eugenics Education Society was won last year after the ground had
been prepared and searched by the Feeble-minded Persons Control Bill.

In the face of the brief time then available before the close of the
session it would have been impracticable to have made a satisfactory
measure of last year’s Bill which had been severely cut about in Committee, and on the whole it was better that the course actually taken
should have been followed.

There is now every prospect of a measure being placed on the Statute
Book which, subject to the exiguous financial provision made, will enable
and require local authorities to make suitable provision for the defectives
who are not already properly cared for, and who, inevitably from the
nature of their condition, come to grief themselves, and are a source of
untold injury to the community and to the race.

R. LANGDON-DowN.
