REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 171

ledge of biology and physiology, who would be able to supply them with
the fuller particulars which would certainly be required by a child who
had read the book with intelligence. It is an excellent handbook for
parents. G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. SLOAN. From Girlhood to Womanhood. London. Cassell
and Co.; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 142.
THIS book can be given to any girl above 12; it explains simply the stage
of development from girlhood to womanhood and gives her sensible and
practical advice as to the best means of becoming a happy, healthy, and
attractive woman. Dr. Sloan Chesser puts forward a high ideal of life.
G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. Stoan. Woman, Marriage and Motherhood. London.

Cassell; 1913; price 6s. net; pp. 287.
WE have here another of the popular books of the day dealing with social
questions affecting marriage and motherhood, written chiefly from the
point of view of women. There is much good work in it. The earlier
chapters are historical and treat briefly of the evolution of motherhood, of
marriage laws and customs, and of the legal position of the wife and
mother at various times and places. The results of sweated labour, the
social effects of factory work on the homes and of our prison system are
clearly stated. There is an account of the attempts, both on the Continent
and in England, to provide pure milk for infants, to feed nursing
mothers, and to establish schools for training in the art of home making
and baby rearing.

The most obvious omission is the absence of any reference to religious
ideals and sanctions as influencing matters connected with sex and social
reform. There is also no attempt to deal with the extremely important
variations in outlook upon all these questions which result from the
physiological and psychological differences of sex. It is the necessity
for the constant readjustment of these two points of view—a readjustment
required by the ever varying pressure on one or the other of a changing
civilisation—that constitutes the extreme difficulty of handling these
problems.

It is to be feared that more better organisation of society, with increased inspection and training and more humane treatment on all sides,
although it might achieve considerable temporary improvement and is
therefore worth working for, would not really help much to a more
permanent solution of the eternal problem which confronts humanity.

Cc. D. W.

Sandeman, Georce. Social Renewal. London. W. Heinemann; 1913;
price 2s. 6d.; pp. 150.

“THE collective or individualist theory of society is inadeauate to
its real nature, and is therefore false. Society... is... a real thing
on ifs own account, with a design of its own, a life of its own, and
Principles of its own. This may be called the realist theory of society
...” (p. 33). This great thought is supported by somewhat arrogant
denunciations of the modern social reformer. He is rebuked, for instance,
for supposing the social problem to be entirely one of “heredity and
breeding” (p. 19): as if anybody ever really supposed it so! But
Mr. Sandeman reaches his high-water mark of exaggeration on page 5.
“The workers,” he observes, “. . . desire to enter into possession; they
want abundance of life; they want to grow up... and to be free. The
reformers and philanthropists intend exactly the contrary; their idea is
to elaborate and to aggravate, and to perpetuate the tutelage of the
workers.” After pointing out the more obvious errors of other people,
Mr. Sandeman presents his own discovery. “Real society” is “humanity
itself”; and the only thing that can renew society is “ charity.” There
172 EUGENICS REVIEW.

you are. Occasionally we are told something worth hearing, for instance,
that poverty is largely due to “the inordinate diversion of labour to
the production of comparatively useless and undesirable things” (p. 108):

but the book is not all equally valuable.
A. W. COCKBURN.

Green, C. E., F.R.S.E. Zhe Cancer Problem: A Statistical Study. 3rd
Edition. Edinburgh. Green; 1914; price 5s. net; pp. 98.

In the first chapter of this work Mr. Green describes certain diseases of
plants caused by mycetozoa, and argues that some analogy exists between
these conditions and cancer in man. In the next chapter he quotes evidence to the effect that the occurrence of one of the plant diseases referred
to is favoured by the use of manures which have been dissolved in sulphuric acid, and then examines the occupational incidence of cancer
suggesting that those occupations in which the use or formation of sulphur
compounds occur exhibit high cancer rates, but that on the other hand
trades, such as those of tanners and papermakers, in which lime is greatly
employed, are relatively immune from cancer. In the following chapter
the geographical distribution of cancer is considered, and in chapter IV.
arguments are adduced in favour of a belief that the combustion of coal
leads to the development of cancer, the principal evidence being derived
from contrasts between the proportion of deaths from cancer to deaths
from all causes in coal burning and peat burning districts. In the last
chapter, Mr. Green suggests that calcium salts may have some curative
value in the treatment of cancer. The book is only of interest to eugenists
in so far as, the real cause of cancer being unknown, the possibility of an
inherited constitutional predisposition cannot be ignored. It is therefore
unnecessary to review it at length, and we would merely remark that few
readers are likely to be convinced by the evidence presented. To take
only a single point, the proportion of cancer deaths to deaths from all
causes, cannot be compared in different districts unless the age constitutions of the populations are approximately the same, a fact which Mr.
Green does not appear to have realised. M. GREENWOOD.

Pyeraft, W. P. Zhe Courtship of Animals. London. Hutchinson; 1913;
price 6s.; pp. 318 and 40 plates.
THE title of this book does not suggest any close relation between its
subject and eugenics, but the author, in the preface and introductory
chapter, shows that he regards the two subjects as closely connected. He
writes: “Such facts [the sexual behaviour of animals] have a vitally
important bearing on the very problems of social well-being which now
loom so largely among us. ‘Reform’ is in the air. Its protagonists are
busy amongst us with schemes for our regeneration, among which ‘ sexproblems’ are made to occupy a very conspicuous place. But no good
can come of their cogitations so long as they fail to realise the springs of
behaviour in this regard. The facts herein set down will, it is hoped,
help much towards this end.” The facts given in the book are full of
interest; many of them are little known, and, especially when dealing with
vertebrate animals, the author is clearly a master of his subject. He is
strongly convinced that the realisation of the intensity of the sexual
instincts in animals is of importance to would-be reformers of human
affairs—“ it is idle to speak of an equality between the sexes in this
matter, in regard to the human race. Dogmatism, and the frequent repetition of pretty platitudes, will not alter what Nature has ordained.” As a
collection of facts of the greatest interest the book is admirable, and the
descriptions are generally clear and graphic. In his speculations the
author is less convincing, and when dealing with the facts of sex in
invertebrate animals, is occasionally inaccurate. His contention that
sexual selection acts, not by the conscious choice by the female of the
most brilliant male, but by the success of the male which most completely
