KENNETH HUTTON, M.A., D.Phil.

The Hon. MICHAEL LAYTON, B.A., A.M.I.Mech.E.

R. PEDDIE, B.A., C.A.

ALEC RODGER, M.A.

New Human Demands in Industry’

Mr. Alec Rodger:

Human demands in industry are determined, in
the last resort, by economic pressures. These
pressures have many origins and many outcomes. So we cannot speak on tonight’s topic
with any certainty at all. But there is some scope
for intelligent hunching and discussion. That is
no doubt what we shall all be trying to offer you.
I have six points to make.

1. We need not panic about automation or
any other development of the kind. For several
reasons radical change is not likely to come
upon us suddenly. British industry is not composed chiefly of organizations of the size of the
United Steel Companies and the Steel Company
of Wales. It is made up mainly of far smaller
firms with far less capital. Wonderful transfer
machines and automatic assembly equipments
are not for them; nor are electronic computers.
They cannot afford them, though some firms will
be able to hire time on computers. Anyway, even
our big firms are usually slow to introduce change.
And even if they were not, it is likely that, while
we pursue a full—or “fairly full’—employment policy, our planners would try to see that
changes did not take place with too disrupting
rapidity. In short, I believe we have time for
inquiry and reflection.

2. However, this is no excuse for setting the
problem aside. Even now we are to some extent
being taken unawares. New jobs are coming into
being; old ones are being modified, partly
through the breaking down of demarcation lines
drawn between them and other jobs; and the
proportion of skilled to unskilled workers in
many industries is decreasing. (Almost everybody knows now about the Moscow factory

 

* A symposium at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on March 19th, 1958. Unfortunately the Hon.
Michael Layton’s contribution is not available for
publication.

that has been making pistons for the whole of
the Russian light car industry with a shift-team
of nine, six of them skilled men.) Undoubtedly,
substantial change is already in the air. If we
do get caught, we shall no doubt find ourselves '
developing tremendous feelings of insecurity;
and then we shall be in trouble. As the
Manchester Guardian said (March 11th, 1958),
“It is the tendency to cling on, to resist the
natural process of industrial change, that may
turn a recession in a few industries into a
general slump.”

3. If my first and second points are sound—
that is, putting them the other way round, if it
is true that important changes are already
taking place, but that we still have time to
organize ourselves properly—then surely our
task is clear. We must make use of our present
opportunities to study thoughtfully the implications of these changes for our working
population. Let me illustrate. At the present
time great expansion is occurring in what is
called “‘programming’’. Programmers, as many
of you will know, are people who plan the work
of electronic computers. Now, it is a plain fact
that programmers are as assorted a bunch as
men ever were. They have come from an extraordinary variety of educational and occupational
backgrounds. Take a sample of them, and you
will find all kinds of improbable people doing
well and badly in this new occupation. Here is a
heaven-sent chance for us to do a simple, inexpensive, desirable and thoroughly useful
“natural history” study in the occupational
field. Why should we not, while we have time,
find out what the earlier attainments, interests
and circumstances of the programmers have
been, with the object of relating the facts we
discover to the degree of their success in programming? Then we should be able to say, with
far greater confidence than we ever could otherwise, that for programming we want people like

107

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

this, not like that. What an advantage this would
be in, say, ten years’ time, when the game has
lost its novelty and its attraction for the eager,
restless spirits who, in hope or despair, are
trying their hand at it now! By then, controllers
of finance and directors of scientific research and
development will have become rather tired of
ad hoc—and sometimes rather expensive—
methods of finding and making programmers.
They will want to have a reasonably clear
picture of the sort (or sorts) of people they
should be after, and of where to get them, how
to train them, how to supervise them and how
to pay them. A few really good interviewers—
that is, in this case, interviewers who really know
what questions to ask people about their
educational and occupational records and their
leisure interests—could do a great deal about
this quickly and at absurdly low cost.

4. In adopting this approach, not only to
programming but to other new occupations
gradually coming into being, we should have to
be careful about what has been called “criterion
trouble’. That is, in finding out what attainments, interests and circumstances “‘go with”
success in an occupation, and may be useful in
forecasting it, we have to take pains to see that
we have differentiated our more successful and
less successful workers properly. We cannot
afford to make serious mistakes on this fundamental point. Now, it is my view that the only
way in which we can do this differentiation
well is through the systematic study of what
I call “‘errors and aversions’’, or ‘“‘difficulties
and distastes”. This is not the place to
expound my thesis in detail. Let me say this,
however. In our attempts to guide people into
suitable occupations, to select and train them,
to devise suitable methods of work for them and
give them suitable equipment, to contrive
working conditions which will satisfy them—in
all these things, nothing is more basic than the
study of difficulties and distastes actually experienced by workers in those occupations.
These are the keys to our understanding or
suitability for any occupation. Which aspects of
the work are often found to be difficult? What
are the aspects of it that people tend to dislike?
Everything about an occupation—from the
guidance of people into it to the arrangement of

108

payment schemes for it—depends on the answers
we give to these two questions.

5. This contention is not as remote from
genetics as might be suspected. For what I am
after is the extensive as well as the intensive
study of occupational difficulties and distastes,
so that we may accumulate knowledge of the
most general and most persisting of them.
Armed with this descriptive knowledge, we shall
be well placed to go forward with investigation
of their genetic and other origins. For too long,
we who study occupational demands have been
content to apply notions worked out mainly in
the educational field. If we did research along
the lines I have suggested, we might well find
something akin to the educationists’s notion of
general intelligence, on which we have for years
been basing important conclusions; but I doubt
very much whether it would turn out to be as
similar to that notion as we have assumed.

6. A major obstacle to progress in matters of
the kind is, very often, a sort of conspiracy of
silence between employers’ associations and
trade unions. An illustration of this is to be
found in the report, published last month,
called Training for Skill. It is a considerable feat
to get representatives of the British Employers’
Confederation and the Trades Union Congress
to sign anything jointly, and we should not be
too critical if we find them recommending that
(for example) “‘... arrangements should be as
flexible as possible”, and ‘“...the utmost
flexibility is desirable”. But it is, I think, disturbing to discover no frank acknowledgment
whatever, in this report, of the existence of really
seriously restrictive practices in the entry and
training of apprentices and in the work of
trained craftsmen. Everybody knows—employers
and unions included—that these bedevil all
planning in the matters we are discussing
tonight. The sub-committee of the National
Joint Advisory Council which produced the
report was chaired by Mr. Robert Carr, the
Parliamentary Secretary of the Ministry of
Labour, who must have known that the experience of his own Department’s Government
Traiming Centres had clearly demonstrated that
skilled men for many trades could be trained in
a fraction of the time commonly laid down for
apprenticeship. So, in our consideration of new
NEW HUMAN DEMANDS IN

human demands in industry; of the genetics of
the characteristics we shall need, if we are going
to meet them; and of the education and training
we shall have to have, if we are going to bring
them out—in our consideration of all these
things let us be realistic.

In short, what I have been arguing is that, as
we have a chance to study changes which are
now taking place fairly slowly, let us seize it and
accumulate systematically the information we
need about new human demands in industry.
Employers, unions and scientists should get
together on this, and they could do it quickly
and easily. Nobody has any excuse for
mishandling the opportunity.

Mr. R. Peddie:

I am afraid I must disclaim any knowledge of
eugenics or of any pretence to being a scientist.
My training has been in accountancy and my
experience in industrial administration and I can
only give you, for what they are worth, the
results of my observations in industry as an
administrator and also as one who has for some
years been responsible for the recruitment and
training of staff for my company.

There is, I think, no doubt that the qualities
which industry is demanding from its recruits
at all levels is changing and that the emphasis
on different qualities is changing too.

This process has been a gradual one which has
been evolving ever since the industrial revolution
took full effect, and has been due in the main to
the progressive mechanization of industrial
processes. In the past this has been evident
chiefly in the elimination of much heavy physical
effort, and, with the ever increasing division of
labour, in the introduction of routine repetitive
manual work.

This has for a considerable time created a
situation in which the main requirement from
the bulk of the working population has not been
a life of sweat and physical toil, but of monotonous routine work calling for detailed concentration and often for certain simple and easily
acquired skills of judgement or manual dexterity.
I suppose this has demanded a somewhat higher
level of education and intelligence than pure
manual labour but not to any great extent.

INDUSTRY

As this development has been due to the
growth of mechanization, it has in turn created
a demand for a much larger proportion of people
capable of servicing and maintaining machinery
of every kind; the skilled craftsman who
requires considerable training and the intelligence to absorb and apply a fair degree of
technical knowledge and the manual dexterity
to execute his work.

In addition, the extension of the division of
labour, the growth of mass-production and
progress in mechanization and in technical
methods has greatly complicated the task of
supervising and organizing industrial activity.
More highly skilled technical specialists and more
technical knowledge in supervisors has been
required. This has demanded a higher degree of
technical training at different levels and also a
practical ability to apply this knowledge to the
living situation.

I imagine that this has meant a demand for a
higher level of intelligence in a greater part of
the population, or at any rate a more positive
development of the intelligence which is intrinsically there. This demand has not been
confined to the technical side.

The increased size of the working unit, the
effects of education and of monotonous routine
work on the general mass of workers have
increased the need from management and supervisors of higher qualities of leadership and
greater skill in handling human problems. One
hesitates to suggest what exactly are the qualities
demanded for this work, but it seems to-be a
field in which the shortage is most acute.

These developments have been so gradual that
their effects have not been immediately apparent,
but now it seems that we are on the threshold of
a period of great and more rapid change.
Scientists of all kinds seem to have broken
through many barriers.

The problem of supplies of fuel to permit the
ever-increasing use of electric power seems to
have been solved for all time, and the application
of electricity for every kind of powered movement will receive a great stimulus as a result.

At the same time the development of electronics has introduced seemingly endless possibilities for the application of automatic
controls both for single machines and for whole

109
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

processes and this may have a revolutionary
effect on manpower requirements.

One can visualize the production line of
repetitive workers being replaced by transfer
machines controlled by planned programmes
built up and operated by electronic computers.

We must not exaggerate this possibility; there
are many fields of industrial and commercial
activity where the unit is too small or the
activities too varied to permit the adoption of
such methods. But even here there will be
progress.

As a nation we are being slowly educated by
the general interest in scientific matters, by the
gradual spread of such things as work study
and by advertisement and propaganda to more
efficient working, to the use of labour-saving
devices and so on. This should mean that
efficiency and productivity will increase gradually, even though it will not mean that the need
for large numbers of routine repetitive workers
will be eliminated. There should, however, be a
decline in the relative demand for them, particularly by large-scale industry.

What will be required in their place?

We can assume that we shall need fewer,
though different people for a given output, but
by all economic history and logic this will mean
an advance in productivity and the standard
of living rather than under-employment.

The advance of mechanization has already
greatly increased the demand for those who
service machines rather than operate them. At
a modern steel works, for instance, the number
of production workers is already less than half
the number of hourly paid employees. This
trend must continue. We shall want more
skilled maintenance craftsmen and more designers and engineers for this purpose. This is a
continuation of an existing trend to which I have
already referred. There is likely, however, to
be a growing emphasis on a sound knowledge
of electricity and electronics.

In addition to the increased need for technicians, the development of automatic controls
and the scientific planning and implementation
of production programmes will create a demand
for types of workers which are almost entirely
new. The operation of the push button controls
of a self-correcting automatic system may not

Iro

make great demands on intelligence or numbers,
but there must be people about who understand
what is going on and why, and who can take
action if matters go awry. We may not require
a great many of these “safety men” if I may so
call them, but their job will be akin to the very
important and complicated task of designing
the programmes by which the system will be
operated, of planning and organizing the
productive flow and of producing the information on which the programmes will be built.
Together, they seem likely to form a large and
important class of highly skilled and specialized
staff.

It is already clear that in many cases the most
important and difficult task in installing an
automatic system is not the introduction and
operation of the automatic equipment itself but
in planning the flow of data to the system and
modifying or eradicating existing procedures
and we cannot limit this new group to system
programmers as such.

One visualizes that they will have a number of
different but rather similar functions which will
demand much the same basic qualities although
in different degrees. How are we to train them?
If we pass them all though the plant maintenance and development side we shall place a
premium on detailed technical aptitudes which
may have little relevance to the qualities of
imagination, logical thinking and human leadership which may ultimately be needed.

Can we therefore develop this wider knowledge by theoretical studies, leaving the practical
side to come with experience on the job?

If this is the answer it surely means that more
emphasis will have to be placed on the standard
of selection. We shall be saying firmly that
leaders and also programmers and interpreters
are born and not made, or at least can be
developed by theoretical studies.

I find this a dangerous doctrine and wonder
what the genetists, psychologists and educationists say about it.

The use of automatic controls and what is
known as integrated data processing (i.e. the
automatic collection and analysis of costing
and production data) introduces another
complication.

Mechanization or automation of perhaps
NEW HUMAN DEMANDS IN

many production processes and of the preparation of the statistical information about
their performances will not eliminate the need
for managerial decisions, at any rate for a very
long time to come, although management may
have more accurate and prompter information
on which to base its decisions. At present, most
information has to be built up, summarized and
presented in a form suitable for managerial
assessment by manual methods. In fact, the
preliminary work of interpretation is done by
those who prepare it. This is work calling for
experience and intelligence, but in practice it is
a by-product of the actual work of analysis, the
interpretation and familiarity with detail
emerging as the work proceeds.

In future, the interpreters will have to work
from completed analyses, but they will still
require experience and detailed knowledge to
make the correct interpretations, and still more
to instruct the programmers to design the system
to produce the right information.

Management too may need training to understand how the information is produced in order
that its value may be correctly assessed and the
best use made of the new tool at its demand.

All this means that the existing methods of
training by the build-up of knowledge and judgement through gradually expanding experience
will no longer be available in many cases. This
difficulty will, I think, arise not only on the office
side or with general management but on many
other sides as well.

The old school still believes that a man should
have done the job he is to supervise and
although this is no longer generally possible in
practice, the conventional theory of training
behind most apprenticeship schemes is that a
man should have some practical experience in
as many fields of his future activities as possible
in order to relate his theoretical knowledge to
the actual situation and to appreciate the human
factors involved.

When the work is entirely mechanical and
automatic, practical experience is hard to gain
and human factors are presumably non-existent.

Nevertheless we cannot expect that routine
work will be entirely eliminated. Many of the
production processes and the analyses of performance will become entirely automatic but

5—ER.

INDUSTRY

human agencies will be required, not only to
plan and control these processes, but to perform
some at any rate of the subsidiary operations
required to feed the process or produce the
basic control data required. This new situation
appears to imply that although it will still be
possible to start at the bottom, the early rungs
of the ladder will be missing. The earlier steps
of widening technical experience and expanding
responsibility will not be there and the interpreters and controllers and planners will have to be
introduced ready made.

What qualities will they need? I doubt if
anyone is yet quite sure. But it seems that their
intellectual basis will be largely a mathematical
and logical one. Their work seems to call for
ingenuity and logic in planning, for thoroughness in detail and for ability to visualize a complicated problem as a whole, while many of the
techniques used are mathematical ones. I wonder
if I dare define much of this as the need for a
“crossword” mind. The standard of attainment
needed is more doubtful. I have heard it said,
on the one hand, that a computer programmer,
for example, should have a good degree in
mathematics, and on the other that a programmer can be trained in a matter of months
from a good “A” level boy. Doubtless, this is
due to the wide range in the type of programme
required. At the one end is the solution of advanced and complicated mathematical equations.
At the other is the programming of routine
but extensive works recording or pay roll
preparation.

Whatever the standard, however, the qualities
required will be similar and this new demand
raises a number of questions.

Does a sufficient supply of people of this
kind exist?

If not, how can they be obtained ?

Will this new field of activity produce another
category of “back room boys” or create a
“blind alley”’ career?

If this is a danger, how can it be avoided ?

How can we develop in these people the
qualities, and provide the training and experience which will enable them later to move
into the field of general management?

It seems likely that the new developments in
automation will add still further to the many

Iit
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

narrow specialisms that already exist, and make
the transition to general management a
problem. Can solutions of the problem be
suggested ?

I am afraid I have not contributed much to
your knowledge on this question. I have ventured
to speculate on developments in the future and
to suggest some of the problems which I think
may arise, but I am afraid I must leave the
answers to you.

May I summarize what I have said as follows.

Historically, the human demands of industry
may be likened graphically to a pyramid of
increasing intellectual and personal qualities,
the distribution of which seems to have coincided
with the supply of these qualities which were
available in the population and also with the
demands for the progressive extension of
responsibility in the conventional industrial
hierarchy.

The pattern of distribution seems to have
accommodated the switch in demand at the base
from purely physical qualities to the simpler
mental qualities required by routine repetitive
work.

Current developments suggest that the picture
of industrial requirements may change from a
pyramid to an oval, a figure in which the middle
is broader than the base.

Is this a requirement which can be satisfied
in practice? Or will these new developments
fail for lack of satisfactory human material?

The primary demands seem to be:

1. A larger proportion of trained and skilled
craftsmen and what I may call mechanics
and electricians.

2. A larger supply of people with a bent for,
and training in mathematics and logic.

3. The possibility that, while the managerial
function with its demand for wide judgements and the ability to handle human
problems may become more complex and
more important, the opportunities for
practical experience and gradual development of these qualities may be reduced.

I am afraid I cannot say if or how these demands
will be met, or even in whose hands the answer
lies. Is it in eugenics, psychology or education?
That is, can supply be adjusted to the demand?

112

Or must the reverse be true and will the ball
come back into industry’s court for it to restrict
development to the supply of human material
available ?

Dr. Kenneth Hutton:

There seems to be an insatiable demand for men
and women possessing qualities of leadership
combined with a scientific outlook. What is the
probable response of educationists to this
demand?

First we must try to ensure that those adults
with a scientific outlook (whether trained
scientists or not) have their powers of leadership developed and properly utilized. Already
there are examples of scientists doing outstandingly good jobs as heads of universities,
training colleges and schools, although there is
still prejudice against appointing them.

Secondly we must try to influence the unscientific thinking of our existing leaders, because
no matter how good the output of our schools,
our pupils will not be in positions of authority
for another twenty years.

Looking to the future, we must modify our
schools’ curricula so that an inquisitive, experimental, practical approach to life is inculcated,
rather than a slavish acceptance of things as
they are. Too many of our leaders learn too
little science and start too late to learn it.

If we are in earnest about this, we must
encourage education authorities to allow
teachers the freedom which they have in an
enlightened county like the one I am privileged
to work for. Space, and time, are vitally necessary if science teaching is to be of adequate
quality. Nearly all maintained schools have
inadequate laboratory space and only a niggardly
ration of laboratory assistance. Industry has
given money to build laboratories for independent schools, and it is a scandal that public
money is not forthcoming in a similar way for
the maintained schools.

Public opinion needs to be aroused to the
iniquity of attempts to put back the educational
clock by schemes such as the “Block Grant”
which will enforce economy at all costs, whereas
on account of the “‘bulge” more spending is
essential if we are even to maintain standards.
NEW HUMAN DEMANDS IN INDUSTRY

Finally, looking to the farther future, as “free education” but a means test for the
intelligence is so largely inherited, why is every universities. Altruism is not enough for profinancial discouragement applied to intelligent ducing our future leaders, or for fulfilling new
parents? Income tax on family allowances; demands in industry.

Around the World News of
Population and Birth Control

The only international journal concerned solely with the world-wide problems of population and birth control.
—requested by libraries, universities, and sociological organizations ;
—quoted by public speakers and newspaper correspondents.

Published ten times a year by the
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

The IPPF, a federation of voluntary associations for family planning and governmental agencies in twenty-two
countries, believes that

—Samily planning is a fundamental human right ;

—a favourable balance between the populations and natural resources of the world is an indispensable condition of
lasting world peace;

—that such a balance is unattainable unless knowledge of planned parenthood is extended.

Annual subscription to the News, 10/-; $2.00. For information and sample copy, write to: IPPF, 69 Eccieston
Square, Lonpon, ENGLAND.

 
