THE DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

New Light on Causes from American Figures

By R. A. FISHER, Sc.D.

MONG the quantity of valuable data
At is gathered together in Huntington and Whitney’s Builders of
America, there are one or two tables of very
particular interest to those of us in this
country who are concerned, not only with
the fact of the differential birth rate, but
with the nature of its causes.

The present writer has more than once
put forward in the EucEenics Review the
é@pinion that the principal cause of the differential birth rate lies in the inheritance of
qualities, temperamental as well as physical, which influence fertility ; or to be more
precise, which influence the actual number
of children born. . On this view the social
selections which sort out the population into
the different social strata, favour the social
rise, not only of energy, competence, and in
general the qualities which we admire and
value in the practical working of our social
institutions, but also of those qualities,
whether physical or temperamental, which
lead to small families, and consequently, as
the Malthusians insist, to a ‘‘ Good start in
life.’’

The links of this argument are all demonstrably sound. It is not only known that
physical and temperamental peculiarities are
heritable, but it has been shown that per‘sons coming from smaller families, do, in
equivalent environments, e.g., as peeresses,
have on the average fewer children than persons from larger families. The importance
of the burden of large families is fairly
obvious, but it, too, has been the subject of
detailed economic demonstration. The
reality of the selection which favours the
social rise of all hereditary tendencies
favouring paucity of children must be admitted; yet as the argument is somewhat
subtle and indirect, it may be doubted, and
usually is doubted at a first glance, whether
Cc

we have here a major and controlling cause
of the differential birth rate, or a very minor
and subsidiary one. It is usual, for example, to ascribe the observed differences
in fertility to differences in social environment, or to some assumed physiological connection between infertility and the powers of
the mind. Causes which have been suggested are : Excess of food, which the upper
social classes are presumably believed to
consume; excess of leisure; the stress of
brain work ; the enervating influence of comfort.

THE TWO VIEWS TESTED

However baseless these supposed causes
may appear to be when each is examined in
detail, it is certainly possible that there
might be some subtle influence of the social
environment really unfavourable to normal
family life. The sharpest possible test between the two views would be to ascertain
the relative fertilities among men of a given
social class of those who had risen rapidly
in the social scale as opposed to these who
were born in that class. For on the theory
that we have to do principally with heritable
factors affecting fertility, the fertility of the
upper social classes must be kept low by the
lower fertility of those whom social promotion brings into their ranks, the movement
downwards of the more fertile members of
the upper classes being relatively a very
feeble one; while the fertility of the upper
class would be expected to recover, if it were
left to itself, by the replacement of its less
fertile by its more fertile strains. Consequently the groups enjoying rapid social
promotion should, on this theory, be even
less fertile than the classes to which they
rise,

If, on the contrary, the important causes
were any of those to be included under

183
184

‘* social environment,.’’ we should certainly
expect the families which rise in the social
scale to carry with them some measure of
the fertility of the classes from which they
originated. Now, Huntington and Whitney
give a remarkable table of the average number of children per person in the American
Who’s Who, when the persons are subdivided according to the education they

received. They are given in descending
order.
Estimated
Kind of Education Children
per person
-College and Professional ... 2.4
College and Ph.D. ... 2.30
College bes bes bes svn OF
Normal, business, trade, secretarial 2.3
High School ... _ ves 2.1
Elementary Schools and Home ... 2.1
Professional School Only ... we 1.9

me pene ot

As.the total number of persons dealt-with
is about 25,000, the trend of these averages
cannot possibly be ascribed to chance. The
table appears to show unmistakably that
among Americans who attain a sufficient
level of eminence to be included in Who’s
Who, those whose social promotion has been
most striking have on the average fewer
children than those whose social promotion
has been less. Such a result would appear
inexplicable on any of the views that connect
the differential fertility of different classes
with elements in their social environment,
and is a striking confirmation of one of the
most surprising consequences of the theory
that the dominating cause lies in the social
promotion of the relatively infertile.

SOCIAL PROMOTION AT WORK

Whitney and Huntington give also the
results of another inquiry, which bear upon
the same problem. They have studied the
average abilities shown by Yale students
coming from families of 1, 2, 3, and up to 6
or more. ‘They find, in general, that the
average ability rises as we pass from

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

families of 1 to families of 2, and so on up
to the largest families. This, of course, is
not at all what we should find, either in
England or America, if we were to test the
sons of the population at large. In the
population at large the classes which furnish
the largest families would certainly show the
lowest average scores, whether we took a
scholastic, an athletic, or an intelligence
test. But the Yale students are a selected
group of the population, and Whitney and
Huntington appear to argue that they are
selected on the basis of an equal social status
of the parents, and therefore that we should
conclude that within the same class the abler
parents have the more children.

I would not like to deny that this may be
so; indeed, I hope that it may be. But
the selection of the Yale students for examination seems to equalize the education of
the children, rather than the social status of
the parents. Remembering that the only
child may be expected to get a ‘‘ better start
in life ’’ than the member of a family of six,
we may perhaps expect to find at Yale the
only children of less successful parents,
educated at equal expense and side by side
with the children of the more stringently
selected parents who are able, with families
of six, still to send them to Yale.

In its general features the differential
birth rate in America, as is most ably shown
by Huntington and Whitney in this book,
displays just the same characters as it does
in England. If I have put upon the results
of some of their researches an interpretation
different from that which they themselves
favour, I only hope that this may serve to
call attention to a body of data and to a
method of investigation which, in my opinion, has an even greater importance than
these authors at present attach toit. They
have, in my opinion, hit upon a method, not
merely of demonstrating the existence of the
differential birth rate, but of discriminating
among its possible causes.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.
