THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC
APPRAISAL*

By Professor F. A. E. CREW, M.D., F.R.S., F.R.C.P.(Ed.).

'T has long been a cherished dream of
| | nx that perhaps some day I might
be thought worthy of being invited to
deliver this Galton Lecture. This dream,
I must confess, has always contained an
element of anxiety, for I have ever doubted
that my performance would be found worthy
of the occasion. I have always looked for‘ward to an opportunity such as this when I
might publicly acknowledge my indebtedness
to Francis Galton, pay homage to him and
express my gratitude. He played a most
important part not only in the development
of a science but also in the creation of a
climate of opinion which made possible,
even inevitable, the institution,of academic
departments of genetics, with one of which
I was connected for a quarter of a century.
A great deal of the abundant joy that was
mine during those years stems directly from
Galton’s thought and philosophy.

I chose this particular topic for consideration for entirely selfish reasons. It is one
concerning which I ought, in virtue of my
present academic position, to have ideas
and opinions. To make this appointment
with you would, I thought, compel me to
clarify such ideas and to formulate such
opinions. My fear of your adverse criticism
of these would compel me to examine them
very carefully ; so I could not but profit.

Maybe I have profited, but now that I am
here I find it necessary to crave your
indulgence, for that which I have to offer
seems very commonplace and hardly worth
the offering. Moreover, it was only a year
ago, on this very occasion, when that
eminent sociologist, Professor Marshall, dealt
very adequately indeed with certain of the
most important aspects of this very subject.
To what he then said I can add nothing.
But the subject 1s so many-sided and can

* The Galton Lecture, delivered on February 16th,
1954
81

claim such jnterest and importance that
possibly it is desirable that it shall be
examined by a variety of people whosé
interests differ and whose approaches are
different. As you have been informed, I
represent that field of interest and activity
which has claimed, if not earned, the title
Social Medicine. As I understand it, social
medicine is primarily concerned with the
search for and the presentation of knowledge
of a medical kind that can aid a government,
local or central, to give effect to its proclaimed aim of preserving and augmenting
the health and welfare of the people. From
the study of the interconnections between
the variety and magnitude of disease occurring within different biological and social
categories, social medicine attempts to give
definition to the biological and social needs
of man and to discover those agencies within
a human society that are involved in disease
causation. Thus social medicine, or socioecological medicine, is a source from which
there can be secured knowledge that can
form the springboard of social and political
action directed toward the elevation of the
health and well-being of the community
as a whole and of various categories within
it. It is medicine as a social science and as an
instrument of social policy. :

I am therefore vastly interested in any
development that has for its proclaimed
purpose the amelioration of the conditions
of the people and the augmentation of their
health, happiness and efficiency.

I propose to examine two sets of ideas
and ideals and their interconnections : those
from which the Welfare State emerged and
which have fashioned it, and those which
mould the views of the eugenist.

To give exact definition to the Welfare
State is beyond my competence. All States
would claim to be welfare states in the
sense that they are actively concerned with
(8200 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

-the well-being of their people. They differ
markedly among themselves in respect of
structure and organization ; in some only a
-few know best what is good for the rest
and act upon this assumption; in others

it is the opinion of the majority that decides.
In some. the State is interested in the well-.

being of certain categories within the commu
\nity ; in others it is interested in the wellbeing of all. There are vast differences in
respect of the content of welfare and also
in the methods by which it is provided.

In so far as this country is concerned, the
idea of the Welfare State, the idea that the
Government should display an active paternalist interest in the affairs of individuals and
groups within the community, is of very long
standing. It was in the reign of Elizabeth I
that the English Government first came
to be concerned on a large scale with
economic as well as political matters. The
mercantilism of those days demanded a
planned economy and so the State became
concerned in such matters as employment,
wage levels, the conditions of apprenticeship,
‘the promotion of industry and the relief
of the poor. In connection with this discussion the last of these, the relief of the
poor, is of the greatest interest. I assume
that compassion played but little part in
focusing the interest of government upon
the poor and that the considerations that
moulded action were primarily economic.
However, because no adequate administrative machinery existed, such intervention
by the State was largely fruitless. It is to be
noted that at this time the citizen could not
claim State help as a right.

With the passing of time there came into
being a reaction to this planned economy.
Under the stimulus of the French physiocrats
and of Adam Smith there developed the
philosophy of laissez-faire. The physiocrats
desired to establish the rule of Nature,
holding that the world was governed by
natural law coming from God and that
therefore within the State there ought to be
a minimum of legislation and of control.
The teaching of Adam Smith was based
upon .a curious system of natural. theology
which he devised in order to explain the

divine governance of the world. He taught
that God had so ordered the world that everyone pursuing his own interests would best
promote the interests of all. In everyone God had implanted the desire to improve himself. God had done all the planning
and .all that man had to do was to avoid
interfering with the arrangements.

By the end of the eighteenth century this
idea of laissez-faire had assumed an inelastic
and doctrinaire form. The State was to be
concerned solely with protection against
disorder within and against enemies without.
The only sound governmental policy was to

leave all things to the competent judgement

of the competent individual who was quite
capable of looking after himself.

Our rulers will best promote the improvement
of the nation by strictly confining themselves to
their own legitimate duties, by leaving capital
to find its most lucrative course, commodities
their fair price, industry and intelligence their
natural reward, idleness and folly their natural
punishment, by maintaining peace, by defending
property, by diminishing the price of law and
by observing strict economy in every department
of the State. Let the Government do this ;
the People will assuredly do the rest.*

This doctrine was the dominant orthodoxy

of a large part of the nineteenth century in

this country and from it stemmed the Poor
Law Act of 1834 which finally brought to
an end all grants to the poor, restricted
outdoor relief and established the workhouse.

It is to be noted that this action, and
many others like it, was based upon the
concept that all men were born free and
equal in respect of opportunity but unequal

_ In respect of goodness and that social

success was a true measure of: individual
worth. In free and fair competition, it
was held, the successful, strong in their
goodness, were rightly rewarded and the
weak, weak because of their own wickedness,
deserved not pity but punishment. Poverty
and destitution were fit and proper punishments for wickedness.

These attitudes derived from the sincerely
held views, regarded as being essentially
reasonable, of upright God-fearing men.
To the eugenist, whose views are shaped

* Lord Macaulay, 1830.
‘THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL 8&8

by scientific knowledge that has become
available since that time, these attitudes
are of particular interest. They will commend themselves to him, or not, according
to whether or not it can now be reasonably
assumed that wickedness and goodness, as
then defined, are in fact the equivalents
of biological inadequacy and adequacy
and that social status and the possession of
wealth are indeed fair measures of biological
worth. In those days the action of certain
selective factors was intense. Intelligence,
pertinacity, thrift, industry, aggressiveness,
egocentricity, the lightness of the load of
family responsibility, were among the possessions that greatly advantaged the seeker
~after wealth and security. Lack of them
spelt failure that led to destitution. So
also did the handicap of defect, derangement
and disease. To the eugenist the question of
importance is whether or not these properties
are of high social importance, are partly or
wholly genetically determined, and whether
aS a consequence of such selection there
came to be a _ widely disproportionate
distribution of genes advantageous to the
individual and to the community within
the population, tending to become concentrated in the more successful, whether
such selection tended to bring into being
“two nations ”’ in the biological sense.

But as we know, this strict doctrine of
laissez-faire was never completely applied,
for under the growing pressure of public
opinion moulded by the literati, the idealists,
the religious revivalists, the social reformers
of those days, humanitarian legislation was
introduced, though but slowly, to improve
the lot of the child worker, the woman
worker and ultimately of workers in general,
and to protect these against the more
extreme forms of exploitation. Compassion
and consideration for the underdog found
expression. It came to be shown that a
very great deal of the destitution, vice,
sickness and untimely death that disfigured
society was caused by the conditions in
which the masses lived and worked and
that much could be eradicated by improving
these conditions by adequate social and
political ‘action.

Crises of mass unemployment recurred
to make massive State intervention in every
function of the national economy necessary.
In them both capital and labour turned:
to the State for rescue and in every instance
such intervention was a further step in
the development of a planned national
economy. These crises indicated clearly
that the national economy was one and
indivisible, and so it was that the need for
some kind of planning authority came to be
recognized. Indeed in every country in the
world today the principle of State intervention is admitted, overtly or tacitly, though
there are differences in the frankness of
the admission, in the objectives and in the
degree of the efficiency of such intervention.
During these events it became increasingly
obvious that the disaster of unemployment
and consequent poverty was in no sense
a penalty of sloth or incompetence and that
its causes were far beyond the power of the
individual to control. The philosophy
that had justified lJazssez-faire became discredited. The reputedly free and equal
individuals who competed for reward manifestly did not enjoy equality. Unrestrained
competition left but little scope for freedom
for the handicapped. The moral foundations
upon which laissez-faire rested became more
and more undermined as it became increasingly obvious that the system which purported to wipe out inequality, and which to
some extent did so, bred and tolerated new
and gross inequalities of its own. Gradually
and progressively there evolved certain
notions which gained widening acceptance.
These were: (1) that only a minority in a
society such as then existed could hope to
provide against the hazards of illness,
unemployment, poverty and old age;
no individual acting alone could successfully
cope with the conditions and circumstances
that obtained within the socio-economic
milieu and which largely determined the
individual’s destiny; (2) that the community as a whole could do much that
lay far beyond the competence of the
individual ; (3) that the State was not only
strong but was also wise, its collective
wisdom being far greater than the wisdom
84 | ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the individual, and (4) that all individuals
were equal in the sense that everyone had
the same claim to the “ protective ”’ services
of the State as a right.

These notions rapidly gained strength
under the impact of two forces: (1) the
Benthamite principle of utility, according
to which the aim of all endeavour was to be
the greatest happiness of the greatest
number, and (2) the vast enlargement of the
franchise by which the masses gained
overwhelming potential political power. With
this expansion, with the growth of trade
union organization and with the universalization of education there came into being
an increasing and ever more persistent
demand that governmental action to abolish
unemployment, destitution and preventable
illness should be unleashed. It was the
refusal on the part of labour to compete to
the point of exterminating the less efficient
for the hypothetical good of the whole
community that played havoc with an
economic system based upon the principle
of unlimited competition with rewards for
the successful. There developed the view
that in the name of justice the wealth of the
country should be_ redistributed more
equitably. |

It was the Fabians who gave to the
term Welfare State the connotation it now
possesses, a State primarily organized for
the provision of the means whereby certain
needs of the individual and of the group
could be satisfied, a social organization in
which a very large proportion of the earnings
of the citizens, being collected by governmental agencies, is spent by other governmental agencies in ways meant to advantage
the health and happiness of the people and
in which many of the more important
instruments of production and distribution
are taken over by the State. |

As ideas became transformed into policies
and projects the State, in increasing measure,
assumed the responsibility of protecting
those who could not fend for themselves.
In our own time we have witnessed a vast
expansion of this interventioh by the State
to ensure the welfare of a wide variety of
categories within the population. We have

seen the inception and development of a
social insurance scheme with its workman’s
compensation, its old age and widows’
pensions and its sickness and unemployment
benefits. We know of the Beveridge Report
and the Acts of Parliament that are based
upon its recommendations which removed
many of the imperfections and _ inadequacies of earlier acts which experience
had revealed, which introduced children’s
allowances and medical care for all and
which attempted to eradicate unemployment.

Thus the State, in its instrument of
government, has now accepted as its prime
aim and responsibility the task of preventing
unemployment, of abolishing poverty and
of doing whatever lies in its power to promote
the health and welfare of the people. That
the social order of the nineteenth century has
become transformed, as though by a revolution, into one in which State intervention
and State planning are not only necessary
but imperative would seem to be beyond
dispute.

Whatever you and I may say of the
organization and functioning of this new
social order, we surely must agree that
the ideas and the aims that lay behind
action were possessed of a certain magnificence. There is always a vast difference
between the dream of the idealist and the
project of the planner that attempts to
make the dream come true. Is not its
real purpose one to which Francis Galton
himself would have subscribed? I remind
you of the quotation that decorates the
front cover of the EUGENIcS REVIEW.

Man is gifted with pity and other kindly
feelings ; he has also the power of preventing
many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall
well within his province to- replace natural
selection by other processes that are more
merciful and not less effective. This is precisely

’ the aim of eugenics. |

Disregarding for a moment the implications of the phrase “not less effective,”’
for eugenics in this quotation read government, for economic considerations apart,
and these are of the strongest, it was pity,
compassion, a sense of fairness, that moved
the social reformers to work for the removal
of the causes of suffering, for replacing the
THE WELFARE STATE

awful selective agents that operated when
the fires of the dark Satanic mills of industry
were fed with the health and happiness of
the human stock by others less merciful.
It became the will of government to ensure
that every individual within the population
should enjoy equality in respect of
opportunity, to give to every citizen, as a
birthright, safeguards against insecurity,
poverty, preventable disease and untimely
death. For reasons such as these the eugenist,
qua eugenist, must surely rejoice. But
since between the aim and the effect of a
project such as this there can be a world of
difference the eugenist must withhold judgement until the effects of this drastic and
dramatic change in the role of government
can be assessed.

It is difficult indeed for one of my age
and experience objectively to examine the
Welfare State as it now exists in this country.
I am the product of a world that now
exists only in the nostalgic memories of the
old, a world in which, largely as a consequence of the thrift, industry and philoprogenitiveness of my parents, I enjoyed
many advantages and many privileges. I
came to know that in it there was much to
be deplored and condemned but to me it
was a gracious world. That in which I
now live and attempt to serve is to me
distinctly uncongenial. Nevertheless, I,
like the rest of my generation that has
survived two wars, attempt to the best of
my ability to refashion my ideas and,
especially, my sense of values and to play
my part, however small, in what surely must
be regarded as a most important experiment
in social engineering. The object of this is
to examine the possibility of reconciling
democracy with State planning.

I do not propose, nor am I competent,
to discuss the economic consequences of the
vast changes that have taken place. But
I may perhaps attract your attention to
two points. The State can give only that
which it exacts and it may be that should
the country ever, on account of the changing
mean age of the population, of the stubborn
opposition of the relatively opulent or for
any other reason, find it difficult to provide

: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL 85

protection to all without means of their
own against want, unemployment and sickness, the danger will arise that a benevolent
State may be forced to transform itself
into an authoritarian State, driven to a
degree of regimentation and control that
today would be regarded as obnoxious.

The second point is this. Practically
everybody in this country now accepts
the view that society has an obligation to
provide decent standards of living for all
its citizens and also that society has an
obligation to provide the opportunity for
everyone within that society to work. But
for the present it is not generally accepted:
that society has both an obligation and a

right to see that the people so safeguarded

shall perform that work. There is no modern
equivalent to the discarded economic whip
as an incentive to work and as a distributor
of labour. Work and remuneration still
retain their outmoded connotations and
we await the development of a new philosophy
that will furnish a new incentive for the
new social habit of work, work primarily
for the welfare of society as a whole. Thus
it is that many are anxious lest the paternalistic activities of government should
retard or prevent the achievement of social
maturity on the part of the citizens, should
weaken the initiative and the independence
of the worker. |

As the statesman knows full well, in
certain instances there can be. no better
method of assessing the effects of these
changes in social organization than |. by
reference to certain indices of the reactions
of the human population. to them, such
indices as live expectancy, the changing
age structure of the population, the movements of the birth and death rates, of the

~ infant mortality rate, of the mortality

rate among women of the age range 15-44
and of the maternal mortality rate. —
There is no doubt whatsoever that the
progressive and general uprising of the
standard of living, the progressive improvement in the conditions in the home and in
the workshop, the ever rising standards of
education, nutrition and social security arid
the expansion of the social -and medical
86 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

services are collectively responsible for the
pramatic halving of the death-rate that has
occurred within the last hundred years, for
the fall of the infant mortality rate to a
quarter, for the extension of life expectancy
at birth by twenty-five and more years. The
main result of the startling rise of the
survival rate interacting with the halving
of the birth-rate has been a progressively
rising mean age of the population.

As a result of the changed age structure
of the population, due in part to the progressive growth of the power to prevent
the occurrence of certain diseases and to
control the course or mitigate the effects
of others, the whole pattern of morbidity
and mortality has changed. Today the
great killers are in the main the degenerative
and malignant diseases that particularly
affect the older age groups.

Birth and death are phenomena that
command the attention of the eugenist
for it is through the portals of birth that
reinforcement reaches the community and
by death that losses are endured. The
eugenist is not primarily interested in
birth-rates and death-rates as such but
with the biological quality of those who are
born and of those who die before the end
of their reproductive phase has been reached.

There can be nothing more difficult than
to define this quality in which the eugenist
is rightly interested ; and even when it has
been defined its recognition is by no means
easy. I assume that it will be agreed that
the attributes which the eugenist would
regard as being desirable in all societies at
all times are health, intelligence and ability
of a general or of a special kind and that
the quality of the individual is determined
by the extent to which the precursors of
these attributes are represented in his
genetic constitution. The eugenist is persuaded that the foundations of these
attributes are laid in the genetic endowment
of the individual which sets a limit to what
the individual may become. But he recognizes that in general the ultimate characterisation of the individual is the outcome of
the interplay of this endowment and a
wide variety of influences present in his

external physical and social worlds and
that it is rare for the genetic endowment
to become fully expressed. Health, for
example, is not a quality that is predetermined by the genetic constitution, for
it is much more than the absence of ill
health. There are defects and derangements
disadvantageous to the individual and undesirable in the opinion of society which
are the direct expression of genetic action ;
if the individual is to be healthy he must
lack the genes corresponding to them: To
this extent the quality of health is genetically
predetermined ; but the vast majority of
diseases of individual and social importance
are either the reactions of the individual,
prone to contract them by virtue of his
genetic constitution, to the stimulus of a
particular agency or set of agencies present
in his environment or else are purely
environmental in origin.

In so far as the defects and derangements
(of body and of mind) of genetic origin are
concerned, those among us who are involved
in the application of genetical knowledge in
the general field of medicine are greatly
impressed by the effects of the activities of
the Eugenics Society upon public opinion.
Among the educated and socially responsible sections of the population there is an
ever increasing number of potential parents
who are unwilling to transmit defect and
derangement to their offspring. There is
every reason to assume that this attitude
will become ever more widespread. Granting
this, the problem that will increase in
importance is that presented by those
within the population who do not regard
parentage as a serious responsibility.

For the present it is not known who these
are or what their number is. Among those

-untouched by the educational system of

this country are two categories, the
ineducable and the unfortunate. Of the
former certain sub-categories are readily
identified either by the grossness of their
deficiencies or, in the case of lesser grades,
by the results of tests now available. But
the latter are engulfed in a mass of those
who, being too greatly handicapped by
illness or being contorted by the conditions
THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL 87.

and circumstances in the home, family and
community that attended their infancy,
childhood and adolescence, were never
‘able to acquire that which was within their
_ competence.

In so far as the defects and derangements
of genetico-environmental and environmental
causation are concerned, and these are
remarkable for their disproportional distribution among the different socio-economic
‘classes of the MRegistrar-General, their
recorded incidence being markedly lower
in the higher classes and higher in the lower,
the improvement of the environment,
‘physical and social, that is the aim of the
Welfare State has reduced and will continue
to reduce their incidence. The control of
the environmental factor in the case of
diseases of genetico-environmental origin
nullifies the action of the genetic component.

This is true also for the quality of general
intelligence and general ability and for the
.capacity to become socialized. It is established that environmental forces play their
important part in determining the extent
to which these attributes are. expressed.
Continuous illness, lack of protection, affection and appropriate care during childhood
can inhibit and contort the development
of the qualities which the individual possesses
in potential. Here again the basal problem
is that of distinguishing between those
incapable of creating a micro-environment
optimal for the smooth development of the

immature by virtue of their genetic. con-|

stitutions and those who, though capable
of doing so, have never learnt how to do it.
In my view, in a society such as ours,
industrialized, urbanized; education for
parentage is very necessary: In this society
child-bearing and child-rearing do not
command high public esteem as they do in
others. The greatest gift to the community
which can be made is not, according to the
prevailing opinion, a genetically well-endowed
child, well nurtured. To do so is probably
the most arduous of all undertakings, even
though it may be the most rewarding. Our
young men and women are trained for
many things and acquire much relevant
knowledge and skill, ‘but for them there is

organisms causing

no preparation for a task and a responsibility
that, from the point of view of society, is
undoubtedly the most important of all.

But these matters are well known to you
and concerning them you are more knowledgeable than I. I refer to them only
to make the point that the eugenist is indeed
interested in all action which tends to
bring into being an environment in which
genetic potentiality in respect of qualities
advantageous to society and to socialized
man. finds full expression. To the eugenist
the best of all social orders is one in which
the proportion of the healthy, of the highly
intelligent, of the greatly able, of those whose
actions are moulded by a deep sense of
social responsibility is regarded as being of
far greater importance than the total
number of individuals within it.

The extension of the life expectancy and
the profound change in the mean age of the
population are not directly of eugenic’
interest in that the effects have been to
increase the proportion of those past their
reproductive phase, of the pensionable,
whose contributions to posterity in the
form of offspring have already been made.

The progressive reduction of the infant
mortality and child mortality rates means
that of the children that are born far fewer
now die in infancy and childhood but live to
reach maturity and to beget offspring. To
the eugenist the question of importance is
whether or not the mortality that used to
operate was selective in the sense that it
removed the relatively inviable and left
only the more biologically efficient, efficient
largely for. genetic reasons, to perpetuate
the stock. |

There is no sure evidence that this
mortality was selective in this sense. It was
due in very large measure to diseases of the
respiratory and alimentary systems, to the
ingestation and inhalation of specific microinflammation of the
bowel or of the lungs in an individual too
young to have been able to develop a
resistance to their attack. Any infant
being so attacked, irrespective of any
differences in genetic constitution, was in
danger of death. Differences in the quality

D
(88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

_ of parental care and of medical-and nursing
attention were mainly responsible for the
differences in survival. There is no suggestion
of any close relationship between the
qualities ef social importance and proneness
to enteritis and broncho-pneumonia in
infancy.

This mortality was and is selective in that
gross defect and derangement of certain
kinds is responsible for a high proportion
of stillbirth and neonatal death and doubtless
also of prenatal death. There can be
nothing dysgenic in a further reduction of
infant and child mortality. There will
come a point, however, when such reduction
will be halted; this will be reached when
the only causes operating to cause death
will be gross defect or derangement due to
genetic action or to developmental mishap.

The same question arises in the case of
the survival of those adolescents and matures
who in former days would certainly have
succumbed. Is. the intervention, medical
and otherwise, which makes survival possible
dysgenic? Nowadays quite a number of
genetic imperfections can be repaired by
appropriate therapy, for while the genetic
basis of a disease cannot be reached the
results of such genetic action can often be
nullified. Individuals thus repaired can
flourish and transmit their defects, potential or actual. Genes of an undesirable kind
could thus become multiplied among the
population and an .increasing number of
individuals in every generation need treatment without which their defects would
become manifest. But surely all this is without significance unless the kind of civilization
that we know is overthrown. Doubtless the
accumulation of undesirable genes of this kind
in our population is now such that if we were
suddenly thrown back into the equivalent of
our own tenth century very large numbers
among us would quickly become inviable.
But since it is our aim to move forward into
the thirtieth and not to move back into the
tenth century it seems to me that we have to
accept the policy to neutralize in so far as
this is possible the action of disease-evoking
agencies within the genetic constitution,

Just as it is the accepted policy to combat |

the action of disease-evoking agencies within
the environment.

In this connection it is profitable to
consider tuberculosis. If it be held that a
marked proneness or susceptibility to contract this disease is a genetic character and
that in the causation of this disease the
tubercle bacillus is greatly aided by a
constellation of unsatisfactory environmental
factors (e.g. malnutrition, overcrowding,
poverty) and by behaviour that involves
close contact with an infective case, what is
the correct policy? To control all the
contributory causal agencies, to gain mastery
over the bacillus, would not affect the
susceptibility of individuals. While they
lived their lives in a milieu from which these
causal agencies had been removed they
would not develop the disease. Should the
milieu change, however, they and all who
had inherited this proneness would quickly
succumb. Surely the policy is to make all
milieux safe for the prone, for tuberculosis is"
the great enemy of achievement in every
part of the world and there is no evidence
which even suggests that proneness to
tuberculosis is’ particularly prevalent among
individuals of low overall biological or
social worth. |

The fall of the birth-rate is of special
interest for a variety of reasons, but in
connection with the present discussion its
interest centres round the question as to
whether it is due in large part to a differential
fertility that distinguishes sections of the
population that can truly be classified as
genetically more and genetically less desirable from the point of view of society as a
whole. It is important to know also whether
such measures as maternity benefits and
children’s allowances tend to enlarge or to
diminish this disparity in respect of fertility,
if this exists. Undoubtedly this differential
fertility did distinguish and still distinguishes
the socio-economic classes; the higher the
class the lower the fertility, stillbirth and
infant mortality. But the gradient is not
nearly so steep as it used to be and the gap
has narrowed. The semi-skilled and unskilled
workers are, however, still rather more fertile
than the rest. It is reasonable to maintain
THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL _ 89

it is in the lowest socio-economic class of the
Registrar-General that there is the greatest
concentration of the socially inadequate
and that of these a proportion are inadequate
for genetic reasons.

But as yet there is no way of knowing
what this proportion is or whether the
fertility of the genetically inadequate is
as high or higher than that of the rest of
this category whose inadequacy is an
acquisition and who would not have been so
had they enjoyed opportunities for development equal to those available to the members
of the higher socio-economic classes.

The aim of the Welfare State can be
regarded as the provision to all of these
classes within the community of the advantages now enjoyed only by the top. Should
this come about then it might be expected
that the birth-rate, stillbirth rate and infant
mortality rate would soon show no social
gradient. Certainly the aim will command
the support of all, but it must not be forgotten that advantages mean little or nothing
unless they are utilized and it is quite
certain that they would not be utilized to
the same extent by all within the community.
As Professor Marshall pointed out, children
in different schools, grouped according to
differences in respect of general ability,
are exposed to different curricula and this
competitive selection yields a variety of
products. He also pointed out that in the
Welfare State, as we know it, there is considerable economic inequality and that the
segregation at the school level is associated
with a corresponding segregation at the
occupational level. This stratification is
inevitably associated with differences in
cultural pattern which in their sum must
influence the wish and the ability to make
use of the services provided by the State.
Thus so long as any form of social stratification exists it is to be expected that there
will remain a gradient in respect of fertility,
though not necessarily the existing kind.
~ If it be granted that the concept of the
welfare state is admirable it is by no means
certain that this country will always be
able to afford to provide complete protection
to all its citizens against want, unemployment

and sickness. The productive capacity
of the country is rising but slowly. The
load of the non-contributors to the common
weal is heavy and grows heavier and a part
of this load is undoubtedly composed of
individuals suffering from gross defect or
derangement of genetic origin who by reason
of their disability could never be selfsufficient in any kind of society. Before
attempting to deal with the problem these
constitute it is necessary and desirable
to know everything possible concerning
their numbers. This knowledge will become
available only when it has been amply
demonstrated that these defects are truly
genetic .in origin and are not in any significant
way to be ameliorated by environmental
agencies. Then, if the genetic system concerned is relatively simple and not a form
of the more complicated kind envisaged by
Penrose, genetic counselling would become
really helpful.

But in these matters, as in most of the
others that have been surveyed, it is quite
obvious that if the Welfare State is to flourish
and if by its actions society and the general
public are to be advantaged, it is imperative
that our society shall be an educated society.
The State, exercising constructive functions,
is striving to create a social organization in
which the opportunity for creative activity |
in the service of the community can be
enjoyed by all. Its efforts will be successful
only if the citizens themselves come to be
so equipped educationally that they can
take full advantage of the opportunity so
provided. If this is so, then the eugenist’s
interest in the genetical varieties of the
uneducable, and his anxiety lest the general
level of intelligence in the population should
fall, are more than justified. Moreover, it
is only in an educated society that eugenics
as a science can influence public opinion.

Thus far government has been concerned
with the amelioration of the environment,
for which it has adopted certain standards
of excellence. It has left the definition of
standards of excellence in man to others
and has assumed with much reason that
improvement of the habitat will be followed
by the betterment of its inhabitant. But
go -.,.. THE EUGENICS REVIEW 
to such betterment there is a limit quickly
reached. If more is desired then it can
be achieved only by an uprising of the
general level of the genetic potential. When
this is attempted it will be essential that
there shall exist a far more comprehensive
knowledge of the genetic basis of personality
and of intelligence and of human genetics

NEW _ ISSUES
of the
GALTON LABORATORY

EUGENICS LABORATORY PUBLICATIONS
MEMOIR SERIES

XXXVI
Race Crossing in Man.
The Analysis of Metrical Characters.
By J. C. Trevor, Ph.D.
Price 12s. 6d. net

XXXVII

An Introduction to Human Biochemizal
Genetics. .

By H. Harris, M.D.
Price 15s. net

Copies may be obtained from any bookshop
or from the publishers.

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W.|!

 

in general than is now available. It is
necessary that immediate research into
these matters shall be greatly encouraged.
In the future, it can confidently be expected,
much praise and much gratitude will be
given to this Society for the quality of
the foundational work of this kind that is
being undertaken under its auspices.

this

SUVTSUNAUONUATUTROAUETGASA HUTT ATER

THE WORLD’S GREATEST
BOOKSHOP

a * FOR BOOKS *

FAMED FOR ITS EXCELLENT
MEDICAL BOOKS DEPT.

All new Books available on day of publication. Secondhand and rare Books on
every subject. Stock of over three million
volumes.

Subscriptions taken for British, American
and Continental magazines ; and we have |
a first-class Postal Library.

Foyles have departments for Records,
Music, Stationery, Handicrafts Tools
and Materials.

We BUY Books, Coins, Stamps.

i

AANA

119-125 CHARING CROSS ROAD
LONDON, W.C.2

GERrard 5660 (16 lines) Open 9 to 6 (Thurs. 9 to 7) |
Two minutes from Tottenham Court Road Station
/

AUAUOONNSAOUVNESGRORLU LEELA ARERR EAHA EUAN

SU TETSIPUGUNTAUGUUUEUAULULUOGAUAECE SAE ALAA

Sal MIMULULNIUUUUNSTENPUEUHGTULUEN ELUNE EERE

Fi

3 eee rrr Rn ee eee reer reer erecta
] J ) ) V 1S HOLD A LARGE STOCK OF BOOKS ON EUGENICS
CC CUAND ALLIED SUBJECTS. FOREIGN BOOKS NOT
IN STOCK OBTAINED "IN STOCK OBTAINED UNDER BOARD OF TRADE LICENCE. CATALOGUES

ON REQUEST. PLEASE STATE PARTICULAR INTEREST.

SECOND-HAND BOOKS: A constantly changing large stock of Medical and Scientific

Literature on view, classified under subjects.

or small collections purchased.

Lists and quotations post free. Libraries

LONDON: H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower St., W.C.1

Telephone: EUSton 4282.

 

Business hours: 9 a.m. to 5-30 p.m., Saturdays to 1 p.m.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No, 2
