SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER

   
  
   
   
  
  

mA LARGE gathering of Fellows, MemW\ bers and guests was present at the
+ \.Galton Dinner which was held at the
Maldorf Hotel on Thursday, February 16th,
th Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics
Byicty, in the Chair. Among the guests of
e Society were Professor Aveling, Mrs.
eG. Darwin, Dr. and Mrs. T. Joekes, Dr.
BF. McCleary, Mr. Terence Maxwell, Mr.
wi Mrs. Ogilvie, Miss A. Hylton Stewart,
. and Mrs. F. Tietze and Sir Sylvanus

F Introducing the Galton Lecturer, Dr. C. G.
rwin, Lord Horder said: You may have
Seticed that while I have been in the very
Benourable position of being your President
shave not. made speeches at the Galton
lebration Dinner, and as I have heard no
@dverse comments I propose to follow my
wen example to-night. I have been provided
By Dr. Blacker, with his usual thoroughness,
mith a list of the positions held by our
Sistinguished lecturer and the degrees earned
By him. I propose to spare both you and
gam from a repetition of these. I have also
ven provided with a résumé of what he will
my to you; it would be more than redun; pent if I said anything about that. I would
mewever like to say this—though it is
; mobably apparent to us all—that three
Mers ago the great-grandson of Thomas
menry Huxley gave us the Galton Lecture,
Bath his distinguished brother sitting at his
fe. To-day the grandson of Charles
Mrwin is our Galton lecturer, and more
F that—and this is my last remark—our
Meturer is a god-child of Francis Galton.
p you see what a truly genetic and eugenic
S batle Ga we once more have here. Dr.
marles Galton Darwin, Master of Christ’s
pllege, Cambridge.
E Dr. Darwin’ s lecture on ‘‘ Positive Eugenic
licy ” is published on p. 13.
B Lord Trent, proposing the vote of thanks
m the lecturer, said: It is my pleasant duty
propose a very hearty vote of thanks to
pr. Darwin for his address to us this evening.
came here knowing that I was going to

   
   
  
  
   
   
  

 

57

have an interesting evening and expecting
some advice to poor industrialists who will
have to provide the money to enable the
aims of eugenics to be carried out in this
country if your speaker this evening is
correct. I have learned a lot. I am a little
hazy as to what the attitude of the industrialists is to be towards such questions as
family allowances. We have always thought
that it was a good thing to encourage people
to have children, especially if they are good
workmen. If two workmen are doing a job
equally well one should not be penalized for
having a family as against one that has no
children.

When Dr. Darwin was talking about
further allowances for people of income tax
level, I was asking myself who was to provide
a more satisfactory family and from what
family were there likely to spring the best
people: the person who paid income tax last
year—possibly a Football Pools promoter—
or a poor Highland crofter? The crofter is
well educated, hardworking and poor—
many of our leaders have come from that
level—but he is not likely ever to be in a
position to receive income tax allowances
for his family. I am not asking for a definite
answer, but it is a point that might be
considered.

It did strike me what a very true remark
it was that our civilization is based on
publicity ; if civilization is to go marching
on it seems to me that a great deal more
publicity must be given to eugenics. There
must be much wider knowledge among all
classes of people of the benefits that are
likely to accrue to the nation if this question
is studied seriously and translated into
practical policy; and though we cannot
expect the man in the street to go into the
technical details of eugenics, wider eugenic
knowledge would be an asset to the nation.

I am not going to take up your time by
dealing with the various points in the
address, but I will say that I think that in
politics—a side not touched on this evening
—it is often the bold course that gets one
58

there soonest, and I would be for making
much more drastic restrictions on the negative side of eugenics and giving much more
support to the positive side. I would broadcast the proposals on both the negative and
the positive side of eugenics; I think you
would get much more response from the
voter, and it is the voter who sways
politicians. Those of you who know politicians know what a reverent fear they have
of the voter.

I have to move to the Master of Christ’s a
very hearty vote of thanks for the extremely
thought-provoking lecture we have had this
evening.

Professor N. F. Hall, in seconding the vote
of thanks, said: I have very great pleasure
for a number of reasons in thanking your
Speaker this evening for his address. In the
first place, it was a very pleasant experience
for an economist to hear a distinguished
physicist stressing not the certainties of
science, but its uncertainties; and in the
second place, it was refreshing to hear the
emphasis which he placed upon the difficulties of dealing with problems that are
largely subjective, for this, after all, is a
general difficulty which has to be faced in
applying knowledge to social problems.
The importance of this was brought home to
me at the very outset of my work in Economics. I well remember sitting one day in my
tutor’s room at Oxford when into it there
burst an excited post-graduate student who
announced that he had discovered the perfect
way to forecast the price of copper. “‘ Have
you allowed, sir, for the effects of your discovery upon the future price of copper? ”’
said my tutor.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I have the honour to be Chairman |
small Committee which owes its existen
the generosity of the Eugenics Socrety, w
is discussing practical measures that m
taken to maintain the quantity and im
the quality of the population of this cou
We shall pay a great deal of attention t
wise, though perhaps to some, provoc
address to which we have listened to-ni
But perhaps after all, Dr. Darwin’s p
that those with large salaries are those '
should be encouraged to have large fam
is not so provocative as it appears at |
sight. He admitted that in the case of po
if you want them to have families you m
see that they have adequate salaries.
making this concession, he has invited u
review the distribution of income as we
to encourage the successful to be par
One of the advantages of a positive eug
policy may be that it will compel us amo
other things to reconsider what shoul
the relative remuneration of poets as w
that of members of other professions
beginning with P.

In particular, I am grateful for
Darwin’s concluding point. :He has urged
not to wait for further advances in scien
knowledge, but to take action now. He
in fact, reminded us that we must not o
stress the scientific aspects of the prob
but must recognize also that public admi
tration is the art of reaching approxima
right decisions upon insufficient evide
Dr. Darwin has given us what Galton wo
have wished—a great stimulus to euge
by trying to translate scientific knowl
into practical social policy.

    
   
    
    
   
    
  
