66 EUGENICS REVIEW.

antagonism. But it is, to say the least, a moot point whether social
progress, as distinguished from national or racial integrity, cannot be
secured in a practically stationary—though not declining (!)—population.
The problem of Malthusianism from this point of view is certainly worth
discussing. S. HERBERT.

Kelynack, T. N., M.D. Auman Derelicts: A Collection of MedicoSociological Studies. London. C. H. Kelly; 1914; price 5s. net. ;

PP. 337EXPERIENCE has taught us to regard the editorship of Dr. Kelynack as a
sufficient guarantee of excellence. By the value of its subject-matter, as
also by the method and the manner in which this is presented, Human
Derelicts fully justifies our expectations. “ This book,” writes Dr. Kelynack in his preface, “ aims at providing all workers engaged in enterprises
striving for human betterment with a concise and reliable presentation, in
non-technical language, of such essential facts, guiding principles, and
effective practices as are likely to be of assistance in the study and
solution of those social problems which are directly related to the chief
sections of morbid mankind. It is hoped that the book will find favour
with those for whom it has been specially written, ministers of religion,
parents, teachers, leaders of organisations dealing with adolescents, as
well as social and religious workers.” We would also commend the book
to the attention of those societies and circles which exist for the discussion
of social proolems. Each of the seventeen articles composing the book
is the work of an expert of high standing, whose guidance may safely be
trusted. The titles of some of its chapters are an indication of the scope
of the volume. These include “ Mental Derelicts,” “ The Epileptic,” “ The
Inebriate Derelict,” “The Criminal Derelict,” “The Vagrant,” “ The
Prostitute,” “The Human Derelict : Pre-Natal Influences,” and “ Eugenics
and the Human Derelict.” And since it is a lack of knowledge rather
than a lack of will which hinders our progress in cleansing human society
and in beautifying human life, we could wish nothing better than a wide
circulation for Human Derelicts, for it is full of vitally important knowledge, set forth with an admirable simplicity.
R. DIXON KINGHAM.

Mereier, C. A., M.D. A Text-Book of Insanity and other Mental
Diseases. London. George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.; price 7s. 6d.
nett; crown 8vo.; pp. 368.
AN authoritative text-book upon mental diseases is worthy of notice, for
it needs to be written by a medical man of large and long experience with
the insane, and who himself should be a physiologist, a pathologist, and
a psychologist of repute and standing. Too rarely is such a combination
of qualifications found, but it is not too much to say that the author of
this manual fulfils all these requirements, being, in addition, a recognised
master of metaphysical subtleties. The text-book under review is lucid,
original and informing, but it is also lacking in some essentials, and to
these deficiencies we shall refer later.
The first edition, brought out a dozen years ago, was designed fo
the student, but, as the present preface suggests, this new edition is intended also for the instructed, and we recognise this must be so, for the
author is frequently tempted to reflect upon the ignorance of the alienist
and the uselessness of the psychologist, and he proceeds to repair these
imperfections in a dogmatic, cynical, albeit original fashion. “A knowledge of text-book psychology is of no more value to the student of
insanity than a knowledge of cuneiform inscriptions. ... The nature and
varieties of attention, the association of ideas, imagination, and the relation of thought to language are no concern of the alienist, the analysis of
sensation or the nature of apperception are useless acquisitions, and the
sooner he forgets them the better will he understand the disorders of mind
from which the patient suffers... . To understand the disorders of mind it
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 67

is necessary to forget all the teaching of psychologists. . . . A psychological analysis of the disordered mind has never hitherto been attempted,”
and “ self-estimation is a faculty unknown to the psychologist.” These are
overstatements, for Bain—upon whose work Dr. Mercier must have
browsed psychologically in his earlier days—deals fully with all the
emotions of self; self-esteem, self-complacency, self-pity, self-interest,
and self-humiliation. Stanley Hall also refers to self-estimation in his
two volumes upon adolescence; Kant based upon it the radical principle
of evil, and Spinoza defines it at full length. Naturally, and because of
the high position the author holds among psychologists, the most interesting chapter in the book is the third, which deals with the analysis of
mind. This chapter is the fundamental factor in the book, and it is
full of originality, ingenuity and suggestiveness. He divides the mind
into certain primary faculties; on page 52 they are seven, on the next
they are five, but they are sub-divided into four evolutionary levels, “so
that altogether there are twenty-five pigeon-holes or compartments, in one
or more of which every disorder of mind can be placed.”

Dr. Mercier states, somewhat categorically, that in practice any one
of these faculties may alone be subject to disorder, apparently in some way
insulated or separated from the others which remain normal. We have
always held and taught that the mind is an indivisible whole, and although it may be convenient theoretically to abstract it into faculties,
these faculties are fictitious. The highest level of “objective” thought
is described by the author as “ wisdom,” but fancy the “wisdom” of a
bank clerk or of a bricklayer’s labourer being alone affected! Moreover,
the cortical structure of the brain forbids a “natural history ” classification of the mind. In only one portion of the brain cortex, and that the
motor area, are there, apart from the granules, any cell areas which can
in any sense support the “faculty” division. It is the whole mind which
feels, which wills, which thinks. We have no belief in “ faculty psychology.” Our experience of mental disorders forbids its validity, and we
hold that the mind must be taken wholly in its cognitive, affective and
conative attitudes, as one of these is meaningless without the other. We
also think that the classification which the author adopted from Herbert
Spencer in the first edition is the preferable analysis whereon to
base the motives for normal conduct, as also to study their departures in
insanity, viz., the impulses, instincts and desires which are directly or
indirectly self-preservative, and in these a chain of mutual dependencies
occur which are sufficient to explain both conduct and character. We
believe it is true to state that the plotting in tabular form of the constituents of mind and their sub-division into evolutionary levels has not
hitherto been attempted in an analysis of mind; but the method, although
original, is neither convincing nor final. These fractional representations
of the mind are frequently referred to in the text, but we think they are
unprofitable as an analysis and are a mechanical setting of a dynamic
psycho-physiological process which, with a “ purpose,” guides the individual in peril and helps him to avoid disaster. The author urges that
the composition of the emotions is not a matter of any concern to the
alienist, but we maintain that in the emotions, the appetities and impulses
we have the clue to all intellectual and voluntary processes, and all
qualities of character must finally depend upon these. The classification
of insanity adopted by the author is one that we have not infrequently
found from experience in teaching to be a source of bewilderment to
students; forms and varieties and symptoms are discussed : “I shall here
call the symptom insanity by the name of the form of insanity and the
different diseases that I include by the title of kinds of insanity,” but as
the author states, classification of insanity has always been a stumblingblock. We find idiopathic insanity—yet with an assignable cause. We
have dissolute insanity for insanity of dissolution. Alcoholic insanity is
68 EUGENICS REVIEW.

partly described under no less than three scattered separate chapters or
eadings. We do not agree with the interpretation of the term anoia,
which is used as the equivalent of dementia rather than of amentia. The
author states “Dementia may, as a form of insanity, be of any degree
from the slight blunting of intelligence and feeling, and the slight
diminution of conduct that we all experience at the end of a tiring day
....tocoma.” Then, “ The degrees of anoia are practically infinite. They
range from the trifling decadence of intelligence, feeling and conduct that
is exhibited by anyone after an enfeebling illness or at the end of a tiring
day,” also. ... “thus understood anoia of some degree is present in
every case of insanity and it is anoia that constitutes insanity.”

Only confusion and embarrassment result from this misleading
description. The term anoia has had a definite meaning ever since its
first application in mental nomenclature by John Mason Good a hundred
years ago, and it is unjustifiable from any standpoint to pervert its
original use. We referred to the deficiencies of this manual. There is too
little about treatment in the volume, no mention is made of the method
of psycho-analysis, yet no modern psychiatrist—a term which the author
would deride as against his own of “ alienist »—would attempt modern
mental therapeutics to-day without using the method of “ free association.”
No description is given as to lumbar puncture, and no details are given of
the Wasserman reaction and the two methods of administering neo-salvarsan or salvarsanised serum are omitted. The subject of heredity is barely
discussed, and Mendelism finds no place, although from the Eugenic
standpoint this is vital, and although also the Cambridge School has
related valuable findings in regard to human heredity relating to lefthandedness, the musical temperament, brown eyes and features, and the
shape of hands and fingers. There is no index to the volume; and to
open the book to ascertain the author’s views upon points of special
interest is analogous to a visit to Selfridge or some other self-contained
emporium in search of underclothing, only to find oneself helplessly
groping in the motor department !

The book, however, is the product of a very able, experienced and
clear thinker who has a right to express himself in ex cathedra statements
upon the subject of his life-work. Dr. Mercier is always interesting when
discussing the meaning of terms, whether insanity be a sym tom or a
disease, how it can best be classified, its relation to crime, the basis of
conduct, and the psychological origin of abnormal actions and their
relationship to the law.

R. A. J.
