STERILIZATION BILL
The Eugenics Society's First Draft

Extract from the Minutes of the Eugenics Society, July 13th, 1928.—‘* The Counc
have had under consideration the question of Sterilization, and in order to serve ac a
basis for discussion a Bill was printed. Although all its details were not finally
approved, it is given here below tn order to direct attention to the lines along which this

problem should be attacked.’’—Ed.

N Act to prevent the practice of
A Bztizatin when morally or socially

objectionable, thus safeguarding its
use for the preservation of the race, and to
make provisions as to the marriage of
mentally defective or insane persons.

1. The local authority for the purposes of
the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, may undertake the sterilization of a mentally defective
person who has in pursuance of that Act
been ordered to be sent to an institution or
placed under guardianship, subject to the
following conditions :

(a) that the treatment has been approved
by the Minister of Health.

(b) that the consent of the Board of Control has been obtained ; and

(c) that the parent of the defective has
consented to the operation being performed.

Provided that such consent shall be
dispensed with if the parent has committed an offence against the defective,
or has been deprived of the custody of
the defective by due process of law or
is certified as mentally defective or insane or cannot be found.

2. (i) At the request of any patient who
is about to be discharged from an asylum
provided under the Lunacy Acts the visiting
committee may undertake his sterilization
subject to the condition that the treatment
has been approved by the Minister of
Health.

(ii) The treatment shall be given at
the expense of the visiting committee and
the patient may be retained in the asylum
until the medical superintendent certifies

that he is in a fit condition to leave the
institution.

3. (i) If any person intermarries with or
attempts to intermarry with any person
whom he knows is certified as mentally de- fective or insane or solemnizes or procures
or connives at any marriage knowing that
one of the parties is certified as mentally
defective or insane, he shall be guilty of a
misdemeanour unless the consent of the
Board of Control to the said marriage has
been obtained.

(11) No minister of religion shall be under
any obligation to solemnize a marriage if he
has reason to believe that either party is
certified as mentally defective or insane.

(111) Any person who is aware that he has
been sterilized, with whatever object in view,
and marries without making known to the
other party that he has been sterilized shall
be guilty of a misdemeanour, and the marriage may be annulled on appeal to a duly
constituted court.

(v) If a mental defective marries whilst
an Order under the Mental Deficiency Act
is still in force, the local authority may,
with the consent of the Board of Control,
appeal to the court to declare the marriage
void, provided that the said marriage was
contracted after the passing of this Act, and
the court shall have power to declare it void
and to make such provisions as it thinks
necessary in regard to the custody of any
children resulting from the marriage and to
financial matters.

This Act shall be read as one with the

Lunacy Acts and the Mental Deficiency
Acts.

166
STERILIZATION BILL

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

(1) It is believed that, if the Bill were
passed, no medical man could be liable to
any action because he had performed the
operation of sterilization at the request of
a local authority.

(2) It is hoped that the policy of the
Board of Control would be to continue to
regard segregation as the normal method of
dealing with mental defectives, and never
to permit sterilization on the plea that it
would be an economical way of dealing with
them, sanction for the operation only being
given when the defective was about to be
given increased liberty involving risk of
procreation, such liberty being for his or
her advantage.

(3) It is believed that to perform the
operation of sterilization of a lunatic, without his free consent, for other than adequate
therapeutic reasons, is and would continue
to be a crime.

(4) The consent of the Board of Control
is inserted in Clause 3, Section iv, in the
hope that their consent to the marriage of a
certified mentally defective or insane person being either contracted or declared void,
would only be given after inquiry had been
made as to the probability of the said
marriage being infertile.

Ss # *

EXISTING STERILIZATION LAWS

It is sometimes said that sterilization
has been ‘‘ proved to be unworkable ”’ in
the United States, where twenty-three
States during the last twenty-one years have
passed sterilization laws. Dr. H. H.
Laughlin adequately answered this charge
in his address to the Munich (1928) meeting
of the International Federation of Eugenic

Organizations.
‘The States, with dates of statutes, are :

I. Indiana ...........cceseeeeeeeeees 1907, 1927
2. Washington .............0606 1909, Ig21
3. California ............... 1909, I913, I9QI7
4. Connecticut ............ 1909, 1918, I9I9
5. New Jersey .........sccescececceseeeeees IQII
6. Towa oo... ceee cesses ee ees IQII, 1913, I9QI5

wo

167
7. Nevada  ......cccccecceccecsecceeveeenes IQII
8. New York oo... ccc ceeceneeeeees 1912
9g. North Dakota .................. 1913, 1927
IO. Kansas .........cccceececeeeeeeees 1913, I917
TI. WISCONSIN 0... cece cee cce eee eeeeeeeees 1913
12. Michigan ............... IQI3, 1923, 1925
13. Nebraska ....... ccc cceeccc ese ee eee es IQI5
14. New Hampshire ............... 1917, 1921
15. Oregon .............0008 1917, 1923, 1925
16. South Dakota ......... I9QI7, I919, 1925
17. Montana ..........ccccceceee eee eeeeeeeees 1923
18, Delaware ...........ccceceeceec esse eeeenes 1923
IQ. ViFQinia .........ecceeseceeeeeeeeeeeeeees 1924
20. Idaho oo... cece cccccceeeeneeeeeenenees 1925
21. Minnesota 20.0... ceecseeeececeee eee es 1925
22. Utah oo. cece eect cena eee 1925
23. Maine ...........ccccececeececeaeeeeneeees 1925

In addition to these the Canadian Province of Alberta now has a eugenic sterilization law, assented to on March aist, 1928,
and the Swiss Canton of Vaud has recently
passed a similar Act.

We have, as yet, only the Press reports to
go upon, but the Swiss Act, in making
sterilization compulsory in some cases,
appears to go even further than the Canadian. The Daily News quotes the ‘“‘ new
Article in the Constitution ’’ as providing
that ‘‘a person affected by mental disease
or mental infirmity ‘ may be the object of
measures of a medical order having for their
object the prevention of children if a person
is recognized to be incurable, and if in all
probability the progeny will be affected ’.’’

The reference to ‘‘ incurable ’’ (if a correct translation) seems irrelevant. Sterilization does not in any case protect society
from the individual, but from his or her
progeny; and it is therefore the heritable,
not the curable quality of the affliction
that is the issue. Some lunatics are curable, yet liable to bequeath their disease
to their children: others, the victims of
injury or encephalitis lethargica, are incurable yet will have normal children. However, even if there has been a little confusion of thought on this point, the main
object of the measure is clearly to check the
perpetuation of hereditary mental disease.
‘* Medical intervention, states the law ’’ (we
168

quote the same journal), ‘‘can only take
place with the authorization of the Public
Health Authority, and the Authority itself
will only give this consent after inquiry,
and with the concurrence of a doctor designated by it.’”’ Other reports explicitly use
the word ‘‘ compulsory.”’

Switzerland is one of those small countries which have made a conspicuous success
of civilization—in the best sense of the
word—a fact which gives this advance
especial significance. The measure was
passed unanimously. Some correspondents
state that other cantons are likely to follow
suit, and that the Swiss Government may
approach the League of Nations ‘‘ with a
view to securing world-wide legislation on
the subject.’’ .

That last is probably too optimistic, but
it is only one of many indications that educated public opinion is everywhere awaking
to the urgent need for racial reform.

Of the American States, Dr. Laughlin
said, six have been declared ‘‘ unconstitutional ’’ by the Supreme Court of the
United States—New Jersey, Iowa, Nevada,
New York, Oregon, and Indiana. In four
more no attempt has been made to enforce
the laws since their enactment—in Maine,
Minnesota, South Dakota, and Utah. In
the remaining States 6,244 sterilizing operations had been performed up to July rst,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

1925, 3,307 on males and 2,937 on females.
Most of them, 4,636, have been performed
in California.

Mr. E. S. Gosney has made a supplementary survey and found that between July
Ist, 1925, and January Ist, 1928, a further
2,271 operations have been performed—
making a grand total of 8,515 (Eugenical
News, September, 1928). Mr. Gosney
further reports that several hundred males
were sterilized in Indiana, for eugenic reasons, between 1899 and the adoption of the
law in 1907. ‘They are not included in the
above total. In some States without sterilization laws institutions occasionally sterilize
on their own responsibility. These, again,
are not included in the total. Idaho and
South Dakota, he adds, are just starting to
put their laws into effect.

For further data, on the effects of sterilization, readers are referred to the series of
pamphlets by Paul Popenoe, reviewed in
this and in our last two issues and now in
the library. The important point to notice
is that purely legal causes have been
responsible for the few _ sterilization
** failures ’’ in the United States. Most of
these laws had a punitive object, aimed at
sexual offenders, and as such were declared
unconstitutional. Acts whose aims are
purely eugenic are not unconstitutional, and
have been entirely successful.—Ed.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.
