REVIEWS OF BOOKS

CONTRACEPTION

Fryer, Peter. The Birth Controllers. London,
1965. Secker and Warburg. Pp. 269+ Pp. 115
Notes, Bibliography and Index. Price 42s.

A BOOK SUCH AS this has been long awaited,
for it contains accurate and readily available
information covering the whole of the history
and development of conception control (inaccurately dubbed “birth control’ at a special
meeting convened to decide on a telling title for
the movement) together with an _ extensive
bibliography, innumerable interesting notes and
lively descriptions of the actors who have played
their part in this most human of dramas.
Although perhaps “martyrs” would be a more
apt word than “actors”. Too little do we appreciate the enormous benefits we all enjoy to-day
as a result of their sacrifices. Moreover, the time
has now come when the printed word need not
conform to extreme delicacy of expression, with
a result—particularly in a subject such as this—
which is especially refreshing. In the past a considerable amount of personal research was
needed even to discover, for instance, exactly
what it was that John Humphrey Noyes advocated and practised at his Oneida Community,
or just what it was that the Reverend Joseph
Townsend recommended to Jeremy Bentham.
And it will be news to many to learn that Annie
Besant (“rhymes with pleasant’) gave birth
prematurely to her daughter Mabel as the result
of a blow from her clergyman husband while
she was pleading with him to restrict their
family—and in this connection it is noteworthy
that it was the better-off and better educated
classes which first adopted family restriction.
The poorer classes regarded babies as “‘savings
banks” because of the fact that they became
breadwinners, working in the mills, from the
earliest possible age. Not until the Workshop
Regulation Act of 1867 did it become illegal to
employ a child below the age of eight, and from
eight to thirteen they were only allowed to work
half time. Then the Education Acts of 1870 and
1876 compelled parents to send their children
to school between the ages of five and fourteen
and no employment was allowed under the age
of ten. It was not until these Acts began to be

felt that family limitation had any appeal to the
poorer classes.

Another good point with this book is that the
author has not allowed the large amount of
research, which has clearly been necessary, to
dull his sense of humour—which indeed is
almost Rabelaisian in places.

Could such courageous and high-minded
pioneers as Dr. Charles Knowlton, in America,
and our own Francis Place, Dale Owen,
Bradlaugh, Annie Besant and many others have
seen this book they would feel that their efforts
and sufferings have at last received honourable
notice. Let us hope that it is not too late for
Margaret Sanger—now in her ninth decade—to
read of and recall her former tribulations and
her triumphs and reflect again on the told and
untold misery and suffering directly attributable
to the life and work of the misguided and infamous Anthony Comstock.

Cc. W. USHER

Draper, Elizabeth. Birth Control in the Modern
World. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth,
1965. Penguin. Pp. 332. Price Ss.

IN THIS BOOK the author discusses all aspects of
birth control, stressing its essential and interrelated importance to society as the humane
solution to population pressures and to individual happiness and well-being.

There are four parts. The first, “Introducing
the Problem’’, poses the question why control?
The second, “Reproduction and Control’,
comprises three chapters—sex, sexuality and
eugenic selection, infertility and associated disorders, and, lastly, methods of control which are
categorized as “mystical” and “rational” and
explained in detail and at some length.

The book is sub-titled “The Role of the
Individual in Population Control” and this is
emphasized in part three which, under the heading “Society and the Individual” discusses interactions, education and attitudes both of religions
and of states—‘‘the two great authoritative influences in birth control”. The fourth part,
“Practice and Prospects”’, includes a description
of the search for new methods and an assessment
of the extent to which contraception is used.
The population problem is discussed and the

35
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

final chapter deals with the future prospects for
effective control by which is implied “‘the contraction of differences, reconciliation of cultures,
and the satisfaction of personal needs and
achievement of personal happiness with the aid
of institutions and disciplines in a manner which
will further man’s still unknown destiny”’.

The extent of the author’s research is impressive but her book would be easier to assimilate, and its impact on the general reader might
be greater, if some of the chapters were shorter
in content and all were more concisely expressed.
It contains, however, much information for the
student and, as the author intends, may well
stimulate further consideration of the many
studies and reports now available on aspects of
population and birth control; no doubt with
this in mind she has appended a useful bibliography divided under chapter headings.

There is an adequate index. F.B.S.

Pethe, Vasant P. Demographic Profiles of an
Urban Population. Bombay, 1964. Popular
Prakashan. Pp. xvi+144. Price Rs. 15.00.

THIS IS A report on the results of a demographiceconomic survey of the city of Sholapur. A
random sample of 1,203 families was interviewed
in 1955. Due to the expansion of the cotton
textile industry, the city has grown rapidly
during the last two decades. Manufacturing
industry being the main source of employment,
over half of the heads of the families interviewed
were manual workers. As about seven-tenths of
the families were employed in low-paid occupations, their standard of living was found to be
very low. The dependency ratio was high; a
family on an average had 1-6 earners and 4-1
dependents. The level of literacy, especially for
the women, was low, and about one-third of the
adult males and over four-fifths of the adult
females were found to be illiterate.

The urban-industrial character of the city
made it an especially interesting area for the
study of patterns of fertility and reproduction.
A total of 1,337 women, who were currently
married, and were between thirteen and fifty
years of age, were included in the study of
fertility. The age-specific marital fertility rates
computed on the number of births which occurred

36

during the one year preceding the inquiry gave
a completed family size of seven children per
woman. The level of fertility has not shown any
change during the life-time of these women; the
number of children they actually had by various
durations of marriage tallied with the numbers
they were expected to have according to the
marriage duration—specific fertility rates based
on the births during the year of the inquiry.
Moreover, no significant difference was found
in the fertility of the various groups according
to their occupation, religion, caste, education or
income. Indeed no differences could be expected
owing to the complete absence of the practice of
family limitation. Over 90 per cent of the males
and females interviewed in connection with the
practice and attitude towards birth control were
unaware of the methods of family planning and
only 2 per cent had ever adopted any method
of birth control. Further, about three-quarters of
the males and over four-fifths of the females
interviewed showed no desire to get full information about family planning.

The attitude of the respondents towards the
general notion of family planning was favourable.
About half of them supported it. The support
was greater among advanced communities and
occupational grades of higher status, and increased with the increase in education. Nearly
half of the respondents considered a mediumsized family of four or five children as the
optimum size.

With this situation in 1955, the reader is left
wondering about the reactions of the people in
this urban-industrial population to the propaganda for family planning that presumably was
undertaken during the Second and the Third
Five Year Plans between 1955 and 1964. The
author points out that in the two family
planning clinics which, till 1955, were the only
ones to operate in this city of about 300,000
population, only 56 persons took advice on an
average in a year, but gives no indication of any
increase in the number of clinics or in their
attendance since then.

This book is another addition to the large
amount of literature showing the puzzle that in
India, while most couples desire a mediumsized family, and also have a favourable attitude
towards family planning, no significant practice
