THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND
HORSES

‘(WITH REFERENCE TO CERTAIN EFFECTS THEREFROM IN SHORTHORN CATTLE
AND CLYDESDALE HORSES, )*

By A. D. BucHaNnan Smiru, M.A., M.Sc.
(Animal Breeding Research Department, University of Edinburgh. )

From the breeder’s point of view, the value of a purebred animal
compared to one which is without pedigree lies not in the fact that the
pure-bred is of better conformation than the unpedigreed, for, particularly in Scotland and England, this is not necessarily true; but rather
in the fact that the progeny of a purebred will be of a more uniform
type than those of nondescript parentage however good the type of the
parents of the latter may be. This fact was recognised, either explicitly, or implicitly, by those who were the early ‘‘improvers’’ of livestock and became the founders of the breeds as we know them to-day.
Thus it came about that the term ‘‘prepotent’’ was applied to such
types of livestock as were able to pass on to the majority of their progeny the specific characters for which they themselves were selected.
With the arrival of the science of Genetics this recognised phenomenon
of the art was readily explained. A prepotent sire or dam was one that
possessed in a comparatively homozygous condition the factors for
those characters for which the breed was bred, the more so if the expression of these characters was dependent upon factors whose action was
chiefly of a dominant nature.

A further phenomenon was also recognised by the early founders
of the improved breeds. Bakewell of Dishley, the pioneer, appreciated
the fact that by mating the best of the progeny back to the parent, he
obtained rams which showed a then remarkable degree of prepotency.
This effect of inbreeding can be readily explained by the scientist in
the same way as that type of prepotency which is obtained merely by
the selection and mating of animals which possess in common certain
characters. As an example, the typical case where there are equal
numbers of dominant and recessive factors in the population may be
taken. Random bred stock will be composed of 25 per cent. 4A, 50

*(For the Conference of the International Federation of Eugenic Organisations, of this, July 2rd, 1926).
190 EUGENICS REVIEW.

per cent. 4a, and 25 per cent. aa. In the case of selection alone, where
only one character dependent upon a single pair of factors is desired, |
homozygosity can be attained comparatively rapidly, absolutely in
the second filial generation if the expression of the character is due to
the recessive action of the genes; and if to dominant, over 90 per cent.
will be homozygous by the fifth generation. This latter homozygosity
may be more rapidly attained if the progeny test is applied to the
parents and a sufficiently large population in each generation is
obtained.

If, however, the character is dependent upon several pairs of
factors, then selection alone will not make for a rapid increase in
homozygosity. Nor will the progeny test give rapid results, for the
animal which is homozygous for all the pairs of factors will appear very
infrequently, will be almost indistinguishable from one that is comparatively heterozygous; and for the testing out of the progeny a
sufficiently numerous population will only be obtained with difficulty.
When to this is added the fact that there are many characters each
dependent on several pairs of factors, it will be readily seen that
selection alone, even with the addition of the progeny test, cannot be
relied upon to give speedy results especially when applied to the slower
breeding farm animals such as cattle and horses.

It is somewhat difficult to estimate the rate at which inbreeding
increases homozygosity in our farm livestock ; a lot depends upon how
homozygous for the breed characteristics the particular animal to
which the others are inbred might happen to be. For instance, a
roan Shorthorn bull (heterozygous for coat colour) might produce by
a similar cow three heifer calves, white, roan, and red. These all
mated to their sire might produce roan calves. In this case, however
much inbreeding to this sire were subsequently adopted, it would never
produce an appreciable degree of homozygosity as regards coat colour.
A white Shorthorn bull on the other hand, mated to a roan cow, might
produce two heifer calves, one roan and one white. These mated back
to the sire would produce calves in the proportion of one roan to three
white. These latter mated back again to the white bull would produce calves one roan to seven white. If, in addition to inbreeding,
selection for white were also made, then the roan calf produced by the
white bull in the first generation would not be bred from and homozygosity would be instantly obtained.

There are thus three requirements that must be known before the
degree of homozygosity for any specific character can be estimated.

(1) The number of pairs of factors upon which the expression of
that character depends, and whether their action is dominant, recessive,
or blending.

(2) To what extent selection is operating.

(3) The nature of the matings, or the degree to which inbreeding
is practised.

As regards the first, it has hitherto not been found practicable to
determine the mode of inheritance of those characters which go towards
increased production in farm livestock. Beyond the generalisation of
Gowen (1920) that in dairy cattle milk yield has a tendency to be inherited in a dominant manner and increased butter fat percentage is
INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND HORSES. 191

somewhat recessive, nothing is known save that these characters are
‘inherited in a complex fashion, depending on several pairs of factors.
Even if they were understood, their complexity would probably preclude accurate analysis.

Concerning the second, the position is equally obscure, . Beyond
stating that the average pedigree breeder as a rule, excludes from his
herd all animals which show no sign of possessing the characteristics of
the breed, it is difficult to state to how great anextent like is mated to
like. As a matter of fact, ‘‘compensating mating’’ is more commonly
practised; that is the mating of an individual which is weak in a
specific character to one that is strong in it, thereby maintaining a
degree of heterozygositv. At the same time, this compensating mating
only pays when practised after a certain degree of homozygosity has
been obtained. With the present state of our knowledge, it is impossible to attempt measurement.

There remains, therefore, only the third requisite, inbreeding,
by which a measure of the homozygosity of a population or individual
may be obtained. Many methods of estimating a co-efficient of inbreeding have been put forward since Galton expounded his ancestral
law. That of Pearl (summed up in 1917) gives a co-efficient for each
generation. And the summation of these in ratio to a summation for
the maximum possible inbreeding in higher animals, viz., brother and
sister mating, gives a single co-efficient for the whole pedigree. Pearl
himself and Sewall Wright (1922) have pointed out the chiei defect of
this co-efficient, which is that it does not take account of the effect of
the various systems of matings.

To overcome this, Sewall Wright (1922) evolved a co-efficient
based on the fact that if an animal is inbred, his sire and dam are
connected in the pedigree by lines of descent from a common ancestor
or ancestors. His co-efficient of inbreeding is obtained by ‘‘a summation of co-efficients for every line by which the parents are connected,
each line tracing back from the sire to a common ancestor and thence
forward to the dam, and passing through no individual more than once.
The same ancestor may, of course, be involved in more than one line.’’
His formula gives the departure from the amount of homozygosis
under random mating toward complete homozygosis. By this means
in an actual pedigree the inbreeding, however irregular the system of
mating,—and this is usually the case both in livestock and humans—
can be compared accurately with that under any regular system of
mating. *

Baashuus-Jessen (1926) has criticised this co-efficient of Wright
chiefly on the ground that it is too cumbersome. The present writer’s
experience does not confirm this. In nearly one thousand Clydesdale
horse pedigrees the co-efficient has been tabulated with comparative
ease. Further, for pedigrees which stretch far back, Sewall Wright
(1925) has put forward a very simple approximate method which is
merely a slight modification. Baashuus-Jessen has another objection

*Letting Fx and Fa be coefficients for the individual and for a representative
common ancestor of his sire and dam, and letting ~ and »’ be the number of
generations between the sire and dam respectively and their common -ancestors,
we have the general formula; Fx= > [ (4) n+2/+1(1+Fa)] Wricut, 1928 p. 342.
192 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to Sewall Wright’s method being in disagreement with him as to
whether the mating of offspring to parent or the mating of full brother
and sister is the closer form of inbreeding, claiming that the former is
the closer and that Sewall Wright’s method does not take this into
account. As a matter of fact, it does. By Sewall Wright’s method
the mating of offspring to parent gives a co-efficient of 50 per cent.,
while that of full brother and sister gives 25 per cent. Baashuus-Jessen
can hardly have appreciated the full significance of the co-efficient he
criticises. Instead he has put forward a method of his own which
does not properly discriminate between types of mating and is but a
simple elaboration of the Galtonian Law. .

The present writer agrees with Tuff (1923) that the method proposed by Sewall Wright for calculating the degrees of inbreeding is
probably the most correct because it decides which system of breeding
leads most rapidly to homozygosis. For this reason it has been adopted
by Calder and himself with a view to making a survey of the Clydesdale
breed of horses on lines similar to those which Sewall Wright has fol lowed in Shorthorn cattle, there being no other method equal to it for
measuring the amount of homozygosity resulting from inbreeding,
while it is impracticable amongst farm livestock to measure the
homozygosity of productive characteristics resulting from selection
or the application of the progeny test.

II.

Sewall Wright applying his co-efficient to the Shorthorn breed,
shows that the degree of homozygosity due to inbreeding in 1920 was
26 per cent. greater than in 1780 at a date which may be taken as the
origin of the ‘‘improved’’ breed. The percentage rose comparatively
rapidly between 1780 and 1825 when it reached 19.9 per cent. This
may be regarded as the formative period of the breed. During that
time cattle possessing in common a fair quanitity of those characters.
which at that time went toward the production of the perfect beef beast,
were considerably inbred. ‘‘Favourite’’ who may be regarded as one
of the most prepotent sires of the breed in its early days had a percent age of 18.75 and was the product of a mating somewhat closer than
half brother and sister, as besides his parents having a common sire,
the dam of one was the grand-dam of the other. In 1920 the coefficient of the breed in general to Favourite was 55.2 (Wright, 1925),
showing how important a part he played in its formation. It is safe to
assume that this importance is due not essentially to the fact that he
was a Sire of infinitely superior quality, but rather that he transmitted
the qualities he possessed to a large number of his offspring, 7.e., he
was prepotent.

Most of the relationship of the breed to Favourite is traced through
his son Comet who was not only his son but his grandson, as the dam,
Young Phenix, was the result of a mating of Favourite back to his
dam, Phenix. This gave Comet 46 per cent. of homozygosity due
to inbreeding over the foundation stock of the breed. Wright (1923)
points out that widespread use of bulls of the Comet and Favourite
stock eliminated 15-20 per cent. of the heterozygosis originally present.
Most of these changes took place before 1825,
INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND HORSES. 193

The year 1875 is followed by a gradual decrease in the co-efficient
which had then reached 27.4 This can be traced to the famous bull,
Champion of England (calved in 1859), who introduced a distinct
modification of type, being the founder of what is known as the ‘‘Seotch
type.’’ The blood of this bull, ‘‘equal to the average of this breed
in heredity and relationship to Favourite but otherwise somewhat
apart from the breed as a whole was being concentrated by Amos
Cruikshank. The diffusion of the blood of this bull through the breed
between 1875 and 1900 having to a slight extent the effect of a cross,
brought down the degree of inbreeding’’ (Wright, 1928).

It is interesting to compare the foundation and construction of one
breed with another. Calder applying Wright’ s co-efficient of inbreeding
to the Clydesdale breed of horses, finds considerably less inbreeding in
the Clydesdale than in the Shorthorn. Taking 1865 as the date of the
foundation of the Clydesdale breed as we know it now. He finds
practically no inbreeding till about 1885. The average for the five
year period 1885—1890 then shows only 1.8, rising to 2.2. in the following five year period. This figure remains stationary for the next ten
years, but the period 1905—1910 shows a rise to 3.6 rising steadily to
6.5 for the 1920—1925 period. Despite the low degree of inbreeding in
the Clydesdale as compared with the Shorthorn, it is safe to say that the
change of type of the former in the past eighty years is as great as in
the latter in 140 years. The most competent authorities agree that in
1860 there were many defects in the draught horses of Scotland. They
had a great tendency to small or brittle, shelly feet with short pasterns.
Fleshy hock joints were not uncommon and the majority were inclined
to go wide behind. There was also a good deal of unsoundness in wind
and limb. About 1867 there was greater emphasis laid upon selective
mating. Besides attempting to eliminate unsoundness, the constructive breeder sought to develop a horse with straight close action at the
walk. The maximum of power and endurance can only be had where
friction is eliminated and the straighter the action the less friction
there is. It is not too much to say that Clydesdale breeders have within
fifty years accomplished this. That the breed is comparatively
homozygous for the main elements of these characters can be stated
fairly definitely, for there are few foals now born which do not possess
this character to almost as great a degree as is desirable from a mechanical point of view.

This homozygosity has not been obtained without some recourse
to inbreeding. The rise in the curve of the percentage of inbreeding
around the year 1890 is attributed to the two great foundation sires,
Darnley and Prince of Wales, particularly to the former to whom there
was a greater degree of inbreeding so that, although he had comparatively few animals inbred to him, these for the years 1890 and 1891
had an average co-efficient of inbreeding to Darnley of 4.7. For the
five year period centering on 1890, 10 per cent. of a random sample of
the population was inbred to Darnley with an average co-efficient of
4,8. For the corresponding period only 4 per cent. of the population
were inbred to the other foundation sire, Prince of Wales, with an
average co-efficient of 1.7. By 1920,100 per cent. of the population
were inbred both to Darnley and the Prince of Wales, though only to
194 EUGENICS REVIEW.

an extent of 1.01 in the case of the former and 0.6 in the latter.

To account for the rise in the co-efficient to over 3 around the year
1905, most of the credit must be given to these two great sires, though
the influence of MacGregor, Top Gallant, and Sir Everard, the first
two being sons of Darnley, the latter his grandson, had a certain effect.
However, the most decisive rise in the curve is from 1912 onwards and
this can be directly attributed to Baron’s Pride (foaled 1890) whose
co-efficient of inbreeding to Darnley is 3.1. For the five year period
1905—-1910, 8 per cent. of the population was inbred to him with a
co-efficient of 7.6. For the period 1910—1915 the figures are 30 per
cent. and 4.7. By 1925 over 85 per cent. of the population was inbred
to him. Although this horse was perhaps the greatest of the sires of
the breed, he was not by any means the best individual, although a
very good one.

The percentage of inbreeding in the breed as a whole has been stead ily increased by the use of his sons and grandsons, but there has been
no in-and-in breeding such as characterised the foundation of the
Shorthorns. There must be reason for this. The early Clydesdale
breeders were men of discrimination and cannot have been in ignorance
of the importance of inbreeding in the foundation of other breeds of
improved livestock. On the contrary, we find in the preface to the
first volume of the stud book several references to inbreeding and in
one place we find, ‘‘Inbreeding is just as legitimate as outbreeding—a
step in a certain direction.’’ There is a certain amount of evidence
and still more tradition that in-and-in breeding was resorted to in the
early days, but the present writer has only been able to trace one
instance recorded in the stud book of any degree of inbreeding comparable to that in Shorthorns, that is, West Surrey 1349 whose sire
and grandsire was the Prince of Wales and whose co-efficient was 25.2.
This stallion, mated to a mare sired by the Prince of Wales, produced
a filly with a co-efficient of nearly 20. This strain then became
extinct. Another stallion of a later date had a co-efficient of 20.

It may be argued that inbreeding was not practised for two
reasons. Firstly, because selection gave the required results. Undoubtedly, selection is easier with horses than cattle, for one stallion
can have a bigger population claiming him as sire than can a bull,
and therefore there is more material to work upon. But this is not
entirely so. The above solitary case of inbreeding occurred in the herd
of Lawrence Drew, a man whose position in the breed could only be
compared with that of the Collings in Shorthorns. This bears out the
second reason that inbreeding did not become a practice because the
breeder found that it brought with it certain undesirable characteristics.

Il.

The work of Morgan and his co-workers in the formation and
elaboration of the Chromosome Hypothesis, followed by the experiments
of King on rats and Wright on guinea-pigs, shows that the primary
effect of inbreeding is merely the creation of homozygosity. While
it may be confidently stated that this is the only primary effect and
that inbreeding fer se is merely the stablisation of the germ-plasm, it
INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND HORSES. 195

cannot be denied that inbreeding in many animals including the human
is frequently, if not always, accompanied by important secondary
effects which are almost as immediate in theiraction. These secondary
effects must then result from the creation of homozygosity. Inbreeding
increases the homozygosity of both dominant and recessive characteristics. ‘The comparative rate at which these are rendered homozygous
depends largely upon the amount of heterozygosity in the original
‘stock—and this cannot be measured. But from the fact that those
characters which inbreeding reveals and which (since many are harmful
to the individual would be easily spotted, were their occurrence at all
common in the usual random bred stock) are by no means commonly
associated with the original population, it can be deduced that these
characters are due to the action of factors acting in a recessive manner.
From the fact that this secondary effect of inbreeding is universal
amongst all domesticated animals and man, it must be concluded that
there is latent in the germ plasm of all random bred stock much that
is deleterious and only waiting its opportunity for expression.

Examples of this may be taken from a careful study of almost
every breed of improved livestock. Excellent illustrations can be
found in the two breeds already studied. In examining the Shorthorns
or the Clydesdale for latent defects, it must not be supposed that these
defects are in any way peculiar to the breeds. They have been chosen
as examples simply because they provided the material for the
present writer more easily than other breeds.

It was Charles Colling who perceived the value of the Shorthorn
bull, Favourite, already mentioned, and bred him to his daughters
and grand-daughters in some cases for as much as five or six generations. When his herd was dispersed in 1810, Favourite and his son
(and grandson), Comet (co-efficient 46.87) were the sires of the 47 head
sold. Thomas Bates bought a cow which he named Duchess I. She
was by Comet, her dam was by Favourite, her grand-dam by a son of
Favourite, her greatgranddam by Favourite and the dam behind that
by the great-great-grandsire of Favourite. Her co-efficient of inbreeding was 40.8. Mated to two bulls inbred to Favourite she had four
daughters, Duchesses Nos. 2, 8, 4, and 5. No. 2 mated to a bull
Marske (co-efficient 45.7) by Favourite out of a cow both the daughter
and grand-daughter of favourite, produced two heifers calves, Nos.
8 and 9. These mated to the Earl (co-efficient 49.2) by a Comet bull,
Duke (who was out of the original Duchess by Favourite), whose dam
was Duchess 8, full sister to Duchess 2, the dam of the two cows to
which he was mated produced two cows, Nos. 15 and 13 (co-efficients
47.9), neither of which had a heifer calf. No. 8, however, produced
to the service of this bull a bull calf, 3rd Earl, who, when mated to a
cow of another Duchess line, No. 11, begat one heifer which failed to
reproduce. These two cows, Nos. 8 and 9, were also mated to 2nd
Hubback (co-efficient 27) who was a son of the Earl and whose dam
was inbred to Favourite and again produced two cows neither of which
bred a heifer calf. One of these two cows, No. 8, mated to the highly
inbred 2nd Earl (60.4) a son of the Earl and No. 3, produced No. 20,
the only one in that generation of the family of No. 2 who produced a
heifer calf. This line bred on, and about the time of Bates’ death was
196 EUGENICS REVIEW.

still in existence, there being three heifer calves born in the three years
1846—1848.

The family of No. 3 was not remarkable for its fertility. No. 3
by Marske produced No. 7, which did not reproduce. By the Earl
she gave birth to No. 16, who was the dam of No. 27 by 2nd Hubback,
but there the line stopped. By 2nd Earl came No. 21 who was infertile
and by 2nd Hubback No. 26 who produced when mated back to her sire
a heifer calf,and here again the female line stopped. For practical
purposes this line was extinct by 1830.

The family of No. 4 who was by Ketton 2nd out of the original
Duchess by Favourite might be compared with that of No. 2. She
produced three heifer calves, two of which were fertile but only one
line through Nos. 12 and 19 continued. No. 19, by 2nd Hubback,
was an amazingly prolific cow for she gave birth to five female offspring, No. 32 who was fertile by 2nd Hubback (also her grandsire) and
Nos. 33, 36, and 40 by Belvedere (co-efficient 52.3), No. 33 being
fertile, and No. 35 by Gambier (co-efficient 32.3) an imeffectual cross
as no offspring were produced. This line was still in existence by the
time Bates died, six heifers being born between 1844 and 1848 inclusive.

The family of No. 5 was the least fertile of all. No. 5 herself who
was also by Ketton 2nd out of the original Duchess by Favourite produced to Young Marske (a bull by Markse out of Duchess 4, co-efficient
35.6) one heifer, No. 11, who mated to the 3rd Earl and 2nd Earl
respectively produced Nos. 3, 27, and 31, none of which had female
offspring and consequently this line died out by 1830.

Thus although in the third generation from the foundation Duchess
by Favourite, 14 females were born between 1823 and 1830, in the
seventh generation 1844-1849 only seven females were born. In all up
to Bates’ death in 1844 he had bred 63 cows in the family from Duchess
2 to Duchess 64. There were 45 males dropped by Duchess cows, 29
of which were not named. Although Bates did not believe in specially
fitting animals for shows, his Duchess family were without rivals in
the ring. He inbred not necessarily with the avowed intention of
doing so because the earlier breeders had practised it, but rather because he said he could get no bulls anywhere else that were worthy to
be mated to the Duchess cows. To all intents and purposes the family
is now extinct and has been so for nearly 50 years.

As Wright (1923) points out, the co-efficient of inbreeding for the
eight generations succeeding Duchess 1, averaged 40.9 varying from 43.5
and 47.1 in the first and second, to 36.4 and 42.8 in the seventh and
eighth. This was about double the average co-efficient for the breed
as a whole during that period. A study of the details can hardly but
lead to a conclusion that by inbreeding Bates rendered homozygous
certain recessive factors which brought about reduced fertility and
eventually congenital sterility. Had Bates, working with a larger
population made a number of outcrosses and then inbred, it is possible
that he might have obtained one or two lines which might have proved
absolutely fertile.

Turning now to the Clydesdale. Are there comparable defects
that have arisen in that breed although comparatively little inbreeding
INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND HORSES. 197

has been practised? As already stated, the foundation stock was as
full of defects as most foundation stock. The early breeders bred for
soundness and this is now fairly universal in the breed. Good action
was also laid down as an essential and obtained, till now no other breed
of draught horse can touch the Clydesdale in this respect. This has
been obtained, however, largely at the expense of the weight and
thickness. In addition, ugly markings have crept in. Of infertility
it is difficult to write with assurance, but there are some suggestive
data.

An examination of the returns to the Board of Agriculture for
Scotland of the premium stallions which travelled between 1913 and
1918 (inclusive) shows a differential fertility on the part of individual
horses. There appear on the list some 366 stallions, the majority of
which served less than 100 mares under the premium scheme in the
five year period. Of those which served more than 100 mares and left
70 per cent. or over of foals there are seven. Of those that served over
90 mares and left under 40 per cent. of foals there are seven. This list
by no means covers the extent of Clydesdale breeding in Scotland, but
it serves as confirmation of the accepted view that some stallions are
remarkably good foal getters while others are not. Seventy per cent.
is a high figure when it is remembered that mares who are not fully in
season, or who may be absolutely out of season, are frequently put to
stallions. The percentage of inbreeding of the seven fertile stallions
is 5.24, while that of the seven relatively infecund ones is 5.86. As
the numbers examined are small, these figures may not be taken as
conclusive. Beyond the fact that both these groups are above the
average for the random samples of stallions in the breed which for the
five year period, 1916-1920 (inclusive, ) amounted to 4.7. little can be
deducted on a cursory examination. What must be noted, however,
is that every one of the relatively infertile stallions has an immediate
ancestor, in each case as a grandfather (as well as in some cases ocurring
in other parts of the pedigree), a certain stallion which, in order to
give no offence, is designated by the symbol, ‘‘X.’’ ‘X was the son
of a “‘rig,’’ t.e. (a horse with an undescended testicle); his grandsire
was a noted stallion, ‘‘Y.’’ Each of these horses is inbred to Y. In
addition, three of them trace to Y through a horse ‘‘Q’’ who is either
their sire or grandsire. It is believed that amongst the other defects
in the original Clydesdale stock there were horses whose reproductive
organs were not entirely normal. One of the ancestors of ‘‘Y’’ was
known as the ‘‘ruptured horse.’’ | Y was inbred to this horse.

Accordingly, it is suggested that there were factors of a recessive
nature operating for reduced reproductive organs in the germplasm
of ‘‘Y’’ ; that these factors received a certain expression in his grandson °‘X’’ by whom they were transmitted. In addition, these factors
in some cases being rendered more homozygous by inbreeding to Y,
were concentrated in other descendants of Y, particularly inQ. When
the sons and grandsons of X were mated to the descendants of Y, particularly those who were the sons of Q (and this constitutes inbreeding
to Y), then animals possessing a considerable degree of infertility were
produced. There is further evidence that stallions which were the
offspring of X in the first or second generation and on the other side
198 ' EUGENICS REVIEW.

of whose pedigree Y appeared through certain other sires, were not
infertile, but, on the contrary, remarkably prolific. It is worth
noting that four of the prolific stallions possessed a considerable
amount of the blood of ‘‘G,’’ a stallion who was a son of Y. G, who
was noted for prolificacy, appears as the great grandsire in all but two
of the seven. Of the remaining three stallions two contained no
inbreeding whatsoever to Y, while one was inbred to the unprolific
stallion X. There is, however. some evidence that the sons of this
stallion were not remarkable for fertility. This is an interesting
exception, but one that can be easily explained genetically. But these
prolific stallions, when mated to mares who trace to X or Q, or to Y
through an infertile strain, have produced male offspring some of
which are relatively infertile and in certain cases absolutely sterile.

Therefore, it seems to the writer that one reason why inbreeding
was not more practised in the formation of the Clydesdale breed was
because the wise breeder noticed that frequently infertility resulted
from it. He accordingly established his breed at a lower co-efficient
of inbreeding. That, however, does not necessarily imply that
homozygosity within the breed has not been obtained. On the contrary, as regards certain of the most important draught horse characters, the modern Clydesdale may be claimed to be more homozygous
than any other draught breeds, and when compared to the homozygosity
of the Shorthorn in regard to beef characteristics, it may also be stated
that probably the Clydesdale has achieved an equal if not a greater
degree of homozygosity. It must be granted that some of this has been
obtained by the fact that a single stallion can exert a greater effect
than a single bull. But to balance that the Shorthorns have been an
established breed for a greater period and the cycle of generations in
cattle is less than in horses. How then has the Clydesdale breed
xchieved this remarkable prepotency ? The answer is by line-breeding
or the continual mating of the male descendants of one line upon
female descendants of another branch of that line or of one other line
or a combination of the two. The breeders have, especially during
‘‘bad times’’ selected very carefully. A remarkable degree of prepotency as regards certain specific draught horse characteristics has been
obtained but in doing this two things have been ignored, infertility and
bad colour. Probably they have beer deliberately ignored for every
experimental animal geneticist knows how laborious it is to bring to a
successful conclusion a simple problem in the selection of characters
depending upon the action of ten pairs of factors.

While the Shorthorn breed is more or less in a state of equilibrium
as regards inbreeding, this is not the case in the Clydesdale. In the
former the population is enormous when compared with the latter.
The co-efficient of inbreeding for the Clydesdale is showing a continual
tendency to rise, and it is conceivable that in the not too distant future
the breed co-efficient will be double what it is now if certain characters
can be eliminated from the animal to which inbreeding occurs.

Thus every breed must find its own level! of inbreeding. According to the number of undesirable characters either present or latent in
the stock on which the breed is founded and the nature of selection by
early breeders,to that extent is it safe to inbreed. Experiments in
INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND HORSES. 199

progress which have not yet been reported show that in certain improved
types of pig, inbreeding of parent to offspring results in almost complete sterility by the fifth generation, and, or, in the production of
types not associated with the pure breeds. But every breed varies.
For instance, in cattle the amount. of inbreeding in the various breeds
is by no means uniform. Probably the Aberdeen-Angus is inbred
almost as much as the Shorthorn but this is not the case in the British
Holstein-Friesian or the Ayrshire. The greatest degree of inbreeding
in cattle has been achieved in certain herds of wild Park cattle where
for some hundreds of years little or no outside blood has been introduced,
the result being that there has been a differential mortality among
the herds. One herd, however, the Chillingham, is as vigorous as
ever. Some stock selected from these wild Park cattle and in which
some Shorthorn and other blood was introduced when inbred offspring
to parent for four generations has shown no sign of infertility. The
co-efficient of inbreeding of some of these animals is as high as 50.
Miner (1922) has recorded a case of human inbreeding which shows no
ill effects. As the co-efficient is only 6.64, the case is only comparable
to that of the mating of first cousins (6.25) and barely worth noting.

The conclusions that are to be drawn trom these observations
cannot be stated dogmatically, but it would appear that inbreeding
ean be practised as far as the obvious or hidden defects of the stock
permit. Many of these defects have only been emphasised because the
interference of the breeder has eliminated natural selection. In the.
wild state nature was continually at work and when any defects
appeared the animals possessing them were not as a rule given the
opportunity of reproducing themselves. And herein probably lies
the application of these results to the human race. For about as great
a number of generations as the Shorthorn cattle have been bred, has
the Anglo-Saxon race been removed from the major effects of natural
selection. Instead, another form of selection has been substituted
which, while it is difficult to define, is nevertheless far removed from
natural selection. There has been no attempt to eliminate the congenitally relatively infertile; on the contrary, the present tendency is
in the opposite direction. |

At the same time, the removal of natural selection should be the
ereatest stimulus to inbreeding, for in the majority of the domesticated
breeds of livestock it is of the greatest importance that these should be
as homozygous as possible for the maximum desired degree of prolificacy, whereas in certain breeds—not necessarily those mentioned above
—-the opposite is more frequent. In the human, however, where controlled matings are impossible, while it may be laid down as a general
rule that it is unwise to practise inbreeding, nevertheless each separate
case must be judged on its own merits, and we must not close our eyes
to the fact that some of the greatest men produced are the result of the
mating of cousins.

SUMMARY.
1. How homozygosity may be obtained and measured is discussed in the first

part and also the various methods of estimating the co-efficient of inbreeding The conclusion being reached that Sewall Wright’s method is probably the best.

2. Sewall Wright’s co-efficient is applied to the Shorthorn breed of cattle and
200 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the Cyldesdale breed of horses. It is shown that there has been considerably more
inbreeding in Shorthorns than in Clydesdales.

3. The reason for this is discussed and it is suggested that the answer lies in
the fact that one breed has a larger proportion of recessively inherited deleterious
characteristics per individual.

4. It is pointed out that the Cyldesdale has probably achieved as great a
degree of homozygosity as the Shorthorn without recourse to the same extent of
inbreeding. In the writer’s opinion this cannot be entirely accounted for by the
fact that one stallion can serve a greater number of females than can one bull, nor
by the fact that the Clydesdale population is considerably less than the Shorthorn.
The writer believes this homozygosity of the Clydesdale to be due not so much to
inbreeding as to careful selection.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

The writer wishes to acknowledge the help he has received from Dr. Sewall
Wright, of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, in dealing with the Shorthorn
pedigrees ; from Mr. James Wood of the Board of Agriculture for Scotland in placing
at his disposal data concerning the premium horses ; from Mr .Archibald MacNeilage,
Secretary of the Clydesdale Breed Society for assistance in the full tabulation of
certain pedigrees ; from Mr. William Brown, M.R.C.V.S., Aberdeen University ;
and from Mr. A. Calder, B.Sc. Agric., of the Animal Breeding Research Department
University of Edinburgh, who analysed the co-efficients for the Clydesdale breed.

THE SHORTHORN BREED. CO-EFFICIENTS OF INBREEDING.

(After Sewall Wright) from random samples. Witha comparison of the breed
to the Duchess family.

400

   
 

oO
4780 1800 1820 1840 1360 1830 1900 SP ZO
VARIATION IN INBREEDING
INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND HORSES.

 

*“repTey

Sid O16 |

Aq pasAjeuy

S06! 006! S681 068! S9sl 088! G28 028!

‘sajdures wopusr wWory ‘spoyied avak aay 1900 (s8,34S1144) Surpsoiquy Jo szusr1o1jza0D
‘quad WIVAGSHCAT) FAL

S98i
EUGENICS REVIEW.

 

  
      
           

adaPlajag “ oF
cS ro
TL euyabuy = ogjaayem S ssayong % ssauong
may paeusm buno, ¢ ssayong Zz ssdyong, IE vopay
sso0 lad uopburyjom } ssayong

cHEPHIAN L3WOD 3 Ss2yong UoH2y

 

a ssayong
x1uzoud buno, |
> ssayong
aLINNOAWS gq sseayong
x1Ue0Ud eyouqbuliog
Kuaaqmedjs bunoy aquieljo4
_ Seep
aquiel jo, MOD) laANoaey aung uayjed Ty >peaqny

| Ly
| A aieadl
T ——
| | (tt
Jing Ae|pnis Ing syjlwc Ing sujws Ing Xa1pnyg
203

INBREEDING IN CATTLE AND HORSES.

v9

&9

(AS; I9

Mw GS UW ee

Uy, GF Gs

ay

A

sy Uy
Co MCS
9 (ZA GL
fo} 9
4

6S

9S

|

8b -Lv8I

a) OF) ts br - yPrsl

(2 Bio wy rr-sssi

ww & © &®@ @ &S 62 -ZE8I

uy Sf - 6291

ra LZ oO Oo & U9 ST) of -<zeI
(4 (4 GD I 6 oa SZ - 618!
3 S iS 91- SII

808i

HLYIG

ALIWNOAWS X SS3HING | 40 diva
204 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FIGURES.

Fig. 1. Co-efficients of inbreeding for the Shorthorn breed of cattle (after Sewal?
Wright), in twenty year periods.

Fig. 2. Co-efficients of inbreeding (Wright’s) for the Clydesdale breed of horses,
from random samples, in five year periods.

Fig. 3. An example of the inbreeding employed at the foundation of the Shorthorn breed with special reference to the Duchess family. Note. Duchesses No. 33 and 37 produced female offspring.

Fig. 4. Bates’ Duchess family. Note. Chart showing the female line of descent
in Bates’s Duchess Shorthorn cows up to the time of his death. No male
is on the chart. Of Nos. 1—56 twenty-five were sired by bulls whose
dams were Duchesses. The dams of the remaining bulls were as inbred
to Favourite as Duchess, with three exceptions: two of which were
Cleveland Lad and 2nd Cleveland Lad, whose dam, The Matchem Cow,
had comparatively little Favourite blood. The sire of both these bulls
had some Duchess and a great deal of Favourite blood ; they sired only one
cow each and produced respectively two and three calves. The 2nd Duke
of Oxford, who sired the last six Duchesses, was a grandson of the Matchem
Cow but with two Duchess top crosses. The Matchem Cow was the only
radical out cross.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Baashuus -Jessen, J., (1926), Conquences of Mendelism on the Problems of Inbreeding in Livestock. Hereditas, vol. 7, pp. 189-214.

Gowen, J. W., (1920), Inheritance of Milk Yield and Butter-Fat Percentage in
Crosses of Dairy and Beef Breeds of Cattle. Jour. Hered., vol. 11, pp. 800316, 365-376.

———(1920). Studies on Milk Secretion. {V. On the Variation and Correlation
of Milk Secretion with Age. VI. On the Variations and Correlations of
Butter-Fat Percentage with age in Jersey Cattle. Genetics, vol. 5, pp. 11187, 249-324.

Miner, J. R., (1922). Note on a Case of Human Inbreeding. Amer. Nat., vol.
56, pp. 188-189.

Pearl, R., (1917), Studies on Inbreeding. Amer. Nat., vol. 51, pp. 548-559,
636-639.

Tuff, P., (1923). Die Wirkung und Bedeutung der Auslese und Inzucht fiir die
Rindviehzucht. Internationaal Congres voor Rundveeteelt. The Hague,
p. 133.

Wright, Sewall (1922). Co-efficients of Inbreeding and Relationship. Amer.
Nat. ,vol. 56, pp. 330-338.

——(1923). Mendelian Analysis of the Pure Breeds of Livestock. Jour. Hered.,
vol. 14, pp. 339-348.

——(1923). II. The Duchess Family. Ibid., pp. 405-422.
——({1925). IYI. The Shorthorns. Jour. Hered., vol. 16, pp. 205-216.

——and McPhee, H. C., (1925). An Approximate Method of Calculating Co.
efficients of Inbreeding and Relationship from Livestock Pedigrees. JourAgric. Research, vol. 31, pp. 377-383.
