THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

THE THEORY OF SEX.
By ARCHER WILDE.

AMONG the many unsolved problems of Biology it is usual to
place that of sex, that is, the question what are the advantages
of reproduction by two parents that have resulted in its
becoming universal among the highest organisms and widely
prevalent among the rest, almost though not quite down to the
lowest and simplest known. That it must be by advantages
that it has so prevailed I shall not here argue; all who accept
the Darwinian doctrine of the persistence of the fittest forms of
life and the consequent fitness of the persistent, which are those
now present, will grant it as self-evident. It is well known
that in its simplest form the sexual process consists in the conjugation or fusion of two independent cells, as like each other
as two individuals ever can be, which then resume their previous
life of nutrition by absorption from the surrounding medium,
alternating with multiplication by splitting each into two.
Among Microbes, the smallest and lowest of known forms of
life, conjugation has not been observed and is confidently
asserted not to occur. The differences between the sexes, often
so striking, appear in later and higher forms of life, and give
rise to other problems, which however important are less fundamental than the question stated, and will not be considered
here. As regards the use of terms, reproduction by two parents
is most conveniently named double parentage, and I call all
organisms in which it occurs sexual organisms, leaving the
term bi-sexual to apply to those in which the sexes differ.

That this problem can be and in fact has been solved, it
will be my endeavour here to establish, and it will also appear
190 EUGENICS REVIEW.

that its solution does not need any very intimate knowledge of
abstruse biological phenomena occurring only in rare Species
of animals and plants, but can be attained by a rational scrutiny
of facts lying within the reach of all and denied by none; while
on the other hand such more recondite facts as may be adduced
serve only to confirm the conclusion so drawn.

As a basis for the true theory I shall refer to common
opinion, which usually contains at least a kernel of truth, and
in this case can be shown to contain virtually the whole. There
is a widespread belief that sex results in mixture. I do not
know where it can be found argued or even explicitly stated,
but it is everywhere assumed as a self-evident truth, and rightly
so, though there could be no harm in stating the grounds on
which it is held, of which I will give the slightest possible
sketch.

We speak of a man as being a mixture of the traits of his
father’s and mother’s families. Most men partake clearly
enough of both, and though we may speak of this or that man
as wholly his father’s or mother’s son, this is well understood
to be but a familiar exaggeration, and the underlying belief is
that the ancestral traits which do not appear are only latent, and
may reappear in his descendants—indeed, will certainly do so
if there are descendants enough. How completely the actual
survival of such traits may accompany their apparent suppression is well shown by Mendel’s experiments with the edible Pea.
Some of them, he found, regularly superseded their opposites
in the offspring of a cross between two Varieties, and these
he consequently called dominant, but in a second generation of
offspring, derived from the first by self-fertilization, the latent
traits, which he called recessive, as regularly reappeared.
Inheritance was thus one-sided in appearance only, the race
being mixed. Hybrids, such as the mule and hinny, are
undoubted mixtures of the characters of the races crossed, and
hybridism differs from ordinary breeding only in the remoter
relationship of the coupled pair. A mulatto is a mixture of
black and white, and a quadroon, as a mixture of three parts
white and one part black, regularly shows a greater proportion
of the white man’s characters. The greater the distance between
THE THEORY OF SEX. IQ!

and consequent unlikeness of the crossed strains, the more
obvious are the effects of mixture, but it is only a question of
degree, and the mating of the nearest relatives is still mixture
when compared with the sexless propagation of creeping plants,
or with the self-fertilization which often occurs in flowers.
Mongrels of all kinds show mixtures of parental characters, and
domesticated animals and plants are habitually and successfully
crossed with the express purpose of obtaining a mixture of the
virtues of different strains. The belief that inspires this
practice also underlies all such expressions as ‘‘ purity of race ”’
and the somewhat figurative ‘‘ pure-blooded,’’ in which the
blood stands for the organism, as the part for the whole, and
‘‘pure’’ means unmixed. And if this were not enough, we
might appeal to the young but promising science of Cytology,
to show that the essence of the process of reproduction, even in
the highest animals, is the fusion of two cells or cell-nuclei, one
derived from either parent, so that the actual mixture of matter
is a fact. It is clear therefore that this belief is not only widespread, but unlike some other popular beliefs, exceedingly well
founded.

What then are the general effects of mixture that ought to
follow in this case as in others? Let us take a very simple
instance by way of illustration. Suppose a printer’s case of
type to contain a thousand of each letter, A in one box, B in
another, and so on down to Z, and let all be well mixed and
returned to the boxes, a thousand in each. What are the
results? In the first place the contents of the boxes, formerly
all different, are now all alike. Likeness has been produced
out of unlikeness. But this is not all, for the contents of each
are changed; they are more heterogeneous than before. Instead
of one letter each box now contains samples of the whole
alphabet mixed together. What were homogeneous dissimilar
wholes have been broken up, and their parts reintegrated into
heterogeneous similar wholes. These then are the two results
of mixture, the production of uniformity among all the
individuals mixed, and of heterogeneity within each. And this
heterogeneity may be otherwise described as unlikeness of parts,
so that mixture produces both likeness and unlikeness, but in
192 EUGENICS REVIEW.

a perfectly clear, simple, and consistent way. The two results
are indeed complementary, and only two aspects of one process,
which cannot be conceived except as producing both. It is also
to be noticed that beyond these two results mixture has made
no change in the letters mixed, which individually remain
unaffected. Nothing objective has been created or destroyed.
All the different types were already in existence, and are now
merely distributed, becoming the common property of all the
boxes instead of being confined each to one. There has been a
redistribution of differences, and that is all.

If I dwell on these tedious simplicities concerning mixture,
it is because I am convinced that it is nothing but the failure to
apply them to the case of sex that has led to all the doubt and
inconsistency in which the subject has been involved. It
appears to me that the mixture caused by sex can be shown to
have these two effects, or one effect of double aspect, that no
effects inconsistent with them have been shown to flow from it,
that they are sufficiently advantageous to explain to the full the
high place taken by it in organic nature, and lastly that they
show the origin of the contradictory explanations so often
advanced.

But before attempting to apply the illustration, it will be
well to modify it so as to bring it more into line with the facts
under discussion. Evidently the results of mixture will not be
essentially altered if instead of supposing the types to differ at
the start, we suppose them to be all blanks with tendencies to
to become A’s, B’s, and so on, and the mixing to be repeated
at intervals. Each mixing now distributes the differences which
have arisen since the last, making all the boxes alike as before,
and uniformity, if not created, is maintained, while heterogeneity, as fast as it arises, is made common to all. Again, let
us suppose that instead of being all mixed at once the boxes are
paired by lot and the contents of each pair mixed and replaced,
and the mixtures then paired by lot for the second mixing, and
so on. Though the results are now delayed, they are the same
in the end; each mixing averages the differences between every
pair, and after a sufficient number both uniformity and heterogeneity will be complete. Lastly let us suppose the types
THE THEORY OF SEX. 193

endowed with powers of increase, arising only on pairing, so
that instead of mixing two whole boxfuls, we have but to take
an A and an N (supposing them to be drawn together) and put
them into an empty box, to find it full of a mixture of A’s and
N’s before the second mixing, and let half a dozen boxes be
filled in this way from each pair, and the lots for the second
mixing be drawn between these, and every subsequent mixing
be conducted on this plan. There is now an important
difference to note, for while the tendency to produce uniformity
is as before, the heterogeneity may appear not only among the
parts of each mixed whole, but in the shape of differences
between the six wholes derived from a single pair, which must
in fact be regarded as parts of the same mixture. For we need
not suppose the mixtures to be perfect—in practice mixtures
never are so—and even if we assume every box to have equal
numbers of all the letters it contains, the arrangement of them
will be different. For example, after the second mixing one of
the boxes containing A, N, B and O (an AN having been
drawn with a BO), might possibly show all A’s at the top,
another all O’s, giving an appearance of great diversity.

Thus multiplication, when it accompanies mixture, gives
greater scope for the display of heterogeneity and the apparently
inconsistent production of likeness and unlikeness, because the
unlikeness is now not only of parts, but also of whole
individuals, the product of the same mixture. And if we merely
put side by side the results of this multiplication with mixture
and those of multiplication without mixture in what are called
in Biology ‘‘ pure lines,’? as instanced by supposing half a
dozen A’s to fill as many boxes by natural increase without
pairing, we shall probably be led to declare, as many biologists
have declared regarding sex, that mixture, manifestly a cause
of unlikeness, is a cause of variation. Nor is it clear that in
doing so we should be misusing the word; but I call this false
variation, because it does not involve, as progressive variation
always does, unlikeness to what. went before. Putting aside
questions of words, the fact is clear, that disguise and delay
them as we may, the ultimate results of mixture, with multiplication or without, are uniformity of the individuals mixed and
194 EUGENICS REVIEW.

internal heterogeneity of their parts, and that the increased
unlikeness of individuals derived from the same pair is an
incidental and unimportant effect. Rather than attempt to carry
the illustration further let us now turn to the facts. The
repeated pairings and mixings are emblems of the successive
generations of animals and plants, and unless the belief that
sex produces mixture is unfounded, they furnish clear indications of the results to be expected from the repeated intermixture brought about by it.

If then we could suppose a herd of deer, much persecuted
by carnivora, to consist wholly of does and to propagate their
kind parthenogenetically like the Greenfly, but throughout
their lives, and not like the Greenfly during the summer
only, then except for those individual differences which are
never absent, the fawns will exactly resemble their dams. So
far as variation does not alter the mould, heredity keeps it
unchanged. But propagation being in pure independent lines,
it is clear that these small but constant variations may differ in
each, and each may find a different road to salvation. One may
escape by superior speed, another by endurance and the
characters that lead to it; others by scent, sight or hearing, and
others again not by the superiority of any particular sense, but
by the qualities of the brain that bring about a quick attention
to the warnings of the senses, and so on; and in the absence of
mixture the herd as a whole will tend to divergence through
variation in independent lines, and probably in the end to
separation into many herds. The animals that fall victims to
their persecutors are chiefly those which have the least shares
of the favourable variations peculiar to their respective lines.
But now if we suppose reproduction to be by sex, this
independence is at once broken down. The males now form
connecting links between the separate and divergent female
lines. The fawns no longer resemble their dams only,
but also their sires, and in resembling both have incidentally more scope for differing from each other. Also their
ancestry, now doubled in every generation, makes their
inheritance increasingly heterogeneous. All favourable variations occurring throughout the herd are in the course of a
THE THEORY OF SEX. 195

few generations transmitted, at least in some degree, to all, and
the greater the value of any one, the more does it tend to transmission by the survival of those who inherit it in the highest
degree, and of larger numbers of those who inherit it in less
degrees but still above the mean, both male and female. The
victims are now not so much those that fail in any one quality,
for, like competitors in an examination, they may have a good
average in the rest, but those that from deficiency in the sum
of all useful qualities fall behind in the struggle for life. All
the members of the herd are now kept in the main alike, because
apart from their individual variations and those of a few
immediately preceding ancestors, the sum of inherited variations is the same for all, divergence being prevented by repeated
inter-mixture; while the continual increase of that sum makes
the organism increasingly complex and heterogeneous. Thus
is plainly seen the work of mixture in its two results, preservation of uniformity in the herd and increase of heterogeneity in
the individual, with the incidental effect of greater variety in
the offspring of a single dam.

The objection may here arise that all this is not fact but
speculation. This however seems unavoidable. The record
of evolution is so slight, the now living creatures that propagate
asexually are so low in the scale of life, or so small, and their
life-processes so little known, that it is difficult if not impossible to bring single and double parentage into direct comparison except by an imaginary case. But happily there is
another way of approaching the subject which will enable us to
adduce facts quite untinged by fancy. This is to consider sex
and its effects on Species dynamically as a question of degree.
That even in those kinds of life in which union precedes every
birth, assuring double parentage to all, it may rightly be
regarded as a force having effects in the evolution of organisms
in proportion to the amount of its action, and so that this or
that other influence may rightly be said to promote or hinder it,
is not difficult to show.

As regards any individual it is of course no question of
degree at all, but one of positive and integral alternatives,
whether it is the offspring of one parent or two, and if of one,
196 EUGENICS REVIEW.

whether it originated in simple fission, or by budding, or
parthenogenesis, or self-fertilization; but as regards the continuous succession of creatures called a Species, these sharp
lines of demarcation fade away, and sex may operate in any
degree between two extremes. By it every individual is provided with double parentage, and through that with four
grandparents, eight great-grandparents, and so on upwards
with enormously increasing rapidity of increase, the maximum
figures being 1,024 in the tenth generation, and 1,040,576 in
the twentieth. These and the like figures form the upper limit,
and in the constitution of an individual whose ancestry reaches
or at all nearly approaches them, that ancestry may be said to
have been widened by outbreeding to the utmost extent, and the
force of sex to have had the freest possible play. To turn to the
opposite limit, if we consider the case of the human race, it is
theoretically possible for the descendants of two men and two
women, assumed to number four only in each generation, two
of either sex, by persistent inter-marriage of what may be called
double first cousins, without violation of the laws of consanguinity to continue the race indefinitely without any mixture of
foreign blood; thus narrowing the ancestry in the tenth,
twentieth, and every degree, to four, attaining a ‘‘ purity of
blood’’ nearly approaching that of single parentage, and
reducing the effects of sex to a minimum. Such a family might
be likened to a rope of four strands and of indefinite length,
while a man of full ancestry is like a knot in a net, owing its
origin to two strands from the row next above, and through
these, only a few rows of meshes higher up, to the whole width
of the net—in a not very remote antiquity his forefathers are the
whole Species. That a family so inbred would not last more
than a few generations is doubtless true, but none the less we
have here the theoretical lower limit of the action of sex in
humanity, while in domesticated animals it is well known that
for a few generations inbreeding is carried to even greater
extremes. It is thus evident that when dynamically considered
with regard to its effects on a Species, sex is a force that may
operate in any degree, from such inbreeding as brings its effects
almost to nothing, to such outbreeding as would occur on
THE THEORY OF SEX. 197

mating all the individuals of a large Species by lot, and so
producing the completest possible distribution of all their
variations by continually repeated inter-mixture; and | shall
now be understood if I speak of inbreeding as narrowing the
ancestry and reducing the force of sex, and of outbreeding as
having the opposite effects.

To pass now to unquestionable facts, it is not so much in
Nature left to herself, and consequently unknown, that we shall
find these, as in Nature under the influence and control of man.
It is here that we must expect to find the crowning proof, not
only because we know far more of the domesticated races of
animals and plants than of the others, but because it is in them,
as I have previously urged in ‘‘ Science Progress,’’ for April,
1913, and as I now find had been clearly stated by Romanes,
in ‘‘ Darwin and after Darwin ’’ long before, that we have the
material for experiment—the most cogent logical process of all.
And in fact we have only to examine the results of innumerable
experiments instituted centuries ago and still being tried everywhere and every day, in order to obtain a final demonstration.
Man’s domestication of animals and plants may rightly be
described as a vast series of experiments in the production of
diversity by restriction of the force of sex. Of course, the converse experiment of crossing is also perpetually being tried, but
it is in the main by inbreeding that the products of nature have
been so profoundly modified for the advantage of man.

Let us then turn to a breeder of Fantail Pigeons for confirmation of the theory. He will almost certainly demur to the
view that sex produces uniformity, pointing to the fact that by
inbreeding among his own strain he keeps all his Pigeons alike,
while by introducing some of his neighbours’ Pouters he would
get a motley flock of mongrels, no two alike, and even crossing
with another strain of Fantails, though perhaps occasionally
desirable, somewhat interferes with his most prized results.
That is to say, a narrowing of the ancestry and reduction of the
force of sex secures uniformity, and their widening and increase
lead to variation—the very opposite of the theory here propounded. And this is undeniably true, but it is far from being
the whole truth. The variation to which he points as a result of
198 EUGENICS REVIEW.

crossing is only the internal heterogeneity which we have seen
to result from mixing, and to appear not only in the variety of
parts of the same whole, but also incidentally in the shape of
differences between several wholes, the product of the same
mixture, and which I have called false variation, as causing no
progress. Looking beyond this breeder’s dovecot, we must ask
what made the Fantails and the Pouters, and all other breeds
of Pigeons so different. The answer is easy and certain. It is
the long-continued and careful selection by many breeders for
breeding purposes of the birds best endowed with the points
they fancied, and the rejection of all backsliders; and this has
always prevented crossing and involved the almost complete
segregation of each breed from the rest. In other words, the
very same process of inbreeding which keeps our breeder’s
Fantails true to type, has made them quite unlike all other
breeds, and these unlike each other. And what would be the
result of free inter-crossing of all the breeds? Undoubtedly the
swamping of their differences, and finally the production of
one common type, whatever it might be like. The motley
result of crossing Fantails and Pouters would be, like the
mixing of A and N, only a first step in the process of making
the whole species uniform, and after all it is widening the
ancestry and increasing the force of sex that produces uniformity
on the large scale. In this free inter-crossing we should see,
plainly exhibited, the apparently contradictory but really complementary results of mixture, uniformity in the species and
diversity in the individual and the strain, and both produced
by outbreeding. On the other hand the great diversities now
existing between the Varieties have been produced by segregation, by which the effects of mixture by sex have been largely
shut out, and the ancient pre-sexual reign of unrestricted
divergence by as much restored.

The breeder’s view, true enough for his own purposes,
involves two misconceptions for ours. One is that the type he
preserves by inbreeding is unchanging; its characters are
supposed to be thereby ‘“‘ fixed.’’ The contrary is the truth;
domestic Pigeons are always being ‘‘ improved,’’ and it is the
accumulation of just these improvements on many divergent
THE THEORY OF SEX. 199

lines that has led to the great diversity of breeds. The other is
that the variations which occur on the introduction of crossbreeding are new variations. They are not new or progressive,
but merely redistributions of characters already existing in other
breeds. It is the improvements that are new, and in life as in
printers’ types, mixture originates nothing.

But these misconceptions have not been confined to the
breeders; they are responsible for the opinion expressed by
most biologists that sex has been a cause of variation. When
Darwin in his ‘‘ Animals and Plants under Domestication,’’
Vol. II., p. 263, grudgingly admitting that close inbreeding, by
inducing lessened fertility and a weakened constitution, ‘‘ may
lead to variability,’’ declared that if not carried to an injurious
extreme, far from causing variability, it ‘‘tends to fix the
character of each breed,’’ it is evident that, like the breeder of
Fantails, he had his eye on the results of a single match, or at
least on a single strain. Had he widened his outlook to include
all contemporary breeds at once, he must have realised that
what is called inbreeding in the strain is segregation in the
Species, and causes it to break into Varieties. Or had he
lengthened it to include the genealogy of a single breed, he
must have remembered what no one did so much to establish,
that the fixity of type is fugitive, or there would be no artificial
improvement and no natural evolution.

It will now be best to state the conclusion that seems to be
warranted by the foregoing considerations, and afterwards to
consider more at large the place of sex in Nature, and test the
theory by further reference to facts.

Mixture of the species of a genus by distribution and
reintegration of differences causes uniformity among all, and
heterogeneity within each. In organic nature the operation of
sex 1s an instance of this general law.

It is to be noticed that the terms genus and species are here
used, not as elsewhere throughout this essay, in their biological,
but in their wider logical senses, in which the relation between
any class of things and the individuals or sub-classes composing
it is described as a relation of genus to species.
200 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Sex then has no part in cauSing variations, nor in preventing their occurrence or destroying them when they have
occurred, except as is noticed below by mutual cancellation.
Living organisms had the power to assimilate surrounding
matter, to divide by fission and thereby reproduce and multiply,
and lastly the power, or rather the necessity, to vary, before
ever sex arose. What sex does, so far as it has free play, is to
mix the otherwise independent and divergent lines of life, thus
combining their variations into a comparatively small number
of large and complex organisms, as against the continual
divergence into a larger number of smaller and simpler
kinds that would otherwise happen. By this continual
integration of variations, originating each in a_ separate
individual, it has had a most powerful influence in promoting the evolution of the sexual kinds. But the variations
so integrated are only those that stand the test of the environment and persist. Individual variations so unfavourable as to
cause the elimination by death or sterility of their possessors
cannot be integrated. Indifferent variations undergo continual
reduction by dispersion through the agency of sex among
posterity, the variations of either parent being on an average
inherited by offspring in half measure only. They also tend to
mutual cancellation when opposites are brought together in one
individual, since in sufficiently large numbers of individuals
they will occur equally on either side of the mean. But variations separately useless may, when combined by the operation
of sex in one individual, prove of the utmost importance.

It might possibly be objected that as evolution consists
mainly or largely in the production of unlikeness out of likeness—of all the variety of the present universe out of the
sameness of a nebula—nothing that tends to produce uniformity
can have much promoted evolution. The reply is that while
differentiation, or the production of unlikeness out of likeness,
is a great and indispensable factor of evolution, it is not the
whole story. So far is it from being so, that in Spencer’s wellknown formula of the process, which, if I may not say it has
met with universal acceptance, has at least not been seriously
touched by criticism, and enjoys undisputed supremacy—in
THE THEORY OF SEX. 20I

that formula this factor does not even take the first place.
‘* Evolution,’’ it runs, ‘‘is an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of motion,’’ and then follow words
indicating as a subsidiary feature the passage from a state of
“‘indefinite incoherent homogeneity’’ to one of ‘‘ definite
coherent heterogeneity,’’ which is the process of differentiation,
or variation as it is usually called in the organic world. It is
this integration which, in living organisms, has been so much
promoted by sex. Compared with the lowest forms of life, man
is a complex of powers and qualities, of organs and tissues, vast
in size and infinite in variety, integrated into a definite coherent
whole chiefly, as it appears to me, by the agency of sex. It is
true that sex is not the only cause of integration. A parallel
cause must have been the association of originally independent
cells in colonies, and their survival by the advantages of communal life. But so far as it is possible to disentangle causes
which operated together to produce a joint effect, it would
appear that integration by association could take place between
like units only, while that effected by sex was of a very different
kind, gathering into every individual by means of inheritance
an infinity of unlike variations occurring originally each in a
single ancestor. While aggregation increased size, sexual
integration increased complexity. In the first volume of his
Biology, 1894, section 166, Spencer enlarges on the difficulty of
supposing a combination in one individual of the many small
variations that may be required to make one useful character.
Instancing the enormous horns of the Irish Elk, he enumerates
seven parts of the body which would independently need
strengthening to make any spontaneous increase in the weight
of the horns advantageous rather than detrimental. The
passage hardly takes sufficient notice of correlation in variations, and moreover much that is relevant to the subject has
been learnt since he wrote concerning the action of secretions
on growth in general. But putting aside these points, surely
the solution of the difficulty is, not as he would have it, the
transmission of functionally acquired modifications, but the
integration effected by sex. All the required variations, each
occurring in a different animal, might be useless in them202 EUGENICS REVIEW.

selves but too small to be seriously detrimental, but when
combined in a few generations into one individual, would make
all the difference in a struggle between the males for possession
of the herd.

Somewhat modifying our language, we might say that
while organic evolution is otherwise divergent, sex alone superimposes convergence. Many lines of ancestry converge to make
a man. It is not for nothing that we inherit our faculties and
organs, not from one or two, but looking back only a score or
two of generations, from many millions. Though in anything
but the barest outline the process is hard to imagine, it may
surely be laid down with confidence that such a convergence
cannot be without effect in the integration of otherwise
independent variations. It is a true cause of combination.

Two factors of organic evolution have to be distinguished,
capable of being considered separately, though working
together, or rather perhaps in conflict, to produce a joint
effect, and both loosely called variation; variation in time, by
which a Species may be transformed without noticeably diverging into Varieties, and variation in space, by which it diverges
into Varieties and ultimately into Species and still more widely
differentiated groups. Yet again variation is used to express
the two together, when it becomes synonymous with organic
evolution. Romanes in the third volume of ‘“‘ Darwin and
after Darwin ’’ strongly urges the importance of the distinction,
calling the two factors Monotypic and Polytypic Evolution.
But these terms are not entirely satisfactory, and in default of
better, it would perhaps serve to speak of linear or progressive
transformation and divergent variation, or simply transformation and divergence. The two processes are largely in conflict,
and the less a Species diverges and breaks into many Species,
the greater the transformation it is likely to undergo through
the integration effected by sex.

To realise the importance of the effects produced by sex
through mixture, we must therefore concentrate our attention
not on evolution in general, but on the linear transformation of
a single sexual Species. Returning to the herd of deer and
pursuing the attempted comparison between the two methods of
THE THEORY OF SEX. 203

propagation, we might say in a figurative way that the members
of the herd by virtue of sexual reproduction instead of keeping
their several improvements to themselves and their offspring,
agree to pool them for the common benefit. Without it a
valuable variation can become the property of the race only by
the elimination of all that possess it in an insufficient degree or
not at all. With this power of communicating characters such
a variation is imparted in a few generations to the whole herd,
and there is thus effected a great mitigation of the harshness of
the process of selection. The resulting uniformity is highly
important as the basis of all sociality. It is only by uniformity
that the unity of the herd can be preserved. To keep together
they must act alike, and to act alike they must be constituted
alike, and it is true of them as of others, that united they stand,
divided they fall.

But of still greater importance is the individual heterogeneity. On comparing the relative simplicity of a single cell,
or even of a group of similar cells forming a living whole, with
the immense complexities of organisation shown in one of the
higher animals, it becomes evident that one effect of sex has
been an enormous saving in the time consumed in the process
of evolution. It may be conceivable that without it creatures
as complex as those now existing would eventually have been
evolved, but only by a far greater lapse of time. For every one
of the thousands of favourable variations that have resulted in
the formation of such organs as eyes, ears, and brain, and others
of humbler and less conspicuous but not less important kinds,
as they now exist, must then have occurred either simultaneously
or in succession in the same pure line, whereas by sex a
thousand utterly different variations, trifling in themselves,
occurring at once in a million individuals, may be, and have
been, welded in a few generations into a harmonious whole,
reducing a thousand times the period taken by an equal amount
of progress. In short, sex expedites linear transformation by
a great extension of the field of variation available for the
improvement of every individual, integrating into each through
inheritance all favourable variations that may occur throughout
the area of a whole Species.
204 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Some attempt must now be made to check the deductions
thus reached by reference, in such bare outline as space will
allow, to the facts of nature. In the first place, if sex has been
so important a cause of linear traasformation as has been
stated, then those forms of life in which it is most firmly
established, and may therefore be presumed to have acted
longest, ought in general to have undergone the greatest extent
of evolution and to be the highest in the scale of life. That this
broadly corresponds with the facts is too obvious a theme to be
much laboured ; it must suffice to point to the difference in this
respect between animals and plants. In the Vertebrates and
indeed a long way down in the scale of animal life, there is
no reproduction except by sex. In the highest plants on the
other hand it appears to be almost a matter of indifference
whether reproduction be sexual or not. Most, if not all, are
capable of reproduction by cuttings, runners, creeping roots,
bulbils, or tubers, in a variety of asexual ways, and among
those that have developed a complete sexual apparatus there are
many which, like the pea and the bean, have abandoned its
main use, that of securing cross-fertilization, and habitually
fertilize themselves—a form of inbreeding so close as nearly to
amount to asexual reproduction. And it needs no proof that as
between the two kingdoms evolution has gone immeasurably
further in animals than in plants. It is partly owing to the
greater prevalence of sex that the animal limb of the tree of life
has shot up so far above the vegetable, but I do not of course
suggest that it is wholly so. Locomotive powers, once developed,
must have powerfully promoted other developments, besides
their indirect action in facilitating the play of sex, and probably
other true causes may be found.

Secondly, if the weighty influence of sex has not only not
been a cause of divergence, but has even been thrown into the
opposite scale, producing uniformity within the limits of every
Species, then in view of the immense variety of organic Nature
weare Clearly bound to assume the existence of an even greater
force of divergence, which sex opposes and tends to check.
And it 1s evident that every influence that promotes the action
of sex ought to decrease differentiation, and everything that
THE THEORY OF SEX. 205

opposes the free play of sex ought to increase it, by so far
setting free the original tendency to divergence. What
then are the influences that respectively promote and hinder
the action of sex? Without attempting any exhaustive
statement, it is clear enough that the most important of
the former is mobility, which brings distantly related
members of a Species into contact, and of the latter a
sedentary habit and any other influence that checks mobility.
And if we ask what are the influences that check mobility, the
reply is, small size and anything that causes or tends to cause
isolation, or as it is perhaps better called, segregation, such
as oceans and seas, mountains and highlands, deserts, swamps
and rivers difficult to cross. And apart from such obstacles
as these, which make intermixture difficult or even impossible,
homing instincts alike in quadrupeds and birds, and the habit
existing even in migratory species of returning each season to
breed in the place of their origin, the ability to find food and
mate near home, and even mere inertia, all tend to diminish the
extent of the area through which complete mixture may be
attained. Last but not least domestication, almost always
restricting free movement and involving inbreeding, diminishes
the force of sex. Plants, for the most part rooted to the soil
and fertilized either by themselves or through the agency of
the wind or of insects by their near neighbours, are necessarily
much inbred. Still more this applies to such as avail themselves of asexual methods of propagation by creeping, like the
Bramble, or by roots travelling underground, but self-fertilization, especially in the plants called ‘‘ cleistogamic,’’ which,
never showing their flowers, cannot be fertilized but by themselves, is almost the same thing. The same applies in somewhat
less degrees to the sessile forms of animal life, such as Oysters
and Sea-anemones. Animals that rove freely over considerable
tracts of country, fishes moving annually between shallow coastal
waters and the deeper outer seas, and above all migratory birds
flying twice a year from one continent to another, have far
better opportunities of ‘‘exogamy,’’ or union with distant
relatives rather than near ones. Briefly then in such mobile
creatures as these we ought to find little variability ; Species
206 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ought to be solid and little broken into Varieties, Genera to
contain few Species, Families few Genera, and so on in the
higher groups of organisms, and the Species ought also to be
comparatively definite and free from intermediate forms.
Immobility on the other hand ought to go with variability and
with comparative indefiniteness in Species and the higher groups,
and these ought also to appear in the mobile kinds so far as
their mobility is frustrated by other causes. It will be at once
recognised by all who are at all conversant with the facts, that
these are so largely in harmony with the inferences thus drawn,
as to place the causal nature of the relation beyond doubt.
There is no space to review them in detail, but putting them
generally, Darwin says in the ‘‘ Origin of Species,’’? p. 48,
*“Amongst animals which unite for each birth, and which are
highly locomotive, doubtful forms, ranked by one Zoologist as
a Species, and by another as a variety, can rarely be found
within the same country, but are common in separated areas.”’
That is, variability appears so far as the action of sex is prevented by segregation, and not otherwise. Of the Cat Tribe,
perhaps the most locomotive of all quadrupeds, there are not
more than 50 Species in the whole world. On the other side
Darwin instances, p. 46, the Bramble, the Rose, and the Hawkweed, several Genera of Insects and several Genera of Brachiopod shells, as protean or polymorphic Genera, in which the
Species present ‘‘an inordinate amount of variation.’’ The
Bramble, including both Blackberry and Dewberry, has been
described by different botanists as forming from one to 36
Species, and the Hawkweed from 30 to 4o, for Great Britain
alone. Such in fact is the tendency to variation in these
Genera, that no one knows how many of the forms might
best be called Species and how many Varieties. Add to
this that the whole Rose Family, to which these Genera
belong, shows great variability, including 15 or more
British Genera, among which are found such different
plants as the Rose, Pear, Apple, Cherry, Plum, Medlar,
Strawberry, and a number of wild flowers, and the immense
variation shown in plants which are yet nearly related is evident.
Among the Insects inordinate variability seems to be the general
THE THEORY OF SEX. 207

rule, but to select a striking instance, the Ichneumon flies are
stated in the Cambridge Natural History to comprise nearly
6,000 described species, although ‘‘ the study of the Family is
but little advanced owing to their parasitic habits and to the
bewildering multiplicity in their specific forms.’’ Now of these
protean Genera, the plants, creeping either above or under
ground, are propagated largely by asexual means; the Insects,
though most if not all sexual, are always small, and the most
variable are the microscopic kinds living a much localised life
as parasites within the bodies of others; while the Brachiopods,
sessile for the greater part of their lives, are extremely’ small
in the short larval stage during which they swim at a rate
of perhaps a yard in an hour.

Strong confirmation is afforded by a comparison of wild
forms of life with their domesticated relatives. Pigeons are
strong on the wing and fly great distances. As representatives
of two Genera of their family, the Columbidz, we have in
England, according to Saunder’s Manual of British Birds, only
the Wood-pigeon, the Rock-pigeon—from which the domestic
Pigeon is derived—and, as a summer visitor, the Turtledove. These few and definite Species appear to show very
little variation, the Rock-pigeon no more than the others, thus
affording the most striking and significant contrast with the
behaviour of his brethren in captivity. But this is only an
extreme case of a general rule that tame animals and plants
vary more than their wild relatives. This fact is noticed by
Darwin in the opening paragraphs of the ‘‘ Origin of Species,’’
and ascribed to their being ‘‘ raised under conditions of life not
so uniform as, and somewhat different from, those of Nature.
But this seems to be an unnecessary multiplication of causes.
The differences between the breeds of domestic Pigeons have
not been produced by treating them differently, but by inbreeding, and the cause that accounts for these variations will account
for the rest if there is good reason to think it has been present.
Now inbreeding uniformly and almost necessarily accompanies
domestication. Cultivated vegetables, fruits and flowers are
to a great extent propagated asexually by means of slips,
bulbs, runners, and tubers. Cereals and other plants raised
208 EUGENICS REVIEW.

from seed, being grown in masses covering the whole ground,
each plant is readily fertilized by its neighbours, all of the same
stock. Exotic plants imported in small numbers are necessarily
much inbred even if propagated by seed, and apart from exotic
importations garden cultivation commonly involves removing
plants from their natural habitats, where more distant relatives
of their kind might be found, and so diminishing their chances
of being fertilized by any but their immediate kindred.
Domesticated animals are almost always matched with their
own breed, for no one wants mongrels. And in the case of
pedigree stock of all kinds, the extreme to which inbreeding and
the narrowing of ancestry is carried, is well known. On the
other hand Cats, thoroughly domesticated though they are,
reserve a good deal of nocturnal liberty, and we read of them
in Darwin that they do not ‘‘ yield distinct races in the same
country.’’ But in his ‘‘ Animals and Plants under Domestication,’’ he describes many Varieties of domestic Cats peculiar to
different lands, showing that where they have been kept separate
they too have diverged.

On these lines it would be possible to bring an immense
amount of evidence in support of the view that sex, in proportion to the extent of its action, far from causing variation,
always holds it in check; but by the extremes that have been
cited we may fairly judge the mean. Some indeed might think
that I have laboured in this to establish admitted fact, for if the
production of uniformity by sex is not universally proclaimed,
it is everywhere assumed. Few phrases are commoner in
discussions of Darwinism than ‘“‘ the swamping effects of intercrossing ’’; and what is inter-crossing but the operation of sex?
Nor was any argument more freely used against Darwinism.
If we and the apes, it was urged, descend from a common
ancestry, how is it that all variations were not swamped by
inter-crossing as they arose? The answer is indeed simple:
that obstructions to free inter-crossing are innumerable, and are
everywhere and always occurring, so that even with extreme
mobility there has been no very near approach to the perfect
mixture that would result from mating all the individuals of a
Species with their most distant relatives. Those who raise such
THE THEORY OF SEX. 209

objections seem to forget that the world is vast even to a
Mammoth, to a Mayfly vastly vast, and to a microscopic
parasite vast beyond expression. Nevertheless, though the
qualifications were not duly weighed, the assumption was
essentially right, and it would be needless to insist on a truth
so commonly accepted if it were not that its implications are as
commonly overlooked. If sex tends to swamp variations, then
variation cannot be caused by sex, but must be caused by some
other force which sex opposes, and we must expect that everything that reduces the free play of sex will give rise to variation
by, as it were, releasing that force, whatever it may be. It
remains to add what that force is, and why it has so long
remained in doubt.

If the theory of sex is as simple as has been stated, how is
it that the great biologists of the last century did not perceive
it, but all pointed to sex as a cause, and some as the cause, of
variation? As to this we must remember that the theory of
evolution is new, and with it the habit of regarding Nature as
in constant motion, and therefore as showing perpetual change.
In spite of the fact that now and again in earlier times the truth
was espied by an exceptional mind, in spite of the fact that
Spencer demonstrated before the ‘‘ Origin of Species’’ was
published, that there was really no tenable alternative belief,
yet to the great majority it was Darwin and the doctrine of the
survival of the fittest that first made evolution a workable idea
rather than a philosopher’s dream. There can therefore be no
occasion for surprise if some simple things escaped him and
the other pioneers of evolution, though lying but little below
the surface. Not fully realising the mobility of Nature, they
were inclined to lay hold of everything, including sex, in the
search for the cause of her infinite variety. Had they fully
realised it, they would have seen that it is idle to seek in the
phenomena of life for the ultimate cause of variation. To do so
is to assume that without life there is no variety, and that before
its origin on this earth the whole universe was one uniform
motionless and unchanging mass of matter. But the activity
and consequent variability even of lifeless matter is now better
understood, and it ought to be burnt into our minds by every
210 EUGENICS REVIEW.

glimpse of the sun. With Spencer however it must have been
otherwise. His doctrine of the instability of the homogeneous
effectually shields him from any charge of incompletely realising
that continual lapse of things into ever greater diversity, which
he was the first to name and adequately describe. But if it
must be accepted as an ultimate fact of Nature that like things
always tend to unlikeness, then we ought to expect inordinate
variety to be the rule, in organic Nature as elsewhere, and what
logic is there in seeking for further causes of variation? It is
not variation, but the wonderfully high degree of uniformity
existing among the individuals of a Species that has to be
explained. With Spencer it was perhaps the perception of the
necessity of assigning to so large a phenomenon as sex an
adequate rdle in the evolution of life that led him to cast her for
the part of variation, or as he called it, plasticity. But we have
seen that she cannot play it, but must be content with the
subordinate though still immensely important rdle of organic
integration.

The ultimate cause of variation is then this instability
inherent in various degrees in all forms of matter, and especially
in those of which living organisms are composed; or rather
variation is a name given to the universal process of change,
as it is manifested in organic Nature. The immediate cause is,
in my opinion, something simpler and more definite, as I have
already expounded it in ‘‘ Science Progress,’’ for July 1914.
All living organisms are either independent cells or aggregations
of such cells that have become more or less interdependent, and
all the fundamental phenomena of life have therefore to be
explained by reference to the life of the independent cell.
Reproduction even in the highest animals is effected by the
conjugation of two cells produced by fission; growth by
repeated fission starting from the cell so formed, and alternating
with nutrition ; regeneration of lost parts and renewal of wasted
tissue in the same way. So also with variation. Every living
cell is highly complex, being composed of a great variety of
substances needed to sustain the functions even of the simplest
life. If it be a free-swimming independent organism, then
when it splits into two like itself, the division of every conTHE THEORY OF SEX. 211

Stituent substance must be made with wonderful equality, or the
daughter-cells would not be fit to survive. But however exact,
the division is never perfect, for if it were so, then there would
be two individuals absolutely alike, and we know, as Leibnitz
knew long ago, that at all events in organic Nature no two such
are to be found. On the contrary the twin cells differ, however
slightly, in every particular. The exactness of the division is a
measure of the force of heredity, its inexactness of the force of
variation. When fission has proceeded for some time, the proportions of the constituent substances become altered, and
vital activity is thereby reduced. Conjugation then takes place
between two individuals, and by averaging their differences
causes the renewal of vitality that has often been observed. If
on the other hand the dividing cell be a fertilized egg destined
to grow into an animal of one of the higher kinds, it undergoes
in the course of fission an ordered differentiation, finally resulting in the formation of many and various tissues and organs.
But here again in no two cases is this ordered process
absolutely alike. Here too small differences occur at every
step. The continued fissive multiplication of slightly differing
cells destined to become a litter of animals involves proportional
multiplication of their differences, which at the end of the long
series of cell-generations needed to make an animal of a highly
developed kind, become considerable, and form the small but
noticeable variations seen, for example, among the pigs of a
pure-bred litter. When cell-division has proceeded for a certain
time, in man eighty years or thereabouts, the accumulated
differences become so great that a majority of newly-formed
cells no longer contain due proportions of the substances
required for the performance of their functions, cease to work,
and have to be removed by the phagocytes, thus causing the
emaciation seen in the aged, and ultimately death, sometimes
attributed to the undue activity of those useful servants.
Marvellous indeed must be the exactness of the process of
division to prevent this result ensuing in a much shorter
time. The conjugation of cells brought about by sex is the
reverse process of fusion instead of fission, and has the opposite
effect of cancelling or reducing variations not common to or not
212 EUGENICS REVIEW.

equal in both, so causing that return towards the mean which
has been proved at large by biometrical statistics. It thus acts
as a powerful corrective of the inexactness of the process of
division, and a great reinforcement of heredity, at the same time
that it gradually integrates into every individual all favourable
variations occurring in an ancestry limited only by the number
of individuals the Species may contain. Thus it may seem
possible to frame a theory of life in general into which the
theory of sex as mixture will exactly fit.
