THE GALTON LECTURE, 1947

Dr. W. Norwoop East delivered this year’s
Galton Lecture at Manson House, Portland
Place, on February 17th, 1947, taking as
his subject “ The Non-Sane Non-Insane
Offender.”’

Mr. B. S. Bramwell, who took the chair,
apologized for the absence of Lord Horder,
who had unfortunately been prevented from
presiding at this year’s Galton anniversary.
February 16th, said Mr. Bramwell, was the
anniversary of the birth of Francis Galton,
but as that day fell this year on a Sunday
it had been arranged to celebrate it on the
following day. The Council had considered
the question of returning to the former
practice of having the Galton Lecture in the
evening, after a dinner, but had come to
the conclusion that it was probably better
to carry on the war-time arrangement, a
decision which in the present circumstances
had turned out a wise one. Introducing
the lecturer, he reminded the audience that
Dr. Norwood East was probably the country’s leading criminologist to-day and that
he had some time been chairman or president of almost every legal and medical
society that concerned itself with his
topic.

The text of the Galton Lecture is ; published
in full elsewhere in this issue. At its conclusion, Mr. Cecil Binney commented on
the lecturer’s statement that there were
few criminals over the age of 65. What was
to be deduced from this? Was it a fact
that the offenders abandoned a life of crime
at the age of 65 or was there a high mortality
among them ?

In reply, Dr. Norwood East said it was
certainly a fact that offenders did give up
crime as they got older. For many years
he had been in touch with a man who, in
a recent letter, had remarked that now, at
75, he had: kept straight for fifteen years. A
study of the figures showed that the number
of aged criminals was relatively very small ;
and his reason for quoting the age limits

was to show that, if the three-quarters of a
million criminals were between the ages of
16 and 65, the proportion of criminals within
this age group was very much higher than
if the comparison was made with the total
population.

Dr. C. P. Blacker, moving a vote of thanks,
said that while the whole of Dr. East’s
paper had been of interest to him, the most
important part from the Soctety’s angle was,
he thought, the proposal put forward at the
end. Dr. East’s thesis, if he had understood
it correctly, was that three roughly definable
classes of offenders were discernible between
the boundaries of indisputable sanity and
indisputable insanity. Each class comprised a continuous series. Those offenders
placed in the series nearest the boundary
line of insanity were, while the furthest
removed from normality, the least responsible, culpable or blameworthy for their
actions ; they were therefore the least likely
to be reformed by sentences given with a
solely punitive purpose.

But the measure of their “ irresponsibility ”’
and unblameworthiness was also the measure
of their danger to the community whose
need for protection could not be ignored.
Punishment for such people should serve
what Dr. East had called a “ demophylactic ”
rather than a punitive purpose; its aim
should be to safeguard the community
rather than to punish the offender.

The new type of institution proposed by
Dr. East resembled a colony for defectives
or épileptics rather than a ptison; a real
effort could there be made to rehabilitate
or treat the offender over a sufficient length
of time to make the effort worth while.

This proposal was of great interest to the
Society. If we could, at any time, do anything to help in the establishment of an
experimental place of this sort, Dr. Blacker
hoped that we should be informed.

A warm vote of thanks to Dr. East wascarried with acclamation.

22
