‘ANTICIPATION’ IN MENTAL DISEASE
By ARTHUR 5S. PATERSON, M.A.(Oxon), M.B., M.R.C.P.E.

(A Report of an address given to the Eugenics Society, June 14th, 1932.)

‘LAW’ which had been supposed
by many writers to govern the heredity of mental disease was, said the
speaker, the subject of his address. In
virtue of this law there was said to be a tendency for an inherited disease to occur in
the child at an earlier age than that at which
it occurred in the parent. This phenomenon
had been called anticipation, ante-dating,
ante-position, and, in France, précession.
Tracing the development of the theory,
Darwin, it seemed, said that there was a
strong tendency for a disease to occur in
the offspring at the same period of life as
in the parent, but where this rule failed,
the disease more often occurred at an earlier
than at a later age. The French psychiatrist, Morel, in 1859, discussing heredity
in relation to mental disease, said that in
some stocks the type of insanity appeared
in a more intense form and at an earlier
age in each succeeding generation, until the
family, being unable to propagate further,
died out. Dr. Henry Maudsley wrote that
there was a silent tendency in Nature to
restore an insane stock to a sound type, if
regeneration was possible, or to end it, if the
degeneration was too bad to mend. It would
be noticed, however, that he did not say that
anticipation was the rule, merely that it
could occur. Later, E. Nettleship collected
pedigrees in which other diseases occurred,
notably cataract and diabetes, and believed
anticipation in these cases to be the rule.
At Nettleship’s instigation the late Sir
Frederick Mott initiated an inquiry in
1909, to find out whether anticipation was
the rule in mental disease. With this end in
view he instituted a card-index system, in
which the name of each patient in the London County Council mental hospitals, who
had either a parent, child, or other relative
in one of these hospitals, was recorded,
together with the date of admission, age of

I9I

onset, and type of psychosis of both relatives. Mott then compiled statistics which
appeared to show that not only was the age
at which the psychosis started much earlier
in the children than in the parents, but also
earlier in nephews and nieces than in uncles
and aunts.

From the results of this inquiry Mott concluded that ‘‘ this signal tendency of insane
offspring to suffer with a more intense form
of the disease, and at an earlier age, is of
great importance for the following reasons :
first, it is one of Nature’s methods for ending or mending a degenerate stock;
secondly, it is of importance to the physician,
for he can say that there is a diminishing
risk of the child becoming insane after he
has passed 25, a matter of great importance
in the question of marriage; thirdly, it is of
importance in connection with the subject
of social surgery of the insane, for when the
first attack of insanity occurs in the parent,
the children, for the most part, have all been
born.”’

The speaker said that he would direct his
arguments against this work of Mott’s
because Mott was the most distinguished
writer who had upheld the so-called law of
anticipation. This law had been repeatedly
quoted as an argument against the utility of
eugenic measures, since it was argued that
Nature caused insane stocks to die out, or
else, less frequently, allowed a spontaneous
recovery.

Mott had to a large extent taken as his
material the patients in Colney Hatch
Mental Hospital, and the speaker (through
the courtesy of Dr. Brander, the Superintendent,) had had access to that material. He
had examined over 4,000 cases in that institution, and was thus able to compare the
material which Mott used in 1911 with that
which obtained to-day. As a result of his
investigation the speaker concluded that
192

Mott’s results, the chief of which were that
insane offspring of insane parents became
insane on an average at an age some 24
years younger than their parents, depended
on certain statistical fallacies, and did not
require that we should postulate any ‘‘ Law
of Anticipation.”’

There were several considerations which
made against the value of Mott’s findings.

1.—Mott compared the age of onset of insanity in three classes of patients:

(a) Insane parents of insane offspring.
(b) All patients.
(c) Insane offspring of insane parents.

The reason why the age of onset was later
in (a) than in (b) depended on the fact that
(a) did not constitute a fair sample of the
general admissions. In order to be a parent
at all, a patient must in all probability have
passed the age of 25 before being admitted
to a mental hospital. The age of onset was
therefore bound to be higher in class (a)
than in class (b) which included those
admitted at the adolescent period.

The fact that the parent group were older
on admission depended on the very fact of
their parenthood and not on an obscure
*‘law.’’? This could be shown by a simple
comparison. If one collected all cases in the
community where parent and child had died
from accidental causes, one would find that
the average age of the parent was much
higher than that of the child. This would,
however, depend on the fact that to be a
parent one must have reached adulthood ;
and the higher age of the parent at death
would have nothing to do with a law of
heredity.

2.—Class (c) also did not constitute a fair
sample of the population. The speaker
found that the average time which elapsed
between the admission of parent and child
was fourteen years. The children class was
therefore composed of those whose parents
had been admitted only fourteen years
before them. Such a group were bound to
be younger than the general run of admissions. If Mott could have extended his
researches over a greater number of years
he would have found that where children

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

were admitted more than thirty years after
their parents, their age on admission would
have been higher—there would have been a
negative anticipation, or post-dating.

In limiting his material to children who
were admitted, on an average, fourteen
years after the parents, Mott was counting
as sane those children who were later to
become insane. The speaker found that in
families where more than one child became
insane, the average anticipation in IQII was
25 years, and of those who have since
become insane thirteen years. If Mott had
waited till all the children were past the
vulnerable age for insanity he would have
found much less apparent anticipation than
he did.

Two of Mott’s pupils had collected
numerous pedigrees which appeared to show
anticipation, but the apparent anticipation
depended on this fallacy, that they did not
wait till the children’s generation had died
out. Thus they took as their starting-point
a patient, the average age of -whose generation was about 25, and in the previous
generations of whose family was a fair
sprinkling of insanity. If acquired forms of
insanity were included, as was done by
Mott, then about four times as many members of a family became insane after 25 as
before it. In the older and completed
generations there was therefore about four
times as much insanity as in the youngest,
whose average age was 25.

If insanity occurred in the youngest
generation, it was said to be a case of anticipation; if not, the stock was said to be
mending. ‘The real truth, however, was
that if Mott had waited till the propositus’
generation was extinct, he would have found
the amount of insanity the same. ‘The
speaker, in fact, showed that if one considered as the youngest generation the
second youngest generation in the pedigree
—that is, the youngest completed generation—there was no anticipation compared
with the older generations.

Turning to the question of anticipation as
between uncles or aunts and nephews or
nieces, the speaker found in his materia] an
anticipation of 13°4, as opposed to 16:0
‘ANTICIPATION’ IN MENTAL DISEASE

years between parents. Mott had attributed
such a difference to the fact that the relationship was less close. The real truth was that
the spurious anticipation which resulted
from the fact of parenthood only held partially for uncles and aunts, many of whom
were unmarried. That there was some
anticipation depended on the other fallacies
described above.

3.—Another fact which accounted for the
spurious anticipation was that between 1890
and i910 the accommodation for mental
patients in London was almost doubled. In
the parent generation, a patient was,
generally speaking, only admitted when he
was dangerous to the community or quite
helpless. In 1910, in the children’s generation, when asylums were more like hospitals, patients were admitted at a much
earlier date. The speaker repeatedly found
that members of the parent generation had
been previously insane, but since they had
not been admitted to a London County
Council asylum, their second or later attacks
were counted as their first.

4.—Further, as already shown, Mott
believed that insanity as a rule occurred in
the children at an age some 24 years earlier
than in the parents, no matter what the
parents’ age. An analysis of Mott’s
material, however, showed that the amount
of apparent anticipation depended on the
parent’s age. Thus, where parents became
insane over 70, there was 34 years’ anticipation, but where between 30 and 4o, only 5
years’. Where the parents were under 30
at the time of onset, post-dating, not
anticipation, was the rule. These facts
taken from Mott’s own material showed that
the apparent anticipation merely resulted
from the way in which the material was
collected.

The fact that similar results were forthcoming from the cases of uncles or aunts
and nephews or nieces, especially where
these had no blood relationship, showed that
the apparent anticipation was spurious.

The speaker then dealt with Mott’s conclusions. There was no evidence that

193

Nature ended a stock by the gruesome
method of causing insanity to appear at a
progressively earlier age in each succeeding generation. ‘The question whether the
child of an insane parent should be allowed
to marry after 25, could be answered by
reference to what was called hereditary
prognosis—that is, how much more likely
the child of a parent suffering from a particular form of insanity was to become
insane than the child of healthy parents.
Figures dealing with this subject had been
worked out in Germany, and were still
being borne out by investigation in other
countries. The child of tainted parentage
might be from 3 times to 83 times more
likely to suffer from a given type of insanity
than the child of healthy parents. The
degree of probability depended on the type
of psychosis.

Lastly, with regard to Mott’s contention
that when the first attack of insanity
occurred in the parent, the children had for
the most part all been born, and therefore
eugenic measures would be useless, the
speaker pointed out that the type of insanity which was most strongly inherited
was recurrent, and therefore parents would
have the opportunity of propagating in their
lucid intervals after they had already
become insane.

The speaker ended by saying that no law
of anticipation having a general validity in
mental disease had ever been proved
statistically. The so-called law which had
been given great prominence in psychiatric
text-books was from the eugenic point of
view of much less importance than the
ascertaining of the hereditary prognosis in
different forms of mental disease. Mott
himself recognized the importance of this
last, but by the time of his death had not
investigated the problem. It was on figures
based on the study of hereditary prognosis
that the eugenist would be justified in discouraging certain individuals from becoming parents.

The address was illustrated by thirteen
figures and diagrams.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.
