MENTAL DEFICIENCY

A Discussion of the Genetic Background
By Professor F. A. E. CREW, M.D., D.Sc., Ph.D., F.R.S.E.

Address to Section J of the Centenary Meeting (1931) of the British Association.

contribution to this symposium by

stating that I personally find the modern
‘ Theory of the Gene’ both satisfying and
exceedingly helpful. I accept the view that
if a character—a detail of structure or
behaviour—is inherited, then corresponding
to it there is a gene (or genes) resident in
the chromosomes.

To me, such vague terms as germ-plasm
or idioplasm possess an interest that is
merely historical. I accept the evidence,
which has emerged from experimentation
with certain plant and animal forms, not
including man, that mutation—modification
of or alteration in, the organization of a
discrete region of the chromatin material,
of a specific kind and associated with a
specific and heritable alteration in characterization—occurs infrequently for reasons
as yet unknown, and that when once such
a mutant gene has appeared, it persists until
a reverse mutation takes place, and so long
as individuals carrying it in their hereditary constitutions propagate. I am prepared to assume that there is no such thing
as ‘spontaneous variation,’ that mutation
is always a peculiar reaction to the stimulus
of some environmental force, and that the
same mutation can occur and re-occur in
succeeding generations if the mautationprovoking agencies continue to operate. I
accept the evidence that mutation can be
induced by X-rays and by radium, and
that disturbances in chromosome division
and distribution can be caused experimentally by such agents as CO, and high
temperature. But I am not convinced that
injury of the egg or sperm or embryo of a
general kind, e.g. poisoning by lead or
alcohol, can produce mutation; and in the
absence of mutation there can be nothing

|= is necessary that I should preface my

new to be transmitted by the mechanism of
organic inheritance. I recognize that it
would be rash to assert that such toxic
agents are incapable of inducing mutation :
in my opinion it has not been shown that
they can, and the onus of proof is upon
those who assert that they can.

Unless mental defect is a character that
is inherited, the geneticist has nothing to
contribute to this discussion. If it can be
shown that in its distribution among successive generations living in the same
environment there is a certain significant
orderliness, then we can assume that it is
indeed a genetic character, and that corresponding to it there is a gene (or genes)
resident in the chromosomes. It would be
unnecessary to postulate a special type of
hereditary mechanism for the transmission
of mental defect; and therefore, if we can
persuade ourselves that it is inherited, we
are entitled to assume that in its transmission from generation to generation it will
obey the rules that have been shown to have
a universal validity.

STRUCTURE AND BEHAVIOUR

In our approach to this question we must
exhibit the greatest caution. The human
subject is surely the least convenient of
materials for genetical study. Furthermore,
almost all that we know of hereditary
characters refers to details of structure
which are easily recognized and readily
measured, and which, save by such completely devastating agencies as severe malnutrition and grossly unfavourable physical
conditions, are apparently uninfluenced by
environmental factors acting upon the
individual during growth and differentiation. “The expression of such characters, it
can be said, is predetermined solely or

299
300

almost entirely by genetic factors, and this
expression occurs in almost any environment in which the individual may live.

But we know of a multitude of heritable
characters the actual expression of which
is conditioned by environmental agencies.
Take stature for example. Though a man
may be equipped with an hereditary endowment which will permit him ultimately to
top six feet, his final height will be determined not by his genetic constitution, but
by the interaction of this with all sorts of
environmental agencies, especially those of
nutrition and disease. In such a case the
limits of his development—of the expression of a particular developmental impulse
—may be fixed by organic inheritance, but
what is expressed is determined by postconceptional experience.

Moreover, we know that a detail of
structure may arise solely from the action
of environmental agencies, being an
‘acquired character,’ an imposition upon
the individual during development by
environmental forces too strong to be
resisted. Manifestly, the longer the period
of development and differentiation, the
greater is the opportunity for interference
by such environmental forces.

Now, when we turn from structure to
behaviour we find that there is little or no
information of a precise nature as to the way
in which the responses of an individual
living in a given environment differ from
those of its relatives living in the same
environment. We are certainly justified
in the assumptions that a particular type of
behaviour can be characteristic of a species,
that there exists a close relation between
structure and behaviour, and that, therefore, the laws of organic inheritance which
apply to structural characters apply, though
perhaps with certain modifications, to
details of behaviour also. But, even if this
be so, we are forced to anticipate that,
though genetic factors provide the impulse
to the development of such characters, a
great variety of environmental agencies,
operating during the prolonged anteand post-natal course of this development, can and do profoundly affect, modify,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in certain circumstances even overwhelm,
the hereditary impulses and yield an endresult which is not in accord with the
genetic constitution of the individual
concerned.

Such a view is demanded of any one who
sets out to study the genetics of mental
defect. At the very start we can assume
that there may be three kinds of mental
deficiency: (1) the type in which the
character is the direct expression of genetic
factors unaffected, in their action, by
environmental forces ; (2) the type in which
the character for its expression requires the
interaction of genetic constitution and
environmental factors; and (3) the type
which is a non-inherited acquisition.

There is plentiful evidence which shows
that mental defect can result from accident
and infection—e.g. birth injury and
syphilis—to constitute an acquired nonheritable character. There is also plentiful
evidence which shows that mental defect
can be one of a group of defects in such
conditions as mongolism, microcephaly, or
amaurotic family idiocy, which affect the
individual as a whole, yielding malformation and malfunctioning of mind and body.
Of these, certain are definitely genetic in
origin—amaurotic family idiocy is a simple
autosomal recessive character, for example.
In addition, there is a mental deficiency
which cannot be ascribed to injury and
which is not a part of some general defect or
derangement, but which alone distinguishes
its exhibitor from the accepted standard of
normality. It is with this that I propose
to deal.

THE PROBLEM OF CLASSIFICATION

I do not propose to describe or define
mental deficiency. ‘This is not the task of
a geneticist, who studies the mode of
inheritance of characters described by
others. Blue sclerotics, diabetes, and a
hundred other less popular terms may or
may not mean much to me: it is for me to
interpret, in terms of the laws of organic
inheritance, pedigrees compiled by the
clinician. Obviously, unless the information in’a pedigree is correct, the interpretaGENETICS OF MENTAL DEFECT

tion cannot possess much value. In a
pedigree, mental deficiency must always
be mental deficiency, a discrete and constantentity. Unfortunately, quite commonly
this cannot have been the case, and even
now the Law, Medicine, and Psychology are
not agreed upon their definitions and classifications of the mentally abnormal. It is a
thousand pities that the classification of
law, precise and definite as it is, has no
relation to realities, for if only idiocy,
imbecility, and mental deficiency, as defined
by the lawyer, would obey the laws of the
land, remaining constant in their expression
and showing no grading and overlapping,
they might perhaps also obey the simpler
laws of inheritance.

Medicine attempts to create order out of
chaos by classifying amentia into primary
and secondary. Tredgold, whose views on
this subject seem to meet with wide acceptance, is of opinion that amentia is the
result of an impairment of developmental
potentiality consequent upon damage by
chemical and physical agencies present in
the environment to the germ cells (primary
amentia), or to the individual at some
time subsequent to conception (secondary
amentia). According to Tredgold, secondary
amentia is an acquired, non-heritable
character, whereas primary amentia is
inherited. Now, as a geneticist, I am fully
aware that mutation can be induced, or I
should say, that the tendency to mutate can
be very considerably exaggerated in certain
experimental material by appropriate
means: in fact, it can be stated that in
almost every genetical laboratory in the
world this induction of mutation is the
commonest activity to-day. . But nothing
that has so far emerged from this work permits me to share Tredgold’s views that

systematic poisons can cause _ specific
changes in the genetic constitution of the
gametes.

However, the problem of the cause of the
origin of a mutation is distinct from the
problem of the mode of inheritance of a
mutant character after this has appeared,
and it is the study of the second problem
which reveals the genetic basis of the

307

character. I agree that if we but knew
whether or not mutation is being induced in
every generation by such environmental
agencies which, it is to be noted, are under
our control, we could hope to check the
incidence of mental deficiency by controlling
personal and public hygiene. But an increase even of startling proportions in the
number of mental defectives in a population
may mean nothing more than that mental
deficiency is a genetic character which first
appeared long ago, and that mental defectives freely propagate their kind. There is
no reason to suppose that normality is being
transformed into abnormality in each
generation if it can be shown that it is the
genetically abnormal individuals of one
generation which are responsible for the
production of the genetically abnormal of
the next.

It is quite clear that in medicine mental
deficiency is not one thing but many.
Differential diagnosis in the case of mental
defect is difficult, and it is probable that
a number of clinical entities presently
grouped together will later be separated by
further research. The recognized range of
mental abnormality is a long one, and it is
most unlikely that all the grades have the
same genetical basis. Furthermore, the real
difficulty is that of deciding whether genetic
or environmental factors (or both) are
operating in any given case. It is manifest
that in the case of mental defect we are confronted with a difference between abnormality and normality which can easily be
magnified by environmental agencies. It
has to be assumed, indeed, that in most, if
not in all, cases of hereditary mental defect,
both genetic and environmental factors have
been operating and therefore it cannot be
expected that the results of matings will
yield such simple numerical ratios as are
obtained in the Mendelian analysis of
clear-cut structural characters, the expression of which is not affected by external
agencies. So long as we disregard the
demonstrable significance of environmental
agencies in the etiology of mental deficiency, so long as we set out to find a single
constant basis for a character which can be
302

the end-result of so many different developmental happenings, there can be no hope of
assessing the roles of whatever genetic
factors enter into its determination.

Nowadays mental deficiency is detected
by psychological tests, but I am not sure
that the classification of the psychologist is
much more helpful to the geneticist than
is that of the clinician. In so far as
classification according to performance in
such tests is behaviouristic, it meets with
the requirements of genetical investigation,
but there is one very real danger in this
method of assessment. It is too easily
assumed that by drawing a line at some
arbitrarily chosen I.Q. figure we are
separating two distinct genetic types within
a population, on one side the normal, on
the other the abnormal. But, in view of
what we know of the grades of mental
defect, this point, so arbitrarily selected to
suit social convenience, cannot possibly cut
off one genetic type. We need to know the
distribution of the Intelligence Quotient
among the general population, whether the
resulting curve is a normal curve of variability, or whether the curve is askew, and
many more things besides before we can
form an estimate of the probable number of
distinct genetic types the mentally defective
segment includes. All that can be said at
the moment is that the group of defectives
as distinguished from the group of normals
by reference to intelligence tests probably
includes more than one genetic type, and
that it is most unlikely that normality and
abnormality differ one from the other in
respect of a single gene.

DIFFERENT GENETIC TYPES

The evidence derived from the study of
pedigrees reinforces this view. It leaves no
doubt whatsoever that in many instances
hereditary transmission is operating. It
seems very probable that in certain cases
amentia behaves as a monogenic autosomal
recessive character. This type should be
remarkable in that there should be a higher
incidence of cousin marriages among the
parents of such aments than in the population as a whole, since this is the most

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reliable indication of simple recessivity. In
the case of this type of inheritance, the
incidence of defect within a family may be
very low, so low, in fact, that a case may
be regarded as an instance of secondary
amentia for the reason that the pedigree
fails to reveal another case. ‘The pedigree
is not a very useful instrument of research
in such cases: far better are studies of
consanguinity in marriage.

Simple autosomal dominance is easily
recognized in pedigrees. Certain pedigrees
of mental deficiency demand this explanation. If simple dominance is involved, we
may expect a high incidence of mental
defect within the family group. Multiple
factors yielding dominance would give the
suggestion of a blending type of inheritance,
each factor reinforcing the action of the
others. Here, again, there should be a concentration of defect within the family group.
Other pedigrees demand other types of
factor interaction—in some cases multiple
recessives, in others a dominant gene for
defect together with a dominant inhibitor
yielding normality.

Since defect of mind is no more of a biological unity than is defect of body, and
since it may be assumed that quite a number
of different abnormalities of the brain can
yield the same abnormality of the mind,
there is no reason whatsoever why different
kinds of genetic factors and factor combinations should not yield the same character—
mental deficiency. If mental processes are
expressions of the functions of the brain,
and if the brain is subject to numerous
hereditary abnormalities, then the character, mental deficiency, can be genetically
many different things—in some instances
an autosomal recessive, in others an autosomal dominant, sex-linked, a multiple
factor character, or even a step-allelomorph,
since this interpretation can accommodate
the fact that two mentally deficient parents
can produce a normal child, as sometimes
seems to happen.

I wish to suggest that not only does the
evidence point to this conclusion, but also
that the view that there is not one genetic
basis for mental deficiency, but several, is
GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFECT

much more helpful in an analysis of the
etiology of this condition than that which
insists that there is a single constant genetic
origin for a character which can be the endresult of so many different developmental
abnormalities. That genetic factors play
a prominent part in the etiology of mental
deficiency is certain, but as to their nature
or number we have no precise knowledge.
This information can be secured, however,
if we but choose to use in our investigation
modern statistical techniques which allow
the relative effects of heredity and environment to be measured.

INFLUENCE OF UTERINE ENVIRONMENT

Studies of the incidence of consanguineous
matings among the parents of the mentally
deficient can yield unequivocal evidence of
the significance of the genetic factors
involved, if, as is probable, the difference
between normality and abnormality is
determined by a small number of genes.
Studies of the order of birth in relation to
mental deficiency can yield equally important evidence of the significance of the
uterine environment, a factor all too commonly neglected in discussions of this
subject. Pearson drew attention to the high
incidence of mental defect amongst first
children, whilst Shrubsall has further
shown that the incidence is also high in late
members of large families. Dayton’s conclusions do mot agree with those of
Shrubsall, but the reason for this, as
Professor Hogben, who deals fully with this
subject in his latest book, Genetic Principles
in Medicine and Social Science, has pointed
out to me, lies in Dayton’s methods of
dealing with his data: Shrubsall’s families
ranged from 1 to 20; Dayton’s from 1 to Io.
Now, in the 9 and ro children families of
Dayton there is a high incidence toward
the higher end, whilst in the less than five
children families, the high incidence is at
the beginning. Naturally, therefore, these
two opposing facts cancel each other. The
genetic constitution of an individual cannot
be affected by the order of birth, but this is
a factor of considerable importance in the
determination of mental quality. The

393

environmental factors which operate before
birth and during the first few months
immediately after, whilst the rudiments of
social behaviour are being acquired, must
be recognized and defined before we can
easily accept the view that so large a proportion of mental deficiency is genetic in
origin.*

SCIENCE—AND PRACTICAL POLITICS

Data relating to the incidence of mental
deficiency among the progeny of the general
population and among the progeny or relatives of aments, when critically collected
and even more critically analyzed, will
undoubtedly reinforce the view that there
are several genetic types of mental deficiency, whilst biochemical researches may
be expected to distinguish different clinical
types which can then be related to the
genetic types thus indicated.

Then and only then can policies relating
to the control of mental deficiency through
controlled breeding be franied which will
command the unqualified endorsement of
the geneticist. The effect of selection varies,
among other things, with the genetic basis
of the character against which such selection
is being practised: it makes all the difference in the world whether the character
is a monogenic autosomal recessive, a
dominant, or a polygenic, and until we know
this genetic basis, how can we hope to predict what the effects of selection will be?

But action quietens disturbing anxiety,
and if the scientist in the man delays action
until he possesses all the pertinent data, the
politician in him does not. It is to the latter
that we turn: not knowing the genetic basis
of mental deficiency, but knowing that much
of it is hereditary, we are eager, and I, as a
private citizen, think rightly so, to take any
action which is not in violent discord with
genetic principles and which gives us the
feeling of satisfaction that we are doing
our best to safeguard the biological excellence of mankind.

* The Note ‘‘ The Cause of Mongolism,’’ on p. 333
is also relevant to this discussion.—ED.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.
