THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

HE Annual General Meeting was held

at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.1, on
Tuesday, June 17th, 1941, at 4.30 p.m.

In the absence of the President, Mr. B. S.
Bramwell occupied the Chair. The Business
Secretary read the notice convening the

Meeting.

Minutes. The Minutes of the Annual
General Meeting held on Tuesday, May 28th,
1940, which were contained in the Annual
Report, and included in the April issue of the
EUGENICS REVIEW (copies of which were
distributed at the Meeting), were taken as
read and signed as correct.

ANNUAL REportT. The Chairman presented
the Annual Report, briefly outlining the
main activities of the Society during the past
year. The formal adoption was seconded by
Mr. Titmuss and was carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented
the Statement of Accounts and Balance
Sheet for the year ended December 31st,
1940. These were unanimously adopted.

APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS

AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR 1941-2. Following the procedure of 1940-1, it was agreed
that the Honorary Officers and Council
should remain as appointed at the Annual
General Meeting held on May 16th, 1939,
with the exception of Sir Charles ArdenClose, whose resignation had already been

_ reported and accepted, and that the Emer
gency Committee for the ensuing year
should consist of the following: The Lord
Horder, Mr. Cecil Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F. Chance, Miss E. Corry,
Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun,
Mrs. E. M. Hubback, Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr.
R. Martin, Mr. R. M. Titmuss.

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR
1g4I-2. It was proposed by Mr. Gun,
seconded by Mr. Martin and carried unanimously, that Messrs. West and Drake be

' re-elected.

A vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. Martin
to Mrs. Grant Duff for her work in connection with the informal luncheons which she
was organizing, and congratulations upon the
success of the speakers whose services she
had been able to secure, was carried unanimously. |

. ANNUAL REPORT, 1941-2

In this Report the accounts relate to the
period December 31st, 1940, to December
31st, 1941. The rest of the Report covers the
period from March 31st, 1941, to March 31st,
1942.

The Report has deliberately been made as
brief as possible owing to the present difficult
conditions, but the work of the Soczety has
been carried on, and is épitomized as
follows :

Problems of Population.—During the
year 1940-1 Dr. R. R. Kuczynski continued
his work on Colonial Population problems.
The book, which is expected to run to about

39

one million words, is to be published soon—
probably in America.” The demographic
problems of the Colonies have never before
been studied, and Dr. Kuczynski’s work will
therefore be of great value and importance.
It will be recalled that this investigation has
been made possible by a grant from the
Carnegie Corporation of America.

Dr. Elsas, who has been investigating the
relationship between Population problems
and Housing, is shortly to have a book published (based on the first part of his work) by
Messrs. P. S. King. Publication has been
made possible by a guarantee from the
40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Carnegie United Kingdom Trust. Dr. Elsas

is continuing with his investigations into |

these problems which will have an important
bearing on reconstruction.

Dr. Pearl Moshinsky who, we regret to
record, died in the autumn of 1941, had completed her Report on housing experiments in
foreign countries. It is hoped that Dr.
Moshinsky’s husband will arrange for the
publication of the work in America.

Education Department. — Comparatively
few lectures have been asked for during the
past year, but Mrs. Grant Duff, Mrs. Tamplin,
Mrs. Poole and Mrs. Eve have given talks in
various. parts of the country. The Soctety’s
film—From Generation to Generation—has
been out on loan six times.

Family Planning Association.—The work
of the Association has been carried on from
its temporary headquarters at 190 Old
Christchurch Road, Bournemouth. The
Eugenics Society continues to allow the
Association the use of premises at 69
Eccleston Square, S.W.1, rent free. The
Association reports that the great majority
of the birth control clinics continue to
function, and most of those out of London
report increased-attendances. A statistical
enquiry is being planned by the Association
in conjunction with the Eugenics Society into
the comparative clinical results obtained
from certain chemical contraceptives which
have passed tests for spermicidal value and
harmlessness.

Galton Celebration.—A luncheon took place
on February 17th, 1942. This was attended
by forty-three persons, and: was followed by
a discussion on “ The Need for a Social
Sciences Research Council,’ opened by
Professor J. D. Bernal, F.R.S., with Lord
Horder in the Chair.

Luncheon Lectures—April 29th, I941:
“ The Work of the Howard League for Penal
Reform,” by George Benson, Esq., M.P.

May 27th, 1941: ‘‘ Are Talents Hereditary ?,”’ by Dr. N. A. B. Wilson.

June 24th, 1941: “‘ Eugenics and the New
World Order,” by Brian Goddard, Esq., of
the New Commonwealth, —

July 22nd, 1941: “The Work of the
Central Council for the Care of Cripples ”
(with consideration as to how far deformities
are hereditary), by H. Jackson Burrows, Esq.,
F.R.CS.

August 26th, 1941: “‘ The Work of the
Family Planning Association in War-time,”’
by Miss H. Holland.

September 24th, 1941:
Aspects of Family Allowances,”
Lafitte, Esq.

November 25th, 1941: “Nature and
Nurture in Mental Health,” by H. CrichtonMiller, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P. :

Finance.—The usual statement of Income
and Expenditure, and Balance Sheet, will be
found at the end of this Report, with corresponding figures for the ‘previous year. It
will be seen that last year there was an excess
of income over expenditure of {£1,536 6s. 6d.

“Some Eugenic
by Frangois

Library.—Only seventeen new books have

' been added during the year. Improvements

have been made in classifying, and additions
made to the pamphlet cases. Press cuttings
are now dealt with in the library. Miss Corry
carries on one day in the week.

EuGENIcs Review.—The REvIEw has
been able to retain its characteristic features
and maintain its war-time size. The circulation has, however, dropped during the year,
owing partly to the discontinuance by the
American Eugenics Society, whereby it
received 600 copies of each issue at cost
price, and to the cancelling of a number of
foreign subscriptions and exchanges. In
September 1941 it was learned with regret
that Dr. Newfield’s poor health would force
him temporarily to relinquish the editorship
of the Review. The Society was fortunate,
however, in enlisting the help of Mr.
Richard M. Titmuss, who was appointed
Acting Editor pending Dr. Newfield’s recovery.

Obituary.—We regret to record the deaths
of the following: Mr. Jeffery East, Mr.
S. M. Fox, Mr. C. G. Montefiore, Mrs.
Nettlefold, Lord Salvesen, Professor SeligANNUAL REPORT, 1941-42

man, Lord Stamp, Mr. W. A. Tennant, and
the Very Reverend Sir George Adam Smith.

Register of Fellows and Members.—An
analysis is presented of the Society’s Register
for the period April 1st, 1941, to March 31st,
1942: "

Life
Fellows Fellows Mobrs. Total
Total, March 31st,

194! 2iI 266 8 545

 

 

Life
Fellows Fellows Mors.
Elections, 1941/2 ... — I 16
Less—
Deceased... oo 5 3
Resigned... eo 8 20
Lapsed or suspended 1 14 40

 

 

Total, March 31st,
1942 aus .. 67 185 219
Affiliated Societies... —

4I

Total
17

28
55

471
