IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?
By RAYMOND B. CATTELL, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.

Leonard Darwin Research Fellow

logists have been familiar with indirect
evidence suggesting that national intelligence is declining.

There is (1) the alleged increase of mental
deficiency, set out in the Wood* and the
Brock reports ; (2) the common observation
of clinical psychologists and school medical
officers that parents having children in the
“dull ’’ category frequently have families not
limited to “ ordinary ”’ size ; (3) the differential birth-rate throughout society, uniformly
favouring less skilled as against more skilled
workers.f I am told by Major Leonard Darwin that in one of the last letters which
Francis Galton wrote he expressed the view
that the differential birth-rate was the most
important problem in eugenics. It would
certainly be the most important factor in any
lowering of national intelligence as a whole.

| ‘OR some years eugenists and psycho
The Indirect Evidence

Yet no one would call the evidence anything but indirect and inconclusive, however
disquieting it may be. Not that there can be
any doubt that inheritable intelligence is
socially stratified, being on an average higher
for skilled than unskilled workers and for
classes of higher earning compared with those
of lower earning capacity. Anyone unfamiliar
with mental testing and inclined to be
sceptical of the findings with adults, may
turn to the researches which show that the
intelligence of groups of children ranks itself
according to the occupations or the social

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee, 1929.
Dr. E. O. Lewis’s investigation undertaken in 1927
found the incidence of mental deficiency to be 8-41 per
1,000 of the total population, as contrasted with 4-61
per 1,000 found in the investigation reported on by the
Royal Commission of 1906.

+ E.g., Dr. Enid Charles gives births per 1,000 in
1921 as: Upper and middle class (professional,
managerial, etc.), 98; skilled workmen, 134; unskilled workmen, 178.

181

status of the parents. Lawrence,* among
others, has shown that this grading according
to parental class holds also among children
reared apart from their parents in institutions. The only hope that the differential
birth-rate is not dysgenic, therefore, lies in
the unlikely contingency that in any one
class the more intelligent members will be the
more prolific, to an extent sufficient to
counteract the inter-class difference.

Of all the inheritable endowments of a
population the most vital for the success of
civilization and for the growth of all that we
value is undoubtedly adequate mental capacity. Historians have presented facts and
arguments, convincing to most students,
indicating that the periodical declines in
civilization and culture level are due to conditions which have sterilized and removed the
more intelligent strains. Since Europe is still
fairly civilized we cannot suppose that the
dysgenic trend, if it exists, has been active
very long. Most research workers agree that
the differential birth-rate is quite a recent
phenomenon—a matter of the last eighty
years—and that before the twentieth century
it was compensated for by a differential
death-rate and other factors.

Method of the Inquiry

Instead of losing ourselves in a maze of
doubtful inferences, we can to-day seek the
more definite answer which so important a
question merits by studying the direct
evidence obtainable from an intelligence test
survey of a sufficiently large and typical
section of our population, leading to the calculation of fertility rates for different intelligence levels.

In what follows I shall describe the conduct
of such a survey and the results achieved.

*‘ An Investigation into the Relation between
Intelligence and Inheritance.””’ See EuGrEnics REVIEW,
1932, XXIV, 143.
182

Since I shall endeavour finally to predict the
change in average intelligence likely to take
place between the present and the next
generation, it will be necessary to digress into
the evidence regarding the degree of innateness and the extent of the inheritance of
intelligence.

The facts we require might at first sight be
most simply obtained by applying psychological tests of constitutional mental capacity
to some sample thousands of our adult population, including in representative measure
earls and electricians, tinkers and _ tailors,
waitresses and watchmen. After grading this
population in a convenient number of groups
in ascending order of intelligence we could
work out the average number of children per
adult produced by each group and, providing
further testing shows that the children of
these groups are in the same order of intelligence as the parents, derive figures to show
the rate at which the national capital of
mental capacity is increasing or decreasing.

In principle this is what we did, but this
most simple plan was not deemed desirable
for the following reasons: (1) It is unduly
time-consuming to assemble a large number
of adults, especially in proportions representative of the general population. (2) Mental
tests so far developed to a practical stage are
not so accurate with adults as with children.
An unknown age variation has to be allowed
for, and environmental effects through prolonged investment of interest in one occupation may exist. (3) Children, on the other
hand, are not so test shy, are in a uniform
school environment and are used to expressing their abilities in examinations or intelligence tests.

Consequently we set out to sample the
family at the child end of it, as it were.* In
order to cover as many families as possible
only one child was tested from each, this
child being taken as a sample of his brothers

* The only disadvantage of this procedure is that we
omit from our calculation all the people who are celibate
or childless. Families of otherwise adequate size in the
intelligent group will not ensure the survival of this
section of the community if many adults belonging to it
remain childless. Another population-determining
factor, except in the special case of a just adequate
family size, is the length of generations.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and sisters ;* and in order to effect a complete sampling of the population, from which
no particular group might escape, we took all
the children in the area born in a certain year.

A convenient age to take is ten years, since
children are not so scattered in different
schools at that age as later, and since they
are old enough already to have examination
experience and familiarity with intelligence
tests at eight and nine.

Our next concern was a geographical one :
we had to get typical samples of English
population without dissipating our time in
too many areas. We therefore chose one
typical industrial city with a population of
239,000 inhabitants and one unspoilt rural
area of twenty scattered villages and townlets varying in population from 300 to 6,000
people.

In these areas we tested all the ten-year-old
children with the same specially designed
non-verbal intelligence test. Records were
kept of parental occupations and the number
of (surviving) children in each family sampled.
A detailed account of how the sampling was
made representative is given in the footnote.f

 

* Apart from the slight effect due to “ regression to
the average,”” the average figures for the brothers and
sisters of, say, one hundred children tested would be the
same (save for slight ‘“‘ sampling error ’’) as that for
these children themselves, since the brothers and sisters
are likely to scatter equally above and below the
representative.

The correlation of intelligence of brothers and sisters
is well known (giving a coefficient of about 0:5). To
those who think from casual observation that the
intelligence of children in one family normally varies
greatly, I would point to an illusion which causes error
in this and in many related fields. The individual gets
his idea of ‘‘ average ’’ from his own family, friends and
social class. Few people realize to what extent they do
this, or how narrow their field is compared with the
ranges of mental capacity in the population as a whole.
A man’s social environment is always well sifted. At
school he is classified with similar people, first by the
nature of the school itself, then by class sorting. The
Same occurs in occupations except in special instances.
Few people have attempted to converse with an Einstein
and the imbeciles in a defective institution on the same
day. Unaware of the heights above them and the depths
below, most people magnify the individual differences
of members of families and groups which they know.

{ METHOD OF SAMPLING POPULATION.

Since the greater part of our English population is in
large towns or cities (urban population, 31 millions ;
rural population, 8 millions) our urban group was larger
than our rural group.

1. City group. London is scarcely typical of English
urban life. Our results were gathered ina city, Leicester,
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

Distribution of Intelligence in City and
Country

Though at first sight it may not seem a
highly relevant matter, we will consider, in
passing, the actual distribution of intelligence
in city and country, as shown in Figs. 1a and
1b. They both reveal the “‘ normal ”’ type
of curve which psychologists have come to

which strikes an average in tone between London and
the industrial cities of the Midlands and North. For the
rural sample Devonshire was chosen as offering typical
unspoilt conditions. The villages and townlets explored
were (1) in the fertile South Hams farming area south
of Dartmoor and clear of big towns and railways; (2)
to a more limited extent the less favoured area on the
northern edge of Dartmoor, with an extension in one
instance to Launceston. Surveys of intelligence were
being made in the city of Leicester, so that the machinery for gathering the results already existed.

Both in the urban and the rural area we had to find
where the ten-year-old children go to school. In
Leicester we considered we had covered the great
majority of the children in the city area proper by
taking all the following schools :

No. of cases
Special school and special classes for the dull

 

and defective : _ <0 49
All elementary schools (24) .. 2,245
2 preparatory schools (for secondary schools) 141
2 private schools . 264
1 public school 174

Total 2,873

 

The boys in the public school were naturally not at
ten years of age as were the others, but we included them
because it would have been very difficult to get hold of
the children of this, a very well-to-do, social group at
ten years, when they are so scattered. Of course, in this
last contributory section, the size of the family was
made accurately comparable by recording the number
of children in the family when the child tested was ten
years old. In this group, too, since we were not able to
test as many children as we needed to give this class its
due proportion, each child was weighted as two.

2. Rural group. The secondary, preparatory and
private school facilities are here greatly decreased, and
in the small villages practically every child was found in
the village school. We added three secondary schools
(correcting families to ten years of age) to give an
adequate proportion of the children who are sent away
to school.

Our rural group consisted of :
No. of cases
22 elementary schools in 22 villages or

 

townlets 758

3 secondary schools it in oN towns drawing on the countryside sm em 103
Total 861

 

This gives a ratio of elementary to non-elementary
of 7-5 to 1 for the country as against 4 : 1 for the city.

183

expect in such surveys,* but the country
group is shifted as a whole towards the lower
grades and both show a skewedness towards
the lower end. This skewedness may be due
to a differential birth-rate acting upon a
“normal ” curve under conditions of assortative mating and with insufficient time for the
curve to readjust itself (see later histograms).

This finding of a slightly lower average
intelligence for the rural population is also
repeating results already familiar in this
country and America.t

* The ‘‘ standard deviation ’’ of these distributions is
for town and country respectively 21-9 and 36-9. This
betokens a rather greater scatter and variability than
has been found in early surveys in America and elsewhere, but confirms the results of the Scottish survey
and my own surveys in this country (Brit. Jnl. Psychol.,
1933, Vol. X. Forum of Education, 1928). The
deficient scatter of the American results may be partly
due to a real absence of extremes in the population,
but, as I have argued elsewhere (Brit. Jnl. Psychol.,
loc. cit.), it is more probably due to the use of defective
tests measuring attainment along with intelligence.
Owing to class teaching which pushes the dull child
whilst allowing the bright to mark time, and owing to
the fact that the life experience of a child of eight is less
than that of a child of ten with a mental age of eight,
any contamination of an intelligence test with education and experience will reduce the real scatter of
I.Q.s. That is why I suggest that the greater deviation
of the present results is at once a closer approach to
the truth about mental variation and an indication
that the tests are relatively clear of environmental
elements. This fact should be noted in connection with
later comments on the early studies of alleged environmental influence on the intelligence of twins.

+ What is perhaps the most thorough of American
surveys (Jones, H. E., e¢. al., 1932. Environmental
handicap in mental test performance, Univ. Calif. Public.
Psychol., 5) shows ten points of I.Q. superiority in
town and concludes “‘ about half of the average difference of ten points I1.Q. is attributable to factors other
than those derived from the social and educational
environment.” With the more recent tests used here
the effect of environment would not be so great, indeed
it would be generous to allot two points to it (and that
because of the accidental circumstance that the town
group was already familiar with intelligence tests). For
it is a naive supposition that the town environment is
more favourable to the development of intelligence.
This allowance for town familiarity with tests would
give a difference of town and country of five points
which is in agreement with the eventual conclusion on
the American results.

As is well known, town children are also superior in
general physique, stature, etc. This aligns itself with
the fact that positive correlation (of a lower order)
exists between good intelligence and good physique,
and points to the conclusion that the town’s advantages
attract a superior biological sample of the population,
though (as I have pointed out in Psychology and Social
Progress) the city tends to sterilize and kill the very
qualities which it attracts. The country continually
184

Scale: 1 cm.=50 cases.

     

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Percentages in each category
at head of column.

numbers in brackets.

   

Actual

40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 180 140 150 160 170
<—_—— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS. —————>
FIG. 1a
INTELLIGENCE DISTRIBUTION IN (LEICESTER) CiTy AREA

All considerations indicate that the urban
superiority is due to a greater readiness of the
more intelligent families to migrate to the
cities. As one such migrant told me, he had
moved away from “small town life, small
wages and small opportunities.’’ This higher
average intelligence of the city is mainly of
interest in illustrating the important sociological principle that, other things being
equal, the more gifted biological strains will

supplies the cities with its better men, but the cities
do not maintain them. (In this survey, for instance,
the average birth-rate in the country was 3:62, in the
city 3-36.) Consequently the cities are moving towards
the present intelligence level of the country.

in time be found where the more attractive
conditions exist and vice versa.*

* I have been much impressed in this survey with the
differences of intelligence between one village and
another. Likewise, one cannot read widely in the literature of intelligence tests surveys without becoming
convinced that marked regional differences exist even
within the same country and race.

The character of the village itself, its cleanliness, the
planfulness of its buildings and the level of its prosperity, were often strikingly related to the level of the
intelligence found. In nearly every case an estimate of
intelligence made on the appearance of the children and
their keenness in work and play was found to anticipate
the independent test results. Dr. Allen Price, who has
carried out intelligence test surveys in most villages
which fall under his supervision as Medical Officer of
Health, tells me that he is convinced that there would
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING ?

Scale (Vertical) : 4 inch=10 cases

185

| M= 93°50

Mo=91 ‘07 |

    

Percentages in each category
at head of column.

Actual numbers in brackets.

50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160170 70 180
<«__— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS. —————FIG. 1b
INTELLIGENCE DISTRIBUTION IN (DEVON) RURAL AREA
(Distribution of total number of families—by implication that child is typical)

be a high correlation between the prosperity of a village,
its freedom from preventable ill-health, and the level
of inborn mental capacity.

At any rate the contention that the average mental
capacity in the long run determines the prosperity of
the group, is one which deserves thorough investigation,
and one which could well be tackled experimentally by
some refinement of the plan of comparing villages for
intelligence, income per head, incidence of preventable

, etc. In relatively small villages an unusual level
of intelligence was often obviously due to the effect of
one or two families, the inbreeding of good families
producing good intelligence, and of defectives even
more defectives. An excess of low intelligence was

invariably found in small towns of great age
which had been important and prosperous in the Middle
Ages. It is as if old cities, like old fires, accumulate much

othe study of such connections is of great importance
to the population-planning of the country as a whole,

and also with regard to the growing tendency deliberately to shift population about the country in a wholesale fashion—e.g. from depressed to prosperous areas—
for in some cases the disease (of low intelligence, prolificness and poverty) may be transmitted with the
people.

Basing my conclusions partly on proven results and
partly on indications known to research students I
should describe the regional distribution of intelligence
in Great Britain roughly as follows: It is in general
higher in towns than in country villages, but in very
remote villages, never tapped by the towns, it is a little
higher than in the towns. It is higher in Scotland than
in England, but the Scottish towns are lowered by
Edinburgh and especially Glasgow, which has a big
influx of Mediterranean Irish. East Anglia and the
Home Counties are probably slightly higher than the
rest of England (except Yorkshire), while Greater
London itself may well be as much as three points
higher than the rest of England.
186

The process deserves to be brought into the
limelight, for the layman’s first reaction is
otherwise always blithely to assume that the
good conditions directly produce the better
biological strains (as bad air was once thought
to produce malaria).

A variety of strange and interesting facts
of this kind is generally hauled to the surface
when the net of a psychological survey is cast,
but, after all, we are most eagerly concerned
with the main catch—the facts regarding
birth-rates and intelligence—and to this we
will now turn.

Birth-rates and Intelligence

Figs. 2a and 2b show, respectively for town
and country populations, the rate at which
our population is being recruited from
various intelligence levels at the present day.
A glance suffices to show that in both regions
the trend of intelligence must be disastrously
downhill ; for, apart from a slight rally in the
upper levels of the city, the rather more
intelligent are at every level reproduced in
smaller families than the less intelligent.

The grim evidence runs with relentless

consistency from top to bottom of these

I mention these indications not only because they are
of general interest, but because they suggest that the
standardization of the present non-verbal test, which
shows rural Devonshire as distinctly below average and
a Midland manufacturing city as a shade below average,
is about correct in level for the composite population of
Great Britain as a whole, when London and Scotland
are included, i.e. the I.Q.s which it gives have meaning
in relation to the ‘‘ average dweller in Great Britain.”

It is of interest to get away from mere averages: a
comparison of the two charts above shows a marked
preponderance of mental defectives and borderline
mental defectives in the rural area, a result in agreement
with the Wood Report of 1929, which found 10-49 per
1,000 of the rural population defective and only 6-71
per 1,000 of the urban population. Neurotic conditions
and insanity, on the other hand, are more common in
the towns, a result in accord with the statement that
they are more environmental in origin.

The shape of the histogram for the country is as if a
slice had been taken off the middling-upper intelligence
section, where we should expect a deficiency if there is
selective migration to the towns. It is interesting to
notice that Thomson (‘‘ The Northumberland Mental
Tests,” Brit. Jnl. Psychol., Vol. XII) found a good,
normal level of intelligence in villages too remote from
towns to be much affected by migration. A Devonshire
farmer tells me that in spite of unemployment he has to
advertise farming jobs in the most attractive terms,
adding ‘“‘ two minutes from nearest bus route to city ”’
if he is to be successful in finding assistance.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

diagrams. For a dysgenic trend we were
prepared, though not on this scale and not so
uniformly—it was reasonable to expect, for
instance, that among the highly intelligent
the birth-rate would rise again—but there is
no redeeming feature to the situation.

Faced with an obstinate and unpleasant
fact it is in the nature of the human mind to
turn away, to forget it, to refuse to see it,
torationalize, to invent a pleasant delusion, to
attack those who call attention to it, and so
on. One confidently expects, therefore, far
more determined attempts to find loopholes
in this evidence than would be made if it
were of a gratifying nature. Lest the value of
thorough discussion from all angles should be
lost through dissipation on points which the
psychologist has already examined, I will
anticipate the more obvious objections ; for
doing so will provide an opportunity to set
down the psychological facts regarding
mental ability, without which all further
interpretations and deductions from the
above analysis would go astray.

Most eugenists are familiar with what
follows, but the layman will be asking how
intelligence is measured, in what terms it may
be expressed and how far it responds to
training. Assertions may be made that the
above effect is due to nutritional differences,*
since on the whole larger families will not be
so well fed as smaller ones, or that the environment of a small family is more conducive to the development of intelligence, and
so on. Those statistically inclined may discuss whether the sampling has been adequate,
what the effects of celibacy rates may be, etc.

The need for brevity imposes a dogmatic
style on the following remarks which is not
intended in the exposition.

Meaning of “ Intelligence ”’

The popular usage of the term intelligence
has so many meanings that ultimately it has
no meaning at all. As far as possible I shall

* Thus even a very recent and valuable contribution
to education (Stead, H. G.: Full Stature), discussing
the increase of mental deficiency, says with apparent
conviction, ‘‘ these I.Q.s may be affected by a variety
of factors . . . emotional disturbances, overstrain and
malnourishment are the most important.”
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING ?

CHILOREN PER FAMILY

FAMILIES

 

187

CHILDREN PER FAMIL
(SMOOTH CURVE ‘LARGER INTERVALS)

2°35
(61 FAMILIES)
2°92
(112 F’s)
2°76
(291 F’s)

3°00
(848 F’s)

MEAN SIZE OF FAMILY IN URBAN AREA = 3°36
FIG. 2a

URBAN AREA:

6¢ >}

use the term ‘‘ mental capacity,’’ meaning
thereby “ mother wit,’’ natural capacity to
understand complexities and grasp ideas,
constitutional ability independent of specialized education and training.

Many years of research, in which the relations of all kinds of human abilities and
mental operations have been studied, show
that such a general ability exists. This mental capacity has been labelled non-committally, by most English psychologists, ‘‘G.”’
The amount of “‘ G ” with which a person is
endowed is partly responsible for the degree
of success he achieves in practically anything,
but it is almost wholly responsible for the
limits of his success in such things as deductive reasoning, power of choosing words correctly in a known vocabulary, mathematical
insight, quickness in picking up ideas and in
learning generally, especially where abstract
notions and complicated relationships are
involved. This ability grows very rapidly
during the early years of childhood, then
more slowly, and finally ceases to develop
after about fifteen or sixteen years of age.

SIZE OF FAMILY AND INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT

Means of Measuring Intelligence

Except when all the people to be tested
have been exposed to and been equally interested in a similar education and environment, it is necessary to take great care when
designing tests to couch the problems in
terms equally familiar to all—i.e. to work
within a “ least common denominator ”’ of
general experience. The test used in this
survey avoided the manipulation of words
altogether, since widely different vocabularies may exist in different homes. Its pictorial and “‘ shape ” items were also such as
to give equal opportunity to differing social
groups and to town or country children. Like
most recent tests it is composed of varieties
of tests which have been proved to correlate
highly with “‘G”’ ; has serried, graded items
and selective rather than inventive answers.*

* The standardization of the present test is described
in the British Journal of Psychology (January 1936).
Its subtests are: classifications, analogies, mirror
images, instructions, essential characters, picture completions, substitutions and mazes. It is published by
188 THE EUGENICS REVIEW |
1Q: 180 --—-4
ro | foyer | 1-80
170 Cases (5 FAMILIES)
_ 20,  j;|4
2-45 one 2-31
150 Cases (26 F’s)
140 720 {15
130 3-05 , |e" 2-62
(47 F's
120 — “ar
———— Cc
3°28 46 3-27
110 (151 F’s)
_ 3°26 105
wee eee ee ee
3°54 1 Sases 8:72
90 Coane (451 F’s)
ed 3:89 i 227
eee eee eee eee oe ee me ee ee ee me ee ee ww oe 1 Cc
414 MTT. 4-24
60 4°38 J a2
Fe ————_——_——_—— oO ~A Cases
5 4-46 M45 ae ee)
8
60 | Cases
405

FIG. 26

Mean size of family in rural (Devon) Area =3-63.

RURAL AREA: SIZE OF FAMILY AND INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT

Omits of Intelligence

Measurement by an intelligence test is first
in terms of “‘ mental age ’—a mental age of
eleven, for example, is credited to anyone
who just achieves the score of the typical,
average child of eleven on that test. Since it
is most desirable to be able to compare the
brightness of people of different actual
(chronological) ages most intelligence measurements are finally expressed in “ intelligence quotients,’ obtained by eliminating
the actual age through dividing the mental
age by actual age, thus:

_. Mental Age

Actual Age
(The 100 being to avoid fractions.)

Intelligence Quotient (I.Q.) X 100

Obviously, by the very definition of I.Q.,
the average child or adult citizen has an
I.Q. of 100. By a convention arising from
experience, the mental defective is a person

Messrs. Harrap & Co. in the series of the Cattell Tests
under the designation: Scale I, Form A. Non-verbal
group and individual test.

having an I.Q. below 70.* A child in school
who is considered ‘“ dull and backward ”’ is
commonly found to have an I.Q. below 8o.
Scholarship children (for secondary schools)
are almost invariably above 120, whilst a
strikingly brilliant child has an I.Q. of

150-170.T

Soon after intelligence tests were first used
it was found that the intelligence quotient of
ea¢h individual tends to remain constant.
Literally hundreds of experiments in different towns, social groups and countries have
since confirmed this general finding.}

* With improved tests, which “‘ scatter ’’ the population more widely, it may be found that 65 is the real
upper limit of deficiency as defined by the Mental
Deficiency Act on the basis of social criteria.

+ In testing thousands of children and adults over
several years I have only twice met an I.Q. of 200—one
in London, one in Leicester. This is an adequate
capacity for a genius. See Terman, et. al., Genetic
Studies of Genius, for this aspect of the study of
intelligence.

t For a brief introduction to the theory and practice
of testing the reader is referred to Dr. R. Knight’s small
book, Intelligence and Intelligence Testing, or to a
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

I take at random, from my card index,
Arthur J , tested at eight years of age by
my predecessor in office, and found to have
an I.Q. of 65. He was sent to a special school,
and is now about to leave at fifteen years of
age. His I.Q., recently measured, without
awareness on my part of the previous result,
was 67. Dipping again I find a “ problem ”’
child, I.Q. 141 at nine years of age. She
failed a scholarship examination owing to
emotional difficulties and an unsatisfactory
home background. Tested recently at twelve
years of age she has an J.Q. of 140. These
minor variations of I.Q., up to five points,
are found in about half the children tested,
‘and may be considered as due to inaccuracies
in the measuring instrument rather than to
real changes, since they are as marked in
re-tests after a lapse of a few days as after
several years.

Experience of this kind, and much indirect
evidence about the nature of intelligence,
together with many direct experiments in
which physical and mental environment have
been altered without producing any significant change in I.Q., have convinced most
psychologists that in the I.Q. we are dealing
with something largely inborn and constitutional, like the colour of the person’s eyes or
the shape of his skull. Notice that this is not
entirely the same thing as saying that it is
inherited in any simple Mendelian manner.
Separate evidence must be considered on that
point.

Unfortunately for the clarity of the issue,
it is not unusual for sociologists, economists,
biologists and philosophers to make holiday
in the field of psychology, presumably when
the confusion of their own subjects becomes
too oppressive. After arranging statistics
concerning psychological facts with which
they have no first-hand acquaintance, they

 

chapter in my popular introduction to psychology,
Your Mind and Mine. A brief but more thorough study
is The Testing of Intelligence, by H. R. Hamley and
others. The classical works in this country are Professor
Spearman’s Abilities of Man, and Professor Burt’s
Mental and Scholastic Tests. The former is indispensable
to any thorough review of the question, and though it
propounds forcefully the theory of ““G”’ no bias is
given to practical issues, since in practice even the
opponents of ‘“‘G”’ construct intelligence tests on the
same principles.

B

189

do not hesitate to make the most authoritative statements about mental testing. It is
obvious that in psychology, as in medicine,
there is a sense which comes from first-hand
experience of and immersion in the facts. No
psychologist engaged day after day in testing
and watching intimately the progress of
children and the reactions of adults doubts
that there are two distinct entities—the
extensive veneer of education and the inextensible innate capacity.

Is Mental Capacity Innate ?

The evidence for innateness of mental
capacity may be summarized under the
following headings :

1. The feeble-minded (who are not, like
imbeciles, a pathological type apart, but
“normal” variants of intelligence) remain
feeble-minded whatever influences of environment, through mental stimulation or
nutrition, are brought to bear. (Even the
desperate remedy of opening the skull ‘so
that the brain may grow ”’ reveals only that
the brain has reached the natural limit of its
growth.)

2. Brilliant men and men of genius similarly show outstanding mental capacity from
birth, as Terman’s studies of the childhood of
men of genius show.

3. Among children in widely different
physical and mental environments the I.Q.
remains equally constant.

4. Children brought up in the very same
environment—e.g. orphanages—show as big
variations of intelligence as any other children (except when the parents are selected
from one social or occupational class).

5. Identical twins have practically the
same intelligence quotient, and even when
reared apart no marked difference of I.Q.
arises.

6. Groups of children given “ intensive
education ”’ or special feeding show the same
“normal ”’ rate of intelligence growth as do
control groups lacking these advantages.

7. The cessation of intelligence growth at
an early age, long before environment has
had its maximum effect, points to an innate
basis of development.
190

8. The connection of mental capacity with
the number of myelinated nerve cells, suggested by the work of Lashley and others,
points to intelligence having the same degree
of innateness as physical characteristics—
e.g. skull shape and size—which are known
to be unaffected by normal variations of
environment.

g. The possibility of breeding in an animal
species a strain possessing distinctly greater
all-round learning capacity than that of
other strains has been experimentally demonstrated (see Tryon, below).

Fuller details of the solved and unsolved
problems in this field are given in an appendix to this paper.

Inheritance of Intelligence

The evidence regarding the inheritance of
intelligence is as follows :

1. About 75 per cent. of the children of the
feeble-minded are also feeble-minded, and
the remainder are not far above the borderline.

2. The children of people of outstanding
capacity also show (except when one parent
is much duller than the brilliant one) outstanding capacity, compared with other
children having the same advantages.

3. A correlation (of about 0-5) is constantly
found between the intelligence quotients of
siblings (brothers and sisters).

4. When school children are arranged in
groups according to the complexity and intelligence demand of their father’s occupations, higher intelligence is found on test
among the children of parents in the more
complex occupations.

5. When adults and children are tested
directly with intelligence tests a good correlation* of the mid-parent (parental average)
with the mid-child (average of children in the
family) is found. Individual children do not
correlate so well with the mid-parent
(thus the child-parent correlation is lowered.
if only one child is taken), and no one
has yet established how inheritance takes
place—e.g. what dominant and recessive
factors are concerned or how many genes

* See American results, p. 203.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are involved. But it is already practicable
to predict that the children of a group of
parents of higher intelligence will have
greater mental capacity than the children
of parents of lower intelligence. Since
no research in this last category has yet
been carried out in this country we tested,*
as already stated, a hundred families with
the following results.

Results of the Investigation

The parents were first ranked in order of
intelligence (of the mid-parent) and then
divided into equal groups (of ten pairs in
each). The average intelligence of the
children of each of these groups was then
calculated and set down opposite the average
intelligence of the parents. Since some of the
parents were over sixty, and since there is
evidence (see below) of an age-decline of
intelligence, the parents’ intelligences were
corrected for age. The new figures thus
obtained are set down opposite the uncorrected raw scores. The ranking of the
groups, however, works out the same in
both cases, and is the same as the ranking
of the children. The correlation of the midparent with the mid-child works out at
+0-73 +0-03.

AMOUNT OF INHERITANCE OF MENTAL CAPACITY.

Mean I1.Q.of  1.Q. Corrected Mean I.Q. of
Parents for Age. Children.
20 parents 147°5 155°2 21 children 148-8
20. ~—a, 142°3 148°3 23 » 147°0
20. —C,, 135:0 145°2 21 - 143°5
20. (a, 125°5 133°0 21 ” 137°!
20. (is, III-o 123°5 21 ” 127°1
20. ~—«,, 99°5 107-0 19 » 118-1
20. —C,, 88-3 95°0 26 ” 102°9
zo. CC; 75°3 76-4 15 ” 93°9
20 67°9 71°4 2400 ns 92°5
20. —(,, 63°5 67°6 _ 32 wh 770

From such findings it is reasonable to conclude that with groups—even quite small
groups—we may regard mental capacity not
only as an innate characteristic, but as one
which has been inherited from the previous
generation and will be passed on to the next.

Turning: to the standard environment

* See, however, Appendix II, p. 203.

+ A more detailed account of the methods by which
these results were obtained, together with a summary
of other investigations on the inheritance of intelligence,
in set out in Appendix IT.
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING ?

   
    
   
 
    
  
   
  
    
    

Average Present Generation.
99°80 (40°44
(37°03)

1°02

40 60 80 100

1gI

Average Last Generation.
103°81

a= Present Generation.
=—awee Last Generation.

Percentages In each category.
Present generation thus - 18

Last ” 9 -G 8)
(12°12)
10°15
———o
é
(4°42)
3:91 (2°96)
=== 2:12

160
—i———— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS. —>

120 140 180

FIG. 3a@
Crry PopuLATION: ALTERATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE DURING
Last GENERATION
(i.e. comparison of generation averaging Io years in 1935 with that of 35 years
in 1935). Retrospective calculation assuming even distribution of childless

people

versus heredity controversy, the verdict of
the psychologist regarding the psychological
field is, in a word, that mental capacity is
inherited, but that character, habits and skills
are largely a matter of environment. It is
true that psychiatric observations show that
the temperamental basis of psychopathic
conditions are to some extent inherited, but
not with the completeness of mental capacity,
and it is in the field of temperament and
character, habits and the skills that environmentalists can most profitably apply their
energies.

Social Implications of Results

We are now able to turn to the social implications of our intelligence and birth-rate
figures, bearing in mind that the facts are
entirely opposed to the popular assumption
that an appreciable part of the existing differences in mental capacity are referrable to
differences of nutrition or education.* More
* For that matter, the present results are not based on
any assumption of a social stratification of intelligence
or of a differential birth-rate between social classes.
They cut across classes and study directly the relation
of intelligence and fertility.
192

  
  
    
 
      

t
Average intelligence

of present generation ——p—

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Average intelligence

I
j~«————— of last generation

(Present Adults)

 

of ace 95'8
Present Generation.
= awa — Last Generation.
i
Percentages in each category.
4 Present generation thus + 18
| Last ” ” -(1 8)
t
{
i
18°57 » {(19°15)

      
  

  

40

60 80 100

120 160

—<e————————— (INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS -——————>FIG. 3)

COUNTRY POPULATION :

ALTERATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE

DURING Last GENERATION
(i.e. comparison of generation averaging Io years in 1936 with that averaging

35 years in 1936.)

Retrospective calculation assuming even distribution of

childless individuals, etc.

over, whatever the mechanism of inheritance
may be, we have seen that, even for quite
small groups of families, the intelligence of
the average offspring is closely related to that
of the average parent. This being so we can
proceed to calculate the alteration of average intelligence in city and country resulting
from the divergent birth-rates found at
various intelligence levels.

Figs. 3a and 30 show the alterations in the
percentages of population at various intelligence levels which have taken place in this
generation. The values are .obtained by
dividing the numbers in each category by the

fertility rates, to get the number of parents in
that category (i.e., the present parents of
the ten-year-old children) and multiplying
throughout by the common factor necessary
to bring the population to the same total size
(allowance for childless adults, assuming
them to be equally common at all levels).
The calculation is only an approximate one
because the birth-rate factor which we apply
really extends more widely than to the category to which we apply it, since the child in
that category is only a sample of the whole
family. Secondly, it assumes that childlessness, celibacy and late marriage are as
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING ?

frequent among the unintelligent as the intelligent. I could get no direct evidence of a
complete kind upon this matter,* but the
whole of the indirect evidence indicates
that the assumption is somewhat incorrect
and that these conditions are more prevalent among the intelligent. In this
view I have the support of Professor R. A.
Fisher, whose acquaintance with the relevant
statistical issues is unrivalled. Consequently
my figures are almost certainly not showing
so great a decline of intelligence as is actually
taking place. Nevertheless the imponderables
in my calculations are not so extensive as to
alter the general order of my results.

As regards the averages of the two generations, the city intelligence seems to decline
more than the country—4:-0 as against 2-3
points—but owing to the migration of the
brighter persons from country to city, which
is still going on, we may suppose that there
will be no great difference in the actual rates
of decline.

Counting a generation as thirty years and
ignoring as meaningless the decimal points in
our figures, we may say that national intelligence is declining at the rate of one point of
I.Q. for every ten years. This is a staggering
rate and one which should admit of direct
verification by re-testing with the same tests
in ten to twenty years’ time.

Figs. 4a and 46 represent the changes
deducible from carrying the calculation forward to the children of the present generation
of children, assuming that the latter have the
same birth-rates as their parents, an assumption which, let us hope, time and the efforts of
eugenists will make incorrect.

From many points of view the changes in
the national average of intelligence are not so
important as the changes in the proportions
of very high and very low intelligences.

* The following evidence on partial aspects exists.
The percentage of married persons among professional
people is lower than in society as a whole, at every age
level. See Occupational Tables, His Majesty’s Stationery
Office, 1934. Secondly, figures for Germany, presumably not essentially different from those which would
appear for this country, show childless marriages to
become more prevalent as social status rises. Neue
Beitrage zum deutschen Bevolkerungsproblem. Sonderheft, Nu. 15.

193

Before undertaking this survey I had expected the greatest changes to be in the
region of borderline feeble-mindedness. The
changes are certainly great—in thirty years
we may expect a 24 per cent. increase in
mental deficiency, whilst more than half the
population would be mentally defective in
three hundred years—but the most striking
change is in the numbers of able and brilliant
children. In the country group the very able
children—above an I.Q. of 140—are practically halved, whilst scholarship children—
above I.Q. 120—are reduced by about 35
per cent., in one generation.

Such findings must set us thinking sharply
on their social and educational implications.
If the able group is being cut down in this
way, whence are the skilled doctors and
surgeons, the organizers and politicians, the
writers and research workers of the next
generation to come? Temporarily one may
look to a better use, through careful scholarship combing, of the intelligence already in
the community, but this is a mere exploitation of reserve capital. Moreover, it assumes
that the jobs needing high education are the
only ones needing high intelligence, an
assumption which, if worked upon, may lead
to bare patches of dullness and incompetence
appearing in unexpected places and to an
impoverishment of the life of the community
in obscure ways.

Clearly the foreshadowed increase in
mental defect betokens a need for education
authorities to set to work at once to provide
more special school accommodation. Since a
dull child on an average costs twice as much
as the normal child to educate, the increase
implies, further, that unless the total grant
for education is augmented the effectiveness
of the educational system will be reduced at
all points. Already there are grumblings that
we are doing too much for the dull child at
the expense of the able child who does not
go to a secondary school.

Perhaps the chief reason why children run
away from home to school to-day, where
formerly they ran away from school to home,
is that the schools have very tactfully and
skilfully graded their curricula to the mental
capacities of the children. A bright boy in an
194

 

Average intelligence i

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Average intelligence

of next generation ————»- || ~<——- of _present generation

of children. I
98'31 (42:60)!
| 40°44

   
  
  
    
  
 
   
 

80 100

29°55

of children,
99°80

a=—=—=«- Present Generation.
=_-—-Next Generation.

Percentages in each category.
Present generation thus - 18
Next ” ” -(1 8).

3:91
(3°47) 2:12
(71°50).

180

160
<< INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS. ————

120 140

FIG. 4a
City POPULATION : ALTERATION OF DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE DURING
NEXT GENERATION
(Comparison of 1935 Io-year-olds with to-year-olds of 1960.) Calculation
assuming numerically stable population, stable conditions and continuation of
present differential birth-rate

A class does more abstract studies and enjoys
mental gymnastics in arithmetic whilst the
duller boy in a C class is dull no longer, for he
does more handwork and practical arithmetic, acquiring manual skills which give him
as much enjoyment as the mental skills do
the A child. The gain in interest and happiness among the school children of this generation is rightly hailed as the triumph of an
education which is child-centred rather than
subject-centred.

But what happens when the child leaves
school, if, through the teacher’s appreciation
of his true capacity, he is taught what he can

assimilate rather than what the community
needs in its citizens? The discrepancy is
most striking in the case of the borderline
feeble-minded child who is expected by the
business man to have all the accomplishments usual at school-leaving, but who, in
spite of extra attention, can barely read and
is completely helpless with the simplest problem arithmetic. Imagine this gap yawning
more widely throughout the whole range of
intelligence levels. Industry demands more
children with the A-class type of education,
but it is going to get more C-class graduates,
since the type of child for whom the C-class
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

Average intelligence
of next generation
of children.
1.Q. = 90'9

        

 
 
 
 
     
 

80
<—_———_— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS.-——————
FIG. 4b

40 60 100

CoUNTRY POPULATION. ALTERATION

OF DISTRIBUTION

195

Average intelligence
~“<— of present generation

of children.
1.Q.=93'5

Present Generation.

 

————Next Generation.

Percentages in each category.
Present generation thus - 18
Next ” ” <Q 8)

120 140 160 180

OF INTELLIGENCE

DURING NEXT GENERATION
(10-year-olds in 1936 to 10-year-olds in 1961.) Predicted on assumption of
numerically stable population, stable conditions and continuation of present
differential birth-rate

curriculum has been modified and designed is
being produced in larger numbers.

This brings us to the second realm in which
these redistributions of I.Q. are undoubtedly
going to be felt—that of employment.
Unemployment — persistent unemployment
—has unfortunately been regarded as a
purely economic problem when in fact it is
fundamentally a psychological one. Any
given culture provides a certain ratio of
skilled to unskilled jobs, and we may suppose,
though here we enter the field of sociological
speculation, that in a more advanced culture
the ratio of skilled to less skilled will be

relatively high. Training for the professional, administrative and more highly skilled
occupations can only be successful on a
foundation of adequate mental capacity. For
example, less than Io per cent. of our population, with the present distribution of mental
capacity, are capable of making anything out
of university education. The proportion of
complex occupations is therefore limited to
the supply of mental capacity. And since,
presumably, the employment of a large
number of low-grade workers depends, even
with the best organization, on the presence
of a proportion of higher-grade workers, a
196

  

Curve arising from

(3)

   

NUMBERS AT VARIOUS EARNINGS

EARNINGS (REWARDS)

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Distribution of
actual I. Q's,
(2) —~——— Distribution of
demand for |. Q's.
(3) ee¢ee@ Rate of Rewards arising
from relation of

 

(1)

B (1) and (2).

  

40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180
~<——— INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS. ———>

FIG. 5

A. Supply greatly in excess of demand at 75 1.Q.—negligible wage.
B. Supply and demand equal—normal wage.
C. Demand greatly in excess of supply—disproportionate wage.

deficiency of numbers among the latter will
result in proportional unemployment in the
lower grades. There is on the one hand a
social heritage providing a “curve of
demand ”’ for intelligence at various levels,
and on the other hand a “ curve of supply ”
determined by the birth-rates at different
intelligence levels. Where these curves do
not fit there is likely to be, in addition to a
dislocation of educational opportunities, a
persistent unemployment.

Originally these two curves cannot” have
been very different, since a culture which a
nation builds and the industries which it is
capable of founding depend on the capacities
of its people, but in time maladaption may
arise from (I) a slight upward shift in the
curve of demand through an increased complexity of industry and organization, arising
from the work of a few geniuses of science and
invention ; (2) a downward sagging in the
curve of supply of intelligence through
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

oe = Se ee ian oo wy

 

   
 
  

——
40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 180 740 %50 160 170
101

197
Average of

City Population

tmeniominens City (155)
waww= Country (24)

 

<————— |NTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS.————>

FIG. 6
INTELLIGENCE DISTRIBUTION OF CHILDREN OF UNEMPLOYED PERSONS

irresponsible reproduction at lower levels
having no perception of the needs and standards of civilization.

An indication of the points at which the
curves diverge is given in part by wage rates.
The individual is penalized through no fault
of his own, but simply because in his generation too many people are produced at that
particular level of capacity, relative to other
levels and to the curve of demand. The low
wage is an indication to the parent as a
parent. Thus if there were a severe restriction
of reproduction rates in the 70-80 I.Q. range
the unskilled labourer might earn as much as
a professional man. Obviously the same
might happen through an alteration in the
curve of demand, as when an earthquake
destroys buildings over a large area and
creates work demands at less complex levels
in the service of civilization.

In the above graph I have made a rough
estimate of the relation of the two curves
to-day, and shown how the curve of earnings,
as a function of the difference of the demand
and supply curves, would actually correspond to the distribution of earnings as it
exists to-day. Considerable research urgently
needs to be done to determine so important a
matter as the real shape of the curve of
intelligence demand. The above diagram is
given more to illustrate the principle than to
present an accurate analysis of present values
true at all points. An artificial arrest of
falling wage-rates would result in unemployment at the point concerned, 1.e., at the point
where supply greatly overshoots demand.
We should therefore expect unemployment to
be greatest in this country in the 70-90 I.Q.
range. I have extracted from my material the
I.Q.s of the children of unemployed. They
198

are not very numerous in the two areas of the
survey, since both are prosperous. Consequently they may be taken to represent,
more than in other areas, the consistently
unemployed.

Clearly they fall in the section anticipated,
only a small minority being above average
intelligence. If these figures were expressed
as percentages of the fractions of the whole
population falling in each intelligence category it is obvious that the tendency to be
unemployed (chances of being so) would rise
regularly and rapidly from an I.Q. of go
downwards.

It is difficult to deal adequately in the
space available with the definition and the
implications of the notions of Fig. 5. Moreover, from the aspect of social ideals, I would
suggest that fitness for citizenship rather
than the narrower conception of fitness for
industry, should be taken as the true basis of
the curve of intelligence demand. A recognition of that basis would almost certainly
lead to a higher curve of demand, for borderline defectives are often employed and exploited in industry whilst at the same time
the community has to provide welfare
workers to look after their social and
domestic affairs.

A psychologist naturally turns first to
repercussions in education and industry
because it is in these two fields—through the
techniques of the child guidance clinic, vocational guidance and industrial psychology—
that most is known about the implications of
mental measurement. Wesee that the present
drift of birth-rates is likely to lower educational standards and to lead to increased
poverty and unemployment. Observations in
the same field, such as, e.g. that a large proportion of criminal behaviour, especially
persistent, petty delinquency, is the form of
expression prevalent among persons in the
lower sector of the intelligence distribution,
lead us also confidently to expect an increase
in juvenile delinquency.*

Had I space, however, I should be most
concerned to follow the more subtle effects

*See Burt, Cyril, The Young Delinquent; and

Healy, The Individual Delinquent.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

upon social tone and political organization.
It is evident that one may expect systematic
changes in the economics and the ethical
values of amusement and recreation, in manners and morals and social interests. A teacher
who deals with many different classes graded
according to mental capacity finds, for
instance, that whereas among children of
higher I.Q. freedom and rights of self-determination can be readily granted, in groups of
low I.Q. rigid prescriptions are both needed
and demanded by the members for their own
social happiness and educational advance.
Most social reformers have increased freedom
and individuality as one of their goals. Their
reforms have little chance of taking root in a
community with falling mental capacity, in
which reactionary political forms and more
rigid customs have a greater likelihood of
evoking comprehension and emotional support.

Proposals for the Future

Since the person diagnosing a disease is
usually supposed to be in a favourable position to prescribe a cure, I will conclude by
discussing measures calculated to arrest the
decline of intelligence. Indiscriminate family
allowances such as have been granted on the
Continent will certainly not have this desirable result. Nations, like buildings in a
crowded city, must grow upwards rather
than outwards, and the spread of low-grade
population which these measures encourage is
most likely to lead to that form of delinquency which we know as war.

Four positive measures are indicated :

I. Since the large families of the low in
intelligence are practically never desired by
them, and destroy what meagre standard of
comfort the parents possess, there can be no
doubt that the flood of low capacity could be
arrested in a generation by adequate birthcontrol facilities being provided for poor as
well as for rich.

2. Increasing the birth-rate of the more
intelligent presents a more difficult proposition. Carr-Saunders and others have shown
that, even before’ the days of simple birthcontrol, the economic value of the child has
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

been a real factor in its production. The able
child, wherever it occurs, should therefore be
made an economic asset, by generous educational allowances and scholarships given
without regard to the social status of the
parent. Intelligence can now be determined
at so early an age that the assistance would
come soon enough to encourage the parents
of an intelligent child to provide it with
brothers and sisters.

3. Since the income-tax paying section of
the community is, on the whole, of greater
mental capacity than the non-contributing
group, the introduction of greater tax allowances for children (and lesser allowances for
marriage alone ?) would tend to reinforce the
stream of higher intelligence. It is unfortunate that eugenics in some aspects needs to
be connected with problems of earning
capacity which have become subjects of
obstinate political and moral sentiment.
Admittedly the adjustment of birth-rate to
earning capacity is far from ideal, since
among those who have passed the level of
simple comfort it frequently happens that the
further acquisition of wealth is a sign of
deficiency of character or even intelligence
in comparison with personalities turning
towards social service. Nevertheless it is the
only index we have and it will become a
better one as a society adjusts its rewards
more deliberately to the true value of the
services rendered to it.

4. Beyond material deterrents and encouragements of breeding lies the yet scarcely
touched possibility of linking religious and
moral drives to a matter which certainly
should have been their concern from the
beginning. Educators, moreover, have hardly
begun to think of creating desirable attitudes
towards parenthood and the prestige of
parenthood, towards interest in children and
towards the social implications of the family.
(They favour, for example, teaching by childless women, whose attitudes and compensatory values are necessarily contagious.) A
social psychologist is required to work out
the possibilities of influencing birth-rates by
changing social attitudes.

I describe these measures as they appear
to be demanded by the findings of my

199

particular study, but eugenists experienced in
assessing the effectiveness of general eugenic
measures are required to remould them to
finally suitable forms.

To the initial question “Is national intelligence declining ? ”’ my answer is emphatically in the affirmative. Others may dispute
the exact rate of decline, and as a research
worker I am interested to join in such a
dispute, but as a citizen I regard the point as
an academic trifling—it is enough that intelligence is declining at all in an era when
the country needs all its available intelligence
to help pull civilization out of a critical
position. And it is a scandalous thing that
no Government inquiry has yet been made
into so grave a change, the existence of which
has been indicated by indirect evidence for at
least twenty-five years.*

APPENDIX I

SUMMARIZING INVESTIGATIONS ON INNATE AND
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN INTELLIGENCE

A. MAINLY ENVIRONMENTAL

1. Effects of Differing Environments and of Definite
Change of Environment. The evidence of the constancy
of I.Q. for individuals in different environments is too
widespread to be gathered here. (Foran lists titles of
eighty researches. ‘‘ The Constancy of the Intelligence
Quotient.” Cath. Univ. Amer. Res. Buil., Nos. 9 and 10.)
On an average an individual’s I.Q. re-tested after a
lapse of months or years is four or five points altered
(see Schwesinger, Hereditary and Environment, p. 52),
but this alterations is just as frequently up as down—
i.e. for groups, quite small groups, the I.Q. does not
change. The individual changes are, therefore, most
probably ascribable to experimental error in measurement.

Any imperfection of the test will increase the apparent variability of the I.Q. as will clerical errors, illness
and all manner of chance factors. Since the earlier tests
on which this degree of constancy of the I.Q. was recorded were far less perfect, it seems legitimate to argue
that with improvements of tests and elimination of
chance effects—i.e., with approach to measurement of
the real I.0.—there would be a corresponding approach
to real constancy. This general tendency to constancy
of I.Q. throughout the population is itself convincing
evidence of a big innate factor in 1.Q.; for under
modern conditions all people have a considerable
environment in common, and any one individual is
subjected to many different environments. Moreover,
in schools there is a systematic tendency to leave the
bright to mark time while concentrating on coaching

*I wish to thank Professor R. A. Fisher, the
Directors of Education for Leicester and Devonshire,
and the teachers in these areas for generous assistance in
planning and executing this research. For ideas given
in discussion I am further greatly indebted to Major
Leonard Darwin, Professor Burt, Dr. Blacker, and Dr.
Colin Clark.
200

the backward and prodding the dull—a tendency which,
if environment is effective, should lower the I.Q. of the
bright and raise that of the dull.

Distinct change of environment, as from an elementary to secondary school, or bad homes to good
ones, also produces no change. Rogers, Darling and
McBride (Nature and Nurture: theiy Influence upon
Intelligence. 1928) tested and re-tested sixty-four girls
committed to good institutional care from extremely
poor social and educational conditions. They were
compared with a control group of unselected children
in a public (elementary) school. There was no difference
beforehand and no significant change of I.Q. afterwards
in either case. Lawrence, in this country (‘‘ An Investigation into the Relation between Intelligence and Inheritance.” Brit. Jnl. Psychol. Mon. Suppl., 1931, No. 16),
likewise looked for changes in 1.Q. in children of drunken,
insane or criminal parents, after shorter and longer
periods of institutional residence, but with all the
changes of personality and character there was no
change in the fixed rate of development of mental
capacity.

Freeman (Nature and Nurture) studied seventy-four
children in unsatisfactory conditions adopted into
private homes. The average I.Q. beforehand was 91-2
and four years later was 93:7, the difference not being
statistically significant.

Shepherd Dawson (Brit. Assoc. Report, 1934) tested
a number of children in slums (Glasgow), about half of
whom were soon afterwards sent to improved conditions
in a new housing estate. The I.Q. of the moved group
remained constant and did not differ significantly
from that of the group remaining in the slums.

2. Studtes of the Similarity of the Intelligence of
Relatives and the Effect of Environmental Differences
(‘‘ Same heredity, different environment.) There is a
correlation of the intelligence of sibs (brothers and
sisters) of about 0-5. Schwesinger (op. cit., p. 232)
summarizes the results of twenty-two researches, all
concordant in showing this agreement. The average
coefficient of the six most satisfactory researches
(eliminating all working with fewer than 500 pairs of
sibs or using the Binet test, which is unduly susceptible
to environmental influences) is 0-458. Such evidence
of heredity is not sufficient, since part of the sibs’
environment (the hours spent at home) is common. We
are indebted to Burks (Nature and Nurture: their
Influence upon Intelligence) for an analysis of measurements on siblings reared apart. The correlation was
0:44-+ -:.07, not substantially different from that found
in siblings reared together. Freeman (Nature and
Nurture) and Hildreth (The resemblance of siblings in
tntelligence and achievement. T.C. Contrib. Educ., No.
186) found for sibs reared apart respectively correlations
of intelligence quotients amounting to 0-49 and 0-34—
i.e., averaging about the same as for sibs reared together.

The intelligence of twins—of identical twins having
the same genetic constitution—is well known to be
strikingly similar. Hogben (‘‘ The Intellectual Resemblance of Twins,’ Herrman and Hogben, Proc. Roy.
Soc. Edin., 1933) summarizes the results of the four
principal researches, which give inter-twin correlations
ofo0-90+0-02,0°88+40:02,0:92+0:01,and0:8640:04.
These correlations, as also the actual distribution of
differences of I.Q. (see Schwesinger, op. cit., 223), are
in fact the same as those which are obtained from
testing and re-testing the same identical individuals
after a lapse of time—i.e. the apparent differences of
twins may express experimental error only.

Here again there is an element of common environ
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment which, if environment affects I.Q., could be
responsible for part of the complete agreement, and no
really adequate research has yet been made on twins
reared apart. Schwesinger (op. cit., 221) reports ten
cases of pairs of identical twins reared apart and finds
intra-pair differences of 1.Q. of 7-7 points as compared
with 5-3 for non-separated identical twins. But this
was a Stanford-Binet test which might well react to
differences of cultural background and training.

The only evidence suggesting an appreciable environmental factor in determining I.Q. is in this field of twin
studies, and it is provided by Herrman and Hogben
(op. ctt.). The latter, from a comparison of the variability of non-identical and identical twins, concludes
it is extremely ‘‘ unlikely that genetic differences
account for more than one-half the mean difference
between offspring of the same parent.’’ To this estimate
of the contribution of environment, differing so much
from all other studies, one may reply : (1) Their finding
that C?=2-4 indicates a greater hereditary element in
individual differences than that admitted in the
above statement. (2) The intelligence test used
was one obviously susceptible to environmental influences. (3) It is admittedly difficult to separate
identical from non-identical twins. Each pair mistakenly classified would reduce the figure for the contribution of genetic factors. (4) The statement that,
within any family, genetic differences do not play the
major role is misleading if applied to intelligence
differences in general; for among the children of one
family we should not expect innate differences to be
very great.

Perhaps the most extensive and able research into
the evidence regarding hereditary intelligence derived
from twin studies is that of Hirsch (Twins: Heredtty
and Environment, Cambridge, Mass., 1930), which
concludes that the average intra-pair difference for
identical twins is two points of I.Q. and for nonidentical twelve points. This makes heredity about five
times as important as environment in determining
intelligence and is in agreement with studies made of
sibs and other relatives.

3. Studies of Intelligence Resemblance of Unrelated
People Subjected to the same Environment (‘‘ Same
environment, different heredity’’). There are three
adequate researches as to whether children reared in
the same institution for a sufficiently long time tend to
become more similar in intelligence. Hildreth (op. cit.)
measured eighty-four children reared in an orphanage
for 50 to 100 per cent. of their lives. The variation was
as great as for unrelated children reared apart. Davis
(‘‘ The Influence of heredity on the mentality of orphan
children,” Brit. Jnl. Psychol., 19) divided orphan
children into groups according to length of stay, but
found no convergence of intelligence compared with an
outside group. Lawrence (op. cit.) found similarly.

Another approach is to correlate the intelligences of
unrelated children in the same foster-home, to see if the
correlation approaches that of real sibs, in which case
some of the resemblance of real sibs could be put down
to the home environment. Freeman (Nature and
Nurture) found a correlation of 0: 40 between foster-sibs
and sibs, and Burks (op. cit.) one of 0-20 between the
child’sintelligence and the intelligence of the (mid) fosterparent. Burks concluded that 17 per cent. of intelligence variation can be put down to environmental
influence. Burks, Freeman and Jones (op. cit.) think
that about seven points of change in I.Q. may result
from a marked change in environment, All this fosterhome evidence, however, is vitiated by an effect which
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

social psychologists have often pointed out—that
consciously or unconsciously those who place fosterchildren tend to place the brighter children, from
parents of better social position, in better families, and
vice versa. When Freeman investigated this preselection effect on placement he found a correlation of
0:34 of pre-adoption I1.Q.s with the Home Rating
scores of the homes to which the children went, but in
spite of this disastrous discovery (the coefficient is
practically that found for true parent-child resemblance)
he courageously continues “ since all of the observed
correlation of 0-40 could hardly be due to selection,”’
etc. This error, which runs through all foster-home
studies, combined with the fact that the results are in
Stanford-Binet measurements affectable by cultural
influences, justifies us in concluding that there is no
convincing evidence derivable from this field of environmental influence on I.Q.

4. Studies on Intelligence in Animals. There is as yet
insufficient evidence regarding the existence of ‘‘G’”’
or the means of testing mental capacity in animals.
But, owing to the readiness with which experiments in
controlled breeding can be carried out, an animal
population offers the simplest means of demonstrating
the large extent to which changes in learning capacity
can be influenced by heredity. Tryon (“‘ The Inheritance of Mental Ability,’ Psychol. Bull., 29, and Schwesinger, op. cit., 334) started with an unselected rat
population and bred two “‘ races ’’—one from the most
able in maze-learning, one from the dullest. In seven
generations not 1 per cent. of the rats in the dull group
could, with the same training, equal the performance of
even the dullest rats in the “* bright ”’ strain.

Summary. The most “ environmentalistic ’’ interpretation of these results assigns an influence of about
seven points of I.Q. (for an average person) to the
environment. But what is this to the 170 points range
of I.Q. available in the present hereditary gene endowment of mankind? Actually, this seven points is, to
any broad survey of the evidence, a quite excessive
allowance. Most of the evidence yet available was
gathered with tests devised before the present advances
in the theory of intelligence, poor in ‘‘G”’ saturation
and weighted with items of learning and information.
Typical of this stage in technique is the work of Woolley
(‘‘ The Validity of Standards of Mental Measurement in
Young Childhood,”’’ School and Soc., 21), whose results
are interpreted to mean that attendance at nursery
school increases the child’s I.Q. ; though the test used,
the Merrill Palmer, is full of nursery school attainment
items, success in which is almost uncorrelated with “‘G’’!

Having regard to the evidence from all angles I
confidently anticipate that when testing technique is
more perfected and stabilized we shall find that the
most extreme changes of environment in the community change the I.Q. permanently from its average
position by about 3 to 4 points—at the utmost 5 points
—and then only when the influence is at work in early
years.

B. PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

Although, as far as mental training is concerned,
intelligence seems to proceed practically unhindered
and unhastened to its own goal of maturation, psychologists have long supposed that physical influences,
affecting the general nervous system itself, might
influence mental capacity. Thus Professor Terman in
1913 wrote that “ the effect of malnutrition on mental
development is probably very great.”

It appears, however, that the general public to-day,

201

like the psychologists before they began investigations,
labours under a serious misapprehension, which may
dangerously mislead social reform. The facts, which are
now well attested, are as follows:

1. Physique and Intellect. There is a small positive
correlation of intelligence with height and weight.
(Terman, Genetic Studies of Genius; Kempf, Collins
and Paterson, Physique and Intellect.) Terman’s group
of 1,000 highly gifted children were in practically every
measurement larger and stronger on an average than
the thousand average children. There is also a tendency for the more intelligent to be relatively free from
constitutional physical defects and to have a lower
incidence of disease (Terman, op. cit., Paterson, op. cit.,
Spearman, Abilities of Man). The following are the
suggested reasons for this connection: (1) Mental
defect is sometimes associated with a general constitutional inferiority of which physical defects are another
expression. (2) Children of lower intelligence come, on
the whole, from parents of low intelligence and consequently are less hygienically and intelligently healtheducated. They may also be undernourished because
(a) the father, if very unintelligent, is unlikely to earn
much; (d) the mother, if unintelligent, is unlikely to
spend well. (3) In social life, through assortative mating and the inbreeding of social classes, there is a
tendency for the most diverse desirable qualities to come
together in one hereditary “‘ complex,” and for the lack
of them also to be associated (as in the ‘‘ social problem
group’), though they have no intrinsic biological (gene)
connection.

2. Adenoids, Tonsils and I.Q. Dullness has long been
popularly and medically associated with diseased
adenoids and tonsils. Rogers (Archives of Psychol.,
No. 50, 1922) studied 530 children. Those with adenoid or
tonsil trouble had the same average I.Q. as those without. A group of twenty-eight children operated on
showed, a year after the operation, a gain of I.Q. of
2°25 points, but this is not significant, for the group
which refused operation gained 3:28 points. Both are
chance gains. This result is confirmed by Terman,
Lowe, Hoefer and Hardy. Well-being, freedom from
mental fatigue, is increased, but not mental capacity.

3. Other Diseases and Glandular Dysfunctions. No
disease not attacking the central nervous system is
known to diminish I.Q. Spinal meningitis, epidemic
encephalitis and arteriosclerosis may produce a fall
of I.Q., but not invariably.

The treatment of thyroid, pituitary and pluriglandular defects has failed to produce evidence of any
significant change of I.Q. (Paterson, op. cit., p. 191),
except in cretins, and even there the mental improvement is far less spectacular than the physical.

4. Malnuiniion. It is unfortunate that medical
diagnosis of malnutrition depends largely on comparison of height and weight with standard values; for in
a mixed racial population (such as the British) if the
physically smaller racial element happened to be the
more intelligent, any effect of malnutrition might be
quite obscured.

A group of children suffering from severe malnutrition
of two or three years’ standing was first studied by
Blanton in Germany (Mental Hygiene, 1919, 378) in
1919, who was surprised to find that “ children with
parents of average intelligence very rarely become
feeble-minded through malnutrition even of an extreme
degree.” Later studies have dealt with malnutrition
rather than starvation, but their methods have been
more exact. Hunt, Johnson and Lincoln, Dowd,
Nicholls, Stalnaker and Stoke, have each concluded as
202

a result of statistically controlled intelligence surveys
that ‘“‘ undernourished children, whatever their other
handicaps, are no whit inferior mentally to wellnourished children of the same race and social status.”
In muscular strength, freedom from fatigue, happiness
and activity in school, the well nourished are, of course,
decidedly favoured. Dowd, for example, found that
the fifty-five studied undernourished children improved
when properly fed in all respects but 1.Q.

Such direct evidence really needs no check, but it is
interesting to notice that indirect evidence of a kind is
available through a study of birth order I.Q.; for in
families on the malnutrition level, since wages do not
increase with parental age, the later children would
suffer more from malnutrition. Although birth position
has many effects on character it has none on I.Q., as
several adequate researches have shown, providing, of
course, that only families of the same size are included
in the calculation.

One must conclude that Nature has designed so many
safeguards around the vital central nervous system that
few diseases or unfavourable physical conditions can
attack it. This view is in accordance with the physiological studies of Scammon (Paterson, op. cit., p. 175),
that even in gross malnutrition which retards physical
growth the nervous system continues to grow, apparently at the expense of the bodily tissues themselves.

Contrary to our supposition intelligence is affected,
if at all, by mental rather than physical influences.
Society may lavish attention on physical improvement
and training for the perfectly good object of improving
energy and well-being, but not under the delusion that
the mentality of the race is improved thereby.

For further investigation of these questions the
reader is referred to Schwesinger (op. cit.) for a complete
summary of evidence regarding mental environment,
and to Paterson for a similar summary with respect to
physical factors and intelligence.

The upshot of our investigation is that mental
capacity may be increased about 3 to 7 points by some
mental environments. I think fuller psychological
investigation will show that if, by forcing and overstrain, the individual is adjusted constantly to working
at the upper limit of his innate mental capacity, it will
be at the cost of other aspects of personality, notably,
perhaps, at the cost of producing a schizoid mentality
and reducing “‘ fluency of association.’”” When those
who hope to do all by environment have stretched the
1.Q. of all individuals to the limit of, say, three points,
they have still to face the fall of inherited I.Q. in each
generation and the possibility that another nation may
have raised its average thirty points by one generation’s
breeding.

APPENDIX II

TESTING OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN, AND EVIDENCE
OF OTHER RESEARCHES ON INHERITANCE OF
INTELLIGENCE

The adults and children in these families were tested
with scales O, I, II and III of my intelligence tests, the
scale being chosen to fit the age of the child or the
approximate mental age of the adult. This use of
adapted tests has the advantage that more accurate
measurements were made than if one coarsely graded
scale were used to cover the whole range. On the other
hand, error may be introduced into the interpretation
of the measurements if the standardization of the
various scales is not equally sound. However, even
should the standardization figures for these scales alter

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

slightly as more extensive standardization results come
in, the data will still be of value and can be reinterpreted
more accurately at a later date.

The correlations and other measures of agreement of
parents and children may not be as high from this
sample as from a purely chance sample; for there is
undue bunching at the upper levels of intelligence, due
to the difficulty we experienced in getting any but professional and ex-university parents to submit to an
intelligence test. Indeed, we quickly realized why this
obviously necessary measurement of parents and children had never been carried out in this country before.
Most of these parents were tested with Scale III. When
we came to the duller parents, less literate people and
dull children, Scale I was always used, and we are
confident that in no instance was an adult tested with
a test demanding greater vocabulary than he possessed.

I have shown elsewhere (Brit. Jnl. Psychol., 1934)
reason to believe that intelligence, or at any rate success
in intelligence tests, declines in most people after about
the age of 35. There are some striking exceptions to this,
ae the nature and causation of the effect are not at all
clear.

From preliminary observations I should be tempted
to generalize that the greater the original intelligence
the smaller the age decline and that the larger individual
differences are connected with differences in rate of
general physical ageing. Since other investigations,
however, show the same trend, I have decided to correct
the parental scores by some age allowance, even though
such allowance must as yet be approximate. The need
for such an allowance in the present results is shown by
the decidedly higher score of the children in every
group.

My own previous results (loc. cit.), which though
scanty are the only ones available as yet in this country,
indicate the following fall of 1.Q. relative to the
adolescent level. The results are from one occupation
only, clerks:

35 years 45 years 55 years
3 16

| 3?
I can only believe that the fall is excessive and I have
sought a second standard by averaging in three age
groups the parents studied in the present research :

65 years
68

Parents’ age in years 40 55 65
Regression on children’s
1.Q.’s 8-5 pts. 12°5 pts. 14°5 pts.

From a consideration of these and the more extensive
American results I have adopted the following approximate rate of age correction :

Parents’ age in

years ... above 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
I.Q. correction, in

points ... ..nil 2 4 6 8 II 14 17 20 24

This has been applied to the raw I.Q. results of the
parents with the results shown in the second column.

Other researches concerning Inheritance of I.Q.
Evidence regarding the innateness of I.Q. is given in
Appendix I, above. It was thought best to set out the
evidence on inheritance as a separate matter, though
there is in some points an overlap. Schwesinger summarizes sixteen investigations of parent, child, grandparent and cousin intelligence relationship. Of these
only three give the correlation of the mid-parent and
the child or mid-child, and one of them is not based on a
direct intelligence test. We are left with Jones’s inquiry
(Nature and Nurture, etc.), using the Stanford-Binet
IS NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE DECLINING?

test and finding a correlation of mid-parent and midchild of 0:693-++0°035 (105 cases) and Outhit (51 cases)
finding 0-77 to 0°80 (Arch. Psychol. No. 149). It is
unfortunate that even in these investigations one is
dependent on a Stanford-Binet test result—limited in
adult range and tainted with educational effects—whilst
one inquiry has only 51 cases. For one parent with one
child the correlation is, of course, lower, averaging
about 0-49.

The three adequate investigations making direct
measures of parents and children, two undertaken in
America and our own in this country (101 cases), thus
agree in indicating a correlation of about 0-7-—0:8
between mid-parents and mid-children.

The supplementary investigation that is still required—a comparison of parents and children when
they are not brought up together—has never been made
directly ; though our own results include several
instances of children reared apart, instances which do
not differ in amount of parent resemblance from the
other cases.

Dr. Lawrence, however, has brought substantial
indirect evidence of a convincing nature (see Appendix
I). It is well known (see above) that the average intelli
203

gence of parents and of children in different social and
occupational groups differs significantly. Lawrence
correlated social status of parents with intelligence of
children, (2) when the children were in their own homes,
(0) among children in an orphan institution. In both
cases the correlation was 0:24. Elsewhere she shows
that the actual differences are not quite so great in the
institutional children, but on hereditary grounds we
should scarcely expect it to be, for, on an average, the
professional man whose child has to go into an institution may not be quite so successful or intelligent as his
fellows. From this effect we should not expect the
results to scatter quite so much as for typical members
of these same social or occupational groups.

The upshot of these investigations is evidently that
whatever the environment, we can predict reasonably
well, from the intelligence of the mid-parent, the intelligence of the mid-child, and that the average intelligence
of the group of children, even a very small group, closely
approaches that of their parental group.

ErratUM.—A slight arithmetical error, detected by
the writer too late to permit correction of the blocks,
repeats itself in diagrams 1 to 4. It is quite negligible
and does not affect any of the conclusions.

PUBLICATIONS OF THE
ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
52 UPPER BEDFORD PLACE, W.C.1

 

Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute

IN HALF-YEARLY PARTS

FIFTEEN SHILLINGS EACH

Vol. LXVI. 1 contains among other matter the following :

CONCERNING HUMAN PROGRESS—PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS

H. S. HARRISON, D.Sc.

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SWAT AND

HUNZA VALLEYS, based on Records collected by Sir Aurel Stein

CRANIOLOGY OF IRELAND

G. M. MORANT, D.Sc.
G. M. MORANT, D.Sc.

COEFFICIENT OF RACIAL LIKENESS AND THE FUTURE OF CRANIOMETRY R.A. FISHER
A REPORT OF THE ANTHROPOMETRIC SURVEY OF THE ISLE OF MAN

ELWYN DAVIES and H. J. FLEURE

 

Man

A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE. Annual Subscription,

£1; monthly numbers, 2s. net.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 3.
