FAMILY ALLOWANCES

In the Contemporary Economic Situation

By R. A. FISHER, Sc.D., F.RS.

(An Address to the Eugenics Society, April 12th, 1932.)

HERE is apparent at the present

time a rather remarkable convergence

of interests, both from the economic
and from the biological viewpoints, on the
sociological possibilities, as well as the immediate practical consequences, of systems
of national economy which make direct,
instead of indirect, provision for the support
of the rising generation. My object is to set
forth the reasons which have influenced the
Eugenics Society in adopting a positive and
explicitly stated policy on this question :
and I should like to begin by emphasizing
some of the current circumstances which
seem to render possible a very substantial
advance in positive eugenics in the comparatively near future.

(a) The first factor which I should, I
think, mention is the more active and efhcient organization of the Eugenics Society,
made possible, partly, by its increased
resources, but more especially by the keenness and enterprise of our General Secretary, Dr. Blacker.

(b) The second point one dare scarcely
mention to a generation so disillusioned of
politics as is our own. But it is a fact, and
I think an important fact, that we have at
the moment and for the next few years, a
Government with power and authority to act
on its convictions, pledged to diagnose and
remedy, at their source, the causes of
national weakness.

We may remember, too, that the Government is pledged as a first charge upon
returning prosperity to restore to a large

class of salaried servants, in the teaching

and other professions, the deductions or cuts
by which their salaries have been reduced.
The restoration of these cuts will form an
exceptionally fine opportunity for pressing
the just claims of parents upon the national
resources.

87

(c) Thirdly I would stress the general intellectual and moral atmosphere, the mood
of the times with respect to national wellbeing. The easy optimism which assumes
that we can enjoy prosperity without earning it, both by forethought and effort, is
practically extinct; and it has not yet been
replaced, in the body of the people, by a
superstitious and fatalistic pessimism. I
believe we could sum up the mood of the
present generation in two propositions :

(i) that all is not well, and
(ii) that the future is in our own hands.

(d) Turning from the moral attitude of
our times to the scientific position, with
especial reference to the eugenic problem,
we have equal grounds for affirming that the
time is ripe for action. There exists a very
general agreement as to the magnitude and
proportions of the racial danger with which
we are threatened; a doubtless imperfect,
but rational and coherent, theory of the
causes at work, which is certainly in harmony with the major facts known; and lastly
a remedial principle, simple in itself but
adaptable to every variety of economic organization, which, though acting slowly, could
certainly in time remove, and even reverse,
the major causes of racial deterioration.

In addressing this Society it may be worth
while to say a few preliminary words upon
the nature of the eugenic policy in its practical application. In dealing with detail we
are sometimes liable to forget the magnitude
of our enterprise. Our aim is no less, and
cannot be less, than to improve the hereditary gifts of the whole of our population.
We are sometimes told that we should start
upon this task by concentrating .our attention upon rare and extreme defects, such as
88

lunacy and feebleness of mind, and that
these will provide the thin end of the wedge
in the education of public opinion towards
a more general and comprehensive eugenic
policy. .

Now it is true and important that these
extreme cases do provide a good objectlesson on the importance of inheritance for
human well-being, and on our power by concerted national action to diminish in future
generations the grievous personal distress
which they occasion. But in another way

they provide a very bad example of eugenic

action. The feeble-in-mind, paupers, criminals, and lunatics already cause endless
trouble and expense, and the payment of
numerous officials to investigate, care for,
and control them. ‘The proposal that this
care and control should be directed, inter
alia, to eugenic ends does not imply any
serious increase either in officialism or in the
restriction of individual liberty. Yet it is
very widely believed that the exercise of
eugenic influence over the great body of the
population does necessarily imply individual
investigation and official control applied to
the whole population. I have heard a very
highly placed and distinguished scientific
man explain to his audience that the eugenic
programme involves, first, a minute genetic
analysis of the human race, to discover
what genotypes are available, next, a public
and officially accepted agreement as to which
of these types is the most desirable, and
finally, the intensive crossing and inbreeding of selected individuals in order to build
up the chosen genotype. After which, I suppose I should add, all who are not the products of the State stud will be quietly eliminated. The speaker was not attacking
eugenics, but rather went out of his way to
say how important he thought it was.

We can all see, in a particular instance,
how harmful and misleading this impression
is, but in a lesser degree it is certainly very
widespread and is responsible for the widely
held opinion that eugenics is a fantastic and
impracticable scheme appropriate to some
of Mr. H. G. Wells’s visions of the future,
but having no relation to the needs and
possibilities of our own time.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

The extreme incompetence of any system
of eugenics based upon personal interference
with the main body of the population may
be seen by comparing our eugenic aims with
the economic aims of a national character
which have been recently much under discussion. Ifa project were under consideration for increasing the consumption of
British dairy products in place of the materials imported from foreign countries, we
should not expect to be told that this policy
involved the appointment of a new army of
inspectors employed by the State to raid the
larders of individual citizens and to determine, by methods of chemical analysis, not
yet discovered, whether their butter and
cheese were or were notimported. Weshould
not expect to be told that we should need to
remove these comestibles from their tables
and to replace them at public expense by
articles of British manufacture; yet this is
not an extreme equivalent of the extravagant
interference with private lives which seems
to be expected of eugenics; and it is worth
giving a moment’s attention to the principles
of State action by which the economic reform
can be brought about more easily, than, it is
supposed, can the eugenic reform.

I submit that the difference in principle is
a very simple one. We take it for granted
that economic action by the State shall be
based upon a general knowledge of the structure and laws of working of our economic
system ; that it is known that the imported
butter and cheese must be unloaded at certain ports ; that an import tax levied at these
ports must either be paid by the foreign producer, to the benefit of the Treasury, or
must be added to the price which must be
asked for his goods in this country; that
many of those who now consume these goods
in preference to home productions would be
unwilling to do so at the enhanced price;
that many foreign producers, who now find
here a satisfactory market for their output,
would no longer do so if their receipts were
diminished; that the home producers, if
assured of support by the national policy,
would find the capital and employ the labour
needed to increase their production. With
this kind of knowledge of the workings of
FAMILY ALLOWANCES

the economic system it is possible to regulate its workings to the national advantage,
as circumstances mays from time to time,
require.

THE SOCIETY’S POLICY

Now students of eugenics, during the last
three-quarters of a century, have developed
a broadly comparable body of knowledge of
the biological system by which, from generation to generation, the nation reproduces
itself. And this knowledge points to certain
fundamental, but not very revolutionary,
reforms, which would be needed to set the
system working in a eugenic direction. The
principle is summed up in the words of the
Society’s Outline of a Practical Eugenic
Policy, adopted by the Council some years
ago, but which has not been, perhaps, made
sufficiently prominent in the Society’s propaganda.

The great economic advantages enjoyed
by children from small families is the most
serious obstacle to a successful appeal to
those well endowed by nature to make an
adequate contribution towards the reproduction of the next generation. In addition,
the social promotion, within groups of equal
civic worth, of the children from the smallest families, cannot but tend to diminish
the innate fertility of the more skilled occupations. For both reasons the economic motive for childlessness should by all possible
means be diminished, in all classes doing
skilled work. The most potent means of
effecting this end is a scientifically designed
system of family allowances. The aim of
such a system should be to equalize the
standard of living between parents and nonparents doing equivalent work, within all
grades affected, in such a way that the
amounts recovered per child by each class
of earner shall be proportional to the earnings. ‘The Society is strongly opposed to
redistribution by means of taxation, or to
the allowances being made a charge on the
State, and favours the establishment of
equalization pools among the employing
bodies of the salaried professions and skilled
occupations.

The scientific basis and the economic application of this item of policy are what I wish
to discuss.

89

What are the broad and unquestioned
facts of the biological situation, with which
we are concerned? ‘The birth rate of the
country as a whole has, as is now well
known, fallen to a level much below that
needed to maintain a stationary population.
Approximately, we may say that the rate
at which children are now being born is
rather less than four-fifths of what would be
required to maintain our numbers. If we
pay attention not to the whole population,
but to a portion of it, in which the Eugenics
Society has always been especially interested, that portion which is popularly
called the upper and middle classes, using
the term in an extensive sense, so as to include not merely the learned professions, the
doctors, clergymen, lawyers, and university
teachers, but the whole range of every grade
of teachers and clerks, taking, like the
Census authorities, all occupations socially
equal to, or superior to, that of a railway
booking clerk, we know that the rate of production of children is only about half that of
the general population, or, say, 40 per cent.
of the numbers needed to replace those engaged in these occupations.

In order to avoid over-statement let us
suppose that sufficient children are produced to replace half the members of these
classes, then, biologically speaking, half of
any eugenic value which these classes may
possess is being destroyed in every twentyfive or thirty years. We lost a million men
in the five years of the War, and certainly
the class of which I am speaking—about 10
to 15 per cent. of the population, bore more
than an equal share of this loss; but the
excess of deaths in the War years is already
far less than the deficiency of births in the
years of peace that have followed. Perhaps
a better parallel is the policy of massacre of
the intelligentsia which has been advocated,
or practised, from time to time, in Soviet
Russia. If the Russian intelligentsia have
a birth rate fit only to maintain their numbers they could afford the massacre of onetenth of their men, women, and children
every five years, and still decrease no faster
than does the intelligentsia in this country.
gO

WHO ARE THE MIDDLE CLASS?

The next point about this class is that
they are the product of an intense selective
process. “Those of us who have made any
study of middle-class genealogies—I mean
a biological study, which counts every ancestor of equal importance, and attempts to
trace the whole of their descendants—will
know that a large proportion are in the first
generation the children of persons in very
humble circumstances, who have been promoted by their own talents, and by the
facilities afforded by our State educational
system; but that perhaps the larger number of the ramifying lines of inheritance
will lead back to shopkeepers or workshop
owners, who by their enterprise, foresight,
and thrift rose to a certain level of affluence
at some time in the eighteenth or mid-nineteenth centuries. The intensity of the selective process of which the English middle
class is the product, is excellently brought
out by the seamy side which all these genealogies contain. I believe a genealogy would
be exceptional if it did not contain a sprinkling of individuals of great apparent promise, who, through drink or debauchery,
have gone to the bad and disappeared from
the cognizance of their family, as well as
other lines which have never even shown
signs that they might do credit to their
name.

In consequence of this selective process
this class has necessarily become differentiated in certain hereditary respects from
the general body of the population from
which it is continually recruited. In the
case of intelligence this difference is readily
demonstrable by applying the psychological
tests to the children of different occupational
groups. But we should be altogether mistaken if we took it that the only important
difference lay in intelligence.

There must be at least a dozen other
psychological characters of importance
governing self-control, ambition, perseverance, judgment of character, «esthetic taste,
foresight, grasp of moral principle, which
have been at least as influential as intelligence in guiding the process of social promotion during the last two centuries, of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which our class is the product. It is true
that in the last two generations the great
agency of universal education has played a
specially important part in promoting the
children of the poor into the clerical and
teaching professions; but even scholastic
promotion is not wholly a matter of intelligence. Ambition, perseverance, and the
driving force of self-respect are extremely
important, even in purely scholastic success, and continue to act throughout life in
determining the status of the children. In
a word, we have reason to think that the
section of the nation under consideration is
characterized, in a higher degree than the
remainder, by all the qualities which make
for successful citizenship, and if the destiny
of a nation depends, as I believe, on the
extent to which its citizens combine, for
example, enterprise with prudence, or
character with intellect, the fate of this class
is of the deepest concern for the future of
our nation.

WHY ALSO STERILE ?

But the characters of good citizens are
not the only ones for which it has been
selected. Malthus, studying the peasantries
of France and England in the eighteenth
century, was led to point out that when the
population required more food than the land
would easily yield, a smaller population
would be better off than a larger one. The
limitations of Malthus’s premises have been
often forgotten, and throughout the nineteenth century, when the population was
rising rapidly, and the standard of living
rising as never before, it was still often
taken for granted that the increased population hindered rather than helped the
increase in material well-being. A less
questionable truth, however, was soon discovered by the later followers of Malthus,
namely that whether or not a larger population was of economic advantage to the nation,
it was certainly of economic advantage
to the individual to divest himself of the
burden of parenthood. Human childhood is
long; the expense of food, clothing, and
care has to go on for some twenty years
before the individual begins to produce
FAMILY ALLOWANCES

wealth, and though during his working
life he produces on the average more wealth
than he consumes in the whole of it (else
national wealth would not increase, as it has
done) yet his parents, as mortal individuals,
see chiefly the debit side of the account.

The motives to which the Neo-Malthusians appealed were not wholly selfish; a
prominent and important part of the argument was not only that, as potential parents,
we are better off the more thoroughly we
leave to others the trouble and expense of
actual parenthood, but that the advantage is
in a most marked degree shared by our
children, that members of small families
enjoy many advantages over members of
large families, supposing these to be the
children of parents of equal affluence performing, in other respects, equivalent services to the society to which they belong.
They can be better fed and cared for in
infancy, better educated and dressed in
adolescence, have a better financial backing
in entering business or the professions, and
inherit a larger share of the family property. At every economic level some one or
more of these advantages is substantial, so
that, from top to bottom of the social scale,
members of small families enjoy a better
‘start in life’ and thus obtain a more
rapid social promotion than members of
large families possessing the same intrinsic
gifts and born to parents of equivalent social
status.

To the list of the qualities which make

for social promotion, through contributing

to successful citizenship, we must add a
further list of those which do so through
being antagonistic to reproduction. Whatever qualities make for caution and postponement in entering the married state, and
so increase the proportion of celibates, and
raise the average age at marriage, and whatever mental and temperamental qualities
have favoured the limitation of offspring by
married couples, have been promoted into
the upper and middle classes with the same
regularity as the mental and moral qualities
upon which their social utility depends. We
have thus the same reason to anticipate in
the more affluent class of the population a

gl

general debility in that group of qualities
which make for effective reproduction as we
have for anticipating a general ability in the
conduct of the other affairs of life; and just
as one conclusion may be verified by the
intelligence tests, so the other may be verified by a striking contrast in the rates of
reproduction.

How much a selection of this type is
capable of achieving may be illustrated by
an extreme instance, drawn from a former
civilization. In the first two centuries of the
Roman Empire the throne was occupied in
succession by members of an extremely
wealthy group of senatorial families, who
drew their names, for the most part, from
ancient patrician clans, but much of their
wealth and blood from the plebeian or even
provincial families with which they had
inter-married. On the succession to the
throne during this pericd Gibbon remarks :

There had been no example of three
successive generations on the throne; only
three instances of sons who succeeded their
fathers. The marriages of the Cesars (notwithstanding the permission, and the frequent practice, of divorces) were generally
unfruitful.

One of the most remarkable characteristics
of Natural Selection is that we constantly
find the same end achieved through its
agency by a surprising diversity of means,
according to the circumstances in which the
selection is applied. A temperamental peculiarity which no doubt contributed to the
infertility of this remarkable group of men
is adumbrated in another of Guibbon’s
inimitable footnotes: ‘‘ Yet we may
remark,’’ he writes, ‘‘ that of the first
fifteen emperors, Claudius was the only one
whose taste in love was entirely correct.’’

TWO KINDS OF OPPONENTS

Eugenics, like any other rational policy,
is liable to find itself opposed by objections
flowing from purely temperamental causes.
If we propose sterilization for that small
group of cases to which that remedy is
applicable or if we advocate the extension of contraceptive advice by public
authority to poor women who are in92

capable, financially or constitutionally,
of discharging the important responsibilities of parenthood, we are met by the
opposition of those who claim that contraception is, in all cases, a sin, and that
parenthood is a natural right, irrespective
of the responsibilities it entails. These are
the temperamental objections to negative
eugenics. To positive eugenics an equally
obdurate temperamental objection is noticeable. It is inevitable, in the conditions of
social promotion which I have outlined, that
many should owe their social position and
present affluence, less to the natural abilities, than to the constitutional aversion, of
their forbears, to normal reproduction.
These will naturally feel resentment at the
proposal that the rate of reproduction
among the well-to-do classes must at least
be doubled, and will endeavour to represent
that the disastrous eugenic situation with
which we are faced is due more to the fertility of the poor than to the infertility of
the well-to-do. It is evident, however, that,
as the fertility of the more affluent classes is
already very far below that needed to maintain their own numbers, and is apparently
still falling, the trouble lies not in the
difference in fertility between different
classes, but in the absolute paucity of
children among the more prosperous. ‘The
complete cessation of childbirth in the
poorer half of the population, though it
would leave a most favourable differential
birth rate, would not take us a step nearer
to arresting the process by which the
eugenically valuable qualities of the nation
are being destroyed.

THE REMEDIAL PRINCIPLE

Although, therefore, I know many wellto-do women ready to tell me that in no circumstances could the birth rate of their
class be doubled, I think we should hesitate
to accept this conclusion until we have tried
the experiment under an economic system
more favourable than the present. At
present every potential parent has the
strongest economic motive for having few or
no children, and it is, I still think, an open
question whether, if this motive were en
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tirely removed, the other motives for childlessness, freedom from pain, and worries,
and cares, would prove sufficiently strong to
prevent this class from maintaining their
numbers.

Eugenically we have no objection to the
qualities which make for ability and social
competence segregating themselves into those
classes of society where this ability has the
greatest scope for its exercise ; eugenically,
again, we can have no objection to defects
of the reproductive instincts, like other
defects of the mental or bodily organization,
weeding themselves out by Natural Selection as fast as they are supplied by mutations. The point to which we have traced
the source of the evil lies in the social promotion of the factors favouring infertility
which leads to their destroying, not themselves only, but every kind of admirable
quality which, like them, is liable to lead
to social promotion. The economic motive
for childlessness is therefore to be combated
not only for its direct effect upon classes
whom, apart from yielding to this motive,
we should judge to be eugenically desirable,
but for its indirect effect in weighting the
scales against the survival of every sort of
quality which meets with social approbation.

THE ECONOMIC CASE |

We are led, therefore, on purely eugenic
grounds, to the same conclusion at which
advocates of family allowances have arrived
from purely economic considerations. But,
though a complete system of family allowances, which should entirely neutralize the
economic motive for childlessness, is the
logical aim of both groups, yet, since our
motives are different, we shall lay very
different emphasis upon the different steps
by which this aim might be achieved.

Those whose chief aim is expressed in
Sir William Beveridge’s opinion that
family allowances constitute the greatest
step now in our power towards the abolition
of poverty, might be content, if a Socialist
Government were in power, to advocate a
flat rate allowance of 5s. per week, paid
through the Post Office to employed and unFAMILY ALLOWANCES

employed alike; a proposal which could be
received with but little enthusiasm on
eugenic grounds. Yet such a proposal
would be inadequate, even on its own premisses. Poverty is a relative term, and the
evils which we designate by that name exist

in the families of curates and school-—

teachers, as well as in those of docklabourers, and, indeed, wherever a family
is hard put to it to maintain the standards
of its class; wherever, in fact, equal social
services are rewarded with an unequal standard of living. It is only fair to say, in
addition, that Sir William has established
among the professors and lecturers at the
London School of Economics the first
English system of family allowances for
university teachers.

Others, again, are more influenced by the
argument which was influential with the
French industrialists after the War, when
they inaugurated the French system, that
industry cannot afford to give a decent standard of living to the operatives who have
children, so long as it is saddled with the
necessity of paying to those who are childless wages 20 or 30 per cent. above what
would give them the same standard. They,
therefore, in the teeth of the opposition of
the labour unions, refrained from raising
the general wage-rates, and instead instituted family allowances out of the wages
fund. The temptation to the employer to
give employment preferentially to the
childless was removed by the simple expedient of pooling the cost of the allowances
among all the employers of the industry,
in proportion to their total wage-bill. The
consequences to French industry are well
known. Whereas in England the excessive
post-war wage rates, by which industry has
been crippled, have been whittled gradually
down, under the pressure of chronic wunemployment and successive industrial disputes, French industry has made almost
uninterrupted progress, and has absorbed
a continuous stream of Italian and German
immigrants.

The bearing of the family allowance
system on the industrial wage question has
been put very forcibly by Miss Rathbone

93

in her book The Disinherited Family. In
industrial disputes it is customary for the
trade union representatives to demand a
wage which will support in decency a man,
a wife, and three children. On a flat-rate
system it is not easy to see that they could
demand less, yet, owing to the inequality
between actual families at any one time,
Miss Rathbone points out that if this
demand were met in industrial England, the
wage-bill would be saddled with the support
of no less than 19,000,000 non-existent children; while at the same time 50 per cent.
of the real children, belonging to families
of more than three, would be unprovided
for. Instances of this kind could easily be
multiplied. It is sufficient for our purpose
that a wage including family allowances,
sufficient to meet the entire cost of children,
enables an equal standard of living to be
given for equal work, and cuts out the
heavy bonus for childlessness which is the
outstanding feature of our present system.

Now, it is evident that exactly the same
principle applies, whether the recipients are
coalminers or schoolteachers or civil .servants or clergymen. If the funds available
for educational salaries are limited, as they
certainly are, they can be more efficiently
applied, on the principle of equal standard
of living for equal work, than on the crude
system of equal pay for equal work, without regard to family responsibilities. If
less rewards are given for the negative service of not having children, more funds are
available for rewarding work of exceptional
professional merit. Incidentally it may be
mentioned that if the ro per cent. cut in
the schoolteachers’ salaries were returned
entirely in the form of family allowances, it
would suffice to give an allowance of 12 per
cent. of the childless man’s salary to every
dependent child supported by the profession, and, without the figures before me,
I should guess that it would suffice also to
restore the ro per cent. to unmarried women
teachers.

The example of the _ schoolteachers
serves well to illustrate some of the diffculties which arise in discussing the question of Family Allowances, difficulties due
94

to approaching the question with a vague
feeling of benevolence, but without any
clear grasp of the economic principle involved. From the eugenic standpoint it is
obvious that the allowances payable in each
grade should be proportional to the basic
salary in that grade. For, what we are concerned with is the neutralization of the economic motive to childlessness, and _ this
motive can only be neutralized by making
the allowances equivalent to the actual cost,
in expenditure and savings, incurred, on
the average, on behalf of each child in the
group. ‘This cost is not far from 12 per
cent for all incomes at least up to £2,000 a
year. On the birth of a child the wealthier
man at, say, £800 a year, would therefore
receive a larger accession to his income than
the poorer man at £300 a year, and this
may be represented as very unfair. It may
even be said that poor childless men, at the
lower grade, are paying by lower salary,
for the large family of their headmaster.
This, of course, would not be true, in fact
really the reverse of the truth; for at the
present time, and it is to be feared, for
some time to come, the more highly paid
support, if anything, a smaller proportion of
children than the less highly paid in the
same occupation. The allowances paid
within the higher grade will, in fact, be no
more, but rather less, than the deductions
incurred by that grade will amount to.
However, if ill-feeling arose on this subject
it would not be a difficult matter, from the
point of view of accountancy, to keep
separate funds for different salary levels.

NOT A CHARITY

The other reason why proportional allowances are thought of as unfair is because
many people approach the whole question as
though it were a kind of charitable enterprise. Charity, I mean, not in the sense of
brotherly love, but in the sense of the noneconomic relief of poverty. Obviously, such
a principle cannot be introduced into an
economic reform without destructive contradictions, for if our motive is purely
charitable, every change must be made at
the expense of the richer for the benefit of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the poorer man, and all idea of differential
payment in accordance with the value of
services performed must be abandoned. It
may be that headmasters are paid more
highly than they deserve in comparison
with assistant masters, or the reverse may
be the case. That is purely an internal
matter for the education authorities to
determine; but, whatever differential rates
of pay they fix upon, ipso facto, they fix
upon proportionate differential expenditure
or savings on behalf of children. The allowances should be regarded not as a charity,
but as an integral right attaching to the
salary. It is, of course, quite possible that
in other services, though not, I fancy, in
the teaching profession, increments of pay.
with length of service should be regarded
not wholly as due to increased efficiency,
but partly as a means of allowing for a
normal increase of family responsibilities.
In the light of experience with direct family
allowances, the increment scales in such
cases would, in time, presumably be graded
down.

Another argument has a more eugenic
appearance. ‘‘ There is Brown,’’ it will be
said, ‘‘ earning twice as much as Smith, but
he is tuberculous and going deaf, whereas
Smith is a splendid specimen. You’re not
going to tell me that Brown’s children are
worth twice as much as Smith’s!’”’ Naturally, I am not going to tell my assailant
anything of the kind. Individual diagnosis
is fortunately no part of our proposals. A
family allowance system provides no economic motive for having children, or for
refraining from having them. It merely
abolishes the economic bonus which at present we offer to both Smith and Brown for
every child they refrain from having. This
will allow them, more freely than at present, to regulate their reproduction as they
think best in the interests both of the
family and of the nation. The fact that one
man is earning twice as much as another
seems to me no good reason for bribing him
twice as much to refrain from parentage.
Prima facie, it is a ground for thinking
that his services to the community are
worth more, but it is not on that ground,
FAMILY ALLOWANCES | 95

but on the actual amount that his children
will cost him, that the family allowances
should be reckoned.

It will be seen that the economic methods
of establishing Family Allowances are very
various. According to your political colour
you can arrange the scheme to cost the
Treasury a £100,000,000 a year, or, by a
re-allocation of wage and salary payments to
cost it not a penny. You can have a scheme
in which the organizing officials cost more
than the children, and as in the proposal
T once encountered that inspectors should be
appointed to see that the allowances were
really spent for the children’s benefit, or,
if we indulged in equally futile expenditure,
on eugenic diagnosis. We may have a
scheme which restricts itself severely to its
economic aim of equalizing the standard of
living of parent and non-parent doing the
same work; or we may, like the French
funds, include social services, maternity

benefit, clinics, playgrounds, et hoc genus
omne.

One might even say that we have a
Family Allowance system already in this
country. The allowances are paid only to
children of the unemployed, and to those in
receipt of poor relief. A consequence is that
the men with sufficiently large families are
better off when unemployed than in employment. The alternative of letting a number
of poor children starve will not, I think, be
readily faced by this generation. What we
need, however, is not a merely emotional
rejection of such a policy in particular cases,
but a broader recognition of the fact that
the nation only continues to exist by reproduction; and that, for this reason, the act
and cares of parenthood, if properly exercised, constitute a social service, which can
be better provided for directly than by the
indirect methods employed in the past.

6 pie OO”

Le

World.

(ONTO

The sale of the Trilogy has already exceeded 500,000
copies, and it has been translated into nine languages.

* A layman can only obtain these volumes on the written recommendation of a doctor.

WILLIAM HEINEMANN (MEDICAL BOOKS) LTD.
99 Great Russell Street, London, W.C.1.

SUTIN UU

THE TRILOGY

*IDEAL MARRIAGE, 255s. net.

SEX HOSTILITY IN MARRIAGE, 17s. 6d. net.

*FERTILITY AND STERILITY IN MARRIAGE, 25s. net.
By Dr. Th. H. van de Velde

“The Trilogy deals with an aspect of normal life that is of supreme importance
to nearly every man and woman, and about which instructed opinion
has hitherto been little accessible.” —Bristol Medico-Chirurgical Journal.

“We feel that in this Trilogy we have a series of treatises unsurpassed for

seriousness of treatment, soundness of judgment, and withal a rare comprehensiveness not to be obtained outside the pages of these erudite volumes.” —Medical

HI TL

STUIUIMUMIIIIIIILUTAMILULUNURULNULSIUAUUNUUVULUUUT UAT

Vol. XXIV, No. 2.

Eugenics Review,
