THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL’

By RaymMonp PEARL.

During the past fifteen years more extensive and penetrating
investigations have been carried out regarding the effect upon the
descendants in the kinship nexus, of the use of alcohol by the
ascendants, than in the entire prior history of the subject. These
investigations have been in the main experimental, though a
few extremely important ones have been statistical. It is the
thorough application of the experimental method to the problem
however, which has markedly, and it appears securely, advanced our
knowledge in this field. To get really critical, accurate and extensive
-statistics about any phase of the alcohol question from human
beings is an extremely difficult task, in my experience.? It can only
be done, I think, by enlisting the services of highly trained field
workers, who by visiting families, are able finally to establish such
relations of friendliness, or even intimacy, as make possible frank
and true statements about such a delicate question (in America, at
least) as alcoholic habits. This is an expensive process, in time and
money.

In a laboratory experiment, on the other hand, not only are
there no social or ethical elements to embarrass the research, but
there is the opportunity of virtually complete control of the whole
life of the individual. It is possible in this way to get a kind of
evidence on the problem which can be had in no other way.

In view of the progress which has been made it seems desirable
at this time to make a brief review of the whole matter. An especial
reason for such a review just now is that during the past two or three
years there has come about a clear agreement between certain
extensive pieces of research on the subject which were formerly
thought by many to be in fundamental contradiction. In _ this
review I shall not attempt, for reasons of space, to list all the papers
on the subject. I shall discuss and refer only to the more important.
But from these any one can easily pick up the bibliographical
‘citations of practically all that has appeared.

The present era of the critical investigation of the problem of the
racial effect of alcohol may be properly said to begin, I think, with

 

1 Papers from the Department of Biometry and Vital Statistics, School of
Hygiene and Public Health, Johns Hopkins University. No. 96.

2Cf. Pearl, R. ‘‘Alcohol and Mortality,’’ in ‘*The Action of Alcohol on
Man.’’ by E.H. Starling. London(Longmans, Green &Co.) 1921.
10 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the work of Pearson.* The chief results of the first of these studies
which is the one directly and pertinently bearing upon our present
problem were :—

‘* ‘Phere is a higher death rate among the offspring of alcoholic than among
the offspring of sober parents. This appears to be more marked in the case
of the mother than in the case of the father, and since it is sensiblv higher in
the case of the mother who has drinking bouts than of the mother who habitually drinks, it would appear to be due very considerably to accidents and gross
carelessness and possibly in a minor «degree to a toxic effect on the offspring.

‘* Owing to the greater fertility of alcoholic parents, the nett family of
the sober is hardly larger than the nett family of the alcoholic.

‘* The mean weight and height of the children of alcoholic parents are
slightly greater than those of sober parents, but as the age of the former chiidren
is slightly greater, the correlations when corrected for age are slightly positive,
i.e., there is slightly greater height and weight in the children of the sober.

_ In the case of the father the correlations are not significant having regard to
their probable error ; in the case of the mother they may be just significant but
they are so slight as to have no importance.

‘* The general health of the children of alcoholic parents appears on the
whole slightly better than the health of the children of sober parents. There
are fewer delicate children and in a most marked way cases of tuberculosis
and epilepsy are less frequent than among the children of sober parents. The
source of this relation may be sought in two directions ; the physically strongest
in the community have probably the greatest capacity and taste for alcohol.
Further the higher death rate of the children of alcoholic parents probably
leaves the fitter to survive.

‘* Parental alcoholism is not the source of mental defect in offspring.

‘* The relationship, if any, between parental alcoholism and filial intelligence is so slight, that even its sign cannot be determined from the present
material.

‘* The normal visioned and normal refractioned offspring appear to be in
rather a preponderance in the families of the drinking parents, the parents
who have ‘‘bouts’’ give intermediate results, but there is no substantial
relationship between goodness of sight and parental alcoholism.

** The frequency of diseases of the eye and eyelids, which might well be
attributed to parental neglect, was found to have little, if any relation to
parental alcoholism.

‘*fo sum up then, no marked relation has been found between the intelligence, physique or disease of the offspring and parental alcoholism in any of
the categories investigated. On the whole the balance turns as often in favour
of the alcoholic as of the non-alcoholic parentage.’

It will be noted that there is here made for the first time the
definite suggestion that alcoholism in the parents may have a selective effect upon the offspring. The evidence for the conclusion is
statistical in character, and consists of two points : (a) greater death
rate among children of alcoholics, and (b) superiority of surviving
children. There was no suggestion made of selection of germ cells
in the gonads of drinking parents.

The most extensive experimental study of the problem is that

3 Iniderton, Ir. M. and Pearson K. A firs. study of the influence of parental
alcoholism on the physique and ability of the offspring. Fugenics Lab. Mem. X,
2nd Edit. pp. 1-46, 1910.

Pearson, K. and Elderton, E.M. A second study of the influcnce of parental
alcoholism on the physique and ability of the offspring. Jbid. XIII, pp. 1-85.
1910.

Barrington, A. and Pearson K. A preliminary study of extreme alcoholism
in adults. Ibid. XIV, pp. 1-55, 1910.
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 1!

of Stockard.* Earlier experimental work, such for example as that
of Laitinen, and a number of others, had been felt to be open to
rather obvious criticism, in one respect or another. Some had used
obviously faulty methods ; others had not kept, or at any rate
published, detailed records of just what was done or happened ;
others had failed to follow the matter far enough to justify any
conclusions. All told, experimental work preceding Stockard’s
attack on the problem produced little effect on the mind of the
scientific public.

Stockard’s work with alcohol began in 1909, and was not at
first genetic in character, but embryological. He instituted experiments on the modification of the development of fish embryos,
which have their embryonic life outside the body of the mother.
He has recently® (loc cit. (B) p. 255) interpreted the results of this.
experiment in the following words :—

** ‘When eggs were placed in water containing from 1 to 5 per cent. of
ethy! alcohol their rate of development was considerably inhibited and in the
stronger solutions almost stopped. On later returning these eggs to the usual
sea-water environment development was resumed at a normal or almost normal
rate. Nevertheless, the arrests which had been experienced caused in many
of the eggs the entire suppression of develorment, while in others the development of many organs and parts were greatly modified. The embryos developed
abnormally and were monstrous in form.

‘* An important fact to be noted is the great individual variation in the
way the eggs react to the solutions. When any lot of one hundred eggs are
examined after these treatments it will be found that a certain ferceit: ge of
them are developing perfectly normally, as if these had entirely resistca. the
effects of the treatment ; others are only slightly affected ; others exhibit more
marked modifications; and a number of the eggs have actually been killed.
It is thus seen that the effect of the treatment varies with the hardiness of the
egg. The poor eggs which would have, under usual conditions, develoyed
into weak embryos are eliminated by the treatment, those of low average
resistance are injured, while the particularly fine eggs are apparently not
affected and live to hatch as vigorous young fish. This variable response occurs
when eggs are treated with a sublethal dose of any chemical substance, and it
is in no sense a peculiar reaction to alcohol.

** Another fact that should be fully recognized in drawing general conclusions from the responses of these embryos to alcohol is that exactly the same
injuries and developmental deformities are readily induced by the use of a
great number of other chemical stuffs, and also by unusual physical conditions.
The fact that such deformities are experimentally produced in embryos by

 

4 Of the many papers published by Stockard and his assistants on this problem

I shall cite here only three, but from them the reader can get the references to the

others, and furthermore they are themselves excellent summaries of the whole work.

(A) Stockard, C. R. and Papanicolaou, G.N. Further studies on the modi
fication of the germ-cells in mammals; the effect of alcohol on treated

guinea pigs and their descendants. Jour. Exper. Zool. Vol. 26, pp.
119—126, 1918.

(B) Stockard, C. R. Alcohol as a selective agent in the improvement of
racial stock. Brit. Med. Jour. Aug. 12, 1922, pp. 255—259.

(C) Id. fxperimental modification of the germ-plasm and its bearing on

the inheritance of acquired characters. Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. Vol. 62,

pp. 311—825, 1921. it, Sa kta: 8 “a

5 I emphasize the recentness of this interpretation because in the original
accounts of this work Stockard did not lay the stress that he now does on the selective character of the results taken as a whole. The significance of this point will
appear as we proceed.
12 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the application of alcohol does not in any sense demonstrate that human
deformities have been induced by a similar cause. The amount of alcohol in
the solutions to which the eggs are subjected is greater than could be tolerated
in the human blood stream. It is also a fact that common salt (sodium
chloride), sugar, and many other constantly used substances in human food are
equally as effective in inducing the same types of developmental modifications
in these eggs as is the application of alcohol. The fact that an experimenter
may use an effective dose of a certain substance to induce developmental disturbances has no direct bearing on the question of the use of this substance in
very much smaller amounts by man or other animals.

‘* These results should be considered in an impartial manner and should
not be distorted for one purpose or another in a discussion of the use of alcohol
by man. I can only say, as an emoryologist, that the experiments give no
certain proof that alcohol has ever caused abnormal] development in the human
embryo. Neither do they prove that it may not, except in so far as the doses
here necessary to induce an effect are greater than we have reason to believe
ever exist in the human body.’’

Following this work on externally developing cmbryos Stockard
began the series of experiments on guinea pigs which has received
such wide and deserved recognition. The initial purpose was to see
whether in internally developing embryos results similar to those
on fish eggs could be got. Alcohol was administered to guinea pigs
in the form of vapor inhalation. This was a great advance in the
experimental technique of the subject because it avoided the
secondary disturbances of general metabolism which follow daily
administration of alcohol in solution per os continued over long
periods of time. It is the general experience of all students of the
problem that animals receiving alcohol by inhalation remain in excellent general health over long periods of time, and in fact usually
attain to greater total duration of life than control animals not given
aleohol. (cf. Pearl loc. cit. supra.).

The general broad result of Stockard’s studies, and essentially
the only one in any way emphasized, or even recognisably pointed
out, in his papers over roughly the first ten years of the work was
that the administration of alcohol to the parents caused the production of a not large but still perfectly definite and significant number
of defective offspring, many of which were non-viable for more than
a short time, and some of which lived as monstrous forms. This
aspect of Stockard’s results has recently been illustrated by him in
a table (loc. cit. (B) p. 255) which may be reproduced here as the
briefest way of stating the facts.

This table needs no particular comment. It demonstrates the
main conclusion of all of Stockard’s reports on this work prior to 1922.
He has supported and developed it by a great variety of ingenious
and painstaking experiments. —

In 1914 I® began experimental work on the problem with the

6 Pearl, R. (A) The experimental modification of germ cells. I. General
plan of experiments with ethyl alcohol and certain related substances. Jour.
Exper. Zool. Vol. 22, pp. 125—164, 1917.

(B) IT. The effect upon the domestic fowl of the daily inhalation of ethyl
aleohol and certain related substances. Ibid. pp. 185—186, 1917.

(C) III. The effect of parental alcoholism, and certain other drug intoxications, upon the progeny. Ibid. pp. 241—310, 1917.

(D) Some effects of the continued administration of alcohol to the domestic
fowl, with special reference to the progeny. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Vol. 2, pp.
675—683, 1916.
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 13

TABLE I.

ALTERNATE Matincs oF NorMaL GuINEA PIGS, wITH NORMAL AND
ALcoHoLic Mates. (From Stockard).

   
     
    
   
 
     
   

Matings of 35 Normal

Matings of 44 Normal
Males successively with

Females successively with

Normal Treated Treated
Females. Females. Males..
Number of matings 81 81 81

185

Total offspring . 196 1 ;
2°42 Av. lit.| 2°28 Av. lit .| 2°53 Av. lit.|2°25 Av: Lit.

ee a ee a eta ee nf |

  

6 6
7°90% 7°90%
Lived over 3 months 151° 105
77-08% 56-64%
Died under 3 months 45
22-96%
Defective 0

domestic fowl as material. My object was two-fold. Primarily I was
interested in seeing whether administrating various volatile chemical
substances over long periods of time by inhalation it would be
possible to induce specific and permanent changes in the genetic
constitution of the germ cells—to induce and experimentally control
new heritable variations, in short. This I then regarded, and still
look upon, as the most fundamental problem of organic evolution.
In the second place Stockard agreed in conference that it was highly
desirable to repeat his experiments with a different animal than the
guinea pig, to see if the same results would be obtained. The methods
used were in all essentials the same as those of Stockard. Like him
I started with a number of different substances, but presently came
to the use only of ethyl alcohol. The investigation went on without
interruption, and on a rather extensive scale, till the spring of 1917.
A large amount of unpublished material had accumulated. My
entrance upon war service in June, 1917, necessarily ended the
experiments, but only for the time being it was then expected. When
in March, 1919, I was able to resume academic life, two developments
of the work were contemplated. One was to publish as soon as
pessible all the mass of material which had accumulated in the
experiments with alcoholized fowls and their progeny. The other was
to continue the experiments with mice, and with all the refinements
of method which had suggested themselves in the course of the earlier
work. To this end a colony of mice of great genetic purity and
homogeneity had been bred up by my assistant, Miss Sylvia L.
Parker, during 1918 and 1919. Both of these projects received a
summary quietus on November 24th, 1919, when my laboratory was

completely destroyed by fire. Neither records nor animals could be
saved.
14 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The first year’s work with fowls is summarised in Table II.
{From Pearl (C) p. 280).
TABLE II.
SHOWING IN SUMMARY FORM THE EFFECT OF CONTINUED ADMINISTRATION OF ALCOHOL UPON THE F, PROGENY.

 

Treated Treated
é 3d X | bf & X JaitTreatea| Untreatea | Nett

Character Studied Untreated | Treated Parents Controls | Resulton
Alcohol
2 g 2 g Offspring
1. Mean germ dosage index ..| 187-8 299-0 210°35 0

2. Percentage of infertile eggs
(i.e., in which no em
bryos were formed)...... 25-2 59-2 41-7 25-3 —
3a. Percentage of embryos dying in shell............ 36-6 26-9 33-3 42-2 +
3b. Percentage of fertile eggs .
whichhatched ........ 63-0 12:3 68-7 57-8 +
4. Percentage of all eggs
which hatched ........ 47-1 29-4 38-6 44-4 —
5. Percentage mortality under 180 days of age...... 21-1 10-6 17-6 36-9 of
6. Percentage mortality over
180 davs ofage ........ 5-9 13-6 10-3 15-3 +
7. Sexratio:percent dd ..| 48-9 45°5 47-7 50-0 0
8. Mean hatching weight per |
bird, males ............ 34°91 36-97 34-24 +
9. Mean hatching weight per
bird, females .......... 35-04 37-17 34°73 +
10. Mean adult weight per
bird, males ...........6. 26869 2815 2392 +
11. Mean adult weight per
bird, females .......... 2020 2063 1928 +
12. Percentage of weak and
deformed chicks ........ 0:7 0 0-4 1-0 +
138. Abnormalities of Mendelian inheritance ........ 0 0 0 0 0

This first year’s work showed that out of 12 different characters
for which there were quantitative data, the offspring of treated
parents taken as a group were superior to the offspring of untreated
parents in eight characters.

These results were first presented in a paper read before the
American Philosophical Society on April 15th, 1916 (Proc. Amer.
Phil. Soc. Vol. 55, pp. 248-258, 1916). It was suggested that these
results, as well as the results of earlier workers, might be most satisfactorily accounted for on the hypothesis that alcohol and similar
substances act as selective agents upon the germ cells of treated
animals. The essential points in the hypothesis were put in the
following way.

(a). Assume that the relative vigor, or resisting power of germ
cells varies, or grades continuously from a low degree to a high
degree, and further assume that the absolute vigor of the whole
population of germ cells measured by the mean, is different for
different species.

(6). In the intensity of dosage employed in inhalation experiTHE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 15

ments alcohol does not destroy or functionally inactivate all germ
cells but does so destroy or inactivate some of them. The proportionate number of the whole population of germ cells which will be
inactivated by such dosage may fairly be supposed to depend upon
the mean absolute vigor or resisting power characteristic of the
particular species or strain used. In a species with germ cells of
absolutely low mean vigor proportionately more will be functionally
inactivated than in a species of high absolute mean vigor of germ
cells.

(c). Besides the germ cells which are wholly inactivated by the
agent, and which we may designate as class (a), we may fairly
assume that there is a possibility of two other classes existing, viz.,
(6) germ cells which, while not completely inactivated, are so injured
by the agent as to produce zygotes which are measurably defective
m some degree, and (c) germ cells which are not measurably affected
by the agent at all in the dosage employed, and produce zygotes
which are not discernibly otherwise than perfectly normal.

(d). It appears entirely fair to assume that germ cells of the
(a) class are of relatively the lowest mean vigor or resisting power,
class (b) next, and class (c) the highest. The proportionate number
of the two sorts of zygotes corresponding to classes (b) and (c) of
germ cells which would be expected to appear in any experiments
made to test the point would clearly be a function of the mutual
relationship or proportionality between two variables, the dosage of
the deleterious agent on the one hand, and the mean absolute
resisting power of the germ cells characteristic of the strain or species
of animal used in the experiments on the other hand.

(e). If the dosage of the agent be relatively high in proportion
to the mean absolute resisting power it would be expected that all the
germ cells would fall into classes (a) and (b), producing no zygotes
at all or zygotes in some degree defective.

(f). If, on the other hand, the dosage, though absolutely the
same, be relatively lower in proportion to the mean absolute resisting
power of the germ cells it would be expected that all three germ cell
classes (a), (b) and (c) would be represented. The zygotes actually
formed would be chiefly produced by (c) germ cells, and to a much
smaller extent by (b) cells. Under these circumstances it would
necessarily follow that a random sample of the zygotes produced
after the action of the deleterious agent would, on the average, be
superior in respect to such qualities as growth, etc., which may be
supposed to depend in part at least upon germinal vigor, to a random
sample of zygotes formed before the action of the agent, because the
germ cells of class (c) are a selected superior portion of the total
gametic population.

(g). Essentially that proportionality between effective dosage
of the deleterious agent and absolute resisting power of the germ
cells outlined in the preceding paragraph (f) is believed to have
obtained in my experiments with fowls, Nice’s experiments with
lice (cf. infra), and nature’s experiment with the working-men’s
population, studied statistically by Elderton and Pearson.

: In December, 1916, some of the results on the second generation
16 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of progeny (Pearl loc. cit. (D) ) were reported in the summary form

of Table ITI.
TABLE III.

SHOWING THE MortTaLiTy (PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL) OF CHICKS OF
ALCOHOLIC ANCESTRY, 4S COMPARED WITH THOSE OF Non-ALCOHOLIC
ANCESTRY.

Matings in 1916.

 
   
 
   

Nature of Ancestry.

torent Ferrera ee rewarming | pens

Both parents alcoholic ..........
Dam only alcoholic ............
Sire only acoholic ...........+6Sire and one or more grandparents

Alcoholic ..........ececeeeees
One or more grandparents alcoholic

 
 

274 | 58-52

 
  
   
 

158 | 67-81
113 | 60-438

ee fee | eee | ee

568 | 52-74

1060 | 78-52; 55-94) 21-20} §

secant fot nite tee ~ ff eater

492 | 26-78) 9-99] 4-70) 10-70
+

    
    
     

All of alcoholic ancestry ........

      

    

All of non-alcoholic ancestry ....

      
 
 

Differences .......ccceseccccces
Aleoholic better = -++ | ..........
Alcoholic poorer =—

 

This Table brings out the following points :—

(a). Considering the totals, and comparing chicks with .any
alcoholic ancestry, as a group, with chicks having no alcoholic ancestry
as a group, it is clear that there were fewer of the former than of the
latter from a given number of eggs. In every 100 eggs from birds
in the alcoholic series approximately 53 zygotes (embryos) were
formed as against 80 in every 100 eggs in the non-alcoholic series.

(b). The total number of offspring zygotes dealt with in the
experiments (1628) is respectable, and such as to lead to reasonable
confidence in the results, especially in view of the fact that these
results were in every essential particular in full accord as to their
sense with those obtained in the 1915 experiments, and even more
pronounced in degree.

(c). The prenatal mortality was approximately 10%, and the
postnatal mortality (to 180 days of age) was approximately 5%
lower in the chicks with alcoholic ancestry than in those of nonalcoholic ancestry.

(d). While from a given number of eggs 26°81% fewer zygotes
were formed in the alcoholic series than in the non-alcoholic, 10.7% more of these zygotes were alive when adult age (180 days) was
reached if their ancestry was alcoholic than if it were non-alcoholic.

(ce). The great reduction in zygote formation (partial sterility)
observed in the alcohol treated series appeared to be preponderantly
due to the effect of the alcohol upon the germ cells of the female.
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 17

While there was some diminution in the effective fecundity of the male
as a result of the treatment, it was much smaller than in the female. In
the first two lines of the Table, where the dam was alcoholic, we have
22 and 8% of the eggs forming embryos, as against values of from
54 to 68% where the sire was alcoholic and the dam not. The lower
value for the percentage of zygote formation in the case of matings
‘where the dam was alcohole as compared with those in which both
parents were alcoholic, almost certainly does not represent a significant difference, but was an accidental result of the small number of
matings in the class. The significant thing is the fact that the
percentage of zygote formation steadily rises as we compare the
following groups : (1) dam alone or dam and sire alcoholic, (2) sire
alone or sire and some other ancestry not including dam alcoholic,
(8) no ancestry alcoholic.

These results clearly indicated that the germinal selective action
of the alcohol postulated in my earlier papers was continuing to
work, so far at least as the basic biological character viability
(duration of life, mortality) was concerned. There was a mass of
other evidence to this effect in the records which did not get published before they were burned, as described above.

I did show, however, that there was no sensibly higher proportion
of abnormalities of development among the zygotes of alcoholic
ancestry than among those of non-alcoholic ancestry. This is
demonstrated in Table IV.

TABLE IV.

SHOWING THE NUMBER AND PROPORTION OF CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES AND MALFORMATIONS FouND AMONG THE CHICKS OF
ALCOHOLIC AND Non-ALCOHOLIC ANCESTRY IN
THE SEASON OF 1916.

Dead in
Mean Shell after
i the

 

 

 

 

 

 

Germinal s | Hatched | ,Total —

Dosage |Tenth Day] | Chicks | _ve0tes a

Index of In- | 2 Surviving} = 8

0 a cubation | = tothe | a] g

ffspring of a Md Reet Dg & &

Ss 3 33 | 3 | Incuba- | 8 | 2

ES a| £|ES| a | 2 [tion and] «| §

3 g 56 | om A o | beyond 3 dD,

} Ay 8/8/38 Ss | 2 ° 3

Alalola;j=+z/< |a]< eB | py

Treated parents or grand- ~

parentsorboth ........ 27 |562-9/40-6| 78) 19 4 | 267) 20 897 43 |10-8
65 |10°2

Untreated control parents. «| 28) 0 | 0 | 190) 23 | 14 | 372) 42 641

 

My results so far had been such as to indicate that alcohol did
act as a selective agent upon the germ cells, and I had therefore laid
stress upon this aspect of its action in interpreting the results. But
I fully recognised that it might act similarly as a selective agent upon
the developing zygotes. In the summer of 1916, in fact, I carried
out the first experiment of which there is record, so far as I know,
specifically and solely directed to the testing of the question as to
18 EUGENICS REVIEW.

whether alcohol did act as a selective agent upon developing zygotes
(Pearl, loc. cit. (D) pp. 681-682). The experiment was as follows :—

Two incubators were used, each containing at the outstart 890
eggs. These eggs were selected with the utmost care to ensure likeness of age, of strain, and of other characteristics in the two lots.
In one incubator 40 cc. of 95% ethyl alcohol were evaporated beneath
the eggs daily. In the other incubator no alcohol was used. At the
end of 7 days 130 eggs, designated as Lot 1, were removed from the
alcohol incubator and allowed to complete their development in a
normal non-alcoholic incubator. At the end of fourteen days the
remaining eggs (after testing out infertiles) of Lot 2, which originally
contained 180 eggs, were removed from the alcohol incubator and
finished their development without further dosage of alcohol in a
normal incubator. Finally Lot 3, originally containing 180 eggs,
was subjected throughout the twenty-one days of incubation to the
daily dosage of alcohol fumes. At hatching, all the normal chicks
from both incubators were put together in the same house and
brooder, and given throughout life the same treatment as to food,
etc. Careful account was kept of mortality, each chick being marked
so that it could be told from which lot it came. The conditions of
brooding were purposely made bad so as to obtain a maximum
severity of post-embryonic environmental conditions with a consequent high absolute mortality rate.

The result was that the more alcohol the embryos received
during incubation the higher was the prenatal mortality, but until
the dosage became so prolonged as to injure all the zygotes, as in
Lot 8, the prenatal mortality was selective, since the higher the
prenatal death rate the lower was the postnatal mortality among the
hatched chicks.

Immediately after the publication of my results, Danforth,’ in
the spring of 1917, began experiments, which were not finally
published until 1919, to see whether the selective action of alcohol
upon the germ cells which I had shown in respect of characteristics
dependent upon general vigor, also obtained in respect of morphologic
characteristics known to follow the Mendelian scheme of inheritance.
He describes his experiments as follows :—

** In each experiment a cross was made between normal, purebred stock
on the one hand and hybrid, heterozygous birds on the other. The hybrid
individuals were subjected for certain periods to two daily treatments with
alcohol vapour, during which time as far as possible all eggs laid were incubated. Since the original purpose of the work was to test the possibility of
selecting germ cells rather than of modifying them through influences brought
to bear on the soma, each experiment is brief and intensive.

** A control was obtained in each case by saving the eggs from the same
flock, kept under as nearly identical conditions as possible, during a period
before or after the alcohol experiment. All eggs that did not hatch were
opened and the character of the contents recorded. Since the eggs were candled
frequently many embryos were obtained only a few davs after death and consequently in a good state of preservation. Very few of the dead embryos were

found to be too macerated to afford the desired data. Some living embryos
were purposely taken. For the sake of brevity, data obtained from eggs laid

7 Danforth, C. H. Evidence that germ cells are subject to selection on the
basis of their genetic potentialities. Jour. Exp. Zool. Vol. 28, pp. 885—-412.1919.
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 19

during the periods of alcohol treatment will be referred to as A, those from
eggs laid in the control periods as C. Each experiment, therefore has an A
and a C subdivision. In experiments, 1, 2, and 3 the heterozygous individuals were males, in 4 they were females.

‘* The characteristics tested for their possible response to alcohol vapor
were brachydactyly, polydactyly, and color.’’

The alcohol was administered by the inhalation method, as by
Stockard and Pearl.
The results, which are analyzed and presented in detail with the

most meticulous care, can be given here only in briefest form. Table
V, which is Danforth’s Table IV, summarises the data.

TABLE V.

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF CERTAIN MENDELIAN CHARACTERS IN
EMBRYOS AND CHICKS OF ALCOHOLIC (A) ann NonALCOHOLIC (C) ParENTAcE. (From Danforth).

 

  

cere errr remrnerenn tpt teers fener cena cuneate eer et

Number | Part] Observed Expected Observed Expected Observed

46°713°1] 39+3:0 | 29-442-7| 3612-9 100
89°242°5; 3942°5 | 338-24+2-1] 36+42°2 100

  
     
 
 

    

50-043:
52°1+4:

A

C

A | 43-343: 89+3:

C } 85-143: 39+3:
3 A | 53-643:

C

A

C

A

Cc

37-9142:
39-03:

36+2°9
36+3°7

  

39 +3:

9
7

52:043°4 86143°3
39+3:- 5

40°1+3: 86+3:°4

   

42°74+3> 56-548:

   

42°8+6:

2

0
59-9+8:°-5
6

3

*443°1

  

388 -4-+4+2>
39 +2>
 
 
 

  

 

86-0+1-7| 3641-7
86:0+1-6) 3641-6 | 53:

48-2+139-041
89+139+1
Mr! ob Id on

1 0
q 8
4 3
5 5
56°3+5-9} 8945-7
8 9
8 7
5 5

2.229
A .

From these data Danforth concluded that there was definitely
a selective action in respect of brachydactyly. By treating a heterozygous parent with alcohol vapor of sufficient strength the proportion
of brachydactyl to normal offspring can be increased. For the other
two characters studied the evidence is less probative, but indicates
some selective action.

I think we are entitled to conclude from the large body of
critical experimental evidence provided by Danforth and Pearl that, |
tn the fowl certainly, alcohol can and does act as a selective agent,
primarily upon the germ cells, and also can be made so to act in some
degree upon the developing zygotes. But since, of course, in the
fowl the zygotes normally undergo all but the earliest stages of their
embryonic development outside the body of the mother, it follows
that any selective action on the offspring of alcohol administered to
the parents in this form must normally be mainly, if not entirely,
germ cell selection.
20 EUGENICS REVIEW.

We return now to Stockard. In 1918 (loc. cit. (A) ) he published
with Papanicolaou a long paper bringing his results up to date and
discussing Pearl’s work which had in the meantime appeared. In this
paper he accepts Pearl’s results in all essential particulars, and for
the first time in his writings upon the subject, so far as I have been
able to find, definitely admits that in the guinea pig alcohol acts in
part as a selective destroyer of unfit and weak germ cells. He says
(loc. cit. pp. 221-228) :—

** It seems to us in keeping with what is known of biological reactions in
general and the guinea pig histories in particular to take the following yposition. The alcohol] treatment acts on the germ cell population of both fowls
and guinea pigs in such a manner that the weakest or least resistant ova and
spermatozoa die from the effects of the treatment as germ cells without taking
part in zygote formation. The somewhat more resistant ova and speimatozoa are greatly injured though still capable of forming zygotes. Thezygotes,
however, are so defective as to be capable of only a short period of development and die during stages too early to be definitely detected by gross examinations of either the fowl’s egg or the mammalian mother. Still other
embryos are capable of development to later stages and are actually found
dead, not only as the youngest embryos to be identified, but from these early
stages there occurs a continuous series of prenatal deaths up to the full-term
of still-births. Immediately after birth the post-natal mortality is greatest
and gradually decreases until those specimens capable of reaching maturity
often enjoy a comparatively long life.

‘* At the present stage of the two experiments it would seem as though
this elimination of defective germ cells and very early embryos was much more
intense in the fowls than in the guinea pigs as a group; so that the late rrenatal and postnatal mortality among the fowl progeny was low and those
specimens that hatched were the hardy survivors from this early vigorous
process of germ cell and individual selection. The records from the double
alcoholic and male treated lines among the guinea pigs forms a second step.
The size of the litters and failures to conceive in these lines indicates a rather
high degree of infertility or germ cel! debility as well as early prenatal deaths,
though this is not so extreme as among fowls, and the late prenatal and postnatal mortality is higher.

‘* Finally the female treated guinea pig lines produce large litters and
have few infertile matings, indicating a low germ cell and early prenatal
mortality, and here the late prenatal and postnatal mortality is highest, not
entirely on account of the action of the treatment on the developing individual
in utero since the same condition is found among other female generations
than the one direcfly treated.

‘* This presentation of the situation is somewhat similar to that which
Pearl (A) has illustrated in his diagrams, figures 5 to 7, pages 290 and 291.
The chicf difference being that we would decrease the proportion of eliminated
germ cells and increase the proportion of defective and non-viable zygotes,
and thus emphasize the selection of individuals rather than of germ celis.’’..

With this interpretation I am in entire agreement. It should be
noted none of the evidence so far presented gives any indication,
Jet alone proof, that alcohol produced any permanent, specific alteration of the germ plasm determiners or genes, as would be demanded
by any supposition that an acquired character had becn inherited.
With this view Stockard (C) is in agreement.

In 1922, and subsequently, Stockard ( (B), (C) ) presented an
analysis of his accumulated data strongly emphasizing the essentially
selective action of alcohol in improving the racial characteristics of his
guinea pig stock over the long period of the experiments. Table VI
gives the latest summary of his results.
.THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 21

TABLE VI.

Tae REcoRDS OF GuInEA Pics OccuRRING IN DIFFERENT GENERATIONS |
oF ALcoHoLic Stock. (From Stockard).

  
 
  
   

Absorb-| Died

    

 
  

      
   
   
   

 

 

 

  

 

 
  
   

 

 

        

Total
Number Total Mortality | ed Pre- within 3
and Lived over under mature | months
Litter 3 months 3 Months Still- | after
Sizes born | birth
I. No. %
Normal stock control:
1 . a% am --| 19 18 94°73 1 0
2 we “ws 8 .-| 114 94 82-45 15 5
3 a * a « 8 --| 216 172 79-62 20 24
4 26 oe oe .-| 132 88 66 -66 26 18
5 as T sh --| 25 19 -00 0 6
Average Litter 2-72
Av. Litter weight 188 - 85g
Totals... om ea 506 | 391 62 53
Percentages (mean) .. 53:91) 46-68
II.
Alcoholic animals of all generations:
= < - --| 58 4;
2 # oe oe ..| 316 24
3 oe a. oe --| 579 78
4 oe ‘ 204 43
5 .. os gs ..| 40 7
Average litter 2-56
Av. litter weight 170- 66g
Totals... 7 an . | 1197 302 | 156
Percentages (mean) .. : 66-22) 33-77

 

 

Ill.
Aleoholic animals with treated
parents (F;):

1 _

° a® oe 1 oO

2 ee ee ee ee 10 Sf

3 wi . _ 8QLtu
4 ee ee@ oe 15

5 ee ee oe ee +3. Was
Average litter 2-56 2.

Av. litter weight 165-89g

Totals.. +m a ws
Percentages (mean) ..

Alcoholic animals with treated
grandparents, greatgrandparents, etc.(F 2-3-4):

Om Co bS at

eo
°
ee
°
e

Average litter 2-56
Av. litter weight 173-73g

Totals.. os as 7
Percentages (mean) .. e 5 . 3-01 136-98
22 EUGENICS REVIEW.
TABLE VI .—Continued.

  
 

 
  
  

 

» Total Absorb-] Died
Number, Total Mortality |ed Pre- within 3
and Lived over under mature | months
pilter 3 months. 8 Months after
zes

re fe 9 eee fees mentees |

| Vv.
Alcoholic animals with treated
great-grandparents and |
great-great-grandparents

 

(F 8-4):
1 “x - a --| 19 15°78
2 ‘ 70 20-00
3 120 26-66
4 68 52-94
5 as ae 10 80-00
Average litter 2-54
Av. litter weight 175-88g
Totals. . a4 wa .-| 287
Percentages (mean) .. 80-66
VI.
Alcoholic animals with treated
great -great-grandparents
(F 4):
1 . 4 25-00
2 16 6-25
3 27 22-22
4& 12
5 oe _ 0
Average litter 2-46
Av. litter weight 183 - 43g
’ Totals... os --| 59

Percentages (mean) .. 13°54 187-50 162-50

Regarding these data Stockard (loc. cit. (B) p. 257) says :—

** Section I. contains data from the control or normal lines. . These animals are of the same blood lines as the alcoholic stock—brothers ant\sisters
and parents and offspring are in the two groups, and actually in cases thosame
individuals have first been used in the control and later in the experimental
groups. There can be no doubt that any original defect or weakness that may
have been in the stock from which the alcoholic animals were derived must
also have been in the control stock, since the stocks are in all cases actually
the same. All records in the present tables are of pedigree animals from
thoroughly known blood lines and relationships. There is no inbreeding in
either the control or alcoholic lines. It is as certain as experimental] evidence
can be that any difference between the records of the control and the treated
groups must be attributed to the action of the alcoholic treatment, since this
is the only element of difference existing in the life histories or experiences of
the two groups of guinea pigs.

**The records for the control show that the stock is strong and well. The
average litter of the young is about three, and the average litter weight is
188:°85 grams at birth. The data from 500 control individuals show a total
mortality before reaching maturity of only 22-72 per. cent, One familiar
with breeding guinea pigs will recognize this as a very good record, far better
than usual. In the last two columns of the table the total mortality has been
divided into pre-natal and post-natal deaths. The absorbed embryos, premature births or absorptions, and stillborn young make up 58-91 per cent. or
about half of the total mortality. The post-natal mortality, under three
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 28

months of age, was 46 per cent. of the total. This equal division of prenatal and early post-natal mortality is the normal expectation for these
animals. But section II. of the table shows that in the alcoholic generations
the pre-natal is double the post-natal mortality, and among the F, animals
in Section III. the pre-natal mortality is more than two and a half times
greater than the post-natal.

** Table 6 shows the size of litter in which the individuals occur. This is
important, since animals born in large litters are at a disadvantage as compared with those born in small litters. The control section, for example,
indicates that animals born in litters of two have a total mortality of only
17-5 per cent. while those born in litters of four suffer a mortality almost twice
as high, or 33-3 per cent. The average litter size in the alcoholic group is

smaller than among the control. This fact actually benefits their records |
and the mortality readings are corrected for the differences in litter size in|

the total mortality line of the table.

** Considering the successive generations it is seen that the offspring from
directly treated parents present the poorest record of all. Almost 48 per cent.
of their young are lost before maturity, and actually 70-8 rer cent. of these
are either absorbed as early embryos, aborted prematurely, or are stillborn.
When these Fy animals occur in smal] litters their chances for survival are
greatly improved, so that of those occurring two in a litter only 28:5 per cent.
died, but of those in litters of four 73 per cent. died. This fact conveys an
idea of the great advantage possessed by members of the small litters. These
are virtually partial litters the hardy survivors of an originally larger litter.
When the records of the F; animals are corrected for litter size their mortality
is about double that of the control. —

‘*Many of these F; animals are defective and many are sterile; thus only
the best of them are available to give rise to the following generations. Yet in
spite of this partial elimination of the defectives enough effect has been produced by the alcohol treatment on all individuals to cause the grandchildren
to show an unfavourable record. When the records of the 747 animals of
Section IV are compared with the control section the influence of the alcohol
treatment is seen to be transmitted by the F; generation, although they had
not been directly treated. The grandchildren of treated grandparents, the
F, group, show a typical record closely comparable with that of the offspring
from directly treated animals. The pre-natal mortality is here almost twice
as high as the post-natal, and the total mortality is here almost twice as high
as the post-natal, and the total mortality is 64 per cent. greater than among
the control.

‘* Again, among the F, animals there are defective and sterile specimens.
Thus another individual elimination and selection occurs in this generation
and only the most vigorous individuals of the group are left to breed. These
more vigorous specimens are in many cases mated with normal stock, so that
the records of animals descended from treated great-grandrparents are scmev hat
improved, yet the litter size is smal] and the mortality record for 287 such
animals is 40 per cent. higher than among the control.

‘* Finally, the constant elimination of the defective individuals through
three generations and the matings with normal stock give animals descended
from aleoholized great-great-grandparents which are superior in their records
to the normal control animals. They are born in smaller litters than the
control, but even when this is taken into account their mortality is actually
only 64 per cent. of that of the control animals. Such animals actually have
a total mortality before the age of maturity of only 13-5 per cent.

‘* The fact that F, animals from alcoholic ancestry are superior in record
to the control is a point of actual significance. There can be no doubt that

eR

Riese

the offspring from treated parents are decidedly inferior as compared with the |
control ; and further, that their offspring, or the progeny from treated grard- °

parents, are also evidently inferior, but during these generations an individual |

selection is taking place through the elimination from the race of the defective |
and sterile specimens. This selection finally brings out a group of unusually .
strong specimens from which all the weaklings have been eliminated, and ~
although they are not quite so productive as the control, their offspring show

g record superior in vitality.
- ** Should one desire to apply these experimental results to the human
24 EUGENICS REVIEW.

alcohol problem, it mizht be claimed that some such elimination of unfit
individuals had beuefited the races of Kurope, si.ce all of the dominant races
have a deiinitely alcoholic history, and the excessive use of alcoho! was decidedly more general three or four geaerations ago than it is to-day. That is,
certaia ta.nities that were alcoholic taree geuerations ago have not been excessively so in the more recent generations.’’

** Wnoen we consider the welfare of the race or stock rather than that of
the individual it is found that the descendants of these groups of animals
which suffered the highest mortalities and withstood the most vigorous selection are superior in quality to the descendauts from the group less severely
affected. ‘fhis individual selection furnishes a great advantage to the later
generations, as is shown by the superior quality of the F, group of guinea
pigs in ‘Table 6.’

It thus appears that when completely analyzed Stockard’s long
and painstaking experiments on guinea pigs are fully in accord with
those of Pearl on fowls, in respect of the racially beneficial effect of
the selection which accompanies the continued administration of
alcohol. Such differences as there are in the two cases in regard to
the proportion of defective, but still in some degree viable
individuals, probably are due mainly to two factors. One of these
factors is probably a basic, inherent difference in response to alcohol
of guinea pig protoplasm as compared with fowl protoplasm ; the
other is probably found in the fact that the guinea pig undergoes its
embryonic development inside the body of the mother, and the fowl
outside.

In neither of these recent papers of Stockard’s in which he has
so strongly and rightly emphasized the racial benefit derived from
the selective action of alcohol does he give the slightest reference or
suggestion that he is not the first investigator to show, or even to
suggest, that alcohol had a selective action. The earlier work is
neglected, no doubt unintentionally, but still completely, and the
reader ignorant of the history of the subject is left to draw the
conclusion that Stockard is the pioneer in showing a racially beneficial action of alcohol through selection.* But as has been set forth
in this paper, Pearl first presented experimental evidence for such a
selective action in 1916, both in respect of germ cells and developing
zygotes, for characters representing general vigor, and Danforth in
1919 for specific Mendelian unit characters.

An experimental study of the racial effect of continued administration of alcohol was begun in 1920 by Hanson,? using the albino
rat as material. As in the work of Stockard, Pear! and Danforth,
the alcohol was administered by inhalation. The characters so far
published upon are chiefly body weight, body length and tail length.
The work has been reported for four generations. The tentative conclusion so far reached is stated in the following words after a resume
of the results of Pearl and Danforth (loc. cit. pp. 805-306).

; ** A germinal selection is probably also in progress in this work. This
is evidenced by the fact that while in the early generations the amount of

.8 That just such a conclusion has been drawn by just such a reader is demonstrated bv an editorial ‘‘Modifiecation of the germ plasm,’’ in the Jour. Amer. Med.
Assoc. Jan. 19, 1924, pp. 211—212.

oO

® Hanson, F. BR. Modification in the albino rat following treatment with
alcoho! fumes and X-ravs: and the problem of their inheritance. Proc. Amer.
Phil. Soe. Vol. 62, pp. 301—310, 1928.
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 25

sterility was very great, at times endangering the continuance of the experi
ment, in the last two generations the fertility has been completely restored,

and now equals, if not surpasses, that of the controls.’

Hanson is cautious in drawing any conclusions and emphasises
the necessity of many successive generations. In regard to any
influence of alcohol upon the sex ratio he finds that there is no such
influence in the rat, confirming Pearl’s conclusion to the same effect
for the fowl, and shows by a proper biometric analysis of Stockard’s
data that it had no significant effect on the sex ratio in the guinea

ig.

ms We must next consider the contributions of MacDowell.'° Their
consideration has been deferred to this point, which brings the work
slightly out of chronological order, because MacDowell has in the
main dealt with an entirely different sort of character than any of the
investigators previously mentioned. Indeed, the only prior experimental student of MacDowell’s main problem was Arlitt,'! whose
work, however interesting to the psychologist, does not contribute
either extensively or critically to the genetic problem in which we
are here interested. MacDowell has concentrated upon the influence
of alcohol (administered by inhalation) upon the behaviour of white
rats and their descendants. Somewhat incidentally, as will appear,
he has collected valuable information upon other characteristics,
notably fertility and growth. |

Considering first the behaviour results, which had to do with the
acquirement on the part of the rats of ability to go through a maze.
The final conclusions of the last paper (E), which are consonant with
and in part based upon the results of the first (A), are :—

** White rats treated with maximum doses of aleohol fumes dailv for 28
days before and on through training took more time per trial in running a
circular maze than did their untreated brothers and sisters; this difference is
significant when all the rats are averaged together. The same superiority of
the normals is shown by each of the four strains separately ; when each strain

is divide according to sexes, most of the sets give similar results, but the
small numers introduce much irregularity into the curves.

** The criteria involving perfect trials give results that tend in the same
direction as those given by the data on time, but they are less conclusive and

efinite.

** The treatment of the parents as well as the rats themselves causes no
more modification in the maze behaviour than was found in the rats originally treated , namely, a tendency to retard learning ; but this tendency with the

10 From the list of MicDowell’s papers on alcohol I select, as in other cases
the important original memoirs and summary articles only for reference here.

(A) MacDowell, E. C. and Vicari, E.M. Alcoholism and the behaviour of
white rats. I. The influence of alcoholic grandparents upon mazebehaviour. Jour. Exper. Zoo. Vol. 38, pp. 209—291, 1921.

(B) MacDowell, E.C. The influence of alcohol on the fertility of white rats.
Genetics, Vol. 7, pp. 117—141, 1922.

(C) Id. F:xperiments with alcohol and white rats. Amer. Nat. Vol. 56,

«pp. 289—811, 1922.
(D) id ; Alcohol and the growth of white rats. Genetics, Vol. 7, pp. 425—
99, 1922.

(E) Id. Alcoholism and the behaviour of white rats. II. The mazebehaviour of treated rats and their offspring. Jour. Exper. Zool. Vol.
87, pp. 417—456, 1923.

11 Arlitt, A.H. The effect of alcohol on the intelligent behaviour of the white
rat and its progeny. Psychol. Monog. Vol. 26, No. 4, 1919.
26 EUGENICS REVIEW.

small numbers involved is either on or below the border-line of statistical

significance.
** A small but consistent modification of the maze behaviour of the un
treated offspring from treated parents was found; this appeared more clearly
in the criteria from perfect trials than in the time per trial.

‘* Seven rats from a normal pair did not appear to differ in their maze
behaviour from five rats from the same mother and a treated father.

‘* Untreated rats from parents treated with mild doses did nut show any
difference in their maze behaviour from their controls.

‘* Considering the evidence in this and the first paper in this series the
following generalization is reached: Alcoholism in ancestors may modify the
behaviour of untreated descendants.’’

One cannot refrain from remarking that this final generalization
js one which might have been reached by an intrepid reasoner even in
advance of any experimentation whatever. MacDowell has in truth
performed a. veritable mountain of laborious experiment to bring
forth such a tiny mouse of cautious conclusion. The detached and
disinterested reader of the paper on this phase of the subject is sure,
I think, to conclude that while he ought in decency to feel in some
degree awed by the magnitude of the labour spent, nevertheless, the
net result is that alcoholization of ancestors produces no very definite
or marked alteration in the behaviour of progeny. If there is any
residual effect it must be almost infinitesimally slight. Certainly it
would be difficult to make a convincing bogey-man of alcohol as a
‘racial poison’? on the strength of MacDowell’s behaviour results.

It seems to me that the by-products of his work, the data on
fertility and growth, contribute rather more of value to the problem
of the racial influence of alcohol than do the behaviour results, chiefly
because they are more definite.

Taking fertility first, Tables VII and VIII give MacDowell’s data
on litter size and litter number respectively (loc. cit. (B) p. 126 and

p. 181).
TABLE VII.

MacDowetu’s Data oN DIFFERENCES IN LitTeR Size BETWEEN
ALCOHOLISED AND ContTroL Waite Rats.

 

 

 

 

TREATMENT WHITE RATS
OR LITTERS Diff.
GROUP OF ANIMALS Differences — % Differences
T Cc — = tests less P.E. Controls 100%

 

First series

Treated from untreated ..| 138 13 |—1-08+0:-78 1°4 11-5
Second series

(1) Treated from untreated

Alllitters .......... 32 87 |—0:67+0-34 1-9 10-0

Ist litters............ 18 86 |—0:70+0:-41 1-7 10-3

**Balanced litters’? ../ 138 13 |}—1-50+0-56 2°6 20-0
(2) Treated from treated

Pparents..........606. 29 14 |—0-66+0-52 1-2 10-3
(3) Untreated from treated

parents........cceeee 20 15 |}—0-70+0-48 1°4 11-2
(4) Untreated from un
treated parents and

treated grandparents 25 19 |—0-88+0:-56 1-6 13°1.
(1) and (2)... eee e ee 46 | 116 |—0-67+40-28| 2-4 10-0
(3) and (4) ...... ce aeee 45 384 I—0:-81+0°388 2-1 12-5
All generations..........| 91 | 150 |—0-79+.0-22 8-6 11-9

 
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 27

TABLE VIII.

MacDoweE.Lu’s Data ON DIFFERENCES IN LITTER NUMBER OBTAINED
AND EXPECTED In WHITE Rats.

<_<

WHITE RATS

 

GENERATION

% difference between Dift.
No. litters produced —_—

and No. normally P.E.
expected
Second series

Treated from untreated ...... —64°86+3-37 19-2
Treated from treated ........ —35°45+6°91 5-1
Untreated from treated ...... +33-33+8:29 4°0
Untreated from untreated from

treated .. cc. ccc ce eee +55°60+8:-40 6°6

His conclusions are :—

‘** The treatment of white rats with alcohol by the inhalation method
tends to reduce the size of litters. A reduction in the neighbourhood of 10
per cent. of the respective controls appears when the daily dose was smull
and when it was maximum, in the litters from treated rats as well as in rats
whose parents or grandparents were treated. The numbers are not large
enough to make this reduction statistically significant when each generation
is considered by itself, but when all the generations are taken together, the
difference between the test and control averages is significant.

** Given daily in maximum doses alcohol reduces the number of litters
produced by the treated rats. Judging by the number of litters produced by
their controls, this reduction is in the neighbourhood of 65 per cent. The
treatment of rats from treated parents made a smaller reduction (85 per cent.)
in the number of litters than when the treatment was confined to one generation. In contrast to this, rats whose parents or grandparents alone were
treated produced from a third to a half as many again as the controls.

‘© These conclusions may be interpreted as due, first, to an inherited
modification that reduces the size of litters, and second, to the selective elimination of germ-plasm bearing factors detrimental to litter production through
the immediate reaction of alcohol upon the treated rats. Thus alcohol appears
to modify fertility in two different ways, each working independently, and,
in the generations after the first, in opposite directions. | ie

** In so far as these results show a reduction in the total output, they
agree with those of Stockard on guinea pigs and Pearl on fowl. Further than
this the per cent. reduction in litter size in the different generations is closely
alike for rats and guinea pigs, while the results given by the numbers of litters
agree with those of Pearl in showing immediate reduction in numbers, followed
by a superiority in the survivors.’’

Regarding growth MacDowell’s data are presented in Table IX
(from (C) p. 806, where the material is given in better form than
in the original paper (D) devoted to this topic).

MacDowell points out that these results are very similar to those
on fertility, and goes on to say :—

*‘Just as the offspring of the treated rats appear to be genetically superior
to the controls in the matter of litter production, so they are found to be 4
superior in the matter of weight, with the result that when they themselves:
are treated, the immediate reducing effect of the alcohol makes them about
equal somatically to their controls, instead of growing markedly slower as did
their parents. This likeness in results leads to a similar interpretation for
the weight as for the number of litters: the alcohol has acted as a selectiveagent, eliminating germinal material that included factors for slower growth.’”
28 EUGENICS REVIEW.

TABLE IX.

THe WEIGHTS AT SUCCESSIVE AGES OF THE VARIOUS TYPES OF MALE
Test Rats COMPARED WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE CONTROLS.
(From MacDowell).

 

Tests Controls

Relation to Alcohol Ags _ | | —_——__—— ———Treatment Difference D/P 4.
Day2 Grams Grams
Averages Nos.| Averages | Nos.

ee fn en reece fener fen

 

Treated from nor
 

 

 

mal parents ....| 40 70-43 70 72-95 64 + 2:52+ 1:40 1°8

60 116-66 71 129-35 65 +12:69+4 2:16 5-9
90 149-63 61 176-63 55 +27:00+ 3:16 8-5
120 192-10 50 229-71 46 +37-61+ 4:07 9-3
150 215-39 38 257-97 39 +42-58+ 4-81 8-8
180 235-88 34 274-34 32 +38-46+ 5-11 7°5

‘Treated from

treated parents..| 40 83-86 | 15 81-81 | 16} — 2°05+ 2-73 | 0-7

60 128-00 15 181-81 16 + 881+ 38-81 1:0
90 166: 50 14 166°37 16 | — 0-18+ 4-96 0:0
120} 198-07 | 14] 207-50 | 14] 4+ 9-48+ 6-01] 1-5
150 228-33 12 236-50 14 + 8-17+ 6:48 1-3
180 245-70 10 258-00 13 +12-30-+ 7°44 1°6

Untreated from

treated parents....| 40 73°03 26 63-82 29 — 9-214 2°37 3:8
60 95-53 26 84°13 29 —11-40+ 2-56 4:4
90 127-26 26 117-79 29 — 9°47+ 3-64 2°6
120 195-26 26 182-14 27 13°-12-+ 5°18 2-5
150 230-42 26 219-88 27 | —10-54+ 6-24 1-6
180 249-00 25 238-85 27 —10°15+4 7-61 1-3

Untreated from un
treated parents and

treated grandpar
ONtS .occcccesees 40 75-90 10 80-57 7 + 4°67+ 5-08 0-9
60 111-18 11 67-20 10 —13°98+ 5°35 2:6
90 131-54 11 125-90 10 — 5°64+11-64 0:5
120 191-63 11 171-30 10 —20-33+16-66 1-2
150 226-09 11 208 -00 10 —18-09+16-20 1-1
180 235-54 | 11 230-20 | 10 — 5-84413-52 0-4

Plus signs indicate the controls heavier ; D/PE: .—difference divided by its probable error.

We may now briefly consider the results of some of the less extensive pieces of experimental work on the subject. Nice’? has
published three papers reporting among other things the effect of
parental alcoholism on the growth and activity of the progeny of
white mice. Administering alcohol in the early experiments per os

12 Nice, L. B. Comparative studies on the effect of alcohol, nicotine, tobacco
smoke and caffeine on white mice. I. Isffects on reproduction and growth.
Jour. Exper. Zool. Vol. 12, pp. 188-152, 1912.

Id. Studies on the effects of alcohol, nicotine and caffeine on white mice.
Ibid. Vol. 18, pp. 123-151, 1918.

Id. Further observations on the effect of alcohol on white mice. Amer. Nat.
‘Vol. 51, pp. 596-607, 1917.
THE RACIAL EFFECT OF ALCOHOL. 29

with food, and later by inhalation, his results on growth are summarised as follows : ‘* Although the young of the alcohol mice when
given alcohol themselves excelled all the other mice in growth, other
young of these same mice when not given alcohol grew even faster.”’
In other words the non-alcoholized progeny of alcoholized parents
made the best growth records. This same result was got by Pearl
with chicks. Furthermore, Nice’s data are such as to indicate that
the result is due to a selective action of the alcohol.

Bluhm’’ performed experiments with white mice on the alteration of the normal sex ratio by the administration of alcohol to the
male parent. A preliminary experiment on 195 complete normal
litters containing 965 young gave a sex ratio of 79.36 ¢ : 100 2.
Alcoholization was produced by injecting a solution of ethyl alcohol
subcutaneously. Gnly male parents were injected. Sixty-seven
alcoholic litters gave a sex ratio of 122.14¢: 1002. She concludes
that this result may be explained on the assumption that there are
two sorts of spermatozoa, male determiners and female determiners,
and that the motility of the latter sort is more diminished by the
alcoholization than that of the former. The work seems carefully
done, but should be repeated because so far out of line with other
extensive experiments by Hanson, Stockard, and Pearl (cf. supra.)

Bilski'* experimented with the frog (Rana fusca). The individuals were alcoholized by immersions in solutions of alcohol of
different strength and for different lengths of time. The spawn of
a female was divided and fertilized with the sperm of non-alcoholized
males and of males alcoholized in varying degrees ; and conversely
the sperm cells of males were made to fertilize ova of females
alcoholized in differing degrees. From the combination of single
pairs and the comparison of their offspring, it was thought possible
partly to eliminate the individual differences in the parents, so that
the effect of the alcohol alone was left. His conclusions are that
alcohol causes premature ovulation in the frog. No typical defects
could be found in the offspring or even the most heavily alcholized
parents. More eggs developed from slightly alcoholized parents
than from unalcoholized control parents. There was, however,
usually an increased mortality in those broods, so that the number of
offspring finally equalled or fell below the number in control broods.
Bilski thinks that moderate alcoholization of parents has a stimulating effect upon eggs and sperm, and hence brings about the
development of zygotes from weak germ cells which normally would
never start development. Later these zygotes are eliminated by
natural selection.

We now briefly summarize the whole case to date. By way of
preliminary it should be noted that throughout this review I have
followed the plan of directly quoting the several workers. This was

18 Bluhm, A. Ueber ein Fall experimentelles Verschiebung des Geschlechtsver
hiltnisses bei Satigetieren. Sitz. Ber. d. Preuss. Akad.d. Wiss. Bd. 84, pp.
549-556, 1921.

14 Bilski, F. Ueber Blastophthorie durch Alkohol. Mit Versuchen am
Frosch. Arch. Entw. Mech. Bd. 47, pp, 629-658, 1921.
80 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

done to forestall any possibility of the charge being made that I had
read into their data different interpretations to what they themselves held.

I think that the following general conclusions may fairly be
drawn as summarizing to date the important net results of the considerable body of careful, painstaking research which had been done
upon the problem.

1. The racial effect of alcohol is preponderantly either beneficial, or at the worst, not harmful. This is true for characters
depending upon general vigor in guinea pigs (after early generations
are passed) fowls, rats, mice, and probably frogs.

' 2, This beneficial racial effect appears to be the result primarily
of the fact that alcohol acts as a definite, but not too drastic selective agent, both upon germ cells and developing zygotes, eliminating.
the weak and leaving the strong.

8. The only racial effects of alcohol which can possibly be
regarded as harmful which have yet been brought to Jight by this
mass of experimental work are :—

(a). The production of defective offspring in early generations
by alcoholized guinea pigs (Stockard). This result is peculiar to the
guinea pig. No such effect has been noted in any other animal :
either the fowl (Pearl, Danforth) ; rat (MacDowell, Hanson) ; mouse
(Nice, Bluhm); or frog (Bilski). These findings suggest that the
guinea pig is somewhat peculiar in its reactions to alcohol. There
can be no shadow of a doubt as to the accuracy of Stockard’s findings
regarding that animal.

(b). A possible slight reduction in activity and ability to learn
of the offspring of white rats (MacDowell).

(c). A reduction in fertility following the administration of
alcohol. But as this marks one element of a selective process which
ultimately is beneficial to the race, it is questionable whether it
should be reckoned a racially harmful effect at ail.

Any application of these experimental results to man should be
cautiously made, for the following reasons, among others :—

The dosage of alcohol is in general much larger in the expermental work with animals than any consumption of alcohol by
human beings.

The alcohol is administered in most of the experiments by inhalation, a process which has some very different physiological
effects than drinking alcohol in solution.

The guinea pig case shows that some organisms may be quite
differently affected racially, for a time at least, by alcohol, than are
others. The conclusions drawn from one organism cannot safely be
transferred to another in this case.

But regardless of any immediate application to man, it is an
extremely satisfactory thing to have such a large body of critical experimental results, so consistently agreeing in regard to their main,
broad conclusions. That much more work needs to be done in this
field goes without saying, but the experimenter who begins now has
& definite and consistent body of solidly grounded knowledge to start
from, instead of the indefinite conjectures of fifteen years ago.
