WHAT NATIONS AND CLASSES WILL.
PREVAIL?

GALTON LECTURE, FEBRUARY 17TH, 19109.
By DEAN INGE.

IN the heyday of British imperialism, towards the end of the last century,
when we were all blind to the German peril, Dilke prophesied that “the
world’s future belongs to the Anglo-Saxon, the Russian and the Chinese
races.” The Germans were then working out their own theory of the
world’s future, in which none of these three nations counted for much.

Their belief is that they belong to the noble Aryan. race, which, they
maintain, dies out in a southern. climate. There is some truthin this contention ; but northern Europeans have proved that they can thrive, when they
live on the land, in any but a tropical climate. The Jews and Chinese,
who have survived in Ghettos and pestiferous towns, can live anywhere.

The fact is that the prevalence of a people is determined not by
racial characteristics, but by economic circumstances. “ Race” - and
“nationality ” are catchwords for which men will fight as they fought for
what they called religion four hundred years ago. But there are no
pure races in Europe, and political anthropology is not a genuine science.

Population increases when (1) more food is produced in the country,
(2) goods are manufactured which can be exchanged for foreign food,
(3) the standard of living is reduced. The war has prevented twelve
million births and effected eight million deaths, but the losses may soon
be made good. Limitation of births only brings down the death-mate,
and emigration does not reduce the home population by a single unit.
Emigration, therefore, is the true means of spreading the English race
and language, for which there is ample scope in Canada, temperate
Australia and New Zealand.

Devices for stimulating population, such as endowment of parenthood, saving babies and housing refonm, merely tend to tax the good
stocks out of existence for the benefit of the bad. As a rule, the higher the
stage of civilisation at which both nations and individuals have arrived
the fewer are both the births and the deaths which take place in their
midst. Thus, a superior race in a conquered country is’ generally doomed.
Nothing fails like success, and the ruling people rule themselves out.

Likewise the upper and middle classes of to-day, in England, will
probably disappear in favour of the aristocracy of labour of which we
are now witnessing the creation. They, in their turn, will become
exclusive and conservative, and will exploit the public for their own
profit. Further, it is likely that when they have consumed the surplus
wealth of the community they will repudiate the burden of maintaining
the proletariat.
18 EUGENICS REVIEW.

This privileged class will be unable to compete ywith races who have a
lower standard of living, and who will therefore undersell them in the
world markets. Then they will restrict their numbers, and will reverse
the capitalistic process of crowding huge populations into the towns which
began with the “industrial revolution ” of 1760 and the succeeding years,
and was initiated by the plunder of Bengal. The trade unionist, perhaps,
will be allowed to place only one son im his union, and accordingly will
take care to have no more; and the woman industrialist will further
reduce the birth-rate by working more and more in factories.

Thus there will be a progressive decrease in every class, and
gradually we may return to the quiet, maimly rural England of 1750, in
which the growth of population was very slow. From the eugenic stand
point this consummation will not be a misfortune. The Englishman is
not naturally a town-dweller or a money-grubber, but a countryman and
an idealist. The quintessential Englishmian is a Raleigh, Drake,
Shakespeare, Milton or Wordsworth. London may one day be the
spirituial centre of the world, when the labour parties, by destroying
capital, have dissipated her wealth, committed suicide, and mace our
dense populations a thing of the past.

Reactions may be set up which will prevent the fulfilment cf these
predictions. What is important is that we should see the direction in
which we are moving. It may even pay some of us to learn to think—
there is so little competition.

Sir Auckland Geddes, in proposing a vote of thanks to Dean Inge,
said :—I came here in the spirit of a student, in the spirit of one who
was to learn, and I have learned a great deal. There were many true
words which fell from. the lecturer’s lips. Those that struck me as quite
the truest were “All government is bad.” (Laughter.) At all events, I
can assure you at present government is very bad. J know that perhaps
as well as amybody else, and we are, as a matter of fact, at the present
moment grappling with a series of problems the solution of every one of
which depends upon the correct interpretation of the future of the English
race. ‘With regard to the lecturer's conviction as to the future of the English
race, if the inhabitants of these islands are cut down from 40 million to
some 5 million I do not know that that would make a popular election
cry. (Laughter.) But even if we did get a Parliament elected with that
cry, with that policy, the process of the execution of 40 millions is
an unpleasant one, and so although I am responsible for putting in the
Government ideas as regiards reconstruction, I am afraid I cannot urge
upon them the main thesis of our lecturer this evening. (Laughter.) I
have no doubt that if we did cut the population down to 5 millions things
would be much easier—but are we quite sure that this island is overpopulated? We have only to go 60 miles from where we are now to meet
people who have never seen a railway train, to meet people whl have
merely “heard ” of London, to meet people whio have never seen any selfpropelled vehicle. England is undeveloped, uncolonised. England is a
land of infinite wealth, lying ready to the hands of those who will
WHAT NATIONS AND CLASSES WILL PREVAIL? 19

develop the resources of this country which were left lying idle at the
time when the industrial revolution started. There are parts of the
country which have never moved from that time to this. There is little
doubt—ithere is none—that within the boundaries of England—I do not
say Britain lest I should offend the subtle senses of our lecturer—food
can be grown to support the 4o odd millions of inhabitants. It is not that
the population of England is too great; im my opinion, it is that the
population of England is wrongly employed. We have set ourselves to
manufacture goods for export and left others to grow food upon which
we live. It is quite possible for us to reverse that process and to set
ourselves now to grow food wpon which we should live, while the surplus
population over those engaged in growing ‘food—in tthe healthy occupation
of growing food—might well be engaged in manufacturing for exports to
those profitable lands in which Europeans cannot live and in which raw
materials grow which we want and need for ithe full development of our
civilisation. And so I would, if I might, urge upon our lecturer to think
perhaps once again over what I understand to be his main thesis,
mamely, that this imcrease of population was possibly encouraged
by the industrial revolution, but to admit the possibility is one thing,
though even to prove it in one imstamce would not establish it as a law
without exception; for not invariably does the needle of a compass
point to the Pole. No one, not a soul, who knows the facts will diisagree with him when he says that there is mortification in the pody of
the State at the present moment. There is a very serious mortification
and that mortification cannot, believe me, be cured by anything but by
the growth of the great emotion whiich is stirring the people of this
country, which is stirring the people of the whole world, at this
time, the emotion of human betterment. We have passed through a
period which has lasted a century im which self-dependence was a. watchword, and we are passing rapidly imto a period of thought in which
community over alll ils the motto. Thit is the changing spirit which is
making the great difference in this land at the present time. Always,
when you look back in history, you will find that in times when thiis
great influence spread and swept through humanity there would be
revolution, it may be bloodshed. Great movements of the spirit do effect
in the truest sense revolution, but we are at present in the throes of a
revolution which has now been going on for ten years and has changed
the whole outlook. Ideals are changing, not only the ideals of the
working class, but the idealls of the other classes. I have been more
struck during the last few weeks than by anything else in the course of
my life to find many gteat employers of labour, whom one perhaps
foolishly regarded as absolutely immersed im money-making, coming; to
me or writing to me and indicating how they aire affected by this new
spirit of which I have spoken. I do not think that you can fairly speak
‘or think of the future of the English race without thinking that thi's
great spiritual movement, the emotion of humian betterment, sweeping
through the land just now—because in politics, in the affairs with whitch
Governments have to deal, it is not accurate knowledge that matters,
20 EUGENICS REVIEW.

it is emotion, and this great emotion moving now, as mo emotion has
moved an our or our fathers’ times, is going to achieve more, I believe,
for the English race within the next generation than anything we have
ever read of. So I am no pessimist. (Cheers.) There are years of
difficulty ahead of us for readjustment, and we know that in our own
lrves the future is full of uncertainty. I would mot have the lecturer or
you believe that I have not enjoyed and profited by the lecture. I have
learned a great deal this evening from it.

Sir Bernard Mallet, Registrar-General, in seconding the vote of
thanks, said :—I am alfraid the Dean takes a malicious pleaisure iin: living
up to his reputation, but I generally feel that I agree with him more
than IJ want to. At any rate, he thinks for himself and is never afraid
to say exactly what he thinks, and he is one who has the gift of expressing his views and his conclusions with absolute clearness, and in simple,
vigorous and terse language. He has taught me a great deal about the
use of the figures for which I am officially responsible. (Laughter.) I
think there are one or two points I would like to say a word or two upon,
but I think perhaps I had better not. I am not able to look upon the
loss of population with quite the same equanimity as our distinguished
lecturer. At any rate, we can say this, that our population im 1914 was.
sufficient to withstand the threat of German domination.
