MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL
WELFARE WORK*

By EVELYN FOX, cB.

(Honorary Secretary, Central Association for Mental Welfare)

HE subject for this paper is so wide

that I can approach it only from the

side with which I am most familiar—
the administrative and social. On the scientific aspects of the problem I am not qualified
to speak, but I hope it may be of interest to
you to hear of the progress that this century
has seen in the care of defectives—more
especially of defectives living in the community.

How far have we advanced in the direction
of securing for defectives, in the words of the
Mental Deficiency Act, ‘‘ care, supervision
and control for their own protection or for
the protection of others’? To what extent

can we, under our present laws, achieve both ©

these objects—the protection of the defective
himself and the protection of the community
and of future generations ?

HISTORICAL

Two main factors led to the setting up of
the Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded in 1904, and to the
subsequent passing of the Mental Deficiency
Act in 1913 and of the Education (Defective
and Epileptic Children) Act in 1914: (1) The
rapid growth, during the nineteenth century,
of humanitarian sentiment, finding practical
expression in the establishment of social
services for the less fortunate members of
the community ; (2) the educational problem presented by the number of children
driven into schools on the establishment of
compulsory education who, for mental or
physical reasons, proved to be incapable of
benefiting by educational methods adapted
for those who were normal.

At the beginning of the century no authority existed for a defective’s care and

* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics
Society on March 29th, 1938.

control ; he drifted from one social organization to another, from prison to workhouse
and often to the asylum, always a failure,
always presenting an insoluble problem to
those from whom he or his family sought
help. From all sides, evidence was collected
pointing to the defective as a stumbling
block in the path of those who were devoting
themselves to the work of rehabilitation.
Workers in prisons and in the Poor Law administration, in Rescue Work and in the Social
Services, all emphasized the urgent need for
the control of defectives by the State and
emphatically contended that once this group
was segregated, the problem of the readjustment of other social failures—prostitutes,
recividists, and unemployables—would be, in
a great measure, solved.

THE PosITION TO-DAY

The position to-day is very different. On
the one hand, we have an ever-growing number of institutions provided by local authorities for the care and training of defectives,
together with a highly developed system of
community care with social services for their
assistance of a type which twenty years ago
was hardly even contemplated. On the other
hand, the results of these activities have
widened our conception of the part played
by mental endowment in the successful conduct of even the simplest existence. The
knowledge gained from the active administration of measures of protection for defectives
has brought out two very important considerations : first, that the provision of care
and protection made for certifiable defectives
does not cover the larger group of social
failures whose incapacity for responsible
citizenship is due to poor mentality ; secondly, that in the combination of temperamental emotional instability with poor

165
166

mentality the vital factor calling for the
protection of the individual is his temperamental rather than his mental make-up.

This emergence of the dull sub-normal
group, showing a high percentage of social
failures (to whom the legal definition of the
feebleminded, namely persons requiring care,
supervision and control for their own protection and for the protection of others, might
equally be applied), has demonstrated how
hard it is to draw the line between the
“mentally defective ’’ and the “ dull.”” Yet
on one side there is found the mentally defective individual who has a legal right to state
assistance, to the services of local authorities, to specialized training, institution care,
etc., and against the results of whose
failures the community can claim to be protected ; whereas on the other is found the
“ dull”? individual who is deprived of all
these protective measures and left to face a
difficult and complicated civilization without
specialized help of any kind, and against the
results of whose social inefficiency the community is denied any facilities for taking
preventive steps.

The various experiments in training and
community care so successfully carried out
for the benefit of the high-grade feebleminded who come under the Mental Defi
ciency Act have shown that they are de-.

sirable for the uncertifiable “dull and
temperamental ”’ if these are to be prevented
from becoming social and economic failures.

The close connection between the two
groups was pointed out by Dr. Lewis in the
Wood Report published in 1929:

If, as there is reason to think, mental deficiency, much physical inefficiency, chronic
pauperism, recividism, are all more or less
closely related, and are all parts of a single focal
problem, can it be that poor mental endowment,
manifesting itself in an incapacity for social adjustment and inability to manage one’s own
affairs, may be not merely a symptom but rather
the chief contributory cause of these kindred
social evils ?

If so, then the problem of mental inefficiency,
of which mental deficiency is an important part,
assumes a yet wider and deeper significance, and
must indeed be one of the major social problems
which a civilised community may be called upon
to solve.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A MODEL ADMINISTRATIVE AREA

Are the measures taken to-day to secure
the protection of defectives adequate also for
the protection of the community? If not,
where do they fail ?

These measures are very complicated and
involve much technical knowledge, and
therefore—in order to simplify the picture—
I have collected all the activities that are
legally possible, and centred them in one
mythical area. It is a mythical area because
no one authority, so far as I am aware, completely carries out all its duties or uses all
its powers, but all the measures I am about
to describe are in actual use, some of them in
one area, some in another.

It should be borne in mind that defectives
are not dealt with by local authorities merely
because they are defectives, but because
certain conditions or circumstances call for
their “‘ care, protection and control.”

The mental deficiency committee of a
county council or county borough council is
responsible for “‘ ascertaining ”’ defectives in
its area for whom protection is needed, and
for providing institutional accommodation,
guardianship or statutory supervision. The
defectives towards whom the committee has
this duty are those who can be certified under
one or other of the definitions in the Act. In
addition a defective must be:

(a) Neglected, abandoned, without visible means
of support or cruelly treated, or be a person
with regard to whom a representation has
been made to the local authority by his
parent or guardian that he is in need of care
or training which cannot be provided in his
home; or (b) a person found guilty of a criminal offence or ordered or liable to be ordered
to be sent to a certified industrial school, or

‘be undergoing imprisonment or in a reformatory or industrial school or in a mental
hospital; or (c) a woman in receipt of poor
relief at the time of giving birth to an illegitimate child or when pregnant of such child.

A mental deficiency committee has no
duties in regard to defective children between 7 and 16, except those who have been
notified to it by the education authority
because they are :

(2) Imbecile—i.e. incapable of deriving benefit or
further benefit from instruction in a special
MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

school or class; or (b) so difficult temperamentally that their presence in a special
school is detrimental to other children; or
(c) about to leave a special school or class and
in need of supervision, guardianship or institutional care.

The education authority’s duties in regard
to defective children are, first, to ascertain
them, and secondly, to notify those who are
imbecile (or idiots), and to provide education
in a special school or class for those who are
feebleminded.

Let us now suppose an administrative
county with a population of 100,000 of which
40,000 are in three small urban areas. In
addition, let us suppose that there is a county
borough with a population of 150,000 entirely independent of the county for all purposes. In these areas, the Acts relating to
defectives are fully and vigorously carried
out, the various authorities are working in
complete co-operation with each other and
with voluntary bodies, and are united by a
common aim and determination.

The county mental deficiency committee
is responsible for the administration of the
Mental Deficiency Act in the county area
and in the three small urban areas. For purposes of education, there are in the county
four education committees (one for the
county as a whole, and one each for the
urban areas).

The number of defectives (including children) in the whole area is as follows :* in the
rural area (60,000) 639, in the urban areas
(40,000) 259, and in the three county boroughs
(150,000) 973—giving a total of 1,871.

Dividing this total number into the different grades of defect we get the following
figures (top of next column).

The problem of the lower-grade defective is,
as these figures show, a simple one numerically. It is simple also so far as care and protection are concerned, for low-grade defectives are generally sterile or their condition
is so obvious as in itself to constitute a safeguard.

* Figures based on Wood Report, i.e. in urban areas
6°49 per 1,000 population, in rural areas 10°66 per
1,000.

167
DEFECTIVES IN AREA OF ALL AGES DIVIDED INTO
GROUPS
Feeble-minded Imbecile Idiot
Urban areas 200 47 II
(40,000) (5°02 per (1°19 per (0°28 per
1,000) 1,000) 1,000)
Rural areas 504 III 25
(60,000) (8-41 per (1°85 per (0°41 per
1,000) 1,000) 1,000)
County Boro’ 753 178 42
(150,000) (5°0 per (r-19 per (0-28 per
1,000) I,000) 1,000)
Total 1,457 336 78
Education

Let us begin by describing how, in these
model administrative areas, the problem of
the high-grade mentally defective child is
dealt with by the various education authorities concerned.

First comes ascertainment—the basis of all
work for defectives. The group of children
to be kept under observation by teachers for
the purpose of deciding whether any are so
defective as to be incapable of receiving
benefit from education in an ordinary elementary school is a very varied one. It includes, besides the child of poor mentality
ranging from the definitely defective to the
‘just below normal ’’—the child of normal
intelligence but backward in school subjects
from extrinsic causes such as ill-health, bad
school attendance, or bad teaching, the child
of unstable and difficult temperament with
marked emotional handicaps, and the child
whose difficulties are mainly caused by the
adverse environmental conditions of his
home or even of his school life.

Nor are any of these factors exclusive of
each other ; they may occur in any combination.

The head teachers are aware of the supreme
importance of ascertainment, and the education authorities have arranged for many of
them to attend courses on the mentally
defective and retarded child. The child who
is probably defective is reported to the
school medical officer for examination. This
generally takes place during the time the
children are in the junior schools, for, except
in cases of imbecility or pronounced behaviour difficulties, a feeble-minded child
168

can usually hold his own in the infant school
where modern individual methods allow him
to progress at his own speed and give him
concrete material to work on.

If, on examination, the child is found by
the school medical officer to be so defective
as to be incapable of receiving benefit even
from the methods used in a special school, he
is promptly notified to the county (or county
borough) mental deficiency committee to be
dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Acts.
If, however, he is considered to be only feebleminded, the education authority tries to
carry out its duty by sending him to a day or
residential special school.

At any given moment, the following is the
approximate number of educable mentally
defective children with which our four
education authorities are dealing: in the
rural area I91 ; in the three urban areas 83
(approx. 28 in each); and in the county
borough 310.

The first difficulty that faces each local
education authority in these areas (except
the county borough committee) is that there
are not enough children to make it possible
to organize a day special school; in the
rural area the numbers are too scattered, in
the urban areas they are not large enough to
warrant a separate school with proper classification. If no day special school is possible,
how is the duty of providing suitable education for defective children to be carried out ?
Our education authorities attempt to solve
the problem in various ways, of which the
following are examples.

In small urban areas, one or more elementary schools are organized to deal with
the defectives from the area who can suitably be educated in the same building as
normal children. Classes are set aside for
juniors in suitably placed schools, and for
boys and girls respectively in selected senior
schools. To these classes are also admitted
other very retarded children who yet are not,
so far as can be diagnosed at present, certifiable or likely to be certified under the
Mental Deficiency Act. The teachers in
charge of these classes have been specially
trained for the work and their methods are
adapted for subnormal children.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

For defective children with undesirable
homes or with character defects so serious as
to show their need of more stabilizing influences covering their whole life, vacancies
are secured by the education authorities in
the special residential schools which may be
under the control of an education authority
or of a voluntary committee. Other children
again, of the tractable, stable type, are
boarded out with foster parents living within
easy distance of the county borough’s day
special school.

The county education authority, in addition to using for its rural children the facilities offered by the residential school and by
boarding out, has to consider the children
whose parents refuse consent to their leaving
home, and those who present no particular
problem other than an educational one. For
these, the authority has on its staff one or
more visiting teachers who visit the schools
attended by the children (in which, although
there will be other children retarded to a
lesser degree, there may be only one defective) for the purpose of helping the teachers
with schemes of training and with advice
about management, etc. In this way every
“ascertained ’’ child is under special supervision throughout his school life.

Educationally, such a comprehensive
scheme may be as satisfactory as conditions
permit, but there is one insuperable difficulty which our authorities with all their
zeal and sense of responsibility are unable,
under present conditions, to surmount—a
difficulty which constitutes the most serious
handicap to the adequate care of defectives
and the protection of the community. The
defective child who has been educated in a
special school can—as I have indicated—be
notified to the mental deficiency committee
for home supervision, guardianship or institution care on leaving school at 16. He can,
therefore, be protected during his subsequent
career and the community can be safeguarded. But the defective child leaving an
ordinary school at 14 cannot be notified for
statutory supervision and—except in very
special circumstances—cannot be brought
under protection of the Mental Deficiency
Acts at all until he becomes 16, and then
MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

only for some specific reason such as neglect,
etc. (see p. 166). He must prove by failure
that he needs such care and control.

This administrative gap has for many years
been a matter of the utmost concern to those
who work for defectives and until it is closed
by legislation allowing the notification of
defective children on leaving ordinary
schools, the machinery set up under the
Mental Deficiency Acts is bound to be incomplete just at the point where completeness is particularly necessary—the control
and protection of the high-grade adolescent
defective from the moment he leaves school.

The following figures amply illustrate the
present state of affairs and the failure of
our system :

Estimated number of feeble-minded children in England and Wales who should be in
special schools, 106,000.

Number actually in special schools (March
31st, 1937), 13,815.*

To return to our ideal area—the county
borough has one or more day special schools
in which it may place all its defective children or only those showing disorders of conduct or those with low intelligence quotients,
and the high-grade stable defective may be
left in the special classes for dull children in
the elementary school (these cannot be
notified). There is also an experimental day
schoolf for “ problem ”’ children (often dull
but probably not defective) who, for the time
being, are misfits in the ordinary schools.
Here we shall find a considerable percentage
of the dull children who present difficulties
of conduct and some children of permanent
temperamental instability who will eventually be dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Acts. If fortunate enough to secure
a vacancy, the local education authority
may send the difficult child needing psychiatric treatment and special understanding to
a home.

These ideal areas have also on their staffs
an educational psychologist (employed

* This figure was given by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Education in answer to a question
in the House in March 1938.

t Only two such schools actually exist, namely, in
Leicester and in Oxford.

169

jointly by the county borough and the
county council) to whom any child can be
referred.

There is also, in the county borough, a
Child Guidance Clinic, whose facilities are
available, by arrangement with the different
authorities, for the whole area.

Lastly, provision is made for the special
psychological examination of any child
coming before the children’s courts in the
area who appears to be retarded or abnormal
in any way. For this purpose full reports
from the child’s head teacher and school
medical officer are made available to the
court and there is a remand home in the
county borough which accepts for observation delinquent children from any part of the
area.

A fter-Care*

All the education authorities of our area
are alive to the importance of after-care by
social workers in the case of defectives leaving school. As I have emphasized above,
only those leaving the residential school or
the day special school in the county borough,
can be notified for institution care or for
statutory supervision, but every child who
has been ascertained to be defective—
whether he is leaving a village school or a
special class in an elementary school in one
of the urban areas—is reported for voluntary
supervision to the mental deficiency committee or to the mental welfare association.

What are the results of this special education? It is very difficult to get reliable
statistics because the results depend so much
on the grade of child admitted to the school,
as well as on the type of training; but
judged by the power of the children to get
and keep employment, the results are good.
Day special schools show in some areas over
50 per cent. of “ school leavers ’’ in employment. A residential school with 100 ‘‘ schoolleavers’’ in six years, shows 74 per cent.

* “* After-Care’’ includes not only help in finding
suitable employment for the defective (sometimes this
can only be secured by moving him to another area),
but the provision of suitable recreation—such as a
club with an understanding leader—as well as a constant readiness to intervene in the innumerable diffi
culties which arise when a subnormal individual is
struggling to keep his place in a normal community.
170

wholly or partially self-supporting. The
stable defectives keep their jobs and make
decent, if humble, citizens. The unstable
often get notified to the mental deficiency
committee, and after a few years’ training in
institutions settle down to routine work and
make good. A proportion of the failures
will remain in institutions permanently.

But those who make an economic success
of their lives cannot be controlled or directed.
They have passed out of the egis of the
Mental Deficiency Acts.

So far as imbecile children are concerned,
the duty of an education authority is limited
to their ascertainment and notification to the
mental deficiency committee. In the areas
we are discussing, this duty is systematically
carried out, and no imbecile child remains in
the elementary schools once his condition
has been diagnosed. Thus, from the outset,
the mental deficiency committees are made
aware of every defective child for whom they
are responsible.

The Mental Deficiency Committees

The mental deficiency committees of the
county and of the county borough in our
model area vigorously administer the Mental
Deficiency Acts.

The first duty of a mental deficiency committee is that of ascertainment, and upon it
depends all the possibilities of protecting
both the defective and the community.
Under the present disability, by which defective children leaving ordinary elementary
schools cannot be notified, complete ascertainment is impossible, and most mental
deficiency committees hear of defectives
over 16 only when they have already become
delinquent or have fallen into other trouble.

On the other hand, since the Local Government Act of 1929, those defectives who were
formerly under the Poor Law have been
ascertained by the mental deficiency committee and have come under its care to be
dealt with, not temporarily as “ paupers,”’
but by reason of their mental defectiveness.
The provision of adequate institution accommodation in our ideal areas has allowed the
mental hospital committees to transfer
defectives who do not need mental hospital

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

treatment to the mental deficiency committee to be provided for in a manner befitting their needs and for as long a time as
may be necessary.

For these reasons—and through the authorities’ connection with social agencies
throughout the whole area—the ascertainment figures in the model districts we are
considering, are high—namely, 7-30 per
1,000. In other areas whose work has not
been so thorough, the figure may fall as low
as 1:06.

As already indicated, the number of defectives in our area is approximately 1,871
(see p. 167).

Subtracting from these figures the number
of educable feeble-minded children who are
the responsibility of the education authorities, there remain 624 notified children and
adults in the administrative county for whom
it may become responsible at any time, and
663 in the county borough. Of these, let us
say that there are, “subject to be dealt
with” at any given moment, 500 in the
county area and 580 in the county borough.
For these, provision is made as follows :

(a) Institutional Accommodation

Of the total number of defectives “ subject to be dealt with”’ in the county area,
it may be estimated that roughly 225 will
need colony accommodation. For an efficient
modern colony this number is too small, and
to run a small separate home is uneconomical.
Therefore the county mental deficiency committee joins with the county borough committee (and possibly with other adjacent
authorities) and shares with them a colony
large enough to admit of adequate classification, an efficient school department for the
children, and workshops and other forms of
occupational training for the adults.

The county borough is responsible for
approximately 260 defectives who are trained
in the colony.

(b) Community Care

Community care has, in our area, been
developed to its fullest possible extent, and
the fact that a large number of defectives
remain safely in their own homes (or in the
MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

homes of carefully selected foster-parents or
employers) is due to the use of trained and
experienced social workers with special
knowledge of mental deficiency, who keep in
close touch with their cases and are quick to
discern indications pointing to inadequate
control or the beginnings of disordered behaviour.

A large number of patients will remain in
the colony over a long period of years, but at
least Io per cent. at any given time are to be
found on licence, on leave of absence, or in
a hostel, going to and from daily work in the
neighbourhood of the colony. The selection
of such cases is made, in the first instance, by
the medical superintendent, and his discrimination in this task is, of course, one of
the major factors in determining whether the
system is a success.

A large proportion of the girls placed out
on licence from the colony are put into
private families as domestic servants, and so
suitable does this arrangement prove that
there is always a demand for them greater
than the supply. Great care is taken to choose
mistresses who fully understand the position,
and who are willing to exercise the special
supervision needed—and equal care is shown
in the choice of the particular mistress for the
particular girl. The boys are placed out, for
the most part, on farms—although the
county borough committee also makes use
of foster homes in districts of the town where
there are facilities for simple factory work.
All these persons on licence—which often is
subsequently converted into “ guardianship’ under the Mental Deficiency Act—are
visited monthly, and the trained staff of the
voluntary association or of the local authority
itself is always at hand to advise in difficulty
or to take action in emergency, making
arrangements in case of illness, or for holidays, or when necessary for recall to the
institution.

(c) Statutory Supervision

For the 275 defectives in the county’s
administrative area under statutory supervision in their own homes—left there either
because the parents object to institution
care or because they can provide adequate

171

control—the mental deficiency committee
does its best to provide some form of training and occupation, particularly in the case
of the children and young adults.

In each of the urban areas there are
roughly 30 defectives under supervision ; in
the rural areas there are some 185 scattered
about in ones and twos. The problem of
training and occupation is, therefore, not an
easy one but, in view of the fact that their
provision was laid upon local authorities
by the Act of 1927 (namely, “ to provide
suitable training or occupation for defectives
who are under supervision or guardianship or
have been sent to certified institutions ”’),
every effort has been made to solve it in the
following ways :

For the children and young adults in the
urban areas, there is, in each area, a small
occupation centre, open daily morning and
afternoon, and organized by the voluntary
association. The attendance at the centre
may not be more than ten or fifteen, but
its existence ensures that every defective in
the area who is capable of benefiting by
training is given the possibility of obtaining
it.

For the defectives in the rural areas of the
county, who are too far away from any
centre to be able to attend for group training,
but who are yet trainable—say approximately 120—the committee has a staff of
home teachers who visit at fortnightly
intervals for the purpose of helping both the
defective and his parents, by providing him
with simple occupational work. Each teacher
may have thirty cases on her books and by
means of a car is able to cover the ground.

In this way, the majority of defectives are
kept under adequate supervision, and official
statutory visits to the homes by officers of the
voluntary association working for the committee are supplemented also by visits from
voluntary visitors living in the neighbourhood.

In cases where the home is good and the
defective is tractable and easily managed,
but where there is an income inadequate to
ensure that his physical needs are fully met,
the committee may adopt the plan of placing
the child under guardianship—the guardian
172

being one or other of his parents—and this
enables a weekly allowance to be made towards his maintenance. Occasionally, also,
such a lower-grade defective child is placed
under the guardianship of a foster-mother
living in the vicinity of an occupation centre.

For the county borough, the provision of
training and occupation is a simpler one.
On behalf of its 300 or 320 defectives under
statutory supervision, it provides occupation
centres in different districts of the town, these
centres accommodating the large majority.
In addition, there are industrial classes for
the higher-grade boys and girls capable of
simple manual work but unable to earn their
living in the outside world, and clubs for
those who are in employment but need
properly supervised recreational facilities.
In this area the official statutory visiting is
carried out by the authority’s staff of trained
social workers.

Delinquency

Throughout both the county and the
county borough areas, use is made of section
8 of the Mental Deficiency Act, whereby any
defective appearing before a court and found
guilty of an offence can be dealt with under
the Act instead of as an ordinary offender.
As in the case of feeble-minded children, provision is made for the special medical and
psychological examination of any person
brought before the magistrates in whose case
there are signs of mental defect or mental
abnormality, so that at the outset of what
may be a series of criminal offences adequate
measures are taken.

CONCLUSIONS

At the beginning of this paper I quoted the
definition of ‘ feeble-minded persons ’’—
those who need, for their own sakes and for
that of others, ‘‘ care, supervision and control,” and asked how far our present methods
have succeeded in achieving this double aim.
I have no hesitation in saying that if we
could secure the notification of all defective
children irrespective of the schools attended
by them, and if the education committees
and the mental deficiency committees
throughout the country fully carried out

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

their duties, providing sufficient institutional
accommodation and an adequate trained
staff of social workers for community care, it
should be possible to control and protect the
majority of defectives.

The results of community work for defectives are, on the whole, very satisfactory. It
has been proved over and over again that,
after a period of training in an institution,
the stable high-grade defective can “ hold
down’ a good situation, earn adequate
wages and lead an orderly life. For those
whose capabilities are not great enough to
merit adequate payment, grants for maintenance can be paid to foster- parents by the
authority concerned. The social worker—as
I have indicated above—is always at hand
to help in difficulty, and should the defective
fail he can be transferred to another foster
home or domestic situation where the protection is greater and where the necessary
recreational facilities are forthcoming.
Finally, he can, if necessary, be recalled to
the institution.

When, however, we turn to the question
of how far the community is protected from
the danger of defectives producing children
who are themselves defective or who may be
carriers of defect, and from their inadequacy
as parents, the position is a far more serious
one.

Under the existing law, it is not possible to
deny parenthood to a defective simply on
the grounds that he or she is a defective, and
in any case, all defectives are not “‘ subject
to be dealt with.”’ If they are leading orderly
and well-conducted lives, supporting themselves (and possibly others also), not asking
help from any authority or forcibly brought
to official notice through any dereliction of
duties as citizens, they are outside the provisions of the Mental Deficiency Acts and cannot be dealt with under them in any way. The
facts that they are likely to transmit mental
defect to their children, or that such children
may be carriers though not themselves defective, or that (if only potential parents) they
are likely to prove inadequate for parenthood, do not in themselves constitute reasons
for being “ subject to be dealt with.’’ No one
can legally prevent the marriage of defectives
MODERN DEVELOPMENTS IN MENTAL WELFARE WORK

who are not certified. We may know that
they have a bad family history and that they
are likely to make bad parents ; or we may
feel that though they may make as good a
job of parenthood as their limited capacity
permits, their children are likely to be defective or carriers of defect. Yet under our
existing laws we can do nothing except offer
advice.

So far as our present experience indicates,
the sole possibility of preventing any defective from becoming a parent (short of perpetual segregation in an institution) lies in
voluniary stertlization, which means that the
defective in question must be able to understand the potential danger to others of
parenthood and the need for avoiding it.
In addition he must appreciate that success
in maintaining economic independence is not
the sole criterion to be taken into consideration. Let us for a moment consider the
difficulties involved in this proposal, as
applied to defectives not in institutions.

A defective tends to find his industrial
level in the humblest groups of workers—
those who complacently continue in easy
routine jobs which are irksome to those
intelligent active individuals who seek promotion and greater responsibility. In this
lowly group, out of which numbers are continually falling into unemployment, the
mere fact of securing and “‘ holding down ”’ a
job is an achievement. It is unlikely, therefore, that it will be possible to convince the
defective who has kept a job that he or she
is unfit for parenthood.

Frankly, I think that this type of defective
—and it is the type to which belong the
majority of the stable high-grade who are
unlikely to be certified or to remain under
the Mental Deficiency Acts—will always
constitute a danger to the community from
the point of view of future generations.

173

What we can do is to try to keep the group
not only as small as possible, but in continuous touch with trained social workers. If
voluntary sterilization were legalized its
members might apply for the operation in
youth.

This group is closely allied to the “ dull ”’
and, as experience shows, its members will
not be likely to be certified unless they commit some anti-social action or are brought by
unstable conduct or economic failure (and
economic failure may be, and often is, the
result of defects of temperament no less than
of intelligence) to the notice of the authorities. The close resemblance between the
dull and the feeble-minded offers a hope that
we may eventually secure some measure of
control over the former, through the same
means that we use for controlling the latter.
Through specialized post-school training,
through the selection of suitable employment,
through help in finding safe social contacts,
through the friendly advice and assistance of
the social worker, and through the possibility of moving the individual to a home
environment suitable for him, much could
be achieved for his protection in the future,
always provided that the subnormal individual who is also unbalanced, unstable, and
a danger and misery to himself and others,
can be brought under some form of care and
control. Whether that control should be
exercised under the Mental Deficiency Acts
or whether (as I hope) we may look for some
further legislation based on the needs of the
individual who is a social failure is very uncertain. But I am sure the day is not far
distant when this whole group of subnormal
members of the community will be dealt
with as needing “‘ care, supervision and control for their own protection or for the protection of others.”’

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 3.
