THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

PSYCHOLOGY IN THE SERVICE OF
EUGENICS.}

By W. McDouaaLi, M.B., F.R.S.,
Reader in Mental Philosophy in the University of Oxford.

WE are becoming accustomed to speak of the science of
eugenics; yet, from the standpoint of the philosopher who
would classify the sciences in a comprehensive and _ logical
scheme, eugenics would hardly be granted a place among the
pure sciences. It is, or aspires to be, an art rather than a
science. But, like medicine, engineering, and education, it is
an art which is concerned with and which must consist in the
application of knowledge established by the pure sciences; that
is to say, it is what we commonly call an applied science; and
it has the same claim to the title of science as these other applied
sciences, medicine, engineering and education. Like these, it
must be based upon and must apply the knowledge built up,
not by any one science, but by a whole group of sciences.

_ What gives such arts as ‘medicine and engineering the
right to be recognised as sciences, is that they are not content
simply to take and apply whatever knowledge may be put at
their disposal by the pure sciences; but rather they define their
own special problems, problems which in many cases the pure
sciences would hardly have discovered or attacked ; and, adopting and adapting the methods of research worked out by the
pure sciences, they apply them to throw light upon their own
special problems. In this way each of the great applied
sciences calls to its service a body of workers who apply
specialised methods of research—and upon whom it relies, more
and more as it develops, for the detailed special knowledge that
is required for the guidance of its practice.

1 Read before the Eugenics Education Society, Nov. 6th, 1913.
296 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In these respects the parallel between eugenics and these
other applied sciences is exact. But in one important respect
the position of eugenics is peculiar. Each of these other
applied sciences grew up in the service of an art that had long
been practised without any scientific basis. Men bound up
their wounds and prescribed herbs, they built bridges and
houses, and they trained their children, for thousands of years,
before anyone attempted to systematise any body of knowledge
for the guidance of such practices. Now, the peculiarity of the
position of eugenics is that it cannot originate as these other
applied sciences did, namely, in sporadic scattered endeavours
to obtain a little light for the guidance of an art already existing
and long practised. Eugenics is in the peculiarly difficult
position, that it must become an applied science before it can
be applied. For the design of improving the human breed
is the product of the last step of evolution, it results from the
human race attaining to self-consciousness; or, at least, it can
only become an effective purpose in proportion as the human
race attains to a collective self-consciousness and becomes
capable of collective volition. In less technical language,
eugenics can only work towards its end by establishing its ideal
in the mind of the community as an aim approved and accepted
by public opinion. Therefore eugenics has to make secure its
scientific foundations before it can begin to make application of
them. It behoves us therefore to examine with the greatest
care the relations of eugenics to its parent sciences, in order
that the scientific basis may be laid as securely and as rapidly
as possible. |

It is generally recognised that eugenics has to find one of
its principal supports in biology; but it is not so generally
recognised that it must rely even more directly upon
psychology, conceived as the empirical study of the mind.
Hitherto eugenists, in so far as they have recognised in any
degree this necessity, have done so in a very partial manner
only, treating psychology as merely an aspect or minor department of biology. But whatever may be the philosophically
correct conception of the relation of psychology to the rest of
the biological sciences, the practical and actual relation is one
PYSCHOLOGY IN THE SERVICE OF EUGENICS. 297

of relative independence; 1.e., psychology is taking shape as an
observational and experimental science which pursues its own
problems by its own methods. And it is therefore of the first
importance that the applied science of eugenics should take
pains to establish intimate relations with psychology, and that
it should apply its results and adopt and adapt its methods of
research for application to its own problems.

For it will, I suppose, be generally agreed that eugenics is
even more deeply concerned for the preservation and, if
possible, the improvement of mental sanity and vigour and the
level of intellectual and moral efficiency in the human stock,
than for its bodily perfection. So long as our bodies were
healthy and hardy, we could tolerate with equanimity some
actual decline of the average standard of stature and bulk and
muscular power. And it is especially the mental qualities of
the race (mental being taken in the widest sense to include all
that we call intellectual, moral, and spiritual qualities) that seem
to be threatened by the conditions of high civilisation. It 1s
the paradox and tragedy of high civilisation that, in the present
and in all previous ages, its tendency has been to destroy or
eliminate just those mental superiorities by which it has been
built up and which are essential for its maintenance and further
progress.

That eugenics has been a little slow in openly proclaiming
psychology as its nearest relative among the sciences was due
largely to the fact that psychology is, as compared with most of
the other biological sciences, still in a very early stage of its
development; and_ especially this is true of that branch
of psychology which can be of most service to eugenics.
Throughout the modern period psychology has been studied
mainly from the point of view of philosophical and biological
speculation, and has been chiefly concerned with the task
of discovering the general laws of mind and mental process, just as physical science is concerned to discover the most
general laws of matter and of physical processes. And the
results achieved by psychology of this kind are not of direct
service to eugenics.
298 EUGENICS REVIEW.

But there is another way of approaching the study of the
mind which, as we have been recently reminded by Professor
Max Dessoir in his ‘‘ Outlines of the History of Psychology,”’
was actively pursued by the philosophers both of classical
antiquity and of the middle ages; nameiy, the study of the
peculiarities of mental endowment of individuals. It is this
branch of psychological study (Professor Dessoir proposes to
call it psychognosis) from which eugenics has most to hope.
For the knowledge which is required as the scientific basis of
eugenics is, above all, a knowledge of the heredity of mental
qualities; and this can only be obtained by the study of the
peculiarities of endowment of related individuals.

It is true that something may be done and has been done
by statistical methods which rely only upon such knowledge
of individuals as may be inferred from their achievements in
life, without attempting any psychological analysis of their
mental endowment. The great founder of eugenics, Francis
Galton, threw open this line of research and did epoch-making
work along this line, as we all recognize. And others have
followed it up and have obtained interesting results (Schuster,
Karl Pearson).

But statistical work of this kind would seem incapable of
bringing the exact knowledge of mental heredity required by
eugenics, so long as it relies only upon popular psychology,
and investigates only such vaguely defined and complex
qualities as talent, or genius, or popularity, or good temper,
or capacity for success in the various professions. That is to
say, students of mental heredity must make use of the principles, the results, and the methods of systematic psychology,
must apply them to their own special problems; and more
especially they must concern themselves with psychognosis.
Now this branch of psychology, after a long period of neglect,
is once more being actively pursued. In Germany its principal
exponent is Dr. William Stern, who has written a valuable
systematic treatise upon it, under the name of ‘‘ Differential
Psychology.’’ But it is also called ‘‘ Individual Psychology,”’
and that, I think, is the most appropriate English name for this
study. Francis Galton himself clearly saw this necessity for
PSYCHOLOGY IN THE SERVICE OF EUGENICS. 299

the detailed study of the qualities of individuals; and in those
researches, reported in his classical work, ‘‘ Inquiries into
human faculty,”’ in which he applied exact measurement to a
number of comparatively simple mental powers, he really
initiated the modern revival of individual psychology, by
introducing the experimental method of observation into this
field. At the time when Galton undertook these researches, the
experimental methods of psychology were just beginning to
attract attention and to be actively developed in Germany, and
Galton’s work did much to promote their development. Nevertheless, the experimental methods continued to be evolved
principally for the sake of and in the service of the general
problems of psychology, rather than of individual psychology.

' Galton’s method of mental tests fell into some disfavour
with the professed psychologists ; and some of the leaders of the
present day revival of individual psychology show themselves
ignorant or forgetful of Galton’s pioneer work in this field,
work of the very first importance; for it is to the application of
the experimental methods in the form of mental tests that we
must chiefly look for progress of our knowledge of mental
heredity. Only such methods can overcome the difficulties that
are encountered, when we pursue the statistical study of mental
heredity on a basis of popular psychology only. These difficulties must be familiar to all who have discussed the bearing
upon eugenics of such work as Galton’s study of ‘‘ Genius.”
The critic always discounts the value of such evidence by raising
the objection that the sons of men of talent or genius start with
special outer advantages, so that their success in life is no proof
that they have inherited exceptional abilities; or he attributes
similarities of the careers of relatives, whether in form of successes or failures, to similarities of social and general environment. And, though we may not feel that such objections are
well founded, there seems to be no way of overcoming such
difficulties, other than the way of experimental observation or
mental tests.

Let me pass now to my proper topic, and attempt to show
you very briefly some of the ways in which the experimental
300 EUGENICS REVIEW.

method can (we may hope) bring us more exact knowledge of
the kind we need as the basis for eugenics.

We may distinguish three principal directions of such
experimental work that are supplementary to one another, but
which may be and are being pursued more or less independently
of one another.

I. The experimental method of mental tests may be applied
to the problem of the analysis of the complex mental powers
that we make use of in ordinary life into elementary or relatively
simple powers. If such relatively elementary powers can be
defined and measured they will not improbably be found to be
in many cases unit factors in heredity, and themselves inheritable not only as regards presence or absence in the make up of
any individual, but also as regards the degree of strength in
which they are transmitted from generation to generation.
Such an analysis and the determination of the heritability of
such unit factors is the ideal to be aimed at; needless to say, we
are at present very far from the accomplishment of it. But it
is much that we can conceive a method for attacking the
problem experimentally. |

Let me illustrate by indicating one step that seems already
to have been made in this direction. We commonly speak of
this man or that as being more or less intelligent; and in so
doing we mean to imply that his conduct generally, or in most
of the relations of life, bears the marks of what we mean by
intelligence ; and if we try further to define intelligence it seems
to mean a readiness and ease of adaptation of conduct to a
variety of circumstances. It is probably this that was aimed at
by Professor Karl Pearson in his well-known research in which
he classified his subjects as quick, moderately quick, slow, very
slow.

Now some psychologists have believed that there is no
such entity as general intelligence, or no one inheritable
factor which is a main condition of what we call intelligence—reaching this conclusion by deduction from general
principles. But since our general principles in this region
are still of very questionable validity, this procedure is
very unsatisfactory. We ought to have perfectly open minds
PSYCHOLOGY IN THE SERVICE OF EUGENICS. 301

towards such a question; and to seek to decide it by carefully
gathering the empirical evidence.

This was the line taken by Professor Spearman. He
asked himself—Is there any truth in this popular notion of
general intelligence ? and he conceived a method of putting the
matter to the test of experiment. ,

Suppose we apply to a large number of individuals (say 50
or more) several (say six or more) mental tests, each demanding
a mental operation of a different kind, though not of a very
highly specialised kind; and we express the degrees of proficiency displayed by the individuals in respect of each test by
ranging them in their order of merit for each task. Now
proficiency in any of these tasks, no doubt, depends in each
case upon a number of mental factors; some of which may
or may not be identical in some or all of the several tasks.
If proficiency in the several tasks does not at all depend
upon mental factors common to some or all of the tasks, we
shall probably find no appreciable correspondence or similarity
of order between any two or more of the lists expressing order
of merit of the 50 individuals. But, if proficiency in any two or
more of the tasks depends in any large degree upon a common
mental factor, 7.e., upon some function involved in each of the
two or more tasks, then we may expect to find some degree of
similarity of order in the corresponding lists of order of merit.
And conversely, if we find such correspondence or agreement
between two or more lists, t.e., if those names which appear
high in the one list are high also in the other list; then we may
infer with some degree of probability that this correspondence
is due to the operation of some one factor or function in the
execution of both tasks. And the closer this correspondence
the more confidently may we make this inference, e.g., if the
correspondence betwen any two. lists were exact, if the order
of merit were exactly the same in any two lists, then we could
infer with high probability that proficiency in the two tasks
depended in a very large, in a predominant, degree upon a factor
or factors equally involved in the execution of both of them.
This kind of correspondence is called in technical language
correlation or positive correlation.
302 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Applying this principle, Dr. Spearman found that the
orders of merit achieved by a series of individuals in a number
of simple mental tests did show a considerable degree of correspondence or positive correlation.' And he found further that
these orders showed also significant degrees of positive correlation with the order of merit in respect of ‘‘ general intelligence ”’
assigned to the same individuals by persons intimately
acquainted with all of them. These results seem then to justify
the popular conception of ‘“‘ general intelligence ’’ as a factor
or psycho-physical function that is common to and plays a
considerable part in a number of different complex mental
operations. Similar and, in some respects, more convincing
results have been obtained by Messrs. Burt and Fligel in a
research in which they applied Professor Spearman’s method,
using a different set of tests, and with certain other modifications of procedure which were thought to be improvements.?

These results, then, bear out in some measure the assumption
of a great function involved in a wide range of mental operations, which provisionally we may call ‘‘ general intelligence.’’
And, if further research should confirm this tentative conclusion, we must regard it as one of the greatest importance for
eugenics; for we should have discovered a measurable factor
which is involved in, and is an important factor or condition
of proficiency in, many mental operations; a factor which ts
possessed in very different degrees by different individuals.

The next step would be to enquire—Is the strength or
intensity of this factor, ‘‘general intelligence,’’ innately
determined ?—(and there is every probability that it is)—and
further, Is it hereditary, and if so in what degree? And it
seems very probable that by the application of similar methods
these questions also can be answered.

I have cited these investigations in order to illustrate what
I mean by the analysis of the mental powers and the discovery
of relatively elementary mental functions. It is probable that,
by the extended application of this method, we may discover

1 ‘‘General Intelligence objectively determined and Measured,” Amer. Journ. of
Psychology, Vol. XV.

2 ‘‘Experimental Tests of General Intelligence,” British Journal of Psychology,
Vol. III.
PSYCHOLOGY IN THE SERVICE OF EUGENICS. 303

and measure other such elementary functions. And the strictly
logical order of investigation would be first to exhaust the
possibilities of such analysis—to establish and define all the
elementary functions that can be thus detected; and afterwards
to measure the degree of their heritability, and to measure their
strength in individuals and in the social classes.

But the sciences seldom or never follow the strictly logical
order in their development; nor is it desirable that investigators
should hold themselves bound to attempt to follow that order.
And so we find that the other two main lines of psychological
experiment in the service of eugenics are already being pursued.

II. One of these, the second of our three lines, is to apply
mental tests directly to the task of detecting, and, so far as
possible, measuring any differences of mental endowment that
may obtain between the various classes and strata of the
population; primarily in any one community such as our own
nation or one university.

You are aware that there has long been an acute conflict
of opinion on the question of differences of innate mental endowment of the social classes. One party dogmatically denies the
existence of any such differences. The other party (basing itself
on the consideration that the upper strata of society have in the
long run been formed and continually regulated by the operation of the social ladder, which leads persons and stocks of good
abilities upward and those of inferior abilities downward in the
social scale) assume, often with a similar confidence and
dogmatism, that the upper social strata are in the main natively
superior in mental endowment to the lower. Hitherto we have
no data for the formation of an opinion other than vague general
impression, and the presumption in favour of the second view
afforded by the consideration of the social ladder.

The citation of instances of sons of labouring men who
have risen to positions of honour and wealth cannot decide the
question in the negative; nor can the demonstration of the
large proportion of distinguished men who come from the
relatively small well-to-do classes establish the positive answer.
For in these cases we cannot discount the influence of the
differing opportunities, and of social environment and education.
304 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The application of mental tests to considerable numbers of
individuals drawn from the different social strata seems to offer
the only possibility of obtaining a definite answer. Of the
importance of this problem I need say nothing. That it ts
widely recognised is sufficiently shown by the many publications which, in recent years, have drawn attention to the
difference of rates of reproduction of the social classes, and in
most cases have regarded the facts as of very grave significance.
But, as is well known, all these many well-meant warnings
make but little impression on the public mind; just because the
assumption on which they are founded, namely, that of some
positive correlation between social level and superiority of
mental endowment, has not been demonstrated, and is repugnant
to the feelings of the great majority of the public.

In order to apply mental tests to throw light on this
question we must devise a series of tests, proficiency in which
shall be as nearly as possible independent of special education ;
t.e., they must test capacities which are developed by such
modes of mental activity as all social classes are equally called
upon to exercise and have equal opportunities of exercising ;
e.g., it is impossible to make use of the results of school and
college examinations for this purpose, because these results are
so largely determined by educational opportunities of widely
different kinds. :

Again, the tests selected must be adapted to throw light on
as many aspects as possible of our mental endowment; provisionally, while we are still ignorant of the primary or
elementary hereditary factors of mind, we must attempt to
measure such ill-defined characters, as ‘‘ general intelligence,’’
‘‘ mechanical memory,’’ ‘‘ logical memory,’’ ‘‘ power of con
centration,’’ ‘‘ power of sustaining a mental effort,’’ ‘‘ capacity
for distributing the attention,’’ ‘‘ quickness and accuracy of
judgment,’’ ‘‘ readiness in seizing logical relations.’”’ And we

must hope to improve our tests and our combination of them
for this purpose in the light of the experience we gain in the
course of such investigation.

Thirdly, we should apply our tests to young subjects, 1.e.,
to children at the earliest age at which they become trustworthy
PSYCHOLOGY IN THE SERVICE OF EUGENICS. 305

subjects for such experiment; because the younger we take our
subjects, the more will native endowment predominate over
the influence of special training and experience in determining
degrees of proficiency. And, fortunately, school children from
the age of about 11 or 12 years are in other respects excellent
and convenient subjects for such investigation.

I may point to an interesting suggestion of an answer to
the question we are considering afforded by the work on school
children, done at Oxford by Messrs. Burt and Fliigel, to which
I have already referred; and I may say that we are following
up this clue with good hope of obtaining interesting results.
But, of course, such work demands the expenditure of much
time and energy by many investigators, before we can hope for
convincing demonstration of the truths required as a basis for
eugenic precepts.

The third principal line of application of psychological
experiment in the service of eugenics is the direct attack upon
the problem of mental heredity. This is the necessary supplement of the other two lines of work already noticed. It must
proceed by applying mental tests to large numbers of near
relatives, of the same and of different generations; and so
determine how far such relatives show greater similarity of
degrees of proficiency in the various tasks than persons not
related by blood. |

And in choosing our tests with this end in view we must
primarily seize upon all peculiarities or qualities in respect of
which individuals show wide differences that cannot be
attributed to differences of training and environment, putting
aside the question of their value.

I may mention that, as is already known to many members
of this society, Dr. Schuster has equipped a laboratory on the
premises of the society and proposes to direct the work of it
more particularly to this problem, to this direct attack upon the
problems of mental heredity; and I believe that Professor
Brown, at King’s College, has put on foot a similar or allied
enquiry into mental variability.

We may, I think, anticipate that these three lines of work
will now go steadily forward; that they will converge more and
306 EUGENICS REVIEW.

more, that they will mutually aid one another, and that within
a few years time they will achieve results which will be
generally recognised as having given us that firm foundation
of fact which is the urgent need of eugenics at the present time.

The work will require much patience, energy, and
ingenuity ; but if it offers a fair prospect of attaining the knowledge we need, and which can be obtained in no other way,
members of this society will not regard any such expenditure of
effort as excessive.

In conclusion, I would say a word or two about a question
of even larger scope than national eugenics. Galton, in his
later days at least, was inclined to regard eugenics as properly
concerned only with the life of the highly civilized nations.
But can we as citizens of the British Empire continue to
observe this limitation? Is it not obvious that practical statesmanship is already confronted with problems, the decision of
which should be largely determined by eugenic considerations
and by answers to questions which lie within the province of
eugenics, broadly conceived as concerned for the future welfare
of the whole human race.

Eventually, eugenics must face this larger problem. And
then it will require positive knowledge of the mental endowments of the various subraces of mankind; and especially it will
require to know as exactly as possible the mental endowments
of the progeny produced by the crossing of these subraces.
For already we see widely manifested the tendency for large
masses of population to transfer themselves from one country
and from one continent to another. Especially in north and
south America, and in many of our colonies, do we see the
juxtaposition within the same areas and political communities
of individuals drawn from many different subraces.

And, wherever such juxtaposition occurs, the crossing of
these varieties of the human species will eventually occur on
larger or smaller scale. Even so determinedly exclusive a
people as the Jews have, as is well known, interchanged much
of their blood with other peoples. In fact, we seem to be
approaching a period of universal miscegenation. Is this tendency, fraught with immense possibilities for good and evil, to
PSYCHOLOGY IN THE SERVICE OF EUGENICS. 307

be allowed to go on in an utterly blind manner? Or is mankind, conscious of itself as a whole, to take intelligent thought
for its own future and to attempt to regulate in some manner
and degree these processes of racial mixture. It is clear that
the civilised governments are already exerting great powers of
interference, that their powers of regulation are almost limitless,
and that problems of this kind will confront them with increasing urgency. Are, then, their decisions to be made utterly
without regard to eugenic considerations? Surely such considerations should have an altogether predominant weight in
deciding such questions. For it is, I think, clear that healthy
political organisms cannot grow up where the population
consists of two or more racial stocks that remain persistently
averse to intermarriage, and therefore racially distinct. We
see this illustrated sufficiently in the United States of America
and in South Africa and elsewhere. And it seems highly
probable that some blends of the human subraces are eugenically
admirable and others disastrous. In order to illustrate the
position by a case in which the question is already acute, I refer
to the United States of America. There the old population is
chiefly descended from the subraces of North Europe. But during
the last decade there has been a tremendous stream of immigration from South and South-East Europe, and already the cry is
heard that this stream should be checked, that it threatens the
future of the States. In Canada and Australia, too, similar
problems already confront practical statesmanship. Are these
great areas to be reserved for the European or North European
stock? or should yellow and brown and black be freely
admitted; eventually to form by blending new subraces?
These are great questions on which, as it seems to me,
eugenics must strive to express its opinion and make its point
of view felt. But it can only do so on a basis of exact knowledge of mental endowment and mental heredity. And the
acquisition of such knowledge is the task of psychology.
Much has already been said or written on these questions of
racial psychology ; but very little is established ; and it is difficult
to see how progress with them is to be made, if we do not apply
308 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the methods of experimental and relatively exact observation
now being worked out by psychology.

I have not attempted to lay before you a statement of results
achieved by psychology in the service of eugenics, because
hitherto those results are few and slight... I have rather
attempted to indicate a program of work that lies before us,
and the nature of some of the methods by aid of which we may
hope to make progress with it; for it is of the first importance
for the progress of that work that the members of this society,
which embodies and focuses enlightened opinion on these
topics, should take an intelligent interest in this programme and
give it their sympathy and support.
