48

than an interest in the same work, which must
surely bring husband and wife together and help
them greatly in the days when the family has
grown up. Joan Hope, S.R.N.
23 Taviton Street, W.C.r1.

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Dear S1r,—To deal adequately with the many
points raised by Mr. Halford in your January issue
(p. 141) would take too much of your space and
more time than can be spared by me, a middle-aged
housewife, involved, like thousands of others, in a
day-to-day struggle on the home front—a front
which, even in wartime, brings little honour and
no glory.

One sentence in Mr. Halford’s letter needs
special comment: “‘ What we say is that .. . the
student habit in women aborts the sexual instinct
and consequently removes from the field of reproduction the very best type of mother.”

If ‘‘ the student habit in women ”’ refers to those
who are able to have a university education, my
first comment is that little or no evidence exists
to prove that this ‘‘ aborts the sexual instinct.”
It is true that many women graduates do not
marry, this, of course, leading to the lack of opportunity of becoming “‘ the very best type of mother.”’

There are, in my opinion, good reasons why such
women do not marry, the chief one being that those
who have gone through the years of disciplined
study necessary to achieve a profession are in no
hurry to be booted out of it through entering the
bonds of holy matrimony, which, in most cases,
entails starting an entirely new job, either without
any domestic help or with assistance of very poor
value from women who, in general, render domestic
service because they cannot—for physical or mental
reasons—fit into the economic machine.

For housework, despite some present raising of
status because of the war, is still the despised and
rejected occupation, and enlightened women cannot be expected to make a straight dash for the
combined job of cook-housemaid-seamstress-nurselaundress which has hitherto frequently been the
lot of the health-conscious woman who has borne

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

two or three children and managed her home
efficiently through constant “ study ”’ to scientize
it. Believe me, life has been hard indeed for my
generation of mothers, who have passed more than
a quarter of their married lives under conditions of
total war.

Some people believe that.a kind of Elysium is
going to begin after this second attempt to end war
by war. If such an Elysium is to be brought into
being, the voluntary personal sacrifice at present
widely prevalent will have to continue for many
years after hostilities cease. Whether or not this
sacrifice continues, as my sex is likely to be called
upon to exhibit the larger share of unselfishness, I
warn Mr. Halford and other insufficiently-informed
persons who have rushed into print about the fall
of the birth rate—including (Heaven forgive him)
Herbert Morrison—that, if the decade after this
war bears any resemblance to that after the last
war, the fall in the birth-rate will be, to say the
least, surprising.

Time does not permit me to verify statistics, but
I believe that Dr. Kugzynski has shown that young
married German women in the years before 1939
had already registered their disapproval of Nazidom
by avoidance of parenthood. And I believe that
such avoidance will happen here, in greater degree,
after peace is signed, despite the present increase
of births, unless this nation completely readjusts
its sense of values. Domestic work must again be
respected, as it was before the industrial era. The
status of those engaged in it must remain at its
present special war-time level. And, lastly, if
woman is to qualify to take her share in the outside
world so that, through the exercise of her special
gifts, a way can be found to preserve for fatherhood
the ‘‘ 1963 class’ now being born, not only should
she be given equality of opportunity in education,
but society must allow her, through the provision
of créches, nursery schools, etc., the right to
determine at marriage whether or not she will
continue—with intervals for child-bearing—the
profession for which she has been trained.

ALICE JENKINS.
53 Gloucester Terrace, W.2.
