Che Eugenics Lou Eoucation society.

Prestdent: Major Major Leowann DARWIN.
Don. Secretary: Mrs. A. C. Gorro. on, Treasurer: Mz. von Frarscut. |
oor Members:
THE Rr. -Hon. A. J. BALFour, P.C., F.R Siz ARCHIBALD GBRIKIE, K.C. B., F.R. a.
Her GRACE, THE DUCHESS OF Mani aonoven. PROFESSOR A. WEISMANN.
Vice=ePresidents :
S1r JAMES BarR, President, Liverpool Branch.
Dr. BENHAM, President, New Zealand Society.
Str JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, -Ex-President, 1908 to 1909.
BisHop D’Arcy, President, Belfast Branch.
ProF. STARR JORDAN, President, Eugenic Section, American Genetic Association.
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL, President, Haslemere Brartch.
RicgHtT Hon. Lorp MOULTON, President, Birmingham Heredity Society.
_ M. EDMOND PERRIER, President, Société Francaise d’Eugénique. ,
Dr. A. PLOETz, President, International Society for Race Hygiene.
_ Pror. E. B. Pou.ton, President, Oxford Branch.
- “ Pror. SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi di Eugenica.
Pror. SEWARD, President, Cambridge Eugenics Society.
BisHOP WELLDON, President, Manchester Branch. oF

Members of Council:
LaDy OWEN-MACKENZIE.
Mr. Rosert MOND.
Dr. F. W. Mott, F.R.S.
Mr. G. P. MUDGE.
Mrs. G. POOLry.
Mr. W. REA, M.P.
Dr. A. REID.
Mr. JOHN RUSSELL.
Dr. ETTIE SAYER.
Mr. F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.Se.
Pror. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.
Mr. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.Se.
Dr. C. G.. SELIGMANN. .
PRoF. J. A. THOMSON.
Dr. A. F. TREDGOLD.
Mrs. ALEC TWexrpis. —
Mr. W. C. D.’ WHetTHaM, F.R.S.
Mr. ERNEST LANR, F.R.C.S. -Dr. DouGLas WHITE.
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. Dr. A: GORDON WILSON.

Branch Representations on the General Council, 1913-14
Mr. CROFTON BLACK.

Sir E. BRABROOK, C.B.
Mrs. THEODORE CHAMBERS.
Hon. Str JOHN Cocksurn, K.C.M.G. |
Mr. R. NEWTON-CRANE.

Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY.

Str H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E.

Dr. LANGDON Down,

Mr. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

Pror. J. FINDLAY.

Mr. E. G. WHELER GALTON.

Mr. M. GREENWOOD, JuN., M.R.C.S.
Dr. W. HADLEY. |

Mrs. HENDERSON...

Major Hits, F.R.S.

Tue Very Rev. W. R. InGg, D.D.
Miss KIRBY,

Birmingbam:
Mr. Carey GILSON, Mr. HUMPHREY HUMPHREYS. MR. PERCIVAL MILLS.
. Liverpool; oo
Mr. R. T. Bovey. Mr. R. D. LAvRIE. -ALtp. T. R. GULLEY.
- $aslemere: Manchester : Belfast:
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. Dr. MUMFORD. Pror. J. A. LINDSAY.
: Rew Zealand: Oxford:
ADMIRAL HENDERSON. THE HION. T. A. MACKENZIE. . Dr. E. SCHUSTER.
Rew South Wales: Brighton: may
Zo be appotnted ). Mr. A. J. HALL. ~ .
escatch Committee ; Education Committee : 2

Mr. EpGar ScHusTfsr, D.Sc., Chairman.
Mr. A. M. Carr-SAUNDERS, Secretary.

Mr. J. RussELL, Chairman.
Mrs. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary.

Dr. GREEENWOOD,
Mr. LIDBETTER.
Dr. TREDGOLD.

Miss BONWICK.
Mr. Hope-JONEs.
Mr. NICHOLS.
Miss TRENCH.
Publication Committee :
This Committee consists of the Executive Officers of the Society, Chairmen and Secretaries of Sub-Conimittees and the
Branch representatives.
N.B.—Other Committees are appointed from time to time for special purposes,

“ Eugenics is the study of agencies under social control that may improve or r impair
- tae racal qualities of future generations either physically or mentally.”

r
. OBJECTS. |
I. .—Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of respone
sib ine int he respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of E meme ideals. .
—T > spread a knowledge of the Laws of Heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as that knpwledge may affect
improvemert of the rac ee
It, — To farther. Eugenic Teaching, at home, in.the schools, and elsewhere.

*-) Metabershi SUBSCRIPTION. > One amen per Annum.
Lote . ? = - Pr ® .
. - Members - Hombership . “ - Five Shillings: Lees Annum. «23
- PRIVILEGES. j
’ . Attendance at. Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.
Zing . Members only receive THE EuGEnics REviEw free.

“Pras ea Application jor Membership and Associate Membership and Juul particulars of 6 the + Saiy
- id be obtained of the Hon. Secretary. —

‘ A eo 1oOREIORS : yf House, Kingsway, 35°, aM to 1 p.m.

- oFFicR HOURS 10.80 a.m, to

 
NOTES AND COMMENTS. |

The Seientific Study of Man.—The science of eugenics
lives and grows by a beneficent parasitism on studies organized
for purposes other than its own. In particular it should search
for and eagerly absorb any knowledge which would facilitate
intra-racial classification according to natural qualities. We
welcome therefore the establishment of the ‘‘ Institut BulsTempels ’’? which was opened at Brussels on January 2oth.
Although it is primarily a school of pedagogy, yet, if its ends are
achieved, it will undoubtedly contribute knowledge of which we
stand in need. This it will do directly by organising experimental researches, having for their object an understanding of
the child and indirectly be training teachers capable of carrying
out such researches. A course of instruction to last for two
years has been arranged. In the first year lectures will be
given on embryology and heredity by Dr. Paul Heger, director
of the Solvay Physiological Institute. He will deal particularly
with the inheritance of instincts, normal psychological inheritance and the inheritance of disease. Dr. Victor Pechere will
lecture on the physiology of the child. The laws of growth
and the technique of anthropometry will receive particular
attention. General psychology will be treated from its experimental. side by Professor Ley, and Dr Henrotin will discuss,
under the heading of Puericulture, such subjects as infant
mortality and the nutrition of the new-born child. Instruction
in school hygiene, including under this heading sex education,
will be given by Dr. Ensch, and Dr. Croly will lecture on
psychogenesis or the psychology of the growing child. His
lectures fall into two groups, of which one treats the subject of
mental tests in theory and, practice.

Knowledge of the utmost value to the eugenist would also
be likely to accrue if the propaganda of Mr. Arthur MacDonald
attain results commensurate with the energy displayed in
making them public. He has, for example, addressed a letter
to the Home Secretary urging the importance of the proper
154 EUGENICS REVIEW.

study of the criminal, and making practical suggestions how
this may be done without incurring a great deal of expense.
He proposes that the inmates of penal and reformatory institutions should be studied in each country by young men with
medical, psychological and anthropological training. The
work should be international in character, and done in each
country in a uniform way in order that comparable results might
be obtained. We have received from Mr. MacDonald a copy
of this letter, together with another addressed to University
students, in which he points out the importance of studying the
criminal pauper and defective classes, and suggests that some
might choose it for their life work. He gives an indication of
the sort of training which those who do so should adopt.

In this connection it is interesting to note that among the
questions to be discussed at the International Penitentiary
Congress, to be held in London in 1915, are whether laboratories
should be installed in Penitentiary institutions for the scientific
study of their inmates, and whether such study is likely to lead
to knowledge of the causes of criminality and the best methods
of treating criminals.

The Eugenie Aspect of the Employment of Married
Women.—The recent discussion in the London County Council
on the advisability of employing married women as school
medical inspectors and the circular issued by the Post Office,
stating that postmistresses and sub-postmistresses would be
dismissed on marriage, show that the practice of barring married
women from skilled employments is being widely adopted, and
may be affecting such a number of women as to be of eugenic
importance. It may, perhaps, be asserted that a department
should not decide whether to employ married women or not
on any other grounds but those of economy and efficiency, and
that therefore eugenic considerations are irrelevant. But this
position is not one likely to be seriously maintained by thinking
people at the present day, and public institutions are generally
expected to set the example of not seeking to obtain immediate
advantages at the expense of the general welfare of the community. Although we are well aware that the whole question
is too complicated to discuss adequately in the space of a short
NOTES AND COMMENTS. 155

note, we will endeavour to state as briefly as possible the case
which may be urged on purely eugenic grounds against the
dismissal of women from skilled employment when they marry.
It is generally recognised that under utopian conditions the
married woman should never be forced by economic pressure to
leave her home and children, and we do not imagine that many
married women with children would undertake extraneous
daily work at all, unless forced to do so to maintain the home.
The main question is therefore not whether married women
should be allowed to work, but whether those who must work
should pursue the calling for which they are trained, or whether
they are to lose on marriage the advantage of their professional
qualifications, and thus be forced to seek some other employment
under conditions which may be more detrimental to the well
being of the family.

The prospect of having to adopt the latter alternative is
likely to deter many women from marrying at all, and to retard
the marriage of others. Both these consequences are dysgenic.
Among wage-earning women, those who have proved their
efficiency by earning their living at skilled work are probably
superior in energy and intellectual capacity than the remainder,
and, as the excess of women over men makes it impossible for
all women to marry, it is just these who should not be prevented
from so doing. It may, perhaps, be argued in answer to this
that such women even if they do marry are likely to have very
small families, but the answer to such an argument is that small
families are better than none at all. Even if marriage is postponed for them and not actually prevented the results are not
much better, since late marriage admittedly leads to many
evils, apart from the consequent reduction in the size of the
family. There are also other grave objections to conditions
which tend to place unreasonable restrictions on marriage,
besides those we have been considering. For it may well be
expected that the people affected will try to minimise the hardship entailed, either by contracting secret marriages or by
entering into irregular unions. Where the restrictions are
really unreasonable such unions might come to be condoned
by public opinion, and thereby the institution of marriage itself
156 EUGENICS REVIEW.

would fall in prestige. We hold that the essential method of
eugenics is the ennobling of marriage, and thus regard any
contrary tendency as undesirable in the highest degree.

The Feeble-Minded in Australasia. —We learn from the
Adelaide Advertiser that the Australasian medical congress, held
at Sydney in 1911, decided to make systematic investigations
into the problems connected with the feeble-minded population
of Australia and New Zealand. For this purpose they appointed
a representative in each State to form a local committee, and in
addition organised a central committee consisting of Dr. Jones
(Inspector-General of the Insane in Victoria) and three others.
The function of the central committee was to collect and coordinate the data and to report to the New Zealand Congress at
the beginning of this year. Their report has now been completed, but is in some ways disappointing as they were unable
to make anything like an accurate estimate of the prevalence of
mental defect. This was due partly to the unwillingness of the
medical profession to supply the information asked from them—
out of the 2,450 who were approached on the subject only 211
responded—partly to similar unwillingness on the part of the
heads of schools, and in Queensland to the hostility assumed by’
the Director of Education towards any enquiry in the State
schools. From such returns as were available the committee
concluded that at least four per thousand of the total number of
school children were definitely feeble-minded, and three times
that number were dull enough to require special training.

The committee recommend the establishment of special day
schools and of residential schools, both paying and non-paying,
where children suspected of being mentally defective might be
kept under observation, so that those found actually to be so
might be properly trained, while the rest were sent back to the
ordinary schools. They further recommend the establishment
of residential colonies with separation of the sexes for the
permanent care of the feeble-minded when grown up. They
suggest that moral defectives might be dealt with to a large
extent by these institutions, or might require some special
provision.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH.

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPICAL SCIENCE. Vol. 59, Part 4.
February, 1914. Chromosomes, Heredity and Sex. By L. Doncaster,
Sc.D. Pp. 487-521. In this paper is presented a review of the present
state of the evidence with regard to the material basis of hereditary
transmission and sex determination. The author summarises it as follows :—“In the first section a summary is given of the main lines of
argument leading to the conclusion that ‘ Mendelian characters are determined by chromosomes.’ Some indication is given of the restrictions,
which must be placed on the meaning of this phrase in respect of the part
played by cytoplasm in heredity. It is concluded that the arguments in its
favour, though very strong indirectly, are not supported by sufficient
direct evidence to be regarded by themselves as indisputable. In the
second section the chief classes of facts are reviewed which suggest a
relation between chromosomes and sex-determination, and a preliminary
account is given of a new case of an unpaired ‘sex-chromosome’ in the
female, in a strain of the moth Abraxas. It is concluded that the arguments for a relation between chromosomes and sex are much stronger
than those connecting chromosomes with Mendelian factors.

In the third section the facts of sex limited inheritance are discussed;
these are regarded as strongly reinforcing the arguments of the two preceding sections.

Lastly, certain difficulties are considered, and it is concluded that sex
cannot be determined directly by the presence or absence of a factor which
merely determines whether an ovary or a testis shall develop, but that
the determining factor causes a certain type of metabolism, which in turn
leads to the production of one sex or the other. If such metabolism is
induced by other causes, an individual of one sex may probably arise from
gametes which, in the absence of disturbing causes, would have given rise
to the other sex.” E. H. J. S.

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY. Vol. XVII. No. 2. March, 1914.
The Action of Various Anzsthetics in Suppressing Cell-division in Seaurchin Eggs, by Ralph S. Lillie.

This is an interesting paper dealing with the inhibitory action of
certain anzsthetics upon cell-division. It is suggested that the rhythmical
process of cell-division, as well as the rhythmical contraction of heart
muscle and cilia, depends upon some reversible change in the permeability of the cell-membranes, and consequently that neuro-muscular
anesthesia is caused by inhibiting these changes in the permeability of the
membrane. It is also concluded that since the concentration, in a great
number of anesthetic investigations, required to arrest cell-division is
the same as that required to produce neuro-muscular anesthesia in the
larve, it is inferred that both phenomena depend upon the same alteration
in permeability.

BEDROCK. Vol. II. 1914. Biological Terms, by G. Archdall Reid.
Pp. 515-538. When shorn of its controversial character, this article is a
protest against the mis-use of the words “innate,” “ acquired,” “ inherit,”
and “reproduced.” Its interest for eugenists lies in the stress laid upon
the essential character both of nature and nurture, for without both these
factors nothing can be reproduced—nurture, to convert to an actuality
the potentiality inherited. The author contends that it is meaningless to
say that characters can be either “innate” or “acquired.” These words
must only be applied to likenesses and differences. Nothing can be
inherited but a bundle of potentialities, nothing can be produced without a
stimulus, so that all characters must be both innate and acquired, or else
neither. It is as ridiculous to say that the ordinary muscular develop176 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ment of a man is “innate,” but the additional muscular development of
the blacksmith “ acquired,” as it is to call a wall “innate,” but the top
layer of bricks “ acquired.” He contends further that had these terms
been used correctly, the Darwinian and Lamarckian controversy would
never have existed, for the disputants supposed that acquired characters
were evoked by something (7.¢., nurture) out of nothing, and that innate
characters were evoked by nothing out of something (¢.e. nature); whereas
in reality, both nature and nurture have co-operated to produce the characters in question.

The words “ inherit” and “ reproduce” are also said to be confused.
When a child is said to inherit the character of his father, the meaning
of “inherit” is shifted to the meaning of “reproduce.” The child reproduces the character, the potentiality for which he inherits from his father.
The author, however, does not hesitate to say that mental and moral traits
are “wholly” developed in response to experience (i.e. nurture), when he
wishes to show the necessity of still further improving the environment
of school children and the poor. H. O.

BEDROCK. Vol. III. No. 1. April, 1914. The Instruction of Schoolchildren in Matters of Sex, by Mrs. T. La Chard.

This somewhat discursive article divides the problem of sex-instruction into two parts, “ Sex-biology ” and “ Sex-hygiene.” The writer quotes
from several early authors and appends a useful though unsubstantial
bibliography. The view taken is that sex-biology should be taught at
an early age as part of the school curriculum, and that instruction in sexhygiene should be given to boys and girls at a more mature age, by
doctors, parents, school teachers and perhaps clergymen, in a manner
which must be decided upon by further experience.

Directions of Recent Work on the Inheritance of Acquired Characters,
by H. M. Fuchs.

This interesting paper summarises the most recent work on the inheritance of acquired characters. There are two possible ways in which
characters may become inherited. (1) By means of stimuli which affect
the soma and through it the germ-cells which form the next generation,
(2) by means of stimuli which affect the soma and the germ-cells simultaneously. The first method is designated “somatic induction” and the
second “ parallel induction.” The latter is considered by the author to
have been established by the experiments of Standfuss, Fischer and
others. He then proceeds to summarise two classes of experiments. (a)
Those in which the soma is subjected to unusual conditions, to see whether
the offspring are affected, e.g., Tower’s experiments with ‘the potato
beetle, Leftzmotarsa, and Kammerer’s experiments with amphibia; and
(b) those in which ovaries are transplanted to a foster-mother, to see
whether somatic characteristics affect the offspring, e.g., Guthrie’s experiments with hens, and Castle and Phillips’ experiments with guinea-pigs.

The interesting work of Secerov, with a view to ascertaining the extent to
which external stimuli can directly reach the germ-cells, is mentioned, as
well as other experiments in which the offspring of animals have been
shown to have been affected by dyes and poisons administered to the
mother. Although the author points out the necessity of using pure
strains, and of avoiding the direct effect upon the germ-cellsof the unusual
conditions due to the experiments, yet he does not lay sufficient stress
on the necessity of rearing animals under ormal artificial conditions in
order to control the animals reared under abnormal artificial conditions,
nor does he mention the extraordinary lack of numerical data and detailed
description in both Tower’s and Kammerer’s experiments, or the curious
chemical and other elementary inexactitudes that have appeared in the
former’s work. Further, no mention is made of the earlier experiments,
Brown-Sequard’s with guinea-pigs and Schiibler’s with wheat, or of the
important work of Wolff and others with micro-organisms.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 177

Dr. Reid on Biological Terms, by the Hermit of Prague. Terminological Inexactitudes: A Reply, by G. Archdall Reid.

In answer to an article by Dr. Reid in the last number of Bedrock, in
which he maintained that to say “acquired” or “ inborn” characteristics
were inherited was meaningless, the Hermit of Prague, whose reply
would be more forcible if it were less facetious, accuses Dr. Reid of
confusing “class-names ” with “class-definitions,” for he holds that the
words “acquired” and “inborn” are merely symbols that implicitly
contain definitions which have been amply stated in the writings of the
various biologists who have used them. Since, therefore, it is plainly
ridiculous to substitute a “class-name” for a “class-definition ”—unless
the original definition is kept in mind—he concludes that Dr. Reid is
wrong in supposing that any man (much less Darwin, Spencer and
Weismann, who are implicated) would be so ignorant as to use them
repeatedly without due consideration for the obvious fact—so much
insisted on by Dr. Reid—that all characters are a product of potentiality
and stimulus (2.é¢., nature and nurture).

With Dr. Reid’s answer, which appears in the same number, the
argument becomes rather tedious, especially as he never appears to come
really into touch with his critic, but contents himself with much repetition
and with pointing out the fact that the Hermit is not very happy in
quoting the definitions said to be implied in the class-names “ inborn ”
and “acquired” by the various authors mentioned—no easy task, considering how many pages Dr. Reid has needed to define his own meaning.
Finally, Dr. Reid does not attempt to defend himself for having in a
very lucid footnote inadvertently slipped into the terminology he wishes
to discard.

HIBBERT JOURNAL. Vol. XII., No. 2. Jan., 1914. Eugenics and Politics,
by Dr. F. C. S. Schiller. Pp. 241-259. Dr. Schiller emphasises the necessity for politicians never to forget that the family, and not the individual
or the society, is the unit that should receive primary consideration. He
points out that progress is dependent upon the continued foresight of the
human race, and is not automatic. The difficulties of civilisation are
increasing, and will be immeasurably greater when the present supplies of
coal and oil are exhausted, so that though Malthus was mistaken, yet
Malthusianism is no false alarm. All nobilities by their nature fail to
reproduce themselves, and tend to die out, though this ordering of society
cannot always have existed, for there must have been a time when the
fitter survived. Now, however, biological progress has come to an end,
and sociological progress has superseded it. Though this is in itself a
gain, yet it has introduced the phenomenon of social contra-selection,
the elimination of the fit, which has resulted in the birth-rate being
recruited from the less able—witness the present lack of officers and
clergymen. If politicians do not see that this is reversed by assisting
the family-unit and refraining from taxing the middle-classes out of
existence, the human race will come to join the physiological failures
with the dinosaurs in the museums of the future. H

HIBBERT JOURNAL. Vol. XII., No. 3. April, 1914. Contains a discussion of Dr. Schiller’s article, “Eugenics and Politics,” by John L.
Heaton, R. M. Maciver, and E. H. Bethell.

JOURNAL OF STATE MEDICINE, April, 1914. Sexual Disease and the
Individual. A. Corbett Smith. This is, after an introduction in a previous number, the second of four papers on venereal diseases. It is of a
popular character and is well calculated to interest the average reader.
The author, who is also the editor, is a fluent and readable writer, and
there is a demand for such information at present. This lecture gives a
popular account of syphilis in its various stages, and discusses its import178 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ance to the community. It is not free from mistakes and errors of judgment. Ozoena, ¢.g., does not mean “bone diseases”; aneurysm does not
mean a gradual closure of the arteries. The quotation fromthe Registrar’s
returns is misleading. The conclusion that “at least one-half of all
disease, if not a still larger proportion, is due more or less directly to
syphilis,” is quite unjustified by his premisses; and this sort of statement
is the most serious defect of the article, with the general purpose of which
we are in agreement. The facts are bad enough; to exaggerate them in
this manner is to bring the movement against venereal disease into disrepute.

P The May number of the same journal gives an account of “ syphilis
insontium,” explaining how this disease is handed on to innocent wives
and their offspring, and bringing home to the reader its disastrous effect
in infantile mortality. Infection of doctors, nurses and others is also
dealt with. It is, on the whole, a fair, if a highly coloured, picture; we
must only protest at the suggestion, which nobody would now defend,
that rickets and syphilis are identical. The series ends with the June
number. Here we find an array of statistics, many of which are interesting. Unfortunately, Mr. Corbett Smith has got confused in his interpretation of the figures, and allows himself to abuse other writers without
obvious justification. The Berlin figures which he quotes represent persons
who were under treatment on a given day, Dr. Blaschko gives an estimate
for the proportion of adult males who have at some time or other contracted disease under 30 years of age. The two figures are hardly likely to
correspond. He forgets, or does not understand, that syphilis, until the
advent of Ehrlich, was rarely cured, and that most persons who acquired
syphilis remained syphilitic. Nobody pretends that 7 per cent. of the
whole Melbourne populace are infected every year, or that there are
500,000 new syphilitic infections annually in London; but these may be
quite reasonable computations of the syphilitic population of each city.
This sort of misapprehension has introduced confusion into the figures
given in this paper.

These, however, are the defects of a popular writer. We are, on the
whole, glad that these papers have been written; and the attitude of mind
exhibited in the closing pages is eminently reasonable. He looks to
education of the public and the introduction of better facilities for treatment as the two great lines of advance; and in this we feel sure he is right.

SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW. Vol. VII., No. 1. April, 1914. Abnormal Psychology. Professor William Brown. Pp. 37-49. In a rather disjointed paper, the
author refers to several well-known phenomena associated with abnormal
psychology—hysteria, automatic writing and double personality, as well
as hypnosis and the “hypnoidal” state. He believes that “functional
diseases are produced by mental causes, and can be cured by mental
means.” Dr. Morton Prince’s case of Miss Beauchamp, from whose
personalities he was able to obtain some important introspective records,
is outlined; and in addition, the author gives the theory of Freud, that
wishes repressed in early childhood may re-appear in later life as the
material of hysteria. These repressed wishes are realised in the dreams of
normal subjects, for during sleep the censor of consciousness is not able to
prevent their appearance, but can only disguise them, so that they fulfil a
counter-wish formed by the waking self against the unwelcome desire.

H. O.

NATURE. Vol. 93. No. 2,321. April 23rd, 1914. Mutations of Bacterta, by R. T. Hewlett.

This is a note mentioning various methods of altering the morphology
and the physiological characters of certain bacteria, especially the
observation made by Mme. Victor Henri of the fact that B. anthracis can
be very materially affected by subjecting the sporing bacillus to ultraviolet light in a quartz tube.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 179

UNITED EMPIRE. The Royal Colonial Institute Journal. Vol. V., No.
5s. May, 1914. The Empire and the Birth-Rate. By C. V. Drysdale,
D.Sc. Pp. 398-416.

This paper examines the facts as to the almost universal decline of the
birth-rate in civilised countries, and tries to correct certain popular ideas
with regard to this decline. |

The writer has deduced from his investigations the existence of a law,
which he calls “ The Law of Correspondence between Birth and DeathRates.” In support of this deduction he gives the figures of the birthrates, general death-rates, and infant mortality rates in various countries.
{It should be noted that in this case the infant mortality rate is not put
in the usual form, as so many deaths per 1,000 births in any given year,
but as so many infant deaths per 1,000 of the whole population, which
gives very different results.)

These figures are mostly given in the form of a very simple diagram,
showing the birth-rate, death-rate, and infant mortality rate, per 1,000 of
the population, one above the other, each being differently coloured, so
that the rate of natural increase (the excess of births over deaths) is easily
seen at a glance.

Dr. Drysdale claims to be a strong Imperialist, and he devotes the
greater part of his paper to the consideration of the position of the various
parts of the British Empire with regard to this natural increase of population, afterwards comparing its position as a whole with that of the other
important nations, to the advantage of the Empire.

He argues that the facts go to show that neither a rapid increase of
population nor a high standard of national efficiency is secured by a high
birth-rate. A high birth-rate means a high death-rate, and if this is
checked by humanitarian legislation the result is a “ process of reversed
selection.” He believes that the question is largely one of food supply,
so that an increase of food production rather than of the birth-rate is the
end to be aimed at.

He also advocates the limitation of families, especially among the
poorer classes, and quotes the case of Holland, where an organisation for
this object has been in existence since 1881, to prove that such a policy
quickly produces improvement in national prosperity and _ national
physique, besides an actually accelerated rate of natural increase.

The paper was followed by a discussion, most of the speakers on the
whole agreeing with Dr. Drysdale’s conclusions, though some of them
thought they needed qualifying.

FOREIGN.

ARCHIV FUER RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE, IX., 5; September-October, 1913 (issued March 6th, 1914).

W. Weinberg: Auslesewirkungen bet biologisch - statistischen
Problemen, II. (p. 557-581). A continuation of the author’s exposition
and discussion of his methods of compensating for the effects of social
selective factors (influences of the environment) and for such errors as
result from the personal equation and its “ artificially selective action ”
in the collection and interpretation of statistical material bearing on
problems of heredity. For example, when a transmitted character appears
with different intensity in different individuals, the more evident cases are
apt to be first seen and noted and the less evident overlooked, and the
same applies to families in which many members are bearers of a particular character as compared to families in which only one member is
affected. The possibility must also be considered that when a character
is manifested with great intensity in a family, there are more individual
bearers of it than in the average affected family. It is further evident
that such characters as seldom appear until a certain age has been reached,
and which become manifest as a result of the mutual action of inciting
180 EUGENICS REVIEW. ;

external forces and complex transmitted factors of unknown number,
must vary greatly in intensity and are frequently passed over unnoticed.
Weinberg shows that the study of biological problems by the statistician
leads to the discovery of sources of error which are hidden from purely
individual and clinical methods of research and to the recognition of the
necessity of compensating for the effects of external, especially social,
influences on the development of transmitted characters. He strongly
recommends a national organisation for research into problems of heredity.

W. Claassen: Rekrutierungsstatistik des Deutschen Reiches, 19021913, und Friedensprdsenastdrke (p. 582-585). In accordance with the

rovisions of the new German defence law, the peace strength of the

erman army and navy has been increased by 120,000 men. It is claimed
by some military authorities that this has been done without lowering
the physical standard of fitness. Claassen shows that unless the percentage of fitness has suddenly risen by 7% per cent., which is not
probable, in view of the fact that it sank over 3 per cent. during the eight
years preceding 1911, this cannot well be the case.

Julius Wolf: Religion und Geburtenriickgang (p. 586-594). An
answer to certain writers who deny the influence of religion on the birthrate. Practically all religions encourage the propagation of the race, but
the Roman Catholic Church, by reason of its explicit condemnation of the
use of preventives and its greater control over the individual, is able to
bring a more powerful influence to bear from this point of view than the
other confessions. Lutheranism, in spite of its “Catholic” sexual
morality, is, in Dr. Wolf’s opinion, less favourable to a high birth-rate
than Catholicism, and this is mainly due to the absence of the confessional. That the influence of religion is small in the centres of industry
is generally recognised, and that this finds its inevitable expression in the
birth-rate can be statistically proved, although great care must be taken
to isolate the religious from the many other factors involved.

Dr. Grassl : Der Erfolg alter und neuer ehelicher Geschlechtssitten in
Bayern (p. 595-627). An interesting if not wholly convincing paper by a
well-known opponent of Neomalthusian and feminist doctrines. Grassl
considers that if one allows for two years between successive births and
for the fact that a large number of women marry at a later age than
twenty-three years, that ten is the normal number of children born to a
Bavarian woman who nurses her own offspring. He views with evident
alarm the headway which Neomalthusian practices are making in the
country districts, where the fertility of the average marriage used to be
considerably greater than it is to-day, and he differs from many competent authorities, including the statisticians of the Bavarian Home Office,
in refusing to believe that a high birth-rate and its accompanying high
rate of infant mortality is either wasteful over-production or an injury to
the health of the race. On the contrary, he endeavours to prove that a
high birth-rate is an unmixed blessing, that the districts in which the
greatest number of children are born relative to the number of women
of marriageable age supply the largest proportion of recruits fit for
military service, and that the Boers and the Bulgarians, the Russians
and the Poles, the Servians and the Turks and other prolific peoples of
Eastern Europe are of a higher average physique than the men of
Western Europe. Dr. Grassl suggests that women should be enabled to
work less in order that they may have more energy to devote to childbearing, and proposes that in the grain-raising districts the authorities
should see to it that during the winter, the men, who are then for the
most part idle, should take upon their own shoulders the duty of caring
for the live-stock instead of letting their wives do it as heretofore.
Mothers should be advised and assisted (by lightening their labour) to
nurse their children for a full year, so that beyond taking advantage of
the usual temporary sterility during the period of breast-feeding no
attempt need be made to limit the number of offspring. Public institutions
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 181

for the care of infants are an evil, because they encourage mothers not
to nurse their children. “The ancient and medieval custom of limiting
marriage to the physically and mentally fit, of taking the fullest advantage
of such selected married couples as producers of children, and especially
of the wife as Vollmutter who nurses her infants for at least a year, would
do far more towards safeguarding the existence and the anthropological
and consequently social development of the population than the modern
customs of high frequency of marriage, the limitation of the size
of individual families, and the bringing up of the child without the
physical and often without even the intellectual assistance of the wife
as mother.” Although much of what Grass] says is quite to the point,
especially his insistence on the importance of breast-feeding, it is obvious
that the question of the birth-rate cannot be satisfactorily dealt with
unless one has as thorough a knowledge of the economic, social and
psychological factors that determine its fluctuations as of its more purely
medical and biological aspects.

Dr. Fritz Lenz: Rassewertung in der hellenischen Philosophie. I.
Der Kynismus (p. 628-644). Antisthenes, and Plato, whose teaching was
greatly influenced by Antisthenes, were the most consistent expositors of
race hygiene among the Greek philosophers, and their sympathies were
with the aristocratic and patriarchal ideals of the Spartans rather than
with Athenian democracy and cosmopolitanism. Antisthenes taught that
civilisation, with its loss of natural conditions of life and its mating of
the strong and capable with the inefficient and weak, inevitably leads to
racial decline. Some of his characteristic utterances were, “the object of
marriage is not the enjoyment of love, but the rearing of children,”
“only the wise man knows whom he should love and marry,” “ agriculture,
pastoral pursuits, hunting and war are the vocations of strong men.”

he apparent contradiction between the contempt of pleasure of the
Cynics and the Dionysiac elements of the popular religion of the period
was removed by intellectualising the latter. Lenz thinks that the
eugenists of the future will be neo-Cynics. HENRY BERGEN.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUER INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE.
Bd. xi. Heft 4. March, 1914. Breeding Experiments which show that
Hybridisation and Mutation are Independent Phenomena. R. R. Gates.
Pp. 209-279. This paper describes the results attained by crossing
different forms of oenothera. The conclusions at which the author has
arrived are of great importance. Mendelians have suggested that all
new characters originate through the loss and recombination of unit
characters. The author claims to have shown that some mutations “ owe
their origin to a cause which is independent of the mere mingling of
characters in hybrids. He concludes that “the combination and sorting of
characters which exist is one problem, and the origin of those characters,
whether it be sudden or gradual, is another. These two problems must
be kept in separate categories, for Mendelians misinterpret the facts and
confuse the issue when they assert that the latter are in any way included
in the former. Any clear view of the facts now known must lead to the
conclusion that the origin of new characters is one question, and their
hereditary behaviour after they have originated is another.” He further
claims to have shown that unit characters are capable of modification
contrary to the view generally held by Mendelians.

Erblichkeitsstudien an Schmetterlingen. II. R. Goldschmidt and H.
Poppelbaum. Pp. 280-316. Two years ago the first-named of these two
authors published in this journal the results obtained by crossing
Lymantria dispar with L. japonica. Various gynandromorphic forms appeared and the results were interpreted on the supposition that not only
were factors for sex and secondary sexual characters present, but that
these factors differed in potency. Further experiments have been undertaken to test this supposition, and it is claimed that it holds good.
182 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Studien an gynandromorphen Schmetterlingsbastarden aus der
Kreuzsung von Lymantria dispar L. mit japonica Motsch. H. Poppelbaum. Pp. 317-354. This study of gynandromorphism was suggested by
the facts discovered in the previous paper.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUER INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE.
Bd. xii. Heft 2. April, 1914. Uber alternative Vererbung bei Kreusung
von Cyprinodontiden-Gattungen. M. W-. Gerschler. Pp. 74-96. This
paper describes the results obtained by crossing the genera Xiphophorus
and Platypoecitius, both of which are sexually dimorphic. The bastards
at first sight present the appearance of blending, but upon further analysis
of individual characters show alternative inheritance. The sexual dimorphism enables an analysis of the nature and inheritance of sexual
characters to be made. A complicated formula is arrived at which differs
from those given by Bateson and Goldschmidt.

Duplicate Genes for Capsule-Form in Bursa bursa-pastoris. G. H.
Shull. Pp. 97-147. These experiments form another example of that
type of Mendelian inheritance first discovered by Nilsson-Ehle, in which
the same apparent or “ Phenotypic” character can be produced independently by any one of several Mendelian factors which are not allelomorphic to one another. These experiments have reference to the shape
of the capsule in B. bursa-pastoris, which may be either triangular or
top-shaped ; the first is shown to be due to either one of two independent
determiners. The author distinguishes sharply between “plural” and
“duplicate” determiners; according to him the presence of “ duplicate ”
determiners has now been proved for the presence of a ligula in oats,
red pericarp colour in wheat, yellow enclosperm colour in maize, and the
triangular capsule form in Bursa. A. M. C.-S.

EUGENIQUE, March, 1914. Transmission Héréditaire ad Alttributs
Psychologiques dans deux Familles Gallo-celtes de Méme Souche observées pendant Quatres Siécles, by Dr. Oriou. Pp. 65-69. This is a
brief account of a study published in the Revue de Bretagne et de Vendée
in June and July, 1913. The author has studied biographically the
descendants of two Frenchman derived from the same Irish stock, who
differed essentially in character. The same differences distinguished
their descendants for eight generations.

Sur la Réceptivité Héréditaire relative des Ainés et des Cadets, by
M. Lucien March. Pp. 70-83. M. March describes in simple language
methods for avoiding statistical pitfalls in studying such problems as the
comparative fertility of degenerate and normal stocks and the relative
liability of first-born and later-born members of families to defects. The
special case of tuberculosis is discussed as an example, and reference is
made to the criticisms of previous work on this subject contained in
memoirs by Dr. Greenwood and Mr. Yule (Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, January, 1914), and by Dr. Weinberg, Archiv fiir Rassen-und
Gesellschafts-Biologie, 1913, Heft 1.

EUGENIQUE, April, 1914. Les Infirmités Mentales en Angleterre et
Act de 1913, by M. Lucien March. Pp. 108-118. M. March discusses
the increase in numbers of the insane as shown by census returns in the
British Isles and in France, and explains the provisions of the Mental
Deficiency Act. He concludes by demanding fresh legislation in France
to deal with mentally defective persons of all grades, legislation which
should have for its objects the protection of these persons and the
utilisation as far as possible of their faculties, the protection of their sane
fellow citizens as well as of the race.

BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE. Tome IIL.,
Fasc. III. April, 1914. La Fécondité des Femmes suivant leur origine
aux Etats-Unis. P. 253. A summary of the results obtained by Mr.
J. A. Hill from the census returns of the state of Rhode Island, published
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 183

in the Journal of the American Statistical Society. Figures of the same
nature based on the 1905 census were communicated by Mr. Hoffman to
the Eugenics Congress (Problems in Eugenics, p. 334.)

Influence des conditions du travail de la mére sur la mortalité de la
prare enfance aux Etats-Unis. Pp. 253-256. From The Report on

ondition of Woman and Child Wage-earners in the United States,

Vol. XIII. Infant Mortality and its Relation to the Employment of
Mothers, by Mr. E. B. Phelps. Although it is difficult to disentangle the
various factors to which excessive infant mortality might be due, the
figures obtained by comparing towns in Massachusetts, in which it is
high, with those in which it is low, appear to indicate that a high birthrate, a high proportion of foreign born mothers and illiteracy are more
closely related to a high rate of infant mortality than the employment of
mothers outside their own homes. The foreign-born mothers for the most
part belong to the very poorest classes, so that in general there is some
ground for the conclusion that the fault lies more with extreme poverty
and ignorance than with married women’s employment.

Budgets de Familles en Divers Pays, by M. L. Dugé de Bernonville.
Pp. 297-336. The author first discusses the methods which have been
adopted in ascertaining the manner in which working-class incomes are
spent, and then summarises such enquiries as have been made on this
subject in different countries. Certain general conclusions emerge. For
example, as the income increases the amount spent on food increases
absolutely, but decreases relatively. The relative amount spent in rent
remains about constant, but that on clothing and such things as amusement and intellectual needs increases. The nature of the food eaten
changes so as to include more meat and less bread and potatoes. With
an increase of the number of mouths to feed goes a very slight restriction of the amount consumed; but the proportion spent for each adult
man falls considerably. It also appears that in most cases the conditions
are capable of amelioration by a more judicious expenditure of the available income. E. H. J. S.

REVUE DE PEDOTECHNIE, tre Année, No. 1. October-November, 1913.
This is the first number of a new journal, whose aim is to deal with the
scientific study of the child and its practical applications. It is published
by the Société Belge de Pédotechnie with the collaboration of the Institut
{-J. pousseay (Geneva). The director of the editorial committee is Dr.

ecroly.

Les Notes Scolaires ont-elles une Valeur Pédotechnique? Ed.
Claparéde. Pp. 9-20. The writer concludes that, providing the marking is
scientifically carried out, and provided aptitude is estimated distinct from
zeal, schoolmarks constitute a source of information which is indispensable to the teacher. Employed as a method for stimulating activity, they
are only justified if they form a means of permitting the pupil to know
himself, to understand and interest himself in his own mental progress.

Les Classes Homogénes et VExamen Mental par la Methode des Tests
de Binet et Simon. Dr. Decroly. Pp. 21-44. The present article consists
mainly of a brief discussion of certain advantages and limitations of the
Binet-Simon tests. A further article is promised containing the results
of an application of the tests to irregular or abnormal children.

L’ENFANCE ANORMALE, No. 25, January, 1914. Le Témoignage des
Normaux et des Aliénés (suite et fin). Drs. Ley and P. Menzerath. Pp.
3-13. The article continues the description of a series of experiments upon
the testimony of normal and abnormal subjects of different types; and
gives a concise summary of the chief conclusions reached in the psychology
of testimony, with special reference to that of defectives and the insane.

Les Arriérés Scolaires d’aprés un Ouvrage Récent (suite et fin). Dr.
Armand Laurent. Pp. 14-20. A critical review of a medico-psychological
184 EUGENICS REVIEW.

publication of joint authorship dealing with various aspects of abnormal
children.
ARCHIVIO PER L’ANTROPOLOGIA E LA ETNOLOGIA. Vol. xliii., 1913, No.
. This periodical, published under the auspices of the Italian Society of
Anthropology and Ethnology, contains imter alia a serious study of fingerprints, their classification, and the question of their transmission by
heredity. Prof. Dalla Volta, the writer, bases his conclusions mainly on
the results obtained by comparing the fingerprints of the members of one
hundred families (fingerprints, not thumbprints only), including six cases
of three generations. These were normal individuals drawn from various
classes of society. The article, with its numerous tables and photographic
reproductions of fingerprints (too often somewhat blurred), gives evidence
of very careful research, but it is perhaps doubtful whether the data justify
the generalisations somewhat elaborately deduced. Few, however, will
quarrel with the general conclusion that heredity counts and that the
influence of one parent is not more marked than that of the anes 5

THE POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol. LXXXIV., No. 4. April,
1914. Eugenics and Euthenics, by Prof. Maynard M. Metcalf. Pp. 383389. Prof. Metcalf claims that human progress has been entirely cultural,
and while fully recognising the social value of efforts directed to the
advance of culture, in its widest sense, urges the importance of improving
eugenically the innate mental, moral, and physical qualities of man. He
believes that mendelian analysis will ultimately supply the knowledge
requisite for this purpose and pleads for patience, but not for inaction,
while the knowledge is being acquired. As an immediate policy he
urges caution in legislation, the promulgation of eugenic ideals of marriage, and the collection of data for the study of human inheritance.
The latter purpose will be the more readily attained the more the public
is taught to realise the potential value of eugenics.

The Psychological Limit of Eugenics, by Professor H. A. Miller. Pp.
390-396. Professor Miller is a sociologist and much afraid of eugenics.
“ If eugenics succeeds in establishing in the popular mind the tremendous
social value of heredity that it is trying to establish, it will overthrow a
mass of valuable work of the last decade which has been pointing the
way to a fundamental solution of many of our social problems.” So he
proceeds to limit its scope by disputing the inheritance of mental and
moral qualities. The following misquotation meets with his approval :
“* Heredity’ is the chief explanation tyros offer for any collective trait
that they are too stupid or too lazy to trace to its origin in the physical
environment, the social environment or historical conditions.” In spite of
this Professor Miller admits that there is a great deal of good in the
eugenic movement. He is quite within his rights in criticising some of
the exaggerations and dogmatic statements made by certain of its
exponents.

The Racial Origin of Successful Americans, by Dr. F. Adams Woods.
Pp. 397-402. From a study of the frequency of different surnames in
Who's Who in America, Dr. Woods concludes that “In the four leading
American cities, New York, Chicago, Philadelphia and Boston, it is
safe to say that at the present time, those of English and Scottish ancestry
are distinctly in possession of the leading positions, at least from the
standpoint of being widely known, and that, in proportion to their
number, the Anglo-Saxons are three to ten times as likely as other races
to achieve positions of national distinction.”

_ _, THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. V., No. 2. February, 1914. Jnjuries to the Germ Cells, by Dr. C. R. Stockard. Pp. 58-64. (Abstract of
an article in the American Naturalist, November, 1913.) Dr. Stockard’s
experiments are already well known, and have been much quoted in the
consideration of the effects of alcoho] on the germplasm. They consist in
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 185

rearing young from guinea-pig matings of the following four classes:
(1) Alcoholised male x normal female; (2) normal male x alcoholised female; (3) alcoholised male x alcoholised female; (4) control
experiment, normal male x normal female. The alcoholised parents
were made to assume this condition by being subjected daily to the fumes
of alcohol until they had reached a certain condition of intoxication.
Dr. Stockard rightly considers the experiments in Class 1 to be of the
greatest theoretical importance, since in Classes 2 and 3, where the
mother was drugged, it is impossible to decide whether the effect of the
alcohol is on the developing embryo or on the germplasm. Fifty-nine
matings of Class 1 have reached term. Twenty-five of these gave
negative results or early abortions. Thirty-four resulted in conceptions
which ran the full term. Eight, or about 24 per cent., of these were
still-born litters containing in all 15 dead individuals. Many of them
were somewhat premature. Twenty-six, or only 44 per cent., of the
matings produced litters of living young, containing a total of 54.
Twenty-one, or almost 40 per cent., of these young animals died within a
few days or less than four weeks after birth, and only 33 of them survived. Only one still-born litter occurred in 35 control matings.

Mendelism in Great Britain, by Professor Punnett. Pp. 86-89. A
brief account of the establishments in Great Britain at which experimental
work on mendelian lines is being carried out, and of the nature of the
work.

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. V., No. 3. March, 1914. Pure
Lines and Selection, by Prof. W. E. Castle. Pp. 93-97. Professor Castle
discusses briefly and lucidly the evidence for and against the habitual
occurrence of “ pure lines” of animals or plants within which selection
for reproduction can effect no racial change of characters. He concludes
that no adequate proof of their occurrence has yet been brought forward,
and what appears to be direct evidence to the contrary exists in his own
experiments with the hooded pattern of spotted rats (a mendelising unit
character). “The experiments show that plus selection and minus selection are both effective, and that selection away from and back to any modal
condition are equally easy of accomplishment.”

_. Marriage Selection, by Prof. R. H. Johnson. Pp. 102-110. Professor
Johnson considers the reasons which prevent men and women of the
educated classes from marrying, or cause them to marry late. He suggests various expedients for promoting earlier marriages, including a
shortening of the time of preparation for the learned professions and the
provision of the right number of dances (not too few or too many) for
each individual.

Tests for Mental Defects, by Howard A. Knox. Pp. 122-130. Mr.
Knox is assistant surgeon in the United States Public Health Service at
Ellis Island, New York, and thus has before him the problem of judging
the mentality of immigrants as speedily and accurately as possible in
order that the federal law against the immigration of mentally defective
persons may be enforced. In choosing a series of tests that should be
applicable to a large variety of people of different ages speaking different
languages, he has followed Binet and Simon in devising an age scale of
intelligence, but the performances demanded from the subject at each
age are less dependent on the subject’s knowledge of language. A favourite
type of test follows the main idea of the jig-saw puzzle. The simplest
of these which he employs should be done by normal children of six
years of age, the most complicated by children of twelve. A fuller account
a these tests is to be published in the Journal of the American Medical

ssociation,

_, THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. V., No. 4. April, 1914. Differential Fecundity, by Prof. W. F. Wilcox. Pp. 141-148. In this address,
186 EUGENICS REVIEW.

which was delivered before the first National Conference for Race Betterment, at Battle Creek, Mich., on January roth, 1914, is contained a brief
review of the data available for ascertaining the relative rate of increase
of various racial constituents in the American population. Considering
the importance of the question, the slenderness of the data is remarkable,
and is due largely to the fact that much raw material which might be
turned to service is not available because the United States census returns
of 1890, 1900, and rg1o have never been tabulated so as to throw light on
the problems connected with fertility. The Immigration Commission, in
its report for 1911, utilised a fraction of this material and arrived at the
following conclusions dealing with married women under 45 years of age.
“Of the negro wives who had been married between 10 and 20 years, one
in five had had no child; of the native white of native parents, one in
eight; of the native white of foreign parents, one in 16; and of the foreignborn wives, one in 19. The proportion of sterile marriages among the
foreign-born is highest among wives born in Scotland or England; lowest
among wives born in Poland, Bohemia or Russia.” “ With reference to the
average number of children born to these groups of wives of various
countries of birth, the smallest number is to wives of native American
birth and parentage. Ten such marriages have resulted in 27 children.
Ten negro marriages in 31 children; 10 marriages in which the wives
were born in England, in 34 children; and at the other extreme, ro
marriages with wives born in Russia, in 54 children; 10 with wives born
in French Canada, in 56; and 10 with wives born in Poland, in 62.” The
results agree in general with the results of investigations made in certain
individual states such as Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York and
Rhode Island. As there appears to be little difference in the mortality
of the native and foreign-born, the differences in birth-rate really indicate
differences in the natural rate of increase. The negro death-rate is,
however, much higher than that of whites and the natural rate of increase
appears to be lower and to be falling at a more rapid rate, thus the
colour question may solve itself automatically by the extermination of the
negro.

8 Eugenics in the Colleges. P. 186. There are now 44 colleges in the
United States giving either a complete course in eugenics or some lectures
on it as part of another allied course; 15 in the East, 14 in the middle
West, four in the South. Sixteen teach it in their zoology department,
11 in the biology department, and 11 in the sociology i aaa 5

THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN, XI., 2, April, 1914. The Problem
of the Moral Defective. Samuel C. Kohs. Pp. 19-22. The writer briefly
discusses the following problem: “ What is there to support the belief
that moral defectiveness is only a symptom of mental defectiveness? ”
“Everyone,” he observes, “working with the problem of juvenile delinquency is crying for more facts.” The article would have been more
satisfactory if the writer had from his experience given us more facts,
on the lines of a recent discussion of the same problem in the Genevan
Archives de Psychologie, or of previous experimental contributions in the
Bulletin. He classifies moral obliquity quite @ friori into three groups:
that due to lack of control; that due to poor judgment; and that due to
a combination of both. He concludes: “It would seem that the only
ones we can really hope to redeem are those lacking in moral judgment
alone.

Mentally Deficient Children. George D. Auden. Pp. 23-25. (Extract from a report presented to the Birmingham Education Committee by
the Chief School Medical Officer.) In this excellent little paper, the
writer develops certain theoretical considerations, based on Professor
Spearman’s hypothesis of two factors (general intelligence and special
faculties) and discusses their practical application to the examination of
mentally deficient children. C. B.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 187

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE. Vol. XV., Nos. 1
and 2. February and April, 1914. These numbers contain further instalments of the papers read at the thirty-eighth annual meeting of the
Academy held at Minneapolis in June, 1913. Dr. Edith Spaulding and
Dr. William Healy contribute an interesting study of thé hereditary
factor in crime, based on the examination of 1,000 young recidivists
referred for report to the Juvenile Psychopathic Institute of Chicago.
Excluding cases where the family history was defective, the authors
worked out in detail the personal and hereditary data in 668 of these
criminals. In 245 cases they found distinct evidence of mental deficiency
or epilepsy in the offenders, The remainder comprised 271 cases in which
there was no known criminality in earlier generations, and 152 cases in
which there was a history of ancestral criminality. Eachof these latter cases
was carefully analysed with a view to establishing the possible causative
factors of delinquency, and in all but 15 cases it was ascertained that in
environmental conditions or in hereditary influences apart from criminality there was adequate explanation of anti-social conduct. Even in the
15 cases where a direct inheritance of criminal tendency might be suggested as possible, the authors considered it very improbable. On the
other hand, they found ample evidence of an indirect inheritance of such
tendency through conditions of nervous defect and disorder, epilepsy,
insanity, and feeble-mindedness. Their conclusion is that a direct inheritance of criminalistic traits as such does not occur. The paper is
illustrated by pedigree charts of a number of the cases. Dr. Newkirk,
who writes from his experience as surgeon to the Hennepin County
Juvenile Court of Minneapolis, puts forward the very reasonable view
that physical defect, while, of course, of very secondary importance in
comparison with bad environment or faulty heredity, may nevertheless
have a part in predisposing to crime when, for instance, adenoids or
errors of refraction act as a further cause of strain to an unstable, overirritable nervous system. In a paper on “Social Factors Affecting the
Volume of Crime,” Professor Gillin refers to the influence of divergent
legal systems in the different states of the union as tending to decrease
respect for law and so to diminish one of the chief forces of social
restraint. As bearing on the same point, he mentions the very interesting
fact that, while the criminality of immigrants into the United States is
not notably high, the criminality of the children of immigrants is excessive. It has been found, for instance, that of the delinquent children
brought before the Juvenile Court in Chicago in the ten years, 1899-1909,
72°8 per cent. were children of foreign-born parents. The cause of this
higher criminality may be sought in the dissolving influence of the new
moral environment on the social traditions and standards of the home.
On the question of the value of imprisonment, the author adopts a somewhat neutral attitude that prisons have little effect either in manufacturing
criminals or in curing them. While specially emphasising the importance
of economic conditions in determining the movement of crime, Professor
Gillin recognises also to the full the part which belongs to the individuality of the criminal, and on this point he agrees with Dr. Goddard, who
contributes a separate paper on the subject, in estimating the proportion of
mental defectives in the delinquent class as at least 25 per cent. The
aspects of the problem dealt with in the other papers are for the most
part of less direct interest to eugenists. W. C. S.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

CENTRAL SOCIETY.

April 2nd.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Dr. E. C. Snow on
“Evidences of the Operation of Natural Selection in Man.” Chairman,
Major Leonard Darwin.

April 28th.—Dr. Simon before the Eugenics Education Society on
“La Mesure de I’Intelligence,” at Burlington House (by kind permission
of the Royal Society).

May 7th.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Dr. J. Cowper on
“Eugenics as a Basis of Hope.” Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin.

June 4th.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Dr. C. W. Saleeby
on “ The National Birth-rate Commission.” Chairman, Mr. Newton Crane.

July 2nd.—At the Grafton Galleries, 3.30 p.m., the Annual General
Meeting, followed by a Reception by the President and Mrs. Leonard
Darwin.

COMMITTEES.

May 15th.—Executive Council Meeting.
35 15§th.—Informal Council Discussion, 12, Egerton
Place. Subject, “Is it for or against the
Interests of Eugenics to bar the Employment of Married Women in the Teaching
and Other Professions? ”
June 17th.—General Council Meeting.

MEETINGS.

March 26th.—Miss Norry before the Walton Women’s Club on
“Eugenics and Social Problems.”

April 1st.—Miss E. Corry before the Society of the Spoken Thought,
Blackheath, on “Some Aspects of Eugenics.”

April 17th.—Mrs. Penrose at the Children’s Welfare Exhibition on
“ Eugenics in the Home.”

April 29th.—Dr. Ham at the National Conference of Nurses and
Midwives at the Horticultural Hall, on “The Influence of the Nursing
Profession in the Prevention of Venereal Disease.”

May 6th.—Mrs. Gotto at the Day Nursery for Jewish Infants, Commercial Road, E., on “ Eugenics.”

May 27th.—Major E. H. Hill on “ The Permanent Care of the FeebleMinded” at a Drawing Room Meeting, Minehead, on behalf of a proposed Farm Colony for Bristol and Somerset.

At the invitation of the Victoria League the Society sent an exhibit
of charts and literature to the Imperial Health Conference and Exhibition organised by them at the Imperial Institute from May 18th to 24th.

June 16-17th.—Dr. D. White represented the Society at the Portsmouth Conference of the International Abolitionist Federation, a report of
which will appear in the next number.

LIVERPOOL BRANCH.

The Council met on May 26th and nominated Alderman Bulley, Mr.
Laurie, and the Hon. Secretary to represent the Branch on the General
Council. Only one meeting has been held since the last quarterly report;
Mr. D’Aeth read a paper on March 31st on “ Personal Qualities in Relation to Eugenics,” giving a tentative classification of human qualities as
manifested in behaviour; discussion followed upon the heritability of such
qualities and the extent to which they may be influenced by training.

Outside our own series, an important lecture was delivered in St.
George’s Hall by Professor Karl Pearson, F.R.S., on “ Some Aspects of the
Problem of the Relative Intensity of Nurture and Nature.” The Medical
Officer of Health for the City of Liverpool presided. The lecture was
concerned largely with official records of Liverpool] children furnished for
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. . 189

the purpose; the records of several other towns of the North were also
laid under contribution. The general conclusion was that the effect upon
infant mortality of rent, wages, type of house, ventilation, sanitation,
employment of the mother, etc., was in each case considerably less than
that of the parental health and habits, the heritable factors.

R. T. BopeEy, Hon. Sec.

Eugenies and Elementary Education.—In recent years the Society
has urged the introduction of adequate training in sex-hygiene into the
training colleges, it has approached the authorities on various occasions,
and in March last year organised a conference of head masters and
mistresses, at which a resolution was passed asking for an enquiry as to
the advisability of introducing eugenics into the educational systems.
The report which has just been issued by a special section of the Elementary Education Sub-Committee of the London County Council is
therefore of special interest to the Society. This section were instructed,
in April, 1913, to consider what action, if any, could be taken with reference to the question of instruction in sex-hygiene and purity in the public
elementary schools. After hearing the evidence of head masters and head
mistresses, school doctors, and others, they concluded that under no circumstances should sex-hygiene be taught in class in elementary schools,
the main grounds being the different types of homes from which the
children came, the varieties of temperament to be met with, and the
danger that the children’s natural modesty and reticence might be broken
down, and that as the result of such teaching undesirable conversations
would take place. This last opinion was endorsed by head teachers and
all witnesses except one. A large proportion of the witnesses were in
favour of individual talks to boys and girls on leaving school. Though
not, therefore, recommending the inclusion of sex teaching as a class
subject, the committee arranged for consideration to be given (1) to the
importance of the subject of sex-hygiene during the early adolescent
stage, and to the possibility of suitable guidance being given in connection
therewith to students attending the evening institutes; and (2) to the
advisability of making provision for teachers in training to receive some
advice which will enable them to deal with undesirable habits in the
children entrusted to their charge.

The opinions here expressed seem to be in general agreement with
those of the National Union of Teachers, who, at their conference at
Lowestoft in April, passed a resolution “ That in view of the increasing
attention given to it by the Press and educational bodies in this country,
the conference is of opinion that instruction in the subject of sex-hygiene
should be a part of every teacher’s equipment, and to insure this it should
become a part of the curriculum in all training colleges both for men
and women.” The question had been previously considered by the Ladies
Committee of the Executive, who had decided that it was neither practicable nor desirable to give class instruction in the subject, but that it
might with advantage be taken up by the students in the training colleges.

Galton Day in New South Wales.—The Eugenics Education
Society in New South Wales gave a dinner during February last in
commemoration of the birth of Sir Francis Galton. The State Governor,
Sir Gerald Strickland, was the guest of the evening, and in replying
to the toast of his health, spoke of the science of eugenics and the part
to be played by the Society. Eugenics he likened to the Chinese ancestor
worship or to the English and Scottish love of pedigrees lifted into a
higher plane. Professor A. Stuart said “The Eugenics Education
Society intended to put before the people of Australia the conditions
of human life as to heredity on the one hand and environment on the
other, which would act and react and act again upon the individual. If
man was to be a rational being and not altogether an irrational character, a certain amount of consideration would greatly tend to the
well-being of the race.” Professor R. F. Irvine, of the University
190 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of Sydney, spoke next. He was not of opinion that the human race
could be improved by legislative enactments in the present state of our
knowledge, and he disputed views expressed by certain biologists that
the environment was an unimportant factor. His remarks appear to have
been reported in a form which gave rise to some misconception as to
his real views, and so he stated them again clearly in a letter to the
Sydney Morning Herald of February 26th. Here he expressed himself
as completely in accord with the main objects of the Society, but insisted
that the problem of how to produce a superior civilisation is both biological and sociological, It is a matter of breeding on the one hand,
and a matter of social organisation and adjustment on the other. The
two aims must go together if valuable results are to be arrived at. Professor Irvine’s letter was followed on March 3rd by a letter to the Daily
Telegraph (Sydney) by Mr. J. C. Eldridge, the Secretary of the State
Labour Bureau in New South Wales, who is the Secretary of the Eugenics
Education Society of New South Wales. He explained that Professor
Irvine’s contention was fully admitted by the Society, who, if they insist
on the importance of heredity, do not do so by belittling environment, but
aim at strengthening all agencies which may improve the human race.

Medical Inspection of School Children in New South Wales.—
We have received from Mr. J. C. Eldridge full particulars of the medical
examination of school children which has been instituted there. Each
school is apparently to be examined about once in four years. The particulars ascertained about each child are entered on a separate card.
They are provided partly by the child’s parents or guardian, partly by
the teacher, and partly by the school doctor as a result of the medical
examination. The parents are asked to give information concerning (1)
the number of children of each sex, living or dead, in the family; (2) the
child’s place in order of birth; (3) their own occupations and nationality,
and the nationality of their own parents; (4) any family history of consumption, rheumatism, heart disease or nervous trouble; and (s) certain
particulars concerning the health of the child. The teacher measures the

eight and weight and chest of the child, records the hair, eye and skin
colour, gives an estimate of mental capacity in comparison with other
children of the same age, and ascertains something of the home conditions, hours of sleep and of work in or out of school, and notes the nature
of the clothing and anything of interest in the physical characters of the
child. The actual medical inspection seems fairly comprehensive and if
all the data obtained from the parents, teachers and doctors could be
thoroughly relied on, a mass of data valuable for ascertaining something
of the conditions associated with physical and mental defects would be
obtained.

The Second International Eugenies Congress will be held at the
American Museum of Natural History, New York City, September 23rd
to 28th, 1915. The organisation, as thus far completed, stands as follows:
Alexander Graham Bell, Honorary President; Henry Fairfield Osborn,
President; Madison Grant, Treasurer. Executive Committee : Henry E.
Crampton, Chairman, Professor of Zoology, Barnard College, Columbia
University, and Curator, American Museum of Natural History; James
McKeen Cattell, Professor of Psychology, Columbia University; ‘Chas.
B. Davenport, Director of the Station for Experimental Evolution, Carnegie Institution of Washington, and Resident Director of the Eugenics
Record Office, Cold Spring Harbour, L.I.; Franklin H. Giddings, Professor of Sociology, Columbia University; August Hoch, Director of the
Psychiatric Institute, Wards Island; Edmund B. Wilson, Professor of
Zoology, Columbia University; Frederick Adams Woods, Brookline,
Mass.; Arthur E. Hamilton, Secretary, Extension Department, Eugenics
Record Office. There is in addition a strong General Committee containing many well-known men of science and other influential people, and
there is every prospect that an interesting and successful gathering will
be organised.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. IOI

Eugenies at the Italian Congress of Science.—The Italian Committee for the Study of Eugenics has approached the governing body of
the Italian Society for the Progress of Science with the suggestion that
there should be henceforward a eugenic section at their annual congress.
In consequence a section has been arranged for their next meeting at
Bari in October. Professor Sergi, President of the Eugenic Committee,
is giving the inaugural address.

Eugenics at the Manchester Sehool of Technology.—<At the
request of the Manchester branch of the Society, Mr. Maxwell Garnett,
Principal of the School of Technology, arranged a series of lectures to be
delivered there if an audience of 15 people could be guaranteed. As
double that number have entered, the course is in progress, Dr. D’Ewart
being the lecturer. The Society has made a small grant towards the
payment of students’ fees, as those imposed by the college placed the
lectures out of the reach of many elementary school teachers.

Hygiene and Heredity at Liverpool University.—The University
of Liverpool grants a degree of Master of Hygiene (M.H.) on the recommendation of the Senate after report from the Faculty of Medicine. The
period of study for the degree extends over two years and includes a
three months’ course of lectures and practical work on “Genetics,
Heredity and Environment.”

A Eugenies Education Society in Chieago.—We are informed
that a dining club under this name has been formed in Chicago. The
members meet regularly and hope to develop a general interest in the
subject and to do useful work.

Cytology and Heredity.—The Croonian lecture was delivered before
the Royal Society on June 11th by Professor E. B. Wilson, who took for
his subject, “The Bearing of Cytological Research on Heredity.” His
main contentions were that it is possible to explain the combinations
shown in Mendelian inheritance by the shuffling of the chromosomes and
the smaller entities that they might contain; that the chromosomes played
an important though not an exclusive réle in heredity; that the facts of
sex-linked heredity could be made clear by means of an accessory
chromosome, single in the male and double in the female, and that there
was good evidence for the view that the linkage shown between the
units of different groups of inherited qualities was due to the fact that they
were borne by the same chromosomes.

Galton Laboratory Lectures.—The staff of the Galton Laboratory
have been turning their attention to provincial centres. Professor Karl
Pearson delivered a popular lecture at Liverpool on May 22nd, entitled
“Some Aspects of the Problem of the Relative Intensity of Nurture and
Nature,” and Dr. David Heron has recently concluded a series of lectures
on National Eugenics at University College, Dundee. The last lecture
of the course appears to have covered much the same ground as that of
Professor Pearson at Liverpool, while on previous occasions Dr. Heron’s
subjects had included the inheritance of mental capacity and mental
defect, of good and bad physique, and of tuberculosis.

The Campaign against Venereal Disease in Liverpool.—
A General Committee consisting of ladies and gentlemen of prominence
in the City of Liverpool has been formed to co-operate with a Special
Committee of the Medical Institution in order to combat venereal disease,
and on May 27th they inaugurated their active campaign with a meeting
at the institution, which was addressed by Dr. Charles J. Macalister on
“The Sociological Aspects of the Venereal Diseases.” Dr. FE. W. Hope,
medical officer of health, and president of the institution, was in the chair,
and was supported by the Lord Mayor and the Rector of Liverpool.
ADDITIONS TO LIBRARY.

*ABBOT, L., 1911. The Spirit of Democracy. Pp. 215. ot 643.)
*ALDEN, M., 1912. Child Life and Labour. Pp. 102. 651.
ARCHIVES OFM ety AND PSYCHIATRY, a Vol. VI.
Pp. 345- 21
*AVEBURY, LORD, 1909. Peace and Happiness. Pp. 386. (L. 20.)
BRANF ORD, V.; 1914. Interpretations and F precast? A Study of
Survivals and Tendencies in C ontemporary Society. (L. 620.)
*BRAY, R. A., 1912. The Town Child. Pp. 333. (L. 632.)
BRIEUX. Damaged Goods. Translated by J. Pollock. Pp. 244.

(L. 654.)
*DADSON, x J., 1901. Evolution and its Bearing on Religions. Pp. 264.

(L. 627.
+ DICKENSON, G. ee Tors Justice and Liberty: A _ Political
Dialogue. Pp. 22
*EUCKEN, R., 1912. the P Problem of Human Life. Pp. 582. (L. 635.)
FAIRCHILD, H. P., 1913. lmmigration. Pp. 456. (L. 622.)
*FLINT, R., 1908. Socialism. Pp. 354. 39.)
*GEORGE, W., 1913. Woman and 0-morrow. Pp. 188. (L. 667.)
*GOFF, A. and LEVY, J. H.. 1906.  VPolstics and Disease. Pp. 2091.
(L. 62

5+)
GRANT, C., aad HODGSON, N., 1913. The Case for Co-education. Pp.
325. (L. 619.)
+H H. RIDER, 1911. Rural Denmark and Its Lessons. Pp. 335.

(L. 633.)
xHIRSCH, W., 1897. Genius and Degeneration. Pp. 333. (L. et)

*HOUGH, W., 1914. Culture of the Ancient Pueblos, etc. p. 138.
(L. 666.)

*KELYNACK, T. N. Lhe Drink Problem. Pp. 300. (L. 644.)

KROPOTKIN, P., 1910. Mutual Aid, a Factor in Evolution: Pp. 348.
(L. 634.

LAYTON, F.G., 1914. Philif’s Wife: A Play. (L.

653.)
LECKY, W. E. H., 1904. History of the Rise and 7 Pe ttonce of Ritionaltsm in Europe. Vol. I., pp. 408; Vol. II., pp. 430. (L. 650.)
*MANET. 656) R., 1913. A Survey of the Woman Problem. Pp. 275.
(L. 636
*McCARTHY, C., 1908. The Causes of Poverty. Pp. 110. (L. 661.)
*MCDOUGALL, W., 1911. Body and Mind. Pp. 384. (L. 662.)
MITCHELL, Cc. A., 1904. The Cultivation of Man, according to the
Teaching of Common Sense. Pp. 168. (L. 624.)
*MOND, F., 1908. The Burden of Woman. Pp. 236. (L. 628.)
*MONTESSORI, M., 1912. The Montessori Method. Pp. 377. (L. 659.)
*MUN STERBERG, H., 1910. Problems of To-day, from the Point of View
of a Psychologist. Pp. 220. (L. 637.)
*NORDAU, MAX, 1906. Paradoxes. Pp. 343. (L. 642.)
*REEVES, Mrs. PEMBER. Round about a Pound a Week. Pp. 231.

(L. "62 26.)

ROW ery B. S., rgo1r. Poverty: A Study of Town Life. Pp. 437.
(L. 663

*RUSSELL, C. E. B., and RIGBY, L. M., 1906. The Making of the
Criminal. Pp. "362. (L. 638 ‘/)

SALEEBY, C. W., 1914. The Progress of Eugenics. Pp. 259. (L. 658.)
(Presented by the author.)

*SAVILL, T. D., 1908. Clinical Lectures on Neurasthenia. Pp. 226.

(R.L. 640.) ;
*SIDGWICK, ‘ee 1902. Philosophy, its Scope and Relations. Pp. 252.
47
(L. 6
NV. B.—Those marked by an asterisk were presented by Mr. E. J. Thompson.
PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED. 193

*SPRIGGE, S. S., 1905. Medicine and the Public. Pp. 293. (L. 630.)
*STOCKER, R. D., 1910. Social Idealism. Pp. 186. (L. 629.)
*TAGORE, R., 1913. Sadhana. The Realisation of Life. Pp. 164.

(L. 645.)

*TALBOT, E. S., 1898. Degeneracy, Its Causes, Signs and Results. Pp.
372. (L. 641.)

*THOMPSON, H. B., 1905. The Mental Traits of Sex. Pp. 188. (L.
646.) ;

TREDGOLD, A. F., 1914. Mental Deficiency (Amentia). 2nd edition.
Pp. 491. (L. 660.) ;

URWICK, E. J., 1912. A Philosophy of Soctal Progress. Pp. 300.

(L. 652.)
*VILLIERS, B., 1908. The Socialist Movement in England. Pp. 339.
L. 648

. 648.
*WEDGWOOD, J. and E., 1913. Zhe Road to Freedom and what Lies
Beyond. Pp. 156. (L. 253.)
*WHITBY, C. J., 1910. Makers of Man: A Study of Human Initiative.
Pp. 424. (L. 623.)
*WRENCH, G. T., 1911. The Mastery of Life. Pp. 518. (L. 631.)
N.B.—Those marked by an asterisk were presented by Mr. E. J. Thompson.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Citti del Comitato ltal:ano per gli Studi de Eugenica. (Publisher:
Societa Romana di Antropologia, Rome, 1914. Pp. 14.)

Co-Education in Practice, being an address delivered in Cambridge in
February, 1914, with many additions and three appendices. J. H.
BADLEY, Mey (Publishers: W. Heffer and Sons, Cambridge. Price
1s. Pp. 40.

Criminology. BARON R, GAROFALO. (Publisher: Heinemann, London.
1914. Price 16s. net. Pp. 478.)

Damaged Goods, by BRikux. Translated by John Pollock. With a
Preface by Bernard Shaw and a Foreword by Mrs. Bernard Shaw.
(Publisher: Fifield, London, 1914. Price 1s. Pp. 244.) The play
treats the problem of venereal disease in relation to society in a
serious spirit. The author believes that a knowledge of the prevalence
and nature of the far-reaching effects of the disease would lead to
its prevention. He vividly depicts the tragedy of innocent infection
and advocates men being required by social custom to give medical
certificates of health to the bride’s parents before marriage, in the
interests of the future generation.

Exambtle of True Hermaphroditism in the Domestic Fowl, with Remarks
on the Phenomenon of Allopterotism, An. §S. G. SHATTOCK and
C. G. SELIGMANN. Report from Transactions of the Pathological
Society of London. Vol. 57, Part I., 1906. Pp. 69-109.

Feeble-Minded in Ontario. H. MacMurcnuy. Eighth Report. For the
year 1913. (Publisher: S. K. Cameron, Toronto, 1914. Pp. 30.)

Golden Heresy, The. Max PLOWMAN. (Publisher: The Author, London,
1914. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 40.)

Interpretations and Forecasts: A Study of Survivals and Tendencies in
Contemporary Society. VICTOR BRANFORD. (Publisher: Duckworth,
London, 1914. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 424.)

Kinship and Social Organisation. W.H. R. Rivers, M.D., F.R.S. (Publishers: Constable and Co., Ltd., London, 1914. Price 2s. 6d.

Pp. 96.)

Legislation tor the Feeble-Minded, by Miss A. H. P. Kirpy. (Publishers :
The National Association for the Feeble-Minded, Denison House,
Vauxhall Bridge Road, S.W. Price 2d.) An excellent pamphlet
stating briefly and clearly the scope of the Mental Deficiency Act,
194 EUGENICS REVIEW.

drawing attention to the eugenic bearing of the principle of permanent care for the mentally defective, and urging the citizen to
take his or her share in securing the effective administration of the

Act.

Observations made to ascertain whether any relation subsists between the
Seasonal assumption of the “ Eclipse” Plumage in the Mallard (Anas
Boscas) and the Functions of the Testicle. C. G. SELIGMANN and
S. G. SHATTOCK. Reprint from the Proceedings of the Zoological
Society of London, 1914. Pp. 23-43.

Observations upon the Acquirement of Secondary Sexual Characters,
indicating the Formation of an Internal Secretion by the Testicle.
S. G. SHATTOCK and C. G. SELIGMANN. Reprint from Transactions of
the Pathological Society of London. Vol. 56, Part I., 1905, Pp. 57°80.

On the Relative Length of the First and Second Toes of the Human Foot,
from the Point of View of Occurrence, Anatomy and Heredity. C. A.
MERRITT HAWKES, M.Sc., B.Sc. Reprint from Journal of Genetics,
Vol. III., No. 4. April, 1914. Pp. 249-274.

Phili~’s Wife: A Play. F. G. Layton, M.R.C.S. (Publisher: Fifield,
London, 1914. Price 1s. Pp. 64.) The author is a medical man very
much alive to the need of public education as to the far-reaching and
congenital effects of venereal disease. He treats the subject most
skilfully, in a way which is convincing without repelling the reader
as much as the more pathological treatment of the same subject by

rieux.

Preparation for Marriage. WALTER Heaps, M.A., F.R.S. (Publishers:
Cassell and Co., London, 1914. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 168.)

Progress of Eugenics, The. C. W. SALEEBY. (Publishers : Cassell, London, 1914. Price ss. Fp. 260.)

Problem of the Nations, The. A. CORBETT-SMITH. (Publishers: John
Bale, Sons and Danielsson, London, 1914. Price 1s. 6d. net. Pp. 107.)

Sex. P. GEDDES and J. A. THOMSON. Home University of Modern
Knowledge. (Publishers: Williams and Norgate, London, 1914.
Price 1s. Pp. 255.)

Should We Remain Silent Any Longer? by Mrs. M. SCHOEMAKERFRENTZEN, Leyden, Holland. (Publisher: A. W. Sijthaff’s UitgeversMij.) The translation of a pamphlet written in Dutch by the wife of
one of the leading surgeons of the Town’s Hospital in the Hague.
It deals with the need for educating women in the dangers of
venereal disease to themselves and their children, and urges that
parents should require their future sons-in-law to undergo medical
examination before marriage.

Soctal Disease and How to Fight It, The: A Rejoinder. L. CREIGHTON.
(Publishers: Longmans, Green, and Co., London, 1914. Price 1s.
Pp. 87.

State and the Poor, The. GrOFFREY DRAGE, M.A. The Nation’s Library.
(Publisher : Collins, London, 1914. Price 1s. Pp. 264.)

sexual Ethics: A Study of Borderland Questions. ROBERT MICHELS.
fe ubpshers : ype Walter Scott Publishing Co., London, 1914. Price

S. . 296.

Teaching we dipainie in the Public Schools. Dr. E. B. Lowry. (Publishers: Forbes and Co., Chicago, 1914. Price 50 cents. Pp. 95.)

The Training of a Working Boy. Rev. H. S. PELHAM, M.A. (Publigher :
Macmillan, London, 1914. Price 3s. 6d. Pp. 16s.)

The Threshold of Religion. R. R. MARETT. (Publishers: Methuen and
Co., London, 1914. Price 5s. Pp. 220.)

What it Means to Marry, or Young Women and Marriage. DR. MARY
SCHARLIEB. (Publishers: Cassell and Co., London, 1914. Price 2s. 6d.

Pp. 140.)

White and Black. ETHELBERT STEVENS. (Publishers: Simpkin, Marshall,
ee and Kent and Co., Ltd., London, 1914. Price 6s. net. Pp.
284.
