PROFESSOR McDOUGALL'’S LAMARCKIAN
EXPERIMENT

By M. S. PEASE

McDougall’s Lamarckian experiment

on rats is of quite unusual interest by
reason of the new data on adverse selection
now published.® It will be remembered that
in this experiment, which has now been in
Pp since 1920, Wistar rats are
into a tank of water from which there are two
exits, one brightly, the other dimly, illuminated ; the bright platform is so wired that
a rat emerging on to it from the water gets
an electric shock—the dim platform is the
safe exit. Professor McDougall and Mr.
Rhine have trained and bred these rats,
generation by generation, to avoid the
electrified platform; the figures given for
the average number of errors made per rat
has clearly diminished from over 120 per rat
in the control stocks (p. 222, Table ITI) to 33
per rat of the trained stock from the twentyfourth to the thirty-fourth generation (p. 219,
Table II). If we compare the figures for the
thirteenth to the twenty-third generation of
rats with those for the twenty-fourth to the
thirty-fourth generation, it is clear that they
show an increase in the facility to escape by
the safe passage ; it is by no means clear,
however, that any substantial progress has
been made in the last part of the iment,
that is to say from the twenty-fourth to the
thirty-fourth generation.

By far the most interesting new data
published concerns adverse selection. Thirteen generations of Wistar control rats were
bred from the parents in each generation
which had shown the worst performance. If
the increased facility observed in the experimental animals had been due to unintentional
selection of cleverer rats, then the intentional selection of stupider rats should show

P ‘HE third instalment of Professor

*j. B. Rhine and William McDougall: British
Journal of Psychology (General Section), Vol. XXIV,
P. 213, 1933.

an increase in the number of errors observed
from generation to generation. No such
effect was found; the adversely selected
controls, like the unselected experimentals,
continued to improve. The figures published
(Table IV, p. 224) do not show a steady
improvement—it is irregular from generation
to generation. But ing the table as a
whole, undoubtedly improved facility is
indicated.

The authors have no doubt that we are
here witnessing at work a Lamarckian process. But of this Professor McDougall and
Mr. Rhine are in a far better position to judge
than are the readers of the published results,
by reason of the persistent omission to give
the relevant breeding-data on which a geneticist would base his judgment. Throughout we are given only figures of average
errors for each generation of rats. It is true
that the best and the worst rats of each
generation are usually noted ; but even this
figure would appear to be not an individual
performance, but only a batch average
(comment on top of p. 226). But from a
breeder’s point of view, what makes judgment difficult, if not impossible, is the
absence of any pedigree tables. The authors
must surely realize that the issue which this
experiment raises is a fundamental one ; for
the spectators it is tantalizing to have
withheld just the detailed breeding data
which might enable a critical judgment to
be made. Unless we are given the performances individually of parents and offspring at each stage, it is futile to speculate
on the process at work.

The absence of the breeding details is all
the more to be regretted, as the authors seem
to be well on their guard against the pitfalls
of such experimentation. Now and again,
however, they betray unexpected lack of
critical caution. In 1932 new tanks were

253
234

used—they were practically similar to the
original tanks ; yet we are told that the rats
found the old tanks 54 per cent. more
difficult than the new ones. (This figure is
arrived at by comparing the average performances of fifty-eight and sixty-three
“ equivalent ’’ rats in the two baths.) This
is surely a most disturbing For it
shows that performance is extremely ‘‘ highly
geared’ to environment, or at any rate to
tank environment. If apparently quite
trivial differences between the two tanks
“cause’’ a 54 per cent. shift in the performance results, what significance should
we attach to observed performance differences of 20 per cent. or 30 per cent. or even
50 per cent.? May not the changes observed
in the number of errors made be due to changes
in the environment unnoticed over ten
years of experimentation ? Are we not face
to face with the basic question as to whether
the design of the experiment is not too coarse
to register differences in the aptitude of rats
to learn? To some extent these questions
could be answered if we had before us the
individual records of the rats and their
pedigrees ; we could then form some judgment of the variability of the material and
of the degree of inheritance. Professor
McDougall and Mr. Rhine are content to
add 54 per cent. to the errors in the new tank,
in order to make comparison with the old
tank results.

Mention should be made of Table VI on
p. 232. The numbers here given are indeed
small, as the authors point out; but as far
as the figures go, they are entirely subversive. We have already drawn attention to
the adversely selected rats: in Table VI
are set out figures showing the converse
experiment, intentionally favourable selection. For seven generations rats were trained,
each succeeding generation being bred only
from the most successful trainees. The
average number of errors made per rat in
the first three generations was sixty-five : in
the last three generations 101. Professor

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

McDougall and Mr. Rhine comment that
the figures go to illustrate the comparative
small influence of such selection. Surely they
equally illustrate the comparative small
influence of such

Fortunately Professor ‘McDougall’ S experiments do not stand alone. We are able
to compare them with results obtained by
Professor Crew in a repetition of the experiment.* It is true that Professor Crew's tank
is not identical with Professor McDougall’s ;
and from what has gone before, it is obvious
that we should avoid making a direct comparison between the performance of the rats
in Professor Crew’s tank with that of the
rats in Professor McDougall’s tank. But
Professor Crew’s contraption is so similar to
Professor McDougall’s that similar effects
of training should become clear in the new
experiment, especially since both used Wistar
rats. But in fact no such improvement in
performance was recorded after six generations of training; there was no significant
difference between the generations of trained
rats or between these and the control rats.
Extraordinarily wide differences were found
between the individual performances of the
rats: but selective breeding showed performance to be to some extent an inherited
characteristic. Professor Crew tentatively
suggests that what is in question is not so
much different aptitudes to learn, but rather
different types of behaviour.

Be that as it may, the fact remains that
an attempt to repeat Professor McDougall’s
experiment has failed. Until a successful
repetition is carried out, it would be wise to
suspend judgment. In the meantime Professor McDougall and Mr. Rhine would be
well advised to publish in full the pedigree
tables and, as far as they can, the individual
performances of the rats; or better still,
to invite the collaboration of a trained
geneticist.

* Proceedings of the sixth international Congress of
Genetics, p. 121, and British Association Report, 1933.

\ a RN AO CR”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 4.
