THE EUGENICS REVIEW

POPULATION

Glass, D. V. and Eversley, D. E. C. (Editors).
Population in History. Essays in Historical
Demography. London, 1965. Arnold. Pp. ix-+-692.
Price £5.

FEW FIELDS OF historical study are so important
or have been so neglected as population history.
That population changes have frequently been at
the root of the social, economic and political
transformation of nations can scarcely be disputed, yet attempts to analyse and explain these
demographic changes were, until recently, few
and far between. It is true that the subject has
given rise to much speculation, but it has been
rare for these hypotheses to be supported by
sound statistics.

Perhaps the principal reason for this neglect
lay in the enormous amount of tedious spadework needed before meaningful historical series
of population statistics could be compiled.
Before the establishment of regular censuses and
systems of vital registration in most European
countries in the nineteenth century (or in the
eighteenth in the case of Scandinavia), the
principal source of demographic data was the
parish registers of births, marriages and burials.
The information in these registers requires careful and painstaking analysis before any worthwhile figures can be compiled. Furthermore, the
interpretation of the results is no easy matter,
and most historians would need the advice of a
demographer or statistician before drawing any
firm conclusions. During the past twenty years,
however, these problems have been systematically tackled, principally in France and in
England, although the examples provided by
these studies have also been followed in other
European countries.

In France the moving spirit, from the demographers’ side, has been M. Louis Henry, who,
in collaboration with M. Michel Fleury, has
produced a short manual for research workers
on the techniques of analysing parish registers.
In England the impetus behind these studies has
come largely from Professor Glass and Dr.
Eversley, the editors of the work under review.

The book consists of a collection of essays on
various aspects of demographic history; some of
these essays were specially written for this

100

compendium, and others are reprints of papers
previously published elsewhere, although some of
the latter have been substantially revised by
their authors, and others have been translated
into English for the first time. There are three
parts, containing a total of twenty-seven different
contributions.

Part I, under the heading of “General”, contains two introductory essays by the editors, two
shorter but nevertheless stimulating pieces by
Professor L. Chevalier and Professor K. F.
Helleiner, a study by Dr. Sigismund Peller of
fertility and mortality among Europe’s ruling
families since the sixteenth century, and a paper
by Mr. J. Hajnal entitled “European Marriage
Patterns in Perspective”. This last is one of the
outstanding contributions in the volume. The
European marriage pattern is (or rather, was,
since it now seems to be disappearing) characterized by “‘(1) a high age at marriage and (2) a high
proportion of people who never marry at all’’.
Mr. Hajnal shows first how these patterns have
been peculiar to western Europe, and then poses
the question of how long they have been in
existence. It is clear that they were already firmly
established in the eighteenth century, but for
earlier periods the data are so scanty that firm
conclusions are difficult to draw. However, on
the basis of the available evidence, Mr. Hajnal
suggests that in the Middle Ages and the
‘ancient world” things may have been different:
people married younger and fewer remained
single throughout life. Precisely when and how
the “‘European pattern’”’ became established are
thus questions for future research. This simple
and important theme has never before been
adequately discussed, and Mr. Hajnal’s admirable paper is all the more readable for the
lucidity and informality of his style.

Part II deals with Great Britain and comprises
ten different contributions, only two of which
are here published for the first time. The
principal themes running through this section
are the causes of the increase in the population
during the eighteenth century, and the light
which the recent studies of parish registers
throw on this problem. In two contributions
Professor Glass examines, first, Gregory King’s
estimate of the population of England and
Wales at the end of the seventeenth century and,
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

second, the estimates made by Rickman, Farr,
Brownlee and Griffiths for the eighteenth and
early nineteenth centuries. Griffiths’s hypotheses
of the decline in mortality in the eighteenth
century and the possible causes of such a decline
are then examined critically in three papers by
Marshall Habakkuk, and McKeown and
Brown. The last of these is particularly stimulating. The authors’ main theme is the examination
of the possible influence of medical science on
mortality in the eighteenth century, and they
reach the challenging conclusion that an extension of medical services at that time would have
been more likely to produce a rise than a fall in
mortality. In the section of their paper in which
they discuss the possible influence of the birth
rate, however, McKeown and Brown are on

rather weaker ground. Statements such as

““Coitus interruptus . .. to be effective requires
more self-control than is usually credited to the
majority of people” are open to dispute; so are
their conclusions on the potential effect of
changes in age at marriage. Detailed studies of
particular areas are provided in the papers by
Eversley on an area in Worcestershire and by
Chambers on Nottingham and the Vale of
Trent; and in an essay on “The Changing
Adequacy of English Registration, 1690-1837”,
Professor Krause of Rutgers University puts
forward the view that the general quality of the
parish registers deteriorated during the eighteenth
century.

Part III is concerned with Europe and the
United States, and comprises eleven contributions: four are devoted to France, and the others
to Ireland, Scandinavia, Finland, Italy, Barmen
(a small town in western Germany), Flanders
and the United States. The French studies
include a paper of outstanding interest and value
by M. Louis Henry, wherein he summarizes the
principal features of the recent analyses of parish
registers in France. We are also given an English
translation of the paper by M. Jean BourgeoisPichat on the evolution of the population of
France since the eighteenth century, which was
first published in Population in 1951. His
reconstructions of the patterns of fertility,
mortality and age-sex distributions in the
nineteenth century are of great value; but his
extrapolations into the eighteenth century are

based on rather shaky assumptions. His conclusion that the long-term decline in French
fertility began somewhere about the year 1770
has not been fully corroborated by the studies
of parish registers described by M. Henry,
although the practice of birth control was
undoubtedly spreading among certain sections
of the population, principally the nobility,
during the eighteenth century. The other chapters
devoted to France consist of a study of the data
available for the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries by Professor Goubert and a discussion
by M. Meuvret of the relationships between on
the one hand the famines and epidemics of the
Ancien Régime and on the other the fluctuations
in fertility and mortality.

Professor Glass and Dr. Eversley are to be
congratulated in bringing together in one volume
such a large range of valuable studies. It should
prove indispensable to all students both of
demography and of economic history. Not only
does it bring out the salient points of recent
research, but it also indicates the lines along
which future investigation should be directed,
and it should thus provide effective stimulus to
such research.

J. G. C. BLACKER

United Nations General Principles for National
Programmes of Population Projections as Aids to
Development Planning. New York, 1965. Pp.
vi+60. Price 75 cents (HMSO, 5s. 6d.).

THIS MANUAL, WHICH should perhaps be
regarded as a short introductory textbook for
the developing countries, was planned at the
1961 session of the UN Population Commission.
In 1963 and 1964 it was sent in draft to various
agencies, institutions and individual experts and
subsequently it was revised, in the light of their
observations, before publication.

About one-half of the text consists of a very
useful and thorough bibliography, classified
according to the different aspects of the subject.
The remainder of the book describes the various
types of projections, and the general considerations underlying their preparation and use.
Technique is not dealt with, and there are no
examples; thus the exposition cannot in any
sense be regarded as complete, but at least the

101
