FAMILY PLANNING: THE PAST AND THE
FUTURE* |

By H. A. DAVIDSON, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.

Male Subfertility
HE male subfertility centre of the
Family Planning Association was
established in 1945 by the decision of
a medical committee under the chairmanship
of Mr. Aleck Bourne. Its purpose was: 1, to
provide reliable investigation of male fertility by semen examination, post-coital

tests, and clinical examination; 2, to help

in establishing standards for this work, and,
3, to collect research material.

The annual number of tests increased from
289 in its first year to 1,019 in the second,
and since then an average of about 2,000
tests a year has been maintained. Patients
are referred to the centre by private consultants and general practitioners, by a
number of hospitals, and by F.P.A. clinics,
and records have already been filed of over
10,000 semen analyses, over 2,600 postcoital tests, and 200 testicular biopsies.

The advent of the National Health Service
brought a reduction of the centre’s income
rather than of its work, and this presumably
means that such a service is not sufficiently
provided for by the general medical services.

What have we learned from the data
collected ?

Firstly, that disturbances of male fertility

are very common indeed. A review of our
material shows that less than one-third of
the men we see are normally fertile. More
than 8 per cent are completely and hopelessly
sterile, and the remainder distinctly subfertile. Admittedly this is a selected group
of men—the husbands of wives who had
failed to conceive—yet the significance of
these findings is unmistakable.

Secondly, we have learned to appreciate
the value of the post-coital examination.
This seems so important that at the risk of
going into tedious technicalities I should like
to discuss it in some detail.

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on October 21st, 1952.

Post-Coital Test

The post-coital test consists of an examination of the woman’s cervical secretions a
number of hours after coitus (usually 7 to 12).
It is painless, it can be done in less than
five minutes, and it needs no unusual
equipment or exceptional ability. This test is
concerned with the no-man’s-land of fertility
which is neither strictly the seminologist’s
nor the gynzcologist’s business, so that one
tends to blame the other for its neglect if,
indeed, it is thought of at all ! Nevertheless,
its practical importance is obvious: for of
what avail is the most favourable report on
a man’s semen if we do not know whether
his spermatozoa reach the cervical canal and
find the conditions they need there? And
how can we be certain that coital mechanics
are adequate, and that a woman’s cervical
secretions are as they should be until we
have found a dense and active sperm population in them ?

In our experience the commonest cause
of failure of fertility investigations is an
irritational attitude to this test. Its frequent
omission, and the sacrifice of its diagnostic
possibilities have given rise to several
popular (and not only popular) superstitions,
such as that of ‘‘ incompatibility,” or a
mysterious ‘‘ X-factor.’”’ And we see with
distressing regularity couples who are said
to be normally fertile in every respect yet
remain, childless for years and get no further
help than the instructions to ‘‘ go on trying.”
The history of two such cases seen within the
last six months may be of interest: one
couple complained of ro the other of 14
years’ sterility. Both had had exhaustive
investigations—one woman had been through
the hands of three specialists. Both wives
had had one major and several minor
operations and both husbands were tested
repeatedly and found normal. Treatment
had been lavish but ineffectual, and postcoital examinations were the only investiga
202
- FAMILY PLANNING

tions omitted. In both cases the post-coital
test showed a poor result owing to unsatisfactory cervical secretions, and both wives
conceived within two months of treating this
condition. In both cases the test took only a
very few minutes, and the cost of treatment
was about ninepence !

A review of our post-coital reports shows
only about one good result in five. This
means that in approximately 80 per cent
of our cases this test gave an immediate
pointer to the diagnosis of a couple’s difficulty. For a poor post-coital result must
mean either poor semen, poor cervical
secretions, or a mechanical fault of coitus.
A subsequent semen test immediately decides
between these alternatives and opens the
way to rational therapy.

Another aspect to these considerations
deserves attention: of most subfertile
couples it is the wife who usually seeks advice
first, and in fact most of the women for
whom we do post-coital tests have already
had routine gynecological investigations.
And, even if they have escaped the still
widespread custom of doing a D. & C. first
and asking questions afterwards, many of
them have had salpingograms, or tubal
insufflations and endometrial biopsies. Now
if the post-coital test were to give a clear
diagnostic indication in only half the cases
examined, the amount of medical manpower
and time wasted and the cost of unnecessary
expenditure of X-ray material must be
enormous every year. This might be worthy
of serious consideration in view of the recent
appeals for economy in the medical services.
Nor should we forget the waste of the
patient’s time and the unnecessary distress
caused by these procedures.

The third lesson we have learned through
this work is that the standard of generally
available male fertility tests is still deplorably
low. A semen examination is highly skilled
and time-consuming work. Also, the conditions under which seminal specimens have
to be collected and delivered to the laboratory
are highly critical and need a good deal of
organization. Most clinical laboratories have
neither the trained technical or secretarial
staff nor the time to attend to these matters,

203

and often the examination of a specimen
brought in is left to any technician who
happens to be at a loose end. It is not
surprising, therefore, that week by week we
see the most tragic mistakes in diagnosis ;
men who have been told that they are
perfectly normal, and whose wives have
consequently undergone any likely and
unlikely form of treatment, turn out to be
subfertile, or even sterile, and, conversely,
men who have been given the most gloomy
opinions turn, out to be perfectly normal.

To quote only one example of many: a
young man came to us with the story that
three semen tests at his local hospital had
shown him to be sterile. Allegedly his
spermatozoa were all immotile, and he was
given a hopeless prognosis. Our semen test
showed him to be highly fertile, and we
found out that his previous tests had all been
done on condom specimens. It has been
known, for over twenty years that condoms
immobilize spermatozoa quite rapidly, yet
this type of test continues in many places
to this day.

It is certain that, until clinical laboratories
faced with this work are prepared to employ
specially trained staff to deal with it, and to
allow them facilities and time to do so, the
male factor in the infertile marriage will be
one of the mysterious “‘ X-factors ” and we
shall continue to guess.

The Position To-day

The subject of this talk is ‘‘ The Past and
the Future,’ and so far I have talked of the
past only. But before looking ahead to the
future, I think it will be well to try to
summarize our present position.

We set out to help to establish standards
for this work, and I think we have made good
headway towards our aim. To-day we are
able to tell a man whether he is fertile or
sterile, or whether he needs further attention.
This may seem little enough from a research
worker’s point of view, but it means very
much to the patient, for a definite verdict
of complete adequacy or hopeless sterility
saves an endless amount of wasted time and
useless treatment and enables a couple to
make practical arrangements accordingly.
204

Secondly, the results of our tests are comparable from one time to the next, since our
methods eliminate the observer as much as
possible. In the past and with other methods
in use nowadays, a semen test often represented an estimate rather than a calculation.
This made it difficult to assess the results of
treatment. With a standardized method and
comparable results we have been able to
eliminate several forms of time-honoured but
irrational therapy, and to prove the value of
others.

Thirdly, our work on post-coital tests has
revealed the inestimable importance of
co-operation, between male and female clinics,
and, incidentally, has yielded some useful
methods of practical treatment.

Our present situation, then, is that we
have accumulated a certain amount of
knowledge, and that experience has shown
this to be of practical use. But the application of what we have learned is still limited
to a comparatively small number of workers,
and our task for the future is to make these
facts known, and to make them part of the
daily routine in subfertility work.

We have already begun to do so, for half
a dozen technicians trained in our methods
of seminology are working at several hospitals, and more than twice that number of
doctors have come for training in post-coital
examinations. In March this year the F.P.A.
organized a meeting for its clinic doctors
who were interested in this field, and over
sixty attended. The meeting was concerned
with practical problems and methods of
investigation, and similar conferences will be
held in future. These will probably be open
to doctors outside the F.P.A. We hope that
this will serve to make more generally
available the services hitherto confined to a
very few centres.

The Future

It has been argued that subfertility investigations are a highly specialized field and
therefore should be confined to hospital
departments rather than left to clinics or
doctors not of consultant status. But then,
every field of medicine is highly specialized
if one chooses to make it so. And no one

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

would criticize a general practitioner for
dealing himself with, say, a straightforward
case of pneumonia, or a broken wrist, rather
than sending the first to a chest hospital and
the second to an orthopedic hospital.
Undoubtedly there are highly specialized
fertility investigations needing special equipment and these are obviously a matter for the
gynecologist, the seminologist, the endocrinologist and the G.U. surgeon. But it is
not in this field that most of the trouble
arises. Where so many couples come to an
impasse is precisely in what I may call the
general practice of subfertility, where the
specialists’ reports have their place but a
balanced and common-sense view of the
whole situation is of first importance.

Therefore we shall continue to make every
effort to keep in contact, by publications,
by post-graduate lectures and by direct
teaching, with the general medical public as
well as with the experts.

Needless to say, we shall also continue
with our established routine and with the
pursuit of our present lines of research.

Summary

The F.P.A. male subfertility centre was
established in 1945 to provide reliable
investigation of male fertility by semen
analyses, post - coital tests and clinical
examination, and to advise on treatment.

The annual number of tests rose from 289
in its first year to about 2,000 in the third
and has continued at this level, thus showing
need for such a service. Records have
already accumulated of over 10,000 semen
analyses, over 2,600 post-coital tests, and
over 200 testicular biopsies. Review of this
material has shown: (1) that about twothirds of patients referred are subfertile
(8 per cent completely sterile) and only onethird normally fertile ; (2) that in 80 per cent
of childless couples the post-coital test gives
an immediate pointer to the difficulty, saving
many other investigations, and (3) that
standards of generally available male fertility
investigation are still deplorably low.
Research into etiology, diagnosis and
treatment of male subfertility continues.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 4
