PLANNED PARENTHOOD IN INDIA
By VERA HOUGHTON

(Secretary, International Committee on Planned Parenthood)

T will soon be three years since the

International Congress on Population and

World Resources in Relation to the
Family met at Cheltenham. During that
time a great deal has been said and written
on the problem of growing pressure of
population on food and other resources. The
Colombo Plan stresses the formidable task
of raising standards of living in South and
South-East Asia while trying to keep pace
with growing populations ; Japan has been
told that if her population reaches roo million
or more, it will be impossible to maintain even
a bare subsistence diet without foreign aid
being continued indefinitely. In the West
Indies the chairman of the Development and
Welfare Organisation has drawn attention,
in his report for 1947-1949, to the serious
economic implications of the excessive rate
of population growth in that region.

Despite these and other warnings, Governments have so far failed to initiate positive
population policies in relation to the resources
of their respective areas. Dissemination of
family planning knowledge is still in the
hands of voluntary organizations, inadequately supported and ill-equipped for
tackling this problem on a large scale.

The need for an international organization
to bring together al]l organizations and
individuals concerned with population problems and family planning in each country,
for the promotion of a world population
programme, is becoming increasingly obvious.
To prepare for this, the Cheltenham Congress
set up a small committee of representatives
of the national organizations of America,
Britain, Holland and Sweden, and the title
of ‘“ International Committee on Planned
Parenthood ’’ has been provisionally adopted.

The main task of the secretariat has been
to establish contact with planned parenthood
movements in other countries and to clarify
the legal and practical difficulties which

33

impede the introduction of family planning
and sex education programmes. We are now
in touch with organizations or individuals in
forty-eight countries and there is a fairly
regular exchange of news and information.
Much of this information is of general
interest, and the invitation to make it known
to readers of the EuGENics REVIEW is
welcomed.

In the months ahead the International
Committee hopes that pressure will be put
on the British Government not only to
implement the recommendations of the
Royal Commission on Population but to
make the dissemination of family planning
knowledge an integral part of the Colonial
Medical Services. We hope to encourage
fresh ideas and proposals for tackling some
of the difficult and almost insurmountable
problems with which voluntary workers are
faced, and to stimulate research for a simple
method of contraception suitable for backward peoples.

There is special need for this in India where
the population is increasing at the rate of
nearly five million a year, and where the
already inadequate food resources have
recently been depleted by a series of natural
calamities. As the plight of Indian women
has been recognized in recent years by Indian
sociologists and demographers, India is
perhaps a good starting-point. What are the
difficulties in the way of a family planning
scheme ?

Dr. S. Chandrasekhar says :

Apart from the general rural conservatism of
the masses that offers resistance to every reform,
there is no organized resistance either by the
Government or the Church as in some countries.
Nor are the Indian religions opposed to planned
parenthood. . . . It should be recognized that
both in India and in Pakistan a majority of the
people live under backward conditions. Matters
like bathrooms, running water, privacy, the
cheapness, reliability and availability of contra34

ceptives, and the illiteracy of women need
attention. No matter what the obstacles, this
reform must be carried through.

Before India obtained her Independence
these problems had been considered by two
Government committees: by the Health
Survey and Development Committee (the
Bhore Committee), which reported in 1946,
and by the National Planning Commission
set up by the Indian National Congress
during the war. The Bhore Committee
recommended that ‘“ when childbearing is
likely to result in injury to mother or infant

. It should be the responsibility of
Governments to provide instruction regarding contraception in maternity and child
welfare centres, dispensaries, hospitals and
any other public institutions which administer medical aid to women.” It also recommended that the means of contraception be
made available free of cost in necessitous
cases; that control be exercised over the
manufacture and sale of contraceptives, and
that public funds be used for research into
more effective methods.

The National Planning Commission, of
which Pandit Nehru was chairman, advised
the State to adopt a policy to encourage
family planning and limitation of children.
The measures outlined included sterilization
of persons suffering from transmissible
diseases of a serious nature.

Since Independence, no action has been
taken to implement the recommendations of
either of these committees, despite the fact
that the chairman of one of them is now the
Prime Minister. This omission may be
explained by the fact that there are other
Ministers, both in the Union and in the
States, who are opposed to birth control.
The Minister of Health, for example, has not
spoken in favour of it.

The Indian Director-General of Health
Services went very fully into the question of
family planning when he was here in 1949
with a view to bringing this matter before
the provincial and union Governments, who
are ultimately responsible for health matters
in their areas. But after two years we are
officially informed that the matter is still
under consideration.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Other departments and Governments of
India have fortunately not waited for a lead
from Delhi. The films division of the
Ministry of Information has produced a
documentary entitled Planned Parenthood.
This film explains that by limiting the size
of families, a better chance, in education and
in life, can be given to India’s children.
Family planning lectures have become a part
of military training in the Army and Air
Force. An experimental scheme of clinics
is being tried out at certain selected stations
in the Army, and the Air Force is to give
advice in all its maternity and child welfare
sections.

Hyderabad State Government has set up a
Bureau of Health Education and Propaganda, and a Health Museum, which will
include propaganda for family planning. A
Family Planning Society has been formed by
Mrs. Vellodi, the Governor’s wife, and a clinic
has been opened at the Central Military
Hospital. In East Punjab, training in
contraceptive techniques has now been made
part of the medical curriculum, and the
Director of Health Services is in touch with
us here. In Mysore, birth-control clinics were
established at State hospitals as long ago as
1930, when, they were the first Governmentcontrolled clinics in the world.

In Madras, where several attempts were
made before the war to start clinics, the All
India Women’s Conference has formed a
Family Planning Committee to stimulate
public interest.

Free birth-control clinics have been
established by the municipalities of Bombay
and Poona. Bombay Municipality was the
first to take action, opening two clinics in
1947 ; there are now four. Poona hasoneclinic.

It is estimated that about 3,000 married
couples have so far used these facilities in
Bombay, which, for a city of that size, is not
an encouraging response. A need is revealed
for propaganda on the part of doctors,
nurses, health visitors and other social
workers, to persuade the poorer sections of
the benefits of family planning. Bombay has
been fortunate in having a long record of
voluntary help, and the newly formed Family
Planning Association, under the presidency
PLANNED PARENTHOOD IN INDIA 35

of Lady Rama Rau, is doing valuable work
in making direct contact with the people and
in gaining the co-operation of the medical
profession. But few doctors and _ social
workers have as yet taken this matter up;
more financial help and many more voluntary
workers will be needed.

Elsewhere in India, a number of hospitals,
dispensaries and maternity and child welfare centres give advice to patients, but the
responsibility for doing so usually rests with
the doctor or other person in charge. Facilities therefore vary between one centre and
another in the same area. Some private
maternity homes and doctors in practice are
also willing to help patients, but their work
does not reach the cases that most need it.

In the past the movement has found its
most vigorous advocates among voluntary
workers, and over the years many distinguished Indian women have devoted themselves to it. The All India Women’s Conference repeatedly passed resolutions in
favour of disseminating birth-control knowledge and, in 1935, Mrs. Margaret Sanger was

invited to the tenth annual meeting at
Travancore. For three years in succession
Mrs. Edith How-Martyn, Honorary Director
of the Birth Control International Information Centre, visited India, and in 1935 she
accompanied Mrs. Sanger on a world tour.
Between them they covered thousands of
miles in India, giving many lectures and
demonstrations. This work was continued
by the Family Planning Association (Great
Britain), who appointed Mrs. Rena Datta
India Organiser in 1938. Mrs. Datta returned
to this country in 1945.

It is now for India to decide how her
population problems shall be solved; last
year the Indian Institute of Population
Studies was founded by Dr. S. Chandrasekhar, to study the basic relation between
population and natural resources. Much of
the hesitancy of Government officials and
members of the medical profession is due to
the absence of simple, effective and cheap
methods, in the discovery of which India
would doubtless be glad of help from the
West.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 1
