SIR JULIAN HUXLEY,
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.

Eugenics in

Evolutionary Perspective

to give the Eugenics Society’s Galton

Lecture. The first occasion was a quarter
of a century ago, when Lord Horder was our
President, and I am proud of the remarks which
he and my brother Aldous made about these.

Let me begin by broadly outlining how eugenics
looks in our new evolutionary perspective. Man,
like all other existing organisms, is as old as life.
His evolution has taken close on three billion
years. During that immense period he—the line
of living substance leading to Homo sapiens—
has passed through a series of increasingly high
levels of organization. His organization has been
progressively improved, to use Darwin’s phrase,
from some submicroscopic gene-like state,
through a unicellular to a two-layered and a
metazoan stage, to a three-layered type with
many organ-systems, including a central nervous
system and simple brain, on to a chordate with
notochord and gill-slits, to a jawless and limbless vertebrate, to a fish, then to an amphibian,
a reptile, an unspecialized insectivorous mammal, a lemuroid, a monkey with much improved
vision, heightened exploratory urge and manipulative ability, an ape-like creature, and finally
through a protohominid australopith to a fully
human creature, big-brained and capable of
true speech.

This astonishing process of continuous advance and biological improvement has been
brought about through the operation of natural
selection—the differential reproduction of biologically beneficial combinations of mutant
genes, leading to the persistence, improvement
and multiplication of some strains, species and

[= HONOURED AT having been twice asked

* The Galton Lecture, delivered in London on
June 6th 1962.

patterns of organization and the reduction and
extinction of others, notably to a succession of
so-called dominant types, each achieving a
highly successful new level of organization and
causing the reduction of previous dominant
types inhabiting the same environment. During
its period of dominance, which may last up to a
hundred million years or so, the new type itself
becomes markedly improved, whether by specialization of single subtypes like the horses or
elephants, or by an improvement in general
organization, as happened with the mammalian
type in general at the end of the Oligocene.
Eventually no further improvement is possible,
and further advance can only occur through the
breakthrough of one line to a radically new
type of organization, as from reptile to mammal.

In biologically recent times, one primate line
broke through from the mammalian to the
human type of organization. With this, the
evolutionary process passed a critical point,
and entered on a new state or phase, the psychosocial phase, differing radically from the biological in its mechanism, its tempo, and its
results. As a result, man has become the latest
dominant type in the evolutionary process, has
multiplied enormously, has achieved miracles of
cultural evolution, has reduced or extinguished
many other species, and has radically affected the
ecology and indeed the whole evolutionary
process of our planet. Yet he is a highly imperfect creature. He carries a heavy burden of
genetic defects and imperfections. As a psychosocial organism, he has not undergone much
improvement. Indeed, man is still very much an
unfinished type, who clearly has actualized only
a small fraction of his human potentialities. In
addition, his genetic deterioration is being

123

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1962, 54, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rendered probable by his social set-up, and
definitely being promoted by atomic fallout.
Furthermore, his economic, technical and cultural progress is threatened by the high rate of
increase of world population.

The obverse of man’s actual and potential
further defectiveness is the vast extent of his possible future improvement. To effect this, he must
first of all check the processes making for genetic
deterioration. This means reducing man-made
radiation to a minimum, discouraging genetically
defective or inferior types from _ breeding,
reducing human over-multiplication in general
and the high differential fertility of various
regions, nations and classes in particular. Then
he can proceed to the much more important
task of positive improvement. In the not too
distant future the fuller realization of possibilities will inevitably come to provide the main
motive for man’s overall efforts; and a Science
of Evolutionary Possibilities, which to-day is
merely adumbrated, will provide a firm basis for
these efforts. Eugenics can make an important
contribution to man’s further evolution: but it
can only do so if it considers itself as one branch
of that new nascent science, and fearlessly
explores all the possibilities that are open to it.

Man, let me repeat, is not a biological but a
psychosocial organism. As such, he possesses a
new mechanism of transmission and transformation based on the cumulative handing on of
experience, ideas and attitudes. To obtain
eugenic improvement, we shall need not only an
understanding of what kind of selection operates
in the psychosocial process, not only new scientific knowledge and new techniques in the field of
human genetics and reproduction but new ideas
and attitudes about reproduction and parenthood in particular and human destiny in general.
One of those new ideas will be the moral imperative of Eugenics.

* * *

In the twenty-five years since my previous
lecture, many events have occurred, and many
discoveries have been made with a bearing on
eugenics. Events such as the explosion of atomic
and nuclear bombs, the equally sinister “‘population explosion,” the reductio ad horrendum of
racism by Nazi Germany, and the introduction

124

of artificial insemination for animals and human
beings, sometimes with the use of deep-frozen
sperm; scientific discoveries such as that of
DNA as the essential basis for heredity and
evolution, of subgenic organization, of the widespread existence of balanced polymorphic
genetic systems, and of the intensity and efficacy
of selection in nature; the realization that the
entities which evolve are populations of phenotypes, with consequent emphasis on population
genetics on the one hand, and on the interaction
between genotype and environment on the other;
and finally the recognition that adaptation and
biological improvement are universal phenomena in life.

I do not propose to discuss these changes and
discoveries now, but shall plunge directly into
my subject—Eugenics in Evolutionary Perspective. I chose this title because I am sure that a
proper understanding of the evolutionary process and of man’s place and role in it is necessary
for any adequate or satisfying view of human
destiny; and eugenics must obviously play an
important part in enabling man to fulfil that
destiny.

As I have set forth at greater length elsewhere,
in the hundred years since the publication of the
Origin of Species there has been a “knowledge
explosion”’ unparalleled in all previous history.
It has led to an accelerated expansion of ideas,
not only in the natural sciences but also in the
humanistic fields of history, archaeology, and
social and cultural development, and its effects
on our thinking have been especially violent,
not to say revolutionary, during the quarter of a
century since my previous Galton Lecture. It
has led to a new picture of man’s relations with
his own nature and with the rest of the universe,
and indeed to a new and unified vision of reality,
both fuller and truer than any of the insights of
the past. In the light of this new vision the whole
of reality is seen as a single process of evolution.
For evolution can properly be defined as a
natural process in time, self-varying and selftransforming and generating increasing complexity and variety during its transformations;
and this is precisely what has been going on for
all time in all the universe. It operates everywhere and in all periods, but is divisible into a
series of three sectors or successive phases, the
EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

inorganic or cosmic, the organic or biological,
and the human or psychosocial, each based on
and growing out of its predecessor. Each phase
operates by a different main mechanism, has a
different scale and a different tempo of change,
and produces a different type of results.

Between the separate phases, the evolutionary
process has to cross a critical threshold, passing
from an old to a new state, as when water passes
from the solid to the liquid state at the critical
temperature-threshold of 0° C and from liquid
to gaseous at that of 100° C.

The critical threshold between the inorganic
and the biological phase was crossed when
matter and the organisms built from it became
self-reproducing, that between the biological and
the psychosocial when mind and the organizations generated by it became self-reproducing
in their turn.

The cosmic phase operates by random interaction, primarily physical but to a small degree
chemical. Its quantitative scale is unbelievably
vast both in space and time. Its visible dimensions exceed 1,000 million light-years (10??km),
its distances are measured by units of thousands
of light-years (nearly 10'*km), the numbers of its
visible galaxies exceed 100 million (10°) and those
of its stars run into thousands of millions of
millions (10*5). It has operated in its present form
for at least 6,000 million years, possibly much
longer. Its tempo of major change is unbelievably
slow, to be measured by 1,000-million-year
periods. According to the physicists, its overall
trend, in accord with the Second Law of Thermodynamics, is entropic, tending towards a decrease
in organization and to ultimate frozen immobility; and its products reach only a very low
level of organization—photons, subatomic particles, atoms, and simple inorganic compounds
at one end of its size-scale, nebulae, stars and
occasional planetary systems at the other.

The biological phase operates primarily by
the teleonomic or ordering process of natural
selection, which canalizes random variation into
non-random directions of change. Its tempo of
major change is somewhat less slow, measured
by 100-million- instead of 1,000-million-year
units of time. Its overall trend, kept going of
course by solar energy, is anti-entropic, towards
an increase in the amount and quality of adap
tive organization, and marked by the growing
importance of awareness as mediated by brains.
And its results are organisms—organisms of an
astonishing efficiency, complexity, and variety,
almost inconceivably so until one recalls R. A.
Fisher’s profound paradox, that natural selection
plus time is a mechanism for generating an
exceedingly high degree of improbability.

In the course of biological evolution, three
sub-processes are at work. The first (cladogenesis, or branching evolution) leads to
divergence and greater variety; the second
(anagenesis, or upward evolution) leads to
improvement of all sorts, from detailed adaptations to specializations, from the greater efficiency of some major function like digestion to
overall advance in general organization; the
third is stasigenesis or stabilized limitation of
evolution. This occurs when specialization for a
particular way of life reaches a dead end as with
horses, or efficiency of function attains a
maximum as with hawks’ vision, or an ancient
type of organization persists as a living fossil
like the lungfish or the tuatara.

Major advance or biological progress is always
by a succession of dominant types, each step
achieved by a rare breakthrough from some
established type of organization to a new and
more effective one, as from the amphibian to
true dry-land reptilian type, or from the coldblooded egg-laying reptile to the warm-blooded
self-regulating mammal with intra-uterine development. The new dominant type multiplies at
the expense of the old, which may become
extinct (as did the jawless fish) or may persist in
reduced numbers (as did the reptiles.)

The psychosocial phase, the latest of which
we have any knowledge (though elsewhere in the
universe there may have been a breakthrough to
some new phase as unimaginable to us as the
psychosocial phase would have been to even the
most advanced Pliocene primate), is based on a
self-reproducing and self-varying system of
cumulative transmission of experience and culture, operating by mechanisms of psychological
and social selection which we have not as yet
adequately defined or analysed. Spatially it is
very limited; we know of it only on this earth,
and in any case it must be restricted to the surface of a small minority of planets in the small

125

ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

minority of stars possessing planetary systems.
On our planet it is at the very beginning of its
course, having begun less than one million years
ago. However, its tempo is not only much faster
than that of biological evolution, but manifests a
new phenomenon, in the shape of a marked
acceleration. Its overall trend is highly antientropic, and is characterized by a sharp increase
in the operative significance of exceptional
individuals and in the importance of true purpose and conscious evaluation based on reason
and imagination, as against the automatic
differential elimination of random variants.
The most significant element in that trend has
been the growth and improved organization of
tested and established knowledge. And its results
are psychologically (mentally) generated organizations even more astonishingly varied and
complex than biological organisms—machines,
concepts, cooking, mass communications, cities,
philosophies, superstitions, propaganda, armies
and navies, personalities, legal systems, works
of art, political and economic systems, entertainments, slavery, scientific theories, hospitals,
moral codes, prisons, myths, languages, torture,
games and sports, religions, record and history,
poetry, civil services, marriage systems, initiation rituals, agriculture, drama, social hierarchies, schools and universities. Accordingly
evolution in the human phase is no longer purely
biological, based on changes in the material
system of genetic transmission, but primarily
cultural, based on changes in the psychosocial
system of ideological and cultural transmission.
In the psychosocial phase of evolution the
same three sub-processes operating in the biological phase are still at work—cladogenesis,
operating to generate difference and variety
within and between cultures; anagenesis, operating to produce improvement in detailed technological methods, in economic and _ political
machinery, in administrative and educational
systems, in scientific thinking and creative
expression, in moral tone and religious attitude,
in social and international organization; and
stasigenesis, operating to limit progress and to
keep old systems and attitudes, including even
outworn superstitions, persisting alongside of or
actually within more advanced social and intellectual systems. But there is an additional fourth

126

sub-process, that of convergence (or at least
anti-divergence), operating by diffusion—diffusion of ideas and techniques between individuals,
communities, cultures and regions. This is tending to give unity to the world: but we must see
to it that it does not also impose uniformity and
destroy desirable variety.

As in the biological phase, major advance in
the human phase is brought about by a succession of generally or locally dominant types.
These, however, are not types of organism, but
of cultural and ideological organization. Monotheism as against polytheism, for instance; or in
the political sphere, the beginning of one-world
internationalism as against competitive multinationalism. Or again, science as against magic,
democracy as against tyranny, planning as
against laissez-faire, tolerance as against intolerance, freedom of opinion and expression as
against authoritarian dogma and repression.

Not only does the succession of dominant
types bring about progress or advance in
organization within each of the three main
evolutionary phases, but it also operates, though
on a grander and more decisive scale, in the
evolutionary process as a whole. A biological
organism possesses a higher degree of organization than any inorganic system; as soon as living
organisms were produced, they became the
major dominant type of organization on earth,
and the course of evolution became predominantly biological and only secondarily inorganic.
Similarly a psychosocial system possesses a
higher degree of organization than any biological organism: accordingly man at once
became the new major dominant type on earth,
and the course of evolution became predominantly cultural and only secondarily biological,
with inorganic methods quite subordinate.

The evolutionary perspective includes the broad
background of the cosmic past. Now against this
background we must face the problems of the
present and the challenge of the future. Let me
begin by reiterating that man is an exceedingly
recent phenomenon. The earliest creatures which
can properly be called men, though they must be
assigned to different genera from ourselves, date
from less than two million years ago, and our
own species, Homo sapiens, from much less than
half a million years. Man began to put his toe
EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

tentatively across the critical threshold leading
towards evolutionary dominance perhaps a

quarter of a million years ago, but took tens of |

thousands of years to cross it, emerging as a
dominant type only during the last main glaciation, probably later than 100,000 B.c., but not
becoming fully dominant until the discovery of
agriculture and _ stock-breeding well under
10,000 years ago, and overwhelmingly so
with the invention of machines and writing and
organized civilization a bare five millennia before
the present day, when his dominance has become
so hubristic as to threaten his own future.

All new dominant types begin their career in a
crude and imperfect form, which then heeds
drastic polishing and improvement before it can
reveal its full potentialities and achieve full
evolutionary success. Man is no exception to this
rule. He is not merely exceedingly young; he is
also exceedingly imperfect, an unfinished and
often botched product of evolutionary improvisation. Teilhard de Chardin has called the
transformation of an anthropoid into a man
hominisation: it might be more accurately,
though more clumsily, termed psychosocialisation. But whatever we call it, the process of
hominisation is very far from complete, the
serious study of its course, its mechanisms and
its techniques has scarcely started, and only a
fraction of its potential results have been
realized. Man, in fact, is in urgent need of
further improvement.

This is where eugenics comes into the picture.
For though the psychosocial system in and by
which man carries on his existence could obviously be enormously improved with great
benefit to its members, the same is also true for
his genetic outfit.

Severe and primarily genetic disabilities like
haemophilia, colour-blindness, mongolism, some
kinds of sexual deviation, much mental defect,
sickle-cell anaemia, some forms of dwarfism,
and Huntington’s chorea are the source of much
individual distress, and their reduction would
remove a considerable burden from suffering
humanity. But these are occasional abnormalities. Quantitatively their total effect is insignificant in comparison with the massive imperfection of man as a species, and their reduction
appears asa minor operation in comparison with

the large-scale positive possibilities of all-round
general improvement.

Take first the problem of intelligence. It is to
man’s higher level of intelligence that he owes
his evolutionary dominance; and yet how low
that level still remains! It is now well established
that the human I.Q., when properly assayed, is
largely a measure of genetic endowment. Consider the difference in brain-power between the
hordes of average men and women with I.Q.’s
around 100 and the meagre company of
Terman’s so-called geniuses with I.Q.’s of 160 or
over, and the much rarer true geniuses like
Newton and Darwin, Tolstoy and Shakespeare,
Goya and Michelangelo, Hammurabi and
Confucius; and then reflect that, since the
frequency curve for intelligence is approximately symmetrical, there are as many stupider
people with I.Q.’s below 100 as there are abler
ones with I.Q.’s above it.

Recollect also that the great and striking
advances in human affairs, as much in creative
art and political and military leadership as in
scientific discovery and invention, are primarily
due to a few exceptionally gifted individuals.
Remember that on the established principles of
genetics a small raising of average capacity
would of necessity result in an upward shifting of
the entire frequency curve, and therefore a considerable increase in the absolute numbers of
such highly intelligent and well-endowed human
beings that form the uppermost section of the
curve (as well as a decrease in the numbers of
highly stupid and feebly endowed individuals
at the lower end).

Reflect further on the fact, originally pointed
out by Galton, that there is already a shortage of
brains capable of dealing with the complexities
of modern administration, technology and planning, and that with the inevitable increase of our
social and technical complexity, the greater will
that shortage become. It is thus clear that for any
major advance in national and international
efficiency we cannot depend on haphazard
tinkering with social or political symptoms or
ad hoc patching up of the world’s political
machinery, or even on improving general education, but must rely increasingly on raising the
genetic level of man’s intellectual and practical
abilities. As I shall later point out, artificial

127
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

insemination by selected donors could bring
about such a result in practice.

The same applies everywhere in the psycho-—

social process. For more and better scientists, we
need the raising of the genetic level of exploratory curiosity or whatever it is that underlies
single-minded investigation of the unknown and
the discovery of novel facts and ideas; for more
and better artists and writers, we need the raising
of the genetic level for disciplined creative
imagination; for more and better statesmen,
that of the capacity to see social and political
situations as wholes, to take long-term and total
instead of only short-term and partial views; for
more and bettér technologists and engineers,
that of the passion and capacity to understand
how things work and to make them work more
efficiently; for more and better saints and moral
leaders, that of disciplined valuation, of devotion
and duty, and of the capacity to love; and for
more and better leaders of thought and guides of
action we need a raising of the capacity of man’s
vision and imagination, to form a comprehensive picture, at once reverent, assured and
unafraid, of nature and man’s relations with it.

These facts and ideas have an important bearing on the so-called race question and the
problem of racial equality. I should rather say
racial inequality, for up till quite recently the
naive belief in the natural inequality of races and
people in general, and the inherent superiority of
one’s own race or people in particular, has almost
universally prevailed.

To demonstrate the way in which this point of
view permeated even nineteenth-century scientific thought, it is worth recalling that it was largely
subscribed to by Darwin in his comments on the
Fuegians in the Voyage of the Beagle, and in
more general but more guarded terms in the
Descent of Man: and Galton himself, against a
similar background of travels among backward
tribes and on the basis of his own rather curious
method of assessment, concluded that different
races had achieved different genetic standards,

* There is the further point that races may differ
considerably in body-build and that Sheldon and others
have made it highly probable that body-build is correlated
with temperament. Unfortunately, racial differences in
body-build have not yet been analysed in terms of
aeons somatotypes: here is an important field for
research.

128

so that, for instance, “the average standard of
the Negro race is two grades below our own.”
This type of belief, after being given a pseudoscientific backing by non-biological theoreticians
like Gobineau and Houston Stewart Chamberlain, was used to justify the Nazis’ “Nordic”
claims to world domination and their horrible
campaign for the extermination of the “inferior,
non-Aryan race” of Jews, and is still employed
with support from Holy Writ and the majority
of the Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa,
to sanction Verwoerd’s denial of full human
rights to non-whites.

Later investigation has conclusively demonstrated first, that there is no such thing as a
‘““pure race.”’ Secondly, that the obvious differences in level of achievement between different
peoples and ethnic groups are primarily cultural,
due to differences not in genetic equipment but
in historical and environmental opportunity.
And thirdly, that when the potentialities of
intelligence of two major “races” or ethnic
groups, such as whites and negroes or Europeans
and Indians, are assessed as scientifically as
possible, the frequency curves for the two
groups overlap over almost the whole of their
extent, so that approximately half the population
of either group is genetically stupider (has a
lower genetic I.Q.) than the genetically more
intelligent half of the other. There are thus large
differences in genetic mental endowment within
single racial groups, but minimal ones between
different racial groups.

Partly as a result of such studies, but also of
the prevalent environmentalist views of Marxist
and Western liberal thought, an anti-genetic view
has recently developed about race. It is claimed
that though ethnic groups obviously differ in
physical characters, and that some of them, like
pigmentation, nasal form, and number of sweatglands, were originally adaptive, they do not
(and sometimes even that they cannot) differ in
psychological or mental characters such as
intelligence, imagination, or even temperament.*

Against this new pseudo-scientific racial
naiveté, we must set the following scientific facts
and principles. First, it is clear that the major
human races originated as geographical subspecies of Homo sapiens, in adaptation to the
very different environments to which they have
EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

become restricted. Later, of course, expansion
and migration reversed the process of differentiation and led to an increasing degree of convergence by crossing, though considerable genetic
differentiation remains. Secondly, as Professor
Muller has pointed out, it is theoretically inconceivable that such marked physical differences
as still persist between the main racial groups
should not be accompanied by genetic differences in temperament and mental capacities,
possibly of considerable extent. Finally, as previously explained, advance in cultural evolution
is largely and increasingly dependent on exceptionally well-endowed individuals. Thus two
racial groups might overlap over almost the
whole range of genetic capacity, and yet one
might be capable of considerably higher achievement, not merely because of better environmental and historical opportunity, but because
it contained say 2 instead of 1 per cent of
exceptionally gifted men and women. So far as I
know, proper scientific research on this subject
has never been carried out, and possibly our
present methods of investigation are not adequate for doing so, but the principle is theoretically clear and is of vital practical importance.*

This does not imply any belief in crude racism,
with its unscientific ascription of natural and
permanent superiority or inferiority to entire
races. As I have just pointed out, approximately
half of any large ethnic group, however superior
its self-image may be, is in point of fact genetically inferior to half of the rival ethnic group
with which it happens to be in social or economic
competition and which it too often stigmatizes as
permanently and inherently lower. Furthermore,
practical experience demonstrates that every
so-called race, however underdeveloped its
economic and social system may happen to be,
contains a vast reservoir of untapped talent, only

* On the supposition that genetic intelligence is
multifactorially (polygenically) determined and that its
distribution follows a normal symmetrical curve, it can be
calculated that the raising of the mean genetic I.Q. of a
population by 14 per cent would result in a 50 per cent
increase in the number of individuals with an I.Q. of 160
or over. The proportion of such highly-endowed individuals would rise from 1 in about 30,000 of the total
population to 1 in about 20,000. Sir Cyril Burt informs me
that if, as is possible, some types of high genetic intelligence are determined by single genes, the increase might
be still greater.

waiting to be elicited by a combination of challenging opportunity, sound educational methods,
and efficient special training. I recently attended
an admirable symposium on nutrition in Nigeria
where the scientific quality of the African contributions was every whit as high as that of the
whites; and African politicians can be just as
statesmanlike (and also just as unscrupulously
efficient in the political game) as their European
or American counterparts.

The basic fact about the races of mankind is
their almost total overlap in genetic potentialities. But the most significant fact for eugenic
advance is the large difference in achievement
made possible by a small increase in the number
of exceptional individuals.

The evolutionary biologist can point out to the
social scientist and the politician that this
importance of the exceptional individual for
psychosocial advance is merely an enhancement
of a long-established evolutionary trend. Exceptional individuals can be important for biological
improvement in mammals, in birds, and possibly
even in insects. New food-traditions in Japanese
monkeys are established by disobedient young
individuals. The utilization of milk-bottles as a
new source of food by blue tits was due to the
activities of a few exceptional tit geniuses in a
few widely separate localities. All male satin
bowerbirds construct bowers and assemble collections of stimulating bright objects at them,
but only a minority deliberately paint their
bowers with a mixture of berries, charcoal and
saliva, and only a still smaller minority indulge
the species’ natural preference for blue objects
by deliberately stealing bluebags to add to their
display collection. And there is some evidence
that even in ants, those prototypes of rigidly
instinctive behaviour, a few workers are exceptionally well-endowed with the exploratory urge,
and play a special role in discovering new sources
of food for the colony.

But I must return to man as a species. The
human species is in desperate need of genetic
improvement if the whole process of psychosocial evolution which it has set in train is not
to get bogged down in unplanned disorder,
negated by over-multiplication, clogged up by
mere complexity, or even blown to pieces by
obsessional stupidity. Luckily it not only must

129
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

but can be improved. It can be improved by the
same type of method that has secured the improvement of life in general—from protozoan to
protovertebrate, from protovertebrate to primate, from primate to human being—the method of
multi-purpose selection directed towards greater
achievement in the prevailing conditions of life.

On the other hand, it can not be improved by
applying the methods of the professional stockbreeder. Indeed the whole discussion of eugenics
has been bedevilled by the false analogy between
artificial and natural selection. Artificial selection
is intensive special-purpose selection, aimed at
producing a particular excellence, whether in
milk-yield in cattle, speed in race-horses or a
fancy image in dogs. It produces a number of
specialized pure breeds, each with a markedly
lower variance than the parent species. Darwin
rightly drew heavily on its results in order to
demonstrate the efficacy of selection in general.
But since he never occupied himself seriously
with eugenics he did not point out the irrelevance
of stock-breeding methods to human improvement. In fact, they are not only irrelevant, but
would be disastrous. Man owes much of his
evolutionary success to his unique variability.
Any attempt to improve the human species must
aim at retaining this fruitful diversity, while at
the same time raising the level of excellence in all
its desirable components, and remembering that
the selectively evolved characters of organisms
are always the results of compromise between
different types of advantage, or between advantage and disadvantage.

Natural selection is something quite different.
To start with, it is a shorthand metaphorical
term coined by Darwin to denote the teleonomic
or directive agencies affecting the process of
evolution in nature, and operating through the
differential survival and reproduction of genetical variants. It may operate between conspecific
individuals, between conspecific populations,
between related species, between higher taxa
such as genera and families, or between still
larger groups of different organizational type,
such as Orders and Classes. It may also operate
between predator and prey, between parasite and
host, and between different synergic assemblages
of species, such as symbiotic partnerships and
ecological communities. It is in fact universal in

130

its occurrence, though multiform in its mode of
action.

Some over-enthusiastic geneticists appear to
think that natural selection acts directly on the
organism’s genetic outfit or genotype. This is not
so. Natural selection exerts its effects on animals
and plants as working mechanisms: it can operate only on phenotypes. Its evolutionary action
in transforming the genetic outfit of a species is
indirect, and depends on the simple fact pointed
out by Darwin in the Origin that much variation
is heritable—in modern terms, that there is a high
degree of correlation between phenotypic and
genotypic variance. The correlation, however, is
never complete, and there are many cases where
it is impossible without experimental analysis to
determine whether a variant is modificational,
due to alteration in the environment, or mutational, due to alteration in the genetic outfit. In
certain cases, environmental treatment will
produce so-called phenocopies which are indistinguishable from mutants in their visible
appearance.

This last fact has led Waddington to an important discovery—the fact that an apparently
Lamarckian mode of evolutionary transformation can be precisely simulated by what he calls
genetic assimilation. To take an actual example,
the rearing of fruitfly larvae on highly saline
media produces a hypertrophy of their saltexcreting glands through direct modification.
But if selection is practised by breeding from
those individuals which show the maximum
hypertrophy of their glands, then after some ten
or twelve generations, individuals with somewhat hypertrophied glands appear even in cultures on non-saline media. The species has a
genetic predisposition, doubtless brought by
selection in the past, to react to saline conditions
by glandular hypertrophy. The action of the
major genes concerned in reactions of this sort
can be enhanced (or inhibited) by so-called
modifying genes of minor effect. Selection has
simply amassed in the genetic outfit an array of
such minor enhancing genes strong enough to
produce glandular hypertrophy even in the
absence of any environmental stimulus, It is only
pseudo-Lamarckism, but no less important for
that—a significant addition to the theoretical
armoury of evolutionary science.
EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

I repeat that the most important effect
achieved by natural selection is biological improvement. As G. G. Simpson reminds us, it
does so opportunistically, making use of whatever new combination of existing mutant genes,
or less frequently of whatever new mutations,
happens to confer differential survival value on
its possessors. We know of numerous cases
where phenotypically identical and adaptive
transformations have been produced by different
genes or gene-combinations.

Here I must digress a moment to discuss the
concept of evolutionary fitness. The biological
avant garde has chosen to define fitness as ‘“‘net
reproductive advantage,” to use the actual words
employed by Professor Medawar in his Reith
Lectures on The Future of Man. Any strain of
animal, plant, or man which leaves slightly more
descendants capable of reproducing themselves
than another, is then defined as “‘fitter.”? This I
believe to be an unscientific and misleading
definition. It disregards all scientific conventions
as to priority, for it bears no resemblance to
what Spencer implied or intended by his famous
phrase the survival of the fittest.* It is also nonsensical in every context save the limited field of
population genetics. In biology, fitness must be
defined, as Darwin did with improvement, “in
relation to the conditions of life’—in other
words, in the context of the general evolutionary
situation. I shall call it evolutionary fitness, in
contradistinction to the purely reproductive fitness of the evangelists of geneticism, which I
prefer to designate by the descriptive label of net
or differential reproductive advantage.

Meanwhile, I have a strong suspicion that the
genetical avant garde of to-day will become the
rearguard of tomorrow. In my own active career
I have seen a reversal of this sort in relation to
natural selection and adaptation. During the
first two decades of this century the biological
avant garde dismissed topics such as cryptic or
mimetic coloration, and indeed most discussion
of adaptation, as mere “‘armchair speculation,”
and played down the role of natural selection in
evolution, as against that of large and random
mutation. Bateson’s enthusiasm rebounded from

* Darwin did not use the phrase in the first edition of
the Origin of Species, though in later editions he added it
as an equivalent to natural selection.

his early protest against speculative phylogeny
into the far more speculative suggestion made
ex cathedra at a British Association meeting, that
all evolution, whether of higher from lower, or of
diversity from uniformity, had been brought
about by loss mutations; and the great T. H.
Morgan once permitted himself to state in print
that, if natural selection had never operated, we
should possess all the organisms that now exist
and a great number of other types as well! This
anti-selectionist avant garde of fifty years back
has now come over en masse into the selectionist
camp, leaving only a few retreating stragglers to
deliver some rather ineffective parthian shots at
their opponents.

Natural selection is a teleonomic or directional
agency. It utilizes the inherent genetic variability
of organisms provided by the raw material of
random mutation and chance recombination,
and it operates by the simple mechanism of
differential reproductive advantage. But on the
evolutionary time-scale it produces biological
improvement, resulting in a higher total and
especially a higher upper level of evolutionary
fitness, involving greater functional efficiency,
higher degrees of organization, more effective
adaptation, better self-regulating capacity, and
finally more mind—in other words an enrichment of qualitative awareness coupled with more
flexible behaviour.

Man almost certainly has the largest reservoir
of genetical variance of any natural species:
selection for the differential reproduction of
desirable permutations and combinations of the
elements of this huge variance could undoubtedly
bring about radical improvement in the human
organism, just as it has in pre-human types.
But the.agency of human transformation cannot
be the blind and automatic natural selection of
the pre-human sector. That, as I have already
stressed, has been relegated to a subsidiary role
in the human phase of evolution. Some form of
psychosocial selection is needed, a selection as
non-natural as are most human activities, such
as wearing clothes, going to war, cooking food,
or employing arbitrary systems of communication. To be effective, such “‘non-natural”’ selection
must be conscious, purposeful and planned. And
since the tempo of cultural evolution is many
thousands of times faster than that of biological

131
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

transformation, it must operate at a far higher
speed than natural selection if it is to prevent
disaster, let alone produce improvement.

Luckily there is to-day at least the possibility
of meeting both these prerequisites: we now
possess an accumulation of established knowledge and an array of tested methods which
could make intelligent, scientific and purposeful
planning possible. And we are in the process of
discovering new techniques which could raise
the effective speed of the selective process to a
new order of magnitude. The relevant new knowledge mainly concerns the various aspects of the
evolutionary process—the fact that there are no
absolutes or all-or-nothing effects in evolution
and that all organisms and all their phenotypic
characters represent a compromise or balance
between competing advantages and disadvantages; the effect of selection on populations in
different environmental conditions; the origin of
adaptation; and the general improvement of
different evolutionary lines in relation to the
conditions of their life. The notable new techniques include effective methods of birth-control,
the successful development of grafted fertilized
ova in new host-mothers, artificial insemination,
and the conservation of function in deep-frozen
gametes.

We must first keep in mind the elementary but
often neglected fact that the characters of organisms which make for evolutionary success or
failure, are not inherited as such. On the contrary, they develop anew in each individual, and
are always the resultant of an interaction between
genetic determination and environmental modification. Biologists are often asked whether
heredity or environment is the more important.
It cannot be too often emphasized that the
question should never be asked. It is as logically
improper to ask a biologist to answer it as it
is for a prosecuting counsel to ask a defendant
when he stopped beating his wife. It is the phenotype which is biologically significant and the
phenotype is a resultant produced by the complex
interaction of hereditary and environmental
factors. Eugenics, in common with evolutionary
biology in general, needs this phenotypic
approach.

Man’s evolution occurs on two different levels
and by two distinct methods, the genetic, based

132

on the transmission and variation of genes and
gene-combinations, and the psychosocial or
cultural, based on the transmission and variation
of knowledge and ideas.

Professor Medawar, in his Reith Lectures on
The Future of Man, while admitting in his final
chapter that man possesses “a new, nongenetical, system of heredity and evolution”
(p. 88), claims on p. 41 that this is “‘a new kind of
biological evolution (I emphasize, a biological
evolution).”’ I must insist that this is incorrect.
The psychosocial process—in other words,
evolving man—is a new state of evolution, a
new phase of the cosmic process, as radically
different from the pre-human biological phase as
that is from the inorganic or pre-biological
phase; and this fact has important implications
for eugenics.

An equally elementary but again often neglected fact is that organisms are not significant—
in plain words, are meaningless—except in relation to their environment. A fish is not a thingin-itself: it is a type of organism evolved in
relation to an active life in large or mediumsized bodies of water. A cactus has biological
significance only in relation to an arid habitat, a
woodpecker only in relation to an arboreal one.
Man, however, is in a unique situation. He must
live not only in relation with the physicochemical and biological environment provided
by nature, but with the psychosocial environment of material and mental habitats which he
has himself created.

Man’s psychosocial environment includes his
beliefs and purposes, his ideals and his aims:
these are concerned with what we may call the
habitat of the future, and help to determine the
direction of his further evolution. All evolution is
directional and therefore relative. But whereas
the direction of biological evolution is related to
the continuing improvement of organisms in
relation to their conditions of life, human evolution is related to the improvement of the entire
psychosocial process, including the human
organism, in relation to man’s purposes and
beliefs, long-term as well as short-term. Only in
so far as those purposes and beliefs are grounded
on scientific and tested knowledge, will they
serve to steer human evolution in a desirable
direction. In brief, biological evolution is given
EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

direction by the blind and automatic agency of
natural selection operating through material
mechanisms, human evolution by the agency
of psychosocial guidance operating with the aid
of mental awareness, notably the mechanisms of
reason and imagination.

To be effective, such awareness must clearly be
concerned with man’s environmental situation as
well as his genetic equipment. In my first Galton
Lecture, I pointed out the desirability of eugenists relating their policies to the social environment. To-day I would go further, and stress the
need for planning the environment in such a way
as will promote our eugenic aims. By 1936, it was
already clear that the net effect of present-day
social policies could not be eugenic, and was in
all probability dysgenic. But, as Muller has
demonstrated, this was not always so. In that
long period of human history during which our
evolving and expanding hominid ancestors lived
in small and tightly knit groups competing for
territorial and technological success, the social
organization promoted selection for intelligent
exploration of possibilities, devotion and cooperative altruism: the cultural and the genetic
systems reinforced each other. It was only much
later, with the growth of bigger social units of
highly organized civilizations based on status
and class differentials, that the two became antagonistic; the sign of genetic transformation
changed from positive to negative and definite
genetic improvement and advance began to halt,
and gave way to the possibility and later the
probability of genetic regression and degeneration.

This probability has been very much heightened during the last century, partly by the differential multiplication of economically less
favoured classes and groups in many parts of the
world, partly by the progress of medicine and
public health, which has permitted numbers of
genetically defective human beings to survive
and reproduce; and to-day it has been converted
into a certainty by the series of atomic and
nuclear explosions which have been set off since
the end of the last war. There is still dispute as
to the degree of damage this has done to man’s
genetic equipment. There can be no dispute as
to the fact of damage: any addition to man’s
load of mutations can only be deleterious, even

if some of them may possibly come to be
utilized in neutral or even favourable new genecombinations.

Now that we have realized these portentous
facts, it is up to us to reverse the process and to
plan a society which will favour the increase
instead of the decrease of man’s desirable genetic
capacities for intelligence and imagination,
empathy and co-operation, and a sense of
discipline and duty.

The first step must be to frame and put into
operation a policy designed to reduce the rate
of human increase before the quantitative claims
of mere numbers override those of quality and
prevent any real improvement, social and economic as much as eugenic. I would prophesy that
within a quite short time, historically speaking,
we shall find ourselves aiming at an absolute
reduction of the population in the world in
general, and in overcrowded countries like
Britain, India and China, Japan, Java and
Jamaica in particular; the quantitative control of
population is a necessary prerequisite for
qualitative improvement, whether psychosocial
or genetic.

Science seems to be nearing a breakthrough
to cheap and simple methods of birth-control, or
reproduction-control as it should more properly
be called. The immediate needs are for muchincreased finance for research, testing, pilot
projects, motivation studies and the education of
public opinion, and an organized campaign
against the irrational attitudes and _ illiberal
policies of various religious and political organizations. Simultaneously, responsible opinion
must begin to think out ways in which social and
economic measures can be made to promote
desirable genetic trends and _ reproductive
habits.

Many countries have instituted family allowance systems which are not graded according to
number of children, and some, like France, even
provide financial inducements which encourage
undesirably large families. It should be easy to
devise graded family allowance systems in which
the allowances for the first two or three children
would be really generous, but those for further
children would rapidly taper off. In India, there
have even been proposals to tax parents for
children above a certain number, and in some

133

ER—D
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

provinces, men fulfilling certain conditions are
paid to be vasectomized. .

A powerful weapon for adequate populationcontrol is ready to the hand of the great grantgiving and aid-providing agencies of the modern
world—international agencies such as the UN
and its Technical Assistance Board representing
its various Specialized Agencies like F.A.O. and
Unesco, the World Bank and the International
Finance Corporation Administration; national
agencies like the Colombo Plan and the InterAmerican Development Fund; and the great
private Foundations (wittily categorized as
philanthropoid by that remarkable man Frederick
Keppel) like Rockefeller and Ford, Gulbenkian,
Nuffield and Carnegie.

At the moment, much of the financial and
technical aid provided by these admirable bodies
is being wasted by being flushed down the drain
of excess population instead of into the channels
of positive economic and cultural development,
or is even defeating its own ends by promoting
excessive and over-rapid population-increase.

Bankers do not make loans unless they are
satisfied of the borrower’s credit-worthiness.
Surely these powerful agencies, public or private,
should not provide loans or grants or other aid
unless they are satisfied of the recipient nation’s
demographic credit-worthiness. If an underdeveloped nation’s birth-rate is excessive, the aid
will go in providing the basic minima of food,
care, shelter and education for the flood of
babies, instead of the capital and the technical
skills needed to achieve the breakthrough to a
viable industrialization. Wherever this is so, the
aid-providing institution should insist that the
nation should frame an approved policy of
population-control, and that some of the aid
should be devoted to the implementation of that
policy and to research on the subject. And the
U.N. should, of course, take steps to prepare the
way for a World Population Policy, should carry
out or in any case encourage research on population-control, and should ensure that its
Specialized Agencies like W.H.O., Unesco,
F.A.O. and I.L.O., pay due attention to the

* In the past, these aims have been generally expressed
in terms of defective or desirable stocks or strains. With
the progress of genetics, it is better to reformulate them
in terms of genes.

134

problems of population in relation to their
special fields of competence.

At last I reach my specific subject—eugenics,
with its two aspects, negative and positive.
Negative eugenics aims at preventing the spread
and especially the increase of defective or
undesirable human genes or gene-combinations,
positive eugenics at securing the reproduction
and especially the increase of favourable or
desirable ones.* |

Negative eugenics has become increasingly
urgent with the increase of mutations due to
atomic fallout, and with the increased survival
of genetically defective human beings, brought
about by advances in medicine, public health,
and social welfare. But it must, of course,
attempt to reduce the incidence, or the manifestation, of every kind of genetic defect. Such
defects include high genetic proneness to diseases
such as diabetes, schizophrenia (which affects
1 per cent of the entire human population), other
insanities, myopia, mental defect and very low
1.Q., as well as more clear-cut defects like
colour-blindness or haemophilia.

When defects depend on a single dominant
gene, as with Huntington’s chorea, transmission
can of course be readily prevented by persuading
the patient to refrain from reproducing himself.
With sexlinked defects like haemophilia, Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy,, or HCN
“‘smell-blindness,” this will help, but the method
should be supplemented by counselling his
sisters against marriage. This will be more
effective and more acceptable when, as seems
possible, we can distinguish carriers heterozygous for the defect from non-carriers. This is
already practicable with some autosomic recessive
defects, notably sickle-cell anaemia. Here,
registers of carriers have been established in
some regions, and they are being effectively
advised against intermarriage. This will at least
prevent the manifestation of the defect. The same
could happen with galactosaemia, and might be
applicable to relatives of patients with defects
like phenylketonuria and agammoglobulinaemia.

In addition, the marked differential increase of
lower-income groups, classes and communities
during the last hundred years cannot possibly
be eugenic in its effects. The extremely high
fertility of the so-called problem group in the
EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

slums of many industrial cities is certainly
anti-eugenic.

As Muller and others have emphasized,
unless these trends can be checked or reversed,
the human species is threatened with genetic
deterioration, and unless this load of defects is
reduced, positive eugenics cannot be successfully
implemented. For this we must reduce the
reproduction rate of genetically defective individuals: that is negative eugenics.

The implementation of negative eugenics can

only be successful if family planning and
eugenic aims are incorporated into medicine in
general and into public health and other social
services in particular. Its implementation in
practice will depend on the use of methods of
contraception or sterilization, combined where
possible with A.I.D. (artificial insemination by
donor) or other methods of vicarious parenthood. In any case, negative eugenics is of minor
evolutionary importance and the need for it will
gradually be superseded by efficient measures
of positive eugenics.
\.dn cases of specific genetic defect, voluntary
sterilization is probably the best answer.* In the
defective married male, it should be coupled
with artificial parenthood (A.P.) by donor
insemination (A.I.D.) as the source of children.
In the defective female, the fulfilments of childrearing and family life will have to be secured by
adoption until such time—which may not be
very distant—as improved technique makes
possible artificial parenthood by transfer of
fertilized ova, which we may call A.O.D. In both
cases, it must be remembered that sterilization
does not prevent normal healthy and happy
sexual intercourse.

Certified patients are now prevented from
reproducing themselves by being confined in
mental hospitals. If sterilized, they might be
allowed to marry if this were considered likely
to ameliorate their condition.

In the case of the so-called social problem
group, somewhat different methods will be
needed. By social problem group I mean the
people, all too familiar to social workers in large
cities, who seem to have ceased to care, and just

* It will be even more satisfactory if, as now appears
likely, reversible male sterilization (vasectomy) becomes
practicable.

carry on the business of bare existence in the
midst of extreme poverty and squalor. All too
frequently they have to be supported out of
public funds, and become a burden on the
community. Unfortunately they are not deterred
by the conditions of existence from carrying on
with the business of reproduction: and their
mean family size is very high, much higher than
the average for the whole country.

Intelligence and other tests have revealed that
they have a very low average I.Q.; and the indications are that they are genetically subnormal in
many other qualities, such as initiative, pertinacity, general exploratory urge and interest,
energy, emotional intensity, and will-power. In
the main, their misery and improvidence is not
their fault but their misfortune. Our social system
provides the soil on which they can grow and
multiply, but with no prospects save poverty and
squalor.

Here again, voluntary sterilization could be
useful. But our best hope, I think, must lie in the
perfection of new, simple and acceptable methods
of birth-control, whether by an oral contraceptive or perhaps preferably by immunological
methods involving injections. Compulsory or
semi-compulsory vaccination, inoculation and
isolation are used in respect of many public
health risks: I see no reason why similar measures should not be used in respect of this grave
problem, grave both for society and for the
unfortunate people whose increase has been
actually encouraged by our social system.

Many social scientists and social workers in
the West, as well as all orthodox Marxists, are
environmentalists. They seem to believe that all
or most human defects, including many that
western biologists would regard as genetic, can
be dealt with, cured or prevented by improving
social environment and social organization.
Even some biologists, like Professor Medawar,
agree in general with this view, though he admits
a limited role for negative eugenics, in the shape
of what he calls “‘genetic engineering.’ For him,
the “newer solution” of the problem, which
‘““goes some way towards making up for the
inborn inequalities of man,”’ is simply to improve
the environment. With this I cannot agree.
Although certain particular problems can be
dealt with in this way, for instance proneness to

135
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tuberculosis by improving living conditions and
preventing infection, such methods cannot cope
with the general problem of genetic deterioration, because this, if not checked, will steadily
increase through the accumulation of mutant
genes which otherwise would have been
eliminated.

It is true that many diseases or defects with a
genetic basis, like diabetes or myopia, can be
cured by treatment, though almost always with
some expense, trouble, or discomfort to the
defective person as well as to society. But if the
incidence of such defects (not to mention the
many others for which no cure or remedy is now
known) were progressively multiplied, the burden would grow heavier and heavier and
eventually wreck the social system. As in all
other fields, we need to combine environmental
and genetic measures, and if possible render
them mutually reinforcing.

Against the threat of genetic deterioration
through nuclear fall-out there are only two
courses open. One is to ban all nuclear weapons
and stop bomb-testing; the other is to take
advantage of the fact that deep-frozen mammalian sperm will survive, with its fertilizing and
genetic properties unimpaired, for a long period
of time and perhaps indefinitely, and accordingly
to build deep shelters for sperm-banks—
collections of deep-frozen sperm from a representative sample of healthy and intelligent males.
A complete answer must wait for the successful
deep-freezing of ova also. But this may be
achieved in the fairly near future, and in any case
shelters for sperm-banks will give better genetic
results than shelters for people, as well as being
very much cheaper.

Positive eugenics has a far larger scope and
importance than negative. It is not concerned
merely to prevent genetic deterioration, but aims
to raise human capacity and performance to a
new level.

For this, however, it cannot rely on measures
designed to produce merely a slight differential
increase of genetically superior stocks, generation by generation. This is the way natural
selection obtains its results, and it worked all
right during the biological phase, when immense
spans of time were available. But with the
accelerated tempo of modern psychosocial evolu
136

tion, much quicker results are essential. Luckily
modern science is providing the necessary techniques, in the shape of artificial insemination
and the deep-freezing of human gametes. The
effects of superior germ-plasm can be multiplied
ten or a hundredfold through the use of what I
call E.I.D.—eugenic insemination by deliberately preferred donors—and many thousandfold if the superior sperm is deep-frozen.

This multiplicative method, harnessing man’s
deep desires for a better future, was first put
forward by H. J. Muller and elaborated by
Herbert Brewer, who invented the terms eutele
genesis and agapogeny for different aspects of it.

Some such method, or what we may term
Euselection—deliberate encouragement of
superior genetic endowment—will produce
immediate results. Couples who adopt this
method of vicarious parenthood will be rewarded
by children outstanding in qualities admired
and preferred by the couple themselves.

When deep-frozen ova too can be successfully
engrafted into women, the speed and efficiency
of the process could of course be intensified.

Various critics insist on thé need for far more
detailed knowledge of genetics and selection
before we can frame a satisfactory eugenic
policy or even reach an understanding of evolution. I can only say how grateful I am that neither
Galton nor Darwin shared these views, and state
my own firm belief that they are not valid. Darwin
knew nothing—I repeat nothing—about the
actual mechanism of biological variation and
inheritance: yet he was possessed of what I can
only call a common-sense genius which gave him
a general understanding of the biological process
and enabled him to frame a theory of the process
whose core remains unshaken and which has
been able successfully to incorporate all the
modifications and refinements of recent field
study and genetic experiment.

Neither did the automatic process of natural
selection “know” anything about the mechanisms of evolution. Luckily this did not prevent it
from achieving a staggering degree of evolutionary transformation, including miracles of adaptation and improvement. From his seminal idea,
Darwin was able to deduce important general
principles, notably that natural selection would
automatically tend to produce both diversificaEUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

tion (adaptive radiation) and improvement
(biological advance or progress) in organization,
but that lower types of organization would
inevitably survive alongside higher.

Critics of positive eugenics like Medawar
inveigh against what they call “‘geneticism.”
However, he himself is guilty on this count, for
he has swallowed the population geneticists’
claim (which I have discussed earlier) that theirs
is the only scientifically valid definition of
fitness; and this in spite of his admission that
one organic type can be more “‘advanced”’ than
another, and that “human beings are the outcome of a process which can perfectly well be
described as an advancement.’ However, he
equates advancement with mere increase in
complexity of the “genetical instructions” given
to the animal: if he had thought in broad evolutionary instead of restricted genetic terms he
would have seen that biological advance involves
improved organization of the phenotype; that
fitness in the geneticismal sense is a purely
reproductive fitness; and that we must also take
into account immediate phenotypic fitness and
long-term evolutionary fitness. To put it in a
slightly different way, “‘fitness’’ as measured by
differential survival of offspring is merely the
mechanism by which the long-term improvement of true biological fitness is realized.

Recent genetic studies have shown the widespread occurrence of genetic polymorphism, in
animal species and man, whether in the form of
sharply distinct morphs (as with colour-blindness
and other sensory morphisms), in multiplicity of
slightly different alleles, or merely in a very high
degree of potential variance. Some critics of
positive eugenics maintain that this state of
affairs will prevent or at least strongly impede
any large-scale genetic improvement, owing to
the resistance to change offered by genetic polymorphisms maintained by means of heterozygote
advantage, which appear to comprise the
majority of polymorphic systems.

It has further been suggested, notably by
Professor Penrose, that people heterozygous for
genes determining general intellectual ability,
and therefore of medium or mediocre intelligence, are reproductively “‘fitter’—more fertile
—than those of high or low intelligence, and
accordingly that, as regards genetic intelligence,

the British population is in a state of natural
balance. If so, it would be difficult to try to raise
its average level by deliberate selective measures,
and equally difficult for the level to sink automatically as the result of differential fertility of
the less intelligent groups.

Although Medawar (op. cit. p. 125) appears
to disagree with Penrose’s main contention, he
concludes that: “If a tyrant were to attempt to
raise the intelligence of all of us to its present
maximum .. . I feel sure that his efforts would
be self-defeating: the population would dwindle
in numbers and, in the extreme case, might die
out.” It is true that he later enters a number of
minor caveats, but his main conclusion remains.
This to me appears incomprehensible. If selection has operated, as it certainly has done in the
past, during the passage from Pithecanthropus
to present-day man, to bring about a very large
rise in the level of genetic intelligence, why can
it not bring about a much smaller rise in the
immediate future? There are no grounds for
believing that modern man’s system of genetic
variance differs significantly from that of his
early human ancestors.

As regards balanced morphisms, it is of course
true that they constitute stable elements in an
organism’s genotype. However, when their
stability is mainly due to linkage with a lethal,
and therefore to double-dose disadvantage
rather than to heterozygote advantage, they may
be destabilized by breaking the linkage. In any
case, morphisms stable in one environment may
sometimes be broken up in another. This has
happened, for instance, with the white-yellow
sex-limited morphism of the butterfly Colias
eurythema, which in high latitudes has ceased
to exist, and the local population is monomorphic, all homozygous white.

Certainly some morphisms show very high
stability. For instance the PTC (phenylthiocarbamide) taste morphism occurs in apparently
identical form both in chimpanzees and man,
and so must presumably have resisted change for
something like 10 million years. However, this
remarkable stability of a specific genotypic component of the primate stock has not prevented
the transformation of one branch of that stock
into man!

Similar arguments apply to linked polygenic

137
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

systems and to the general heterozygosity in
respect of small allelic differences shown by so
many organisms, including man. In the former
case, Mather has shown how selection can break
the linkage and make the frozen variability
available for new recombinations and new
evolutionary change. In the latter case, the
stability need not be so intense as with clear-cut
morphisms.

Frequently, it appears, polymorphism depends
not so much on heterotic advantage as on a
varying balance of advantage between the alleles
concerned in different conditions: one allele is
more advantageous in certain conditions, another
in other conditions. The polymorphism is therefore a form of insurance against extreme external changes and gives flexibility in a cyclically
or irregularly varying environment (Huxley
1955). Such loose polymorphic systems can
readily be modified by the incorporation of new
and the elimination of old mutant alleles and
the incorporation of new ones in response to
directional changes in environment. In any case,
their widespread existence has not stood in the
way of directional evolutionary change, including
the transformation of a protohominid into man.
Why should they stand in the way of man’s
further genetic evolution?

The same reasoning applies to those numerous
cases where high genetic variance, actual or
potential, is brought about by multiple genic
polymorphism, when many genes of similar
action exist, often in a number of slightly
different allelic forms.

In all these cases the critics of eugenics have
been guilty of that very “‘geneticism” which they
deplore. They approach the subject from the
standpoint of population genetics. If they were
to look at it from an evolutionary standpoint,
their difficulties would evaporate, and they
would see that their objections could not be
maintained.

Two further objections are often made to
positive eugenics. One is by way of a question—
who is to decide which type to select for? The
other, which is by way of an answer to the first,
is to assert that effective selection needs
authoritarian methods and can only be put into
operation by some form of dogmatic tyranny,
usually stigmatized as intolerable or odious.

138

Both these objections reveal the same lack of
understanding of psychosocial evolution as the
genetical objections revealed about biological
evolution: more simply, they demonstrate the
same lack of faith in the potentialities of man
that the purely genetical objections showed in
the actual operative realizations of life.

For one thing, dogmatic tyranny in the
modern world is becoming increasingly selfdefeating: partly because it is dogmatic and
therefore essentially unscientific, partly because
it is tyrannical and therefore in the long run
intolerable. But the chief point is that human
improvement never works solely or even mainly
by such methods and is doing so less and less as
man commits himself more thoroughly to the
process of general self-education.

Let me take an example. Birth-control resembles eugenics in being concerned with that
most violent arouser of emotion and prejudice,
human reproduction. However, during my own
career, I have witnessed the subject break out of
the dark prison of taboo into the international
limelight. It was only in 1917 that Margaret

Sanger was given a jail sentence for disseminating

birth-control information. In the late twenties,
when I was already over forty, I was summoned
before the first Director-General of the B.B.C.,
now Lord Reith, and rebuked for having contaminated the British ether with such a shocking
subject. Yet two years ago an international
gathering in New York paid tribute to Margaret
Sanger as one of the great women of our age.
Time and Life Magazines both published long
and reasoned articles on how to deal with the
population explosion, and two official U.S.
committees reported in favour of the U.S.
conducting more research on_ birth-control
methods and even of giving advice on the subject
if requested by other nations. And to-day one
can hardly open a copy of the most respectable
newspapers without finding at least one reference to the grievous effects of population increase
and population density on one or another aspect
of human life in one or another country of the

globe, including our own. Meanwhile, six

nations have started official policies of family

planning and population control, and many

others are unofficially encouraging them.
Birth-control, in fact, has broken through—
EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

and in so doing it has changed its character and
its methods. It began as a humanitarian campaign for the relief of suffering human womanhood, conducted by a handful of heroic figures,
mostly women. It has now become an important
social, economic and political campaign, led by
powerful private associations, and sometimes
the official or semi-official concern of national
governments. Truth, in fact, prevails—though
its prevailing demands time, public opprobrium
of the self-sacrificing pioneers at the outset, and
public discussion, backed by massive dissemination of facts and ideas, to follow.

We can safely envisage the same sort of
sequence for evolutionary eugenics, operating
by what may be called Euselection, though
doubtless with much difference in detail. Thus
the time to achieve public breakthrough might
be longer because the idea of Euselection by
delegated paternity runs counter to a deep-rooted
sense of proprietary parenthood. On the other
hand it might be shorter, since there is such a
rapid increase in the popular understanding of
science and in the agencies of mass communication and information, and above all because of
the profound dissatisfaction with traditional
ideas and social systems, which portends the
drastic recasting of thought and attitude that I
call the Humanist Revolution.

Some things, at least, are clear. First, we need
to establish the legality, the respectability, and
indeed the morality of A.I.D. It must be cleared
of the stigma of sin ascribed to it by Church
dignitaries like Lord Fisher when Archbishop of
Canterbury, and from the legal difficulties to its
practice raised by the lawyers and administrators.
Most importantly, the notion of donor secrecy
must be abolished. Parents desiring A.I.D.
should have not only the right but the duty of
choice. For the time being, it may possibly be
best that the name and personal identity of a
donor should not be known to the acceptors,
but there should certainly be a register of
certified donors kept by medical men (and I
would hope by the National Health Service)
which would give particulars of their family
histories. This would enable acceptors to exert
a degree of conscious selection in choosing the
father of the child they desire, and so pave the
way for the supersession of blind and secrecy
ridden A.I.D. by an open-eyed and proudly
accepted E.I.D. where the E stands for
Eugenic.

The pioneers of E.I.D., whether its publicists
or its practitioners, will undoubtedly suffer all
kinds of abusive prejudice—they will be accused
of mortal sin, of theological impropriety, of
immoral and unnatural practices. But they can
take heart from what has happened in the field of
birth-control, and can be confident that the
rational control of reproduction aimed at the
prevention of human suffering and frustration
and the promotion of human well-being and
fulfilment will in the not too distant future come
to be recognized as a moral imperative.

The answers to the questions I mentioned at
the beginning of this section are now, I hope,
clear. There will be no single type to be selected
for, but a rangé of preferred types; and this will
not be chosen by any single individual or committee. The choice will be a collective choice
representing the varied preferences and ideals of
all the couples practising euselection by E.I.D.,
and it will not be dogmatically imposed by any
authoritarian agency, though as general acceptance of the method grows, it will be reinforced
by public opinion and official leadership. The
way is open for the most significant step in the
progress of mankind—the deliberate improvement of the species by scientific and democratic
methods.

All the objections of principle to a policy of
positive eugenics fall to the ground when the
subject is looked at in the embracing perspective
of evolution, instead of in the limited perspective of population genetics or the short-term
perspective of existing socio-political organization. Meanwhile the obvious practical difficulties
in the way of its execution are being surmounted,
or at least rendered surmountable, by scientific
discovery and technical advance.

In evolutionary perspective, eugenics—the progressive genetic improvement of the human
species—inevitably takes its place among the
major aims of evolving man. What should we
eugenists do in the short term to promote this
long-term aim? We must of course continue to
do and to encourage research on human genetics
and reproduction, including methods of conception-control and sterilization. The establish
139
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment of the Darwin Research Fellowships is an
important milestone in this field: I hope that we
shall be able to enlarge our research activities in
the future.

We must continue to support negative eugenic
measures, especially perhaps in respect of the
so-called Social Problem group. We should
assuredly continue to be concerned about
population increase, and to support all agencies
and organizations aiming at sane and scientific
policies of population-control. We must equally
support all agencies giving eugenic advice and
marriage guidance. Since significant eugenic
improvement depends on donor insemination,
we must do all we can to win public support for
A.I.D., and to improve current practices in the
subject.

In general, we must bring home to the general
public the possibility of real genetic improvement, the burden it could lift off human shoulders, the hope it could kindle in human hearts.
We must make people understand that social
and cultural amelioration are not enough. If they
are not to turn into temporary palliatives or
degenerate into mere environmental tinkering,
they must. be combined with genetic amelioration, or at least with the hope of it in the
future.

To ensure this, not only must the eugenics
movement help to educate the public and especially the members of the professions—medical,
educational, scientific, administrative, and others
—in respect of eugenics, but it must make every
effort to get the educational system improved at
all levels, so as to provide everyone with the
necessary minimum of biological understanding
—an understanding of reproduction and population, genetics and selection, ecology and conservation, and above all of the process of
evolution in its awe-inspiring sweep and of man’s
specific significance and responsibility in that
comprehensive process.

If, as I firmly believe, man’s role is to do the
best he can to manage the evolutionary process
on this planet and to guide its future course in a
desirable direction, fuller realization of genetic
possibilities becomes a major motivation for
man’s efforts, and eugenics is revealed as one of
the basic human sciences.

140

REFERENCES

Baker, P. T. 1960. Climate, Culture and Evolution.
Human Biol., 32, 3. (Race, environment and culture.)

Blacker, C. P. 1952. Eugenics: Galton and After. Duckworth. London. (Galton’s work and views. Modern
developments in eugenics.)

Boyd, W. C. 1950. Genetics and the Races of Man. Little,
Brown. Boston (Race and evolution.)

Brewer, H. 1935. Eutelegenesis: Eugen. Rev., 27, 121.

—— 1939. Eutelegenesis. Lancet. 1939. 1, 265.

—— 1961. Ethical Parenthood and Contraception.
Balanced Living. Brookville, Ohio. (17) 3, p. 69.

Burt, C. 1958. The Inheritance of Mental Ability. Amer.
Psychol. 13, 1. (Eugenics and intelligence.)

—— 1959, 1961. Class Differences i in General Intelligence.
Brit. J. statist. Psychol, 12, 1

——- Intelligence and social "nobility. Ibid., 14, 3. (Distribution of intelligence.)

—— 1962. The Gifted Child. Yearbook of Education, 1962.
p. 1. (Genetic intelligence.)

Carter, C. F. 1961. The Economic Use of Brains. Advanc.
ae pond 18, 222. (Shortage of individuals of high
ability

Coale, A. J. and Hoover, E. M. 1959. Population Growth
and Economic Development in Low Income Countries.
(O.U.P., Bombay.)

Count, E. W. 1950. This is Race. Schuman. New York.
(History of racial concepts.)

Darlington, C. D. 1960. (Review of P. B. Medawar’s The
Future of Man.) Heredity, 15, 44.

Dobzhansky, Th. 1962. Mankind Evolving. Yale Univ.
Press. New Haven and London. D.N.A. (Population
genetics, race, polymorphism, fitness, eugenics,
cultural evolution, genotype and phenotype.)

Fisher, R. A., Ford, E. B. and Huxley, J. S. 1939. Tastetesting the anthropoid apes. Nature, 144, 750. (Sensory
morphisms, apes and man.)

Ford, E. B., 1949. Polymorphism. Biol. Rev., 20, 73.
(Morphism, blood groups and disease.)

—— 1956. Genetics for Medical Students. Methuen.
London (Human genetics; morphism.)

Hulse, F. S. 1960. Adaptation, Selection and Plasticity in
Ongoing Human Evolution. Human Biol., 32, 63.
(Genetic plasticity and environment.)

Huxley, J. S. 1953. Evolution in Action. London and New
York. Chatto and Windus (Natural selection and
biological improvement.)

—— 1955. Morphism and Evolution, Heredity, 9, 1.

Huxley, J. S. (Ed.). 1961. The Humanist Frame. Allen and
Unwin and Harpers. London and New York. (Introductory Chapter. General evolutionary theory.)

Kalmus, H. 1959. Genetical Variation and Sense-Perception. Ciba Found. Symp., Biochem. Human Genetics,
60. (Sensory defects and morphisms.)

Livingstone, F. B. 1960. Natural Selection, Disease and
Ongoing Human Evolution. Human Biol., 32, 17.

Mather, K. 1953. Genetical Control of Stability in
Development. Heredity, 7, 297. (Balanced polymorphism, stability, release of variance.)

—— 1956. Polygenic Mutation and Variation in Populations. Proc. roy. Soc. (B), 145, 292 (as for op. cit.)

McConnell, R. A. 1961. The Absolute Weapon. Amer.
Inst. biol. Sci. Bull., 11, 14. (Eutelegenesis ; importance of
individuals of high ability.)

Medawar, P. B. 1960. The Future of Man: The Reith .
Lectures. Methuen. London.

Montague, A. 1957. Anthropology and Human Nature.
Sargent. Boston. (Environmentalist views on race.)
BUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

Motulsky, A. G. 1960. Metabolic Polymorphisms and the
Role of Infectious in Human Evolution.
Human Biol. 32,29. (Morphisms and resistance.)

Muller, H. J. 1929. The Method of Evolution. Sci.
Monthly, Dec. 1929, 481. (Natural selection and directional evolution.)

—— 1936. Out of the Night. Gollancz. London. (Eugenics
and eutelegenesis.)

—— 1949, The Darwinian and Modern Conceptions of
Natural Selection. Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., 93, 459.
(Natural selection; fitness.)

— 1950a. Our Load of Mutations. Amer. J. hum.

' Genet. 2, 111. (Genetic load.)

—— 1950b. Radiation damage to the Genetic Material.
. Amer. Scientist, 38, 3. (Effects of X rays, fall-out, etc.)
—— 1959. The Guidance of Human Evolution. Persp.
Biol. Med., 3, 1. (Eutelegenesis, deep-frozen sperm.)
— 196la. (Review of P. B. Medawar’s The Future of

Man.) Fer. Biol. Med., 4, 377.

—— 1961b. Human Evolution by Voluntary Choice of
Germ plasn. Science, 134, 643. (Eutelegenesis, agapo
geny.)

—— 196ic. The Human Future: The Humanist Frame,
ed. J. S. Huxley. London and New York. (Cultural and
genetic evolution.)

Pettenkofer, H. J. et. al. 1962. Nature, 193, 445. (Bloodgroup morphisms and disease-resistance.)

Roberts, J. A. Fraser. 1959, An Introduction to Medical
Genetics, 2nd Ed. O.U.P. Oxford.

Sauvy, A. 1961. Fertility and Survival. Chatto and
Windus. London. (Over-population and economic
development.)

Sheldon, W. H. 1940. The Varieties of Human Physique.
Harpers. New York.

Sheppard, P. M. 1958. Natural Selection and Heredity.
Hutchinson. London. (Natural selection.)

Tax, S. (Ed.). 1960. Articles by Kroeber, Washburn and
Howell, Adams, Steward, et. al. in The Evolution of
Man, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. (Evolution and
culture.)

Thoday, J. M. 1953. Components of Fitness. Symp. Soc.
exp. Biol. (Evolution) 96. (Fitness, stability, selection.)

Waddington, C. H. 1957. The Strategy of the Genes.
Allen and Unwin. London. (Genetic assimilation;
genetics and development.)

Williams, R. 1960. Why Human Genetics? J. Hered, 51,
91. (Human genetic variance and environment.)

141
