COMMENTS AND CRITICISMS.

Mothers’ Pensions.—Judge Henry Neil, the father of the
Mothers’ Pensions System, gave a most interesting account of
it at the Central Hall, Westminster, on Wednesday evening,
May 23rd. Mothers’ pensions are maintenance grants made in
respect of children under fourteen to a parent who is a “‘ proper
guardian,’ that is to say, of established good character, but
too poor to feed, clothe, and ‘‘home’’ her children adequately.
The State Legislature of Illinois enacted a law putting the
system into force eleven years ago, and at the present time
thirty other States have adopted it. In these States a
marked improvement in the health of mother and children
is said to have taken place, as well as a steady decrease in
juvenile delinquency. It is hardly necessary to comment upon
the increased happiness and self-respect the mothers gain by
being in a position to properly care for their children and their
homes, and it has been proved in America that home-reared
children make better citizens than those brought up in institutions, and that ‘‘ mothers’ love is a scientific necessity, and
makes all the difference between virile and weakly children.”
Supervisors, appointed by each State, see that the children are
properly cared for, and an immense saving in public money has
been effected, the cost per child being about one-third of that
incurred by institutional care. The money is provided by
general taxation, and the pensioned mother is put on the county
pay-roll and receives her cheque every month. If she proves
herself unable to handle the money properly her pension may
be revoked, but very few cases of any abuse of this kind occur,
and practically about three-fourths of the destitute children in
the thirty States in which the pension system has been adopted
are now looked after at home.

Miss Maude Royden also spoke, and said she would like
to see the system applied not only to destitute mothers, but to
all mothers, as she thought it would help to raise motherhood
to its right place as the most beautiful and honourable of
woman’s duties.
136 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Migration in the British Empire.—Those who are nervous
about the depletion of the male population of the British Isles
by emigration will find comfort in the Report of the Dominions
Royal Commission, where it is shown that emigration has only
taken 27 per cent. of the annual increase of males in the United
Kingdom, and that in the last decade, when emigration has
been larger than ever before, the home population has correspondinglv increased.

The necessity of using discrimination in the matter of
migration throughout the British Empire is now widely recognised, and it is felt advisable to combine the transport of the
emigrant with some care for his subsequent welfare, so that
the unnecessary waste of money, time, and labour involved in
settling men in unsuitable conditions may be avoided. It should
not be forgotten that Canada has lost 400,000 settlers since 1913,
this number having crossed over to the United States as permanent residents.

The Soldiers’ Settlement Board appointed by the Commonwealth of Australia appears to be taking this task thoroughly
in hand, for its gifts of land under perpetual lease, with three
years’ rent free, is only the beginning of its care for settlers.
In addition, it gives financial aid irrespective of these grants,
settles the purposes for which advances may be made, the rate
of interest, and the conditions of its payment. This and
kindred matters are adequately dealt with in the United Empire
for March.

The Value of Propaganda Work.—From the report of
Major Darwin’s lecture to the Insurance Institute of London,
and the comments which followed it, given in the Post Magasine and Insurance Monitor, one may gather that a fair statement of eugenic principles and eugenic ideals does much to
break down that prejudice against the youthful science, founded
on misconceptions, which is still, unfortunately, rather widespread. In this connection it is encouraging to note the keen
interest in the subject displayed by members of the Workers’
Educational Association at various of their branches to which
lecturers have been sent. N.A.,
