SUGGESTIONS FOR THE UTILISATION OF
BYE-PRODUCTS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS
OF HEALTH?

By E. Scuuster, D.Sc.?

THE utilisation of bye-products and of waste-power has
been the means by which some of the greatest advances in
industrial development have been made in recent years, and in
many cases the bye-products have become almost of greater
importance than the article primarily manufactured. It is the
object of the present paper to suggest very diffidently means of
utilising for the purposes of eugenic enquiry the material
-accumulated and often very efficiently stored by medical officers
of health. This may be divided into four classes obtained in
the following different ways:

(1) By the compulsory notification of infectious diseases;

(2) by the notification of deaths and causes of death ;

(3) by the medical inspection of school children ;

(4) by visiting families in their own houses; which is done
to a certain extent by the medical officer himself and also by
volunteer health visitors.

Problems on which light may be thrown by an examination
of the four categories enumerated above are as follows:

(a) Family susceptibility to particular diseases. Two
problems arise: firstly, different people acquire infectious diseases
in the first instance with different degrees of readiness, that is to
say, they are susceptible to a greater or less extent.

Are these differences in susceptibility inherited ?

Secondly, some people having suffered from an infectious
disease acquire immunity against it, while others apparently do

1 Read at the National Health Congress, Dublin, ro11.

2 (The author wishes to express his thanks to Dr. A. L. Ormerod, who has given
him considerable assistance in preparing this short note.)
240 E. Schuster :

not and may suffer two or three times from the same disease.
Is this power of acquiring immunity inherited ?

Direct evidence on these points would be of value more
particularly if it showed to what extent and in what manner
inheritance takes place, but there are many somewhat obvious
difficulties in obtaining it which it would require a considerable
degree of ingenuity to overcome. For example, it is obvious
that if a number of members of a family are living together, then
if one catches the disease the others are more likely to do so,
therefore it would probably be necessary to deal only with families
of which the members were living in different homes. This
would, of course, greatly reduce the amount of material available
for investigation and would mean that a vast quantity of recorded
cases would be required in the first instance.

Typhoid fever is a disease to which particular attention
might be given as there is some evidence that particular families
are particularly addicted to it. It would also be interesting to
examine the families of typhoid carriers to see whether typhoid
carrying is inheritable.

(6) The correlation between susceptibility to a particular
disease and some other physical character. For example,
scarlet fever and the rheumatic diathesis, or particular colours of
hair and eyes.

(c) An investigation into the causes of death and age at
death of its different members might throw some light on the
weaknesses inherent in particular families.

(dq) The measurement and medical inspection of school
children, when done in a careful and reliable manner, opens up
many fields for research. But a knowledge of the home
conditions of the children is almost an essential for obtaining
profitable results. The relation between height and weight for
a given age and different home conditions is a subject which has
received attention yet might be further studied. The resemblance
between brothers and sisters with regard to these characters and
also with regard to the rate of growth at different periods of
their lives, are also problems for the solution of which the
material is adapted.
