Fertility Differentials in England
and Wales

SOME FACTS

THE RECENT PUBLICATION by the General Register Office of the Fertility Tables for
1961 provides members of the Society with a long-awaited opportunity to learn about the
progress of a trend that is of much interest to them. In the early part of the twentieth
century there existed between the social classes a considerable reproductive differential in
which a negative correlation was observed between fertility within marriage and occupational ability. The more intellectually demanding the job the lower was the number of
children borne. As time passed, however, the extent of the differential seemed to be diminishing and by 1951 the first signs of the emergence of a positive correlation had begun to appear.
Top professional people then showed evidence of having more children, instead of fewer,
than the average of the most nearly allied classes. Thus the standardized index figure of
family size for higher administrative, professional and managerial people in 1951, for all
marriage durations together, was 90, which was higher than the corresponding figures for
other administrative, professional and managerial grades (84), clerks (82), shopkeepers (87)
and shop assistants (87) though lower than for farmers, manual workers and other occupational groups and for the general average (100).

It should be mentioned in passing that these figures, relating as they do to fertility
within marriage, would need to be adjusted in respect of any differences between the occupational groups in mortality and marriage rates before any precise conclusions could be
drawn about reproductive differentials. The question of marriage differentials was discussed
on pages 49 and 50 of the March 1966 issue of the REVIEW, and so need not be mentioned
further here except to say that their effect is to modify the fertility differentials only slightly.
Similarly, mortality would not alter the picture very significantly.

The socio-economic groups into which the Registrar General has subdivided the 1961
census data are nineteen in number, and they do not correspond exactly with the fourteen
categories of 1951. Some fertility index figures of interest are:

Professional workers—self-employed 104
Professional workers—employed 89
Employers and managers—large units 88
Employers and managers—small units 90
Workers on own account (non-professional) 94
General average 100

They suggest that there has been at least a continuation, and perhaps an intensification, of
the encouraging feature found in 1951. In order to investigate the trend more closely, it is
desirable to attempt a direct comparison of 1951 and 1961. This can be done in two general
ways:
i. Aggregate the socio-economic classes into groups that are as nearly as possible
comparable between the two censuses.
ii. Use the 1961 Census data alone, thus removing any uncertainty about occupational
classification, and compare the experience of couples married at different periods
in order to bring out changes in family building in the course of time.

70
FERTILITY DIFFERENTIALS IN ENGLAND AND WALES

The second method eliminates one disadvantage but introduces others: couples
married in 1936 had been together for twenty-five years in 1961 but couples married in 1946
had had only fifteen years of married life, so the degree of completeness of their family
building will therefore not be quite the same. Moreover, the social class composition of the
population varies with attained age, with the result that the extent of segregation into
economic groups will not be the same for younger couples as for older ones.

There is another problem. The average age at marriage has become younger over the
years, and the pace at which this has happened has varied from one socio-economic group
to another. Such variation can be eliminated by processes of standardization; but it may be
argued that those groups for which the marriage age has fallen the most are just those groups
who wed younger in order to have larger families. If this is so, this propensity would be
concealed by the standardization process. Probably, neither the use nor the absence of
standardization leads to a perfect answer.

As it is hardly possible either to establish a statistically perfect method of comparison
of 1951 and 1961 or to be sure which of a number of imperfect methods is the most appropriate, it seems desirable to show several presentations of the results and draw conclusions
from the features they have most strongly in common.

 

TABLE 1
PERCENTAGE INCREASE IN FAMILY
SIZE FROM THE LONGER MARRIED 10
SOCIO-ECONOMIC GROUP THE MORE RECENTLY MARRIED
"OO —_--__—T
Unstandardized Standardized
Employers and managers—large units +10 + 7
Employers and managers—small units + 3 + 3
Professional workers—self-employed +17. +17
Professional workers—employed +13 + 7
Intermediate non-manual workers + 8 + 4
Junior non-manual workers + 5 + 2
Self-employed workers: not professional + 7 + 9
Foremen and supervisors + 2 + 2
Skilled manual workers _— —
Semi-skilled manual workers — 3 _
Unskilled manual workers — § —
ALL Groups (including some not shown above) + 1 +1

The first table uses the 1961 Census data alone, and shows for eleven of the socioeconomic groups the percentage increase in family size from couples who had then been
married for 25-29 years to couples who had then been married for only 15-19 years. The
left-hand column is based on data unstandardized for age at marriage; the right-hand
column gives the standardized results.

The impressive increase for self-employed professionals is unaffected by standardization, while the figure for employed professionals is halved by that process. All of the rise
for the first of these groups is therefore attributable to fertility within marriage; but for the
second group the rise in fertility within marriage at a given age has been only 7 per cent on
average, and the propensity to marry earlier has reinforced this by 6 per cent.

The results for some of the groups towards the bottom of Table 1 should probably be
given a small positive addition because the larger the family the longer it takes to complete,
and so the degree of incompleteness in the data for the more recent marriages is more
marked for manuals than for non-manuals. Nevertheless, the evidence for a positive association between social class and increase in family size appears strong.

The average family size in 1961 of couples married for 15-19 years (unstandardized
for age at marriage) was as follows:

71
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Employers and managers—large units
Employers and managers—small units
Professional workers—self employed
Professional workers—employed
Intermediate non-manual workers
Junior non-manual workers

Self employed workers—not professional
Foremen and supervisors

Skilled manual workers

Semi-skilled manual workers
Unskilled manual workers

BN NO RAD me oe om me BR oe
WN = © 6 600010 N 00

The curve associating family size and job sophistication thus tends to be U-shaped.* But
in spite of recent trends there is still on the whole slightly negative association between
class and fertility.

Table 2 compares the 1951 and 1961 Census results for certain aggregates of socioeconomic groups (a) for three selected quinary groups of ages at marriage (viz., 15-19,
25-29 and 35-39) all durations combined, unstandardized; (5) for all durations combined,
standardized for age at marriage, and (c) for durations 15-19 years only, standardized for
age at marriage.

TABLE 2

PERCENTAGE EXCESS OF FAMILY SIZE IN
1961 OVER THAT OF THE COMPARABLE

SOCIO-ECONOMIC GROUP GROUP IN 1951
-——__—_————_-’(a) (1) (c)
Professional, administrative and
managerial +20 +7 +14
Shopkeepers +21 +8 +14
Clerks and shop assistants +22 +5 + 7
Foremen + 16 +3 + 6
Skilled manual workers +11 +2 + 2
Semi-skilled manual workers + 8 —4 — 6
Unskilled manual workers +13 +1 — 1
ALL GROUPS +11 — =

The figures under (a) are affected by changes in age-distribution between 1951 and 1961;
those under (b) and (c) are reduced to zero in total by the standardization process. The
interest is, however, not in the absolute values of these figures but in the differences between
the individual socio-economic groups.

All three columns show some re-distributive effect, varying at the extremes from about
10 to 20 per cent. It is interesting to observe, however, that the families of unskilled manual
workers have declined less, or risen more, than those of semi-skilled manuals, and have
developed similarly to those for skilled manuals.

The projections of the population in 1961 in the social groups shown in the above
Tables do not differ greatly from the corresponding proportions in 1951. Thus, for unskilled
manual workers, for instance, the percentages are 7 and 10 respectively and for the foremen
they are 4 and 4. The results shown are thus not greatly affected by changes in social
classification between the two Censuses.

* There is a similar U-shape for fertility measured according to terminal age of education. This will be
dealt with in a later Note.

72
