EUGENICS AND PUBLIC HEALTH.

AS social effort becomes more co-ordinated in the countries of Western
Europe it is possible to foresee the time when fairly complete records of
their inhabitants will be available for examination and analysis. To the
Eugenist such records will be of immense value, as they will throw light on
the complicated problems of human heredity and enable the social policy
of the future to be so framed as to conduce to the racial improvement
of mankind.

One of the most powerful agencies for collecting such information
is the Public Health service. Once this body is awake to the racial bearing
of its work, and considers what policy of social hygiene is best calculated
to raise the inherent capacity for health in the general community, we
may hope to improve “the racial quality of future generations.” Indications
are not wanting that the awakening of the medical eugenic conscience is
at hand. The Public Health Conference met in Paris (May 15-20) this
year, and for the second time in its history, devoted a whole section to
work concerned with “ Eugenics and Child Study.” The conference was
bi-national, and as many French as English members participated,
both as readers of papers and members of the audience. The recent
formation of the “ Société Francais d’Eugénique ” resulted in the attendance at the section of a number of its members, who took a very
prominent part in the proceedings, in organising the section, in reading
papers, and above all, in keenly discussing the contributions.

Monsieur Lucien March, Registrar-General of France, and Treasurer
of the “Société Frangais d’Eugénique,” presided at the meetings. Twentynine papers in all were contributed, and were grouped as shown in the
appended programme. They fall, more or less naturally, into two

roups:
gene Group I.—Eugenics, comprising those papers which have a direct
bearing on the inborn qualities of future generations.
Group Il.—Child Study, including pre- and post-natal hygiene, etc.

The Eugenic group contained some dozen papers, the majority of
which rose to a distinctly high level. They fulfilled the main requirements of conference contributions in giving a clear presentation of
various branches of work, and being provocative of thought and discussion.

M. March, in his opening address, answered some of the points raised
by opponents to Eugenics, and defined the Eugenic ideal as the progressive development of races. He denied that any attempt at racial
improvement pre-supposed the “neglect of those sentiments and feelings
which are the flower of civilisation,” but, expressed the belief that through
the aid of the affections, reasoned selection would tend to bring about the
desired results. The cruel methods of nature would not be re-introduced,
but the attempt made to attain the same ends by more kindly means. The
conception of life would be enlarged to include the future, and with the
increase of knowledge of the laws governing human development, the
road of continuous racial improvement would become clear, and form
the ultimate goal of civilisation.

The consideration of health as a factor in racial evolution was
treated from the broadest standpoint by Professor Lindsay. Hitherto
disease has been regarded mainly as an isolated condition, and considered
from the medical standpoint of immediate cure rather than in its racial
aspect as a possible selective agency.!

The subject of Eugenics extends over so wide a field, that it is
necessary to define what aspect of it comes especially within the scope

Professor Lindsay’s paper appears in full on p. IOr.
158 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the public health official.. This was very clearly done by Dr. Saleeby
(Eugenics and Public Health). He analysed the problem into the follow
ing categories :—
A. Positive Eugenics:—The encouragement of worthy parenthood.
8. Negative Eugenics :—The discouragement of unworthy parent
hood.
C. Preventive Eugenics:—The protection of parenthood from racial

isons.

Sections B. and C. formed the subject of the paper. With reference to
Negative Eugenics (B.), the need was emphasised of a drawing a clear
distinction between transmissable and non-transmissable defects, and
especially of classifying the causes of certain defects, such as deaf-mutism
and certain types of paralysis, where the outward appearance may be
identical, although in one case the effect is due to inherent and hereditary
defect, and the other to acquired disease. In the former case Eugenic
standards would require the sufferer to refrain from parenthood, in the
latter case there would be no reason for so doing. Dr. Theodore Thomson’s
classification of mental defect brings this point out clearly.

If those people who cite wonderful cases of mentally deficient or
deaf-mute parents having normal offspring would examine into the
cause and origin of the defect, they would find in the majority of
cases that it is confusion between these two types of defect, not an
exception in the working of the laws of heredity, that is responsible
for apparent discrepancy between fact and expectation. With reference to what Dr. Saleeby calls “the three great enemies of public
health—alcoholism, tuberculosis, and venereal disease—alcoholism in
many cases is symptomatic of inherited nervous defect,” and “in so
far as negative Eugenics strike at stock deficient in self-control and
highly susceptible to the charm of narcotics,” such families must be
discouraged from parenthood. Tuberculosis and venereal disease were
still in the experimental stage with regard to the inheritance factor, but
both come definitely under the heading of Class C

Preventive Eugenics (C).—Dr. Saleeby names racial pvisons those
diseases and drugs which apparently have a directly injurious effect on
the germ-plasm, resulting in the birth of defective children. Preventive
Eugenics is concerned with protecting potential parents from “racial
poisons,” among which are included tuberculosis, syphilis, lead and alcohol.
The recent work of Bertholet and Stockard was quoted in support of the
contention that alcohol acts directly on the germ-plasm.

It is obvious from the differences of opinion still existing among
biologists on this important subject, that there is urgent need for further
experimental investigations.

The statistical treatment of unanalysed data will not further our knowledge; surely, what is needed is more work on the lines of the experiments recently made by Dr. Mjéen in Norway, and the collection of
individual detailed family histories. Here again, cause and effect are
obscured, and until the various causes of alcoholism can be clearly
classified, it is difficult to lay down any definite recommendations to
ensure Eugenic conduct in all cases. As with mental defect and’ deafmutism, there are alcoholic stocks where the tendency is undoubtedly
inherited, and hard drinking parents with perfectly normal offspring,
so the answer to the problem does not seem to be as simple as the
extremists of either school would have us to believe. Here also the
need of the Eugenist is more knowledge.

Venereal disease, included as one of the cares of preventive Eugenics,
ranked first in the amount of interest aroused at the conference; its
incidence, and the best methods of treatment, formed the basis of
Dr. Douglas White’s paper (“The Suppression of Venereal Diseases ”),
and was brought forward by a number of other contributors, notably
EUGENICS AND PUBLIC HEALTH. 159

Dr. Raimondi (“L’Utilité de Peugénique dans la pratique de lélevage
du nourrisson ”), Dr. Apert, Dr. Saleeby, and Dr. Theodore Thomson.
The need for immediate action is keenly realised, and all were agreed
that the amount of defect directly attributable to this disease is greater
than to any other, and the deerioraing effect on offspring is but too
well-established. The nature of the disease, together with the recent
discovery of a more rapid and certain method of treatment by Ehrlich,
brings it directly within the scope of public health administration.
Dr. White regretted that with regard to cancer and tuberculosis public
interest had outstripped medical knowledge; vast sums were available for research into the causation and treatment of both diseases,
and already extensive provisions for sanatoria treatment of tuberculosis had been made, while the lasting benefit of such treatment was
still uncertain, but with syphilis the case is reversed. “Ehrlich has given
the cure, yet the public remain apathetic, looking on the discovery more
as an academic triumph than a vast opportunity, and do not realise it
has brought the national treatment of the disease within the bounds of
practical politics.” Although it is suggested that the disease has been
steadily decreasing in the United Kingdom during the last 40 years, the
decrease being shown both in the Registrar-General’s returns, and the
number of affected recruits, this is not confirmed by other tacts. In
those diseases and defects which are mainly the outcome of syphilis, such
as “aneurism, tabes, and general paralysis, we find the numbers are not
decreasing at all, but are practically msing in proportion to the population.”

Dr. White quoted the recent attempt made by the Australian State
Board of Health to obtain in Melbourne some measure of the incidence
of the disease in the general population. The investigations were made
under the direction of Dr. Ham, medical officer of health, They came
to the conclusion that about 7 per cent of the whole population of
Melbourne was syphilitic, z.e., 42,000 in a population of 600,000. A
similar proportion would bring the figures for greater London to 500,000
(such figures would include all stages of the disease).

Dr. Raimondi (“Utilité de Peugénique dans la pratique de l’élevage
du nourrisson ”) gave an account of the methods used at the Pouponnieére,
especially with regard to infected parents and children.

All those who deal with the subject recommended the same general

licy :—
. T Cure.—That sufficient facilities for treatment should be provided and steps taken to encourage the public to make use
of them.

II. Prevention.—That efforts should be made to introduce into the
educational systems sound teaching on sex hygiene, which
would go far to guard the younger generation against infection.

Ill. Research.—In the interests, both of medicine and Eugenics, the
fullest possible records should be kept, both at hospitals and
in private practice.

This last recommendation does not apply only to one disease.

Dr. Apert gave a very necessary definition of Eugenics, pointing out
wherein it differed from “ puériculture” or child study. It is a point
that needs continual reiteration, as so often those engaged in excellent
and much-needed social reform, concerning regulations of maternal health,
facilities for infant feeding, schools for mothers, and many other valuable
institution, plead for interest on the ground that they are eugenic.
Their eugenic bearing, if any, is very indirect, as Eugenics is concerned
with the inborn characters of future generations, and unless it is proved
that such institutions preserve a proportionately larger number of fit
babies they are not eugenic, although they may reduce the death-rate.
160 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Dr. Apert points this out very clearly, defining negative and constructive Eugenics, and outlining a possible policy. From the recent
genetic studies he takes an optimistic view of the possible application of
the laws of heredity to human evolution in the future, but lays stress on
the fact that, except on one or two small points, legislation at present
would be premature.

One point where legislative action would be possible was raised by
Dr. A. Broca (“ La logement des familles nombreuses ”). It is always
important to encourage the birth-rate among the fit, more so than ever
in a country like France, where the “Commission sur la Dépopulation ”
is still at work. The practical difficulty in Paris, as in all large French
towns, that confronts the working man with several children is that
of obtaining housing accommodation. The landlord of the prevalent
tenement building usually lets in three-roomed flats, and objects to small
children, as their presence reduces the value of the whole property. In
order to remedy these conditions, a number of capitalists have combined

under the name of Le Société Anonyme des Logements Economiques pour
Familles Nombreuses.

The object of the society is to purchase or construct tenement buildings, letting four-roomed flats at the usual three-room rent (£18 per
annum), and as tenants, give preference to parents of large families.
From the profits 3 per cent. is paid to the shareholders on their capital,
and the surplus has been found sufficient to allow for reductions in the
rents paid by the tenants. These reductions are made on the following
grounds: The society realises that children below the age of 16 cannot
contribute to the family income, a reduction is therefore made in the rent
of each family having four or more children (in the case of widows, every
child beyond the third entitles them to the reduction). For every child
below 13 the reduction is 24 fr. per annum; between 13 and 14 years,
16 fr. per annum; and between 14 and 15, 8 fr. per annum. The result
of this policy has been a very considerable increase among the tenants
in the number of children born during the years the buildings have
been open. It was, of course, only to be expected that the proportion of
children would be high, as large families would) gravitate towards
them in the first place. In December, 1912, in four tenement buildings
out of a total population of 2,652, the children numbered 1,857, a proportion of 4°8 per family, the highest in any part of Paris. One family
of eight obtains a reduction of 120 fr. rent per annum, a very considerable
assistance to a family earning from 30 to 48 francs a week. At present
there are about 1o births per annum for every 100 families, and each
year about four children reach the age of 16. Therefore, the net increase
of those on account of whom a reduction is made is about six per 100
families. That the total loss on unpaid rent has not exceeded 1 per cent.
speaks well for the type of workmen accepted, and it is hoped that the
movement will continue, and prove to be really Eugenic in its effect.

One regrets that public opinion is not far enough advanced to enable
the administrators to give preference among applicants for accommodation
to those families most likely to carry on a healthy and sound stock. That
this is done indirectly to some extent already, is shown by the very low
disease and death-rate returns given in the report issued by the Society.

The general question of heredity was raised on several occasions, and
especial interest attaches to Professor Houssay’s paper, “Eugénique et
régimes alimentaires,” in which he describes some experiments in the
feeding of poultry. Professor Houssay wished to ascertain whether a
change of diet in one generation of poultry would effect the type or
quality of the offspring, and if so, whether the differences would be transmitted to future generations.

He found, by feeding poultry on fresh raw meat, that at first they
improved in size, weight, and plumage, but shortly began to deteriorate.
In egg-laying capacity, in three consecutive years, the figures were 27°2,
EUGENICS AND PUBLIC HEALTH. 161

18'°6, 6°35 per cent. Of these eggs the fertility varied considerably, bot
from generation to generation and also in proportion to the size of the
individual hen. The longer the treatment had continued, the lower the
percentage of fertile eggs. Even in one season the viability of the

gs of the same hens fell to zero, none of them in the later months
developing beyond the fourth or fifth day. Another point gained from
the expenence of rearing six generations, was that the vitality of the
chicks hatched varied in relation to the time the ancestors had been
fed on raw meat. Professor Houssay drew the conclusion that an
insidious food poison might thus kill off a race in six generations, and
that a comparison should not only be made with alcohol, but that any
food was a possible deteriorating agency. Civilisation had drawn man far
from his natural form of nourishment. Danger is greater for those
who live in ease and luxury, as it is the surplus food taken into the
system which creates the poisons and causes degeneration of tissue, therefore it is in the leisured classes one would expect to see the decline
in fertility and vitality. In Professor Houssay’s opinion it is more than
probable that the present degeneracy and low birth-rate among the upper
es may be in part owing to poisoning due to unsuitable and unstinted
ood.

Dr. Hyslop and Dr. Theodore Thomson discussed the nature of the
two most important Eugenic problems, the former taking the origin and
nature of genius, the latter, the origin and nature of mental defect.

Dr. Hyslop (“The Inheritance of Mental Characters ”) gave the term
genius the meaning of emotional and artistic development, rather than the
meaning attached to it by Sir Francis Galton. The latter, in “ Hereditary
Genius,” collected evidence of the inheritance of marked ability, and its
constant re-appearance in the same families, thus using genius to indicate
what is usually termed talent or ability.

The genius dealt with by Dr. Hyslop was the type that is “akin to
madness.” Dr. Hyslop’s analysis of the opinions of various writers on the
subject tended to show that the diversity of opinion as to its inheritance
was mainly due to the different sense in which the term genius was used.
Whatever may be the opinion on that point, there is considerable evidence
of the strength of the hereditary factor in many mental traits. Dr.
Hyslop notes, for instance, “that emigration appears to have no influence
in modifying the ratio of the insane to the sane, 7.¢., environment is
apparently insufficient to account for much.”

Dr. Theodore Thomson (“The Prevention of Mental Defect in
Children ”) supported Dr. :Hyslop in his contention that much of the
confusion as to the inheritance of mental defect arose from failure to
analyse its causes. His effort to bring order into chaos was so successful
that one cannot do better than reproduce the main heads of the classification.

Starting from the two main groups—

I. In which the mental deficiency is the result of a developmental

defect, and

II. In which an apparently normal development has been arrested
by some extraneous cause.

These are termed primary and secondary amentia.

Primary amentia includes—

(1) A large group of unclassified cases, where the main symptom
is mental defect and no peculiarities of bodily defect accompany it.

(2) A group of cases where the mental defect is accompanied by
bodily abnormalities (e.g., microcephalus, mongolismus, etc.).

(3) A group of cases in which, in addition to mental defect, there
is evidence of a local lesion in the brain (e.g., diplegic
cases, word deafness and word blindness).
162 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Secondary amentia includes—

(1) Cases due to gross cerebral lesions (¢.g., meningeal hemorrage
at birth, meningitis, congenital syphilis, etc.).

(2) Cases following intractable idiopathic epilepsy.

(3) Cases due to cretinism, alcoholism, improper nutrition.

(4) Cases arising from sense deprivation (if untreated), blindness,
or deafness.

The causes of primary amentia may be looked for first in neurotic
heredity. Ashly found it present in 75 per cent. of his cases. Parental
alcoholism is found in about 15 per cent. of cases, but though this may
have a direct influence in the unborn child, “it may also be the manifestation of the neurotic strain in the parents.”

Dr. Ettie Sayer supports Dr. Thomson in his measure of the intensity
of the inheritance factor in mental defect. As Assistant Medical Officer
to the London County Council, Dr. Sayer had experience working in
the special schools for the mentally defective. A very interesting account
is given of an investigation, lasting over two years (1904-6), into the
family histories of inmates of these schools. To avoid selection the
name of every seventh child in the school registers was taken and the
family history followed up; the same process being adopted in a normal
school.

The differences between the family conditions in the two sets is illustrated in the following table :—

 

Family conditions

of 100 Family Conditions
Mentally Defective | of 109
children. ormal children.
Family History of Insanity 5 we 31 ”
Family History of Epilepsy eee wee II 6
Family History of Tubercle ees see 66 39
Parent Mentally Defective se ame 34 2
Parent Alcoholic ... vee ves asi 42 6
Abject poverty, Mother having insufficient
food during whole of pregnancy ea 40 4
Total Number of Children ee ves 761 506
Number still alive... ses — eee 467 387
Miscarriages... wae tes vee eee 101 23
Other children Feeble-minded in same
family... 0 eee eee we 28 oO
Other children Tubercular in same family 10 2

 

Dr. Sayer advocates the adoption of the colony system for the permanent care of the mentally defective, both as a protective measure for
themselves and a safeguard for the future.
EUGENICS AND PUBLIC HEALTH. 163

We think that Dr. R. Dupuy, in urging the need for special schools
under medical supervision for the mentally defective, omits the main consideration, that the care should be permanent. The hope he holds
out that the alliance between medicine and pedagogy would enable a large
proportion of the feeble-minded to be rendered normal does not seem to
be borne out by facts. The defect being, as he himself avers, in many
cases due to a physiological defect of the brain.

The student of human heredity is at a great disadvantage, as his
material is not available for experiment. It is, therefore, of the utmost
importance to obtain large numbers of detailed family histories, and to
subject them to analysis. M. L. March (“Les statistiques relatives a
Yenfance et le point de vue de Peugénique ”) states that even in such a
comparatively simple and definite issue as the causes of infantile mortality
present methods of enquiry leave several important points obscure. For
instance, actual mortality may be measured, but not the extent to which
disease is present when not the cause of death. In his opinion biological
facts will have to be mainly collected from children, as their grouping in
schools and institutions makes it possible to examine them in large numbers.
Institutions should be encouraged to keep “individual schedules ” for all
their members on a uniform scheme and not, as at present, enter the
minimum of useful facts in ledgers. M. March gave specimen types
of suitable schedules at present in use among three types of organisations :

(a) Those dealing with the mother during the pre-natal period.

(6) Those dealing with the child during the post-natal and preschool period.

(c) Those dealing with the child during elementary school age.

In class (a2) are given those used by the “Mutualité Maternelle” in
Paris, and the Women’s Municipal League of Boston. Both ask age, occupation (both of father and mother), length of time mother quitted work before
confinement, besides the usual personal questions. The Boston Society
includes, on the back of the anti-natal schedule, the necessary questions for
the post-natal, pre-school period. M. March suggests it is Important that
all such schedules should register the dates of birth, and sex, of previous
children, and especially of the last preceding one, also a more complete
history of the father. In France, under the “ loi Roussel,” all children put
out to nurse are subject to medical inspection up to the age of two, the
schedule now in use by them was prepared by M. Bertillon, and only
contains the minimum of questions necessary to enable the mortality to
be correctly analysed. A more complete one is in use by the “ Assistance
Maternelle,” organised by Mlle. Chaptal, which gives the family history
from the grandparents.

A model schedule has been drawn up by Mme. Picard, M. March, and
Dr. Raimondi (Director of the Institut de Puériculture), which if used
for twelve years would give most valuable data.

BULLETIN DE PUERICULTURE.

Enfant entré en No.

I. Enregistrement: Nom et prénoms; sexe, date et lieu de naissance.

Entré le; sorti le; pour cause de; mode d’allaitement
(avant, aprés l’entrée); age au sevrage.

II. Parents: Mére vivante; décédée; (quand? causes)—
Pére vivant; décédé (quand ? causes)—
Age au mariage (du pére, de la mére); Age (du pére, de la
mére) & la naissance de l’enfant); Age de la mére 4 la ire
menstruation.
Profession (du pére; de la mére).
164 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Nombre des enfants antérieurs nés de la méme mére.
La mére a-t-elle fait des fausses couches, combien ?
Autres antécédents (du pére; de la mére).

Ill. Enfant précédents: Date de la naissance de l’enfant précédent.
fehl été élevé par sa mére; allaité au sein; artificiellement !

Si cet enfant est décédé, date du décés?  Est-il mort chez
ses parents; aprés retrait de chez une nourrice; chez une
nourrice; a Vhépital?

IV. Etat de Venfant: Accidents survenus au cours de la grossesse.
L’accouchement a-t-i] été naturel; artificiel ?

L’enfant a-t-il eu des jumeaux? Combien, de quel sexe?

The first example of school age schedules is that in use in the Paris
schools, which gives the result of the medical examination made on
entering school, the previous illnesses, general health, skin, hair colour,
mouth and dentition, the results of physiological examination, intellect,
hearing, eyesight.

Later examinations deal with intellectual development, eyesight, illnesses, and other points.

The schedule now in use in the English elementary schools covers
much the same ground.

The Eugenic value of these returns could be greatly enhanced by a
few additions, such as the profession of the father, the number and ages
of other children in the same family, and the individual social position
in the family, etc. Of the schedules cited the general criticism applied
that all were somewhat vague on certain points, that the only really
useful questions for such enquiries were those which dealt with facts and
not with opinions. Efforts must be made to convince parents of the
Eugenic importance of giving truthful answers to such enquiries, which
could be made under the seal of professional secrecy. Dr. Raimondi
urged that the doctors should assist in this educational work, as there
were many points on which they could collect information. That to which
he drew special attention being the influence of the psychological and
physical conditions of the parents at the time of conception.

Natural immunity was also a very evident condition of which we
had but little accurate knowledge. The influence of parental age on offspring, the after effects of zymotic disease on the parents’ capacity to
produce vigorous offspring, and many other matters were brought forward and discussed. It is to be hoped that the attention given to the
subject, and the definition of some of those problems awaiting solution
will inspire the medical profession with the necessary enthusiasm to enlist
their co-operation in the Eugenic cause. The doctors should be the
priests of the religion of Eugenics; let them hasten to search for the
answers to those questions which the laity will be asking them in the
near future. They have the opportunity, will they make use of it?

SEANCES.
Vendredi, 16 Mai.
A pres-midi.
Ouverture des séances ... wes wae ... Le Président.
Eugenics and public health ... wes .. Dr. C. W. Saleeby.

Eugénique et régimes alimentaires .... .... Professeur F. Houssay.
The influence of disease upon racial fitness
and survival ... ... Professor J. A. Lindsay.

The suppression of venereal diseases ... D. White, M.D., M.R.C.S.
EUGENICS AND PUBLIC HEALTH.

Samedi 17.
hier

Puériculture et eugénique .

Utilité de Veugénique dans la pratique de
Pélevage du nourrisson .

The relation of eugenic education to "public
health wee

Quelques notions sur hygiene ‘de la femme
enceinte ws we

La puériculture aprés la conception

La protection d’enfance du 1* Age

Apres-midi.

Les consultations de nourrissons

Maternité et mutualité ...

Assistance 2 4 la mére et a l'enfant de la famille
ouvriére

Salles d’allaitement au sein dans les usines

Préservation de Venfant du 1& Age contre
la tuberculose wes ves wee

Lundi 19 Mai.
Matin.

Le logement des familles nombreuses
The inheritance of mental characters

Prevention of mental defect in children

Le role du medecin dans education des
enfants arriérés . a

Defective children and their treatment

Abpres-midi.

Les droits de enfant...

La protection legale de la femme ‘pendant
la grossesse ... vee eee wes

Protection legale des enfants ... aon

Mortalité infantile celle de la annee
comparee a celle de la 2&me nee

Mortalité des enfants placés en nourrice

Les statistiques relatives & Venfance et le
point de vue de lDeugénique

e
I ére

CLOTURE.

Dr. E. Apert.

Dr. Raimondi.
Mrs. S. Gotto.

Dr. Lepage.
Mme. Pierre Budin.
M. S. Turquan.

Mlle. Chaptal.
Mme. le Générale Sée.

Mme. Alphen Salvador.
M. F. Poussineau.

Dr. Lesage.

Dr. Falhoen.

Dr.
Dr.

Nobécourt et
Georges Schreiber.

Dr. Aug. Broca.

T. B. Hyslop, M.D.,
M.R.C.P., F.R.S.E.

Dr. T. Thomson.

Dr.

Dr.

Raoul Dupuy.
Ettie Sayer.

M. E. Drugeon.

Dr. Maxwell.
Mme. Veil Picard.

Dr. Bonnenfant.
M. M. Huber.

M. Lucien March.
