Registration in Relation to Eugenics.”

By Srr Bernarn Maruit, K.C.B.,
(late Registrar-General for England.)

I am glad to comply with a request which has been made to me to
offer some observations on the bearing of Registration and Census
administration upon Eugenic problems. I have, however, some difficulty in doing so, because it can hardly be said that Government vital
statistics, as hitherto understood, have heen collected and organized
with any direct reference to the study of the ‘‘agencies under social
control which may improve or impair the racial qualities of future
generations either physically or mentally’’—to adopt a definition
which figures as the motto of the ‘‘Kugenics Review’’ of London.
Professor W. Bateson, F.R.S., the author of a brilliant Galton lecture
in 1921, has indeed told us that the ‘‘first essentials for any serious
investigation of the biological structure of the community are analytical
data as to the distribution of faculty and similar particulars which
our present returns to the Registrar General do not aim at supplying,’’
and that ‘“‘to decide from these returns how the birthrate is distributed
among the various grades, even among the various ages, of the parents
is not readily possible,’’ adding that the ‘‘Registrar General returns
might be made to give that information but they do not because,
though Governments are manipulating living units, social physiology
is no concern of theirs.’’

I fear there is truth in this indictment, although, as I shal! hope
to show, a good dea] has been done in the past to lay the foundation
for eugenic study, and although the British Census of 1911 did make
at least one serious statistical contribution to the problems of human
fertility. It may be said, moreover, in mitigation of such strictures,
that until we know what precise meaning for our purpose should be
attached to the word ‘‘eugenic,’’ and until some means have heen discovered for measuring the changes which may be taking place in the
‘‘actual inborn characters’? of a population which would give a
clearer direction to statistical inquiries, there mav be some excuse
for what looks too much like culpable neglect. I can only say, as
regards the Department with which J was until recently connected,
that we were always anxious to meet modern requirements in this
direction as far as our very limited powers enabled us to do so; and
that I hope the establishment of the Ministry of Health, with full
powers and active interest in the questions which interest. us, may in
time enable the dreams of greatly increased efficiency in which we
indulged—more co-ordination of agencies and statistical publications
affecting public health, better equipment of intelligence branches,

* Paper read to the International Congress, 1921.
24 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and the like—to be realized. I cannot but anticipate that the discussions at the forthcoming Congress will throw much light on all
these matters—-not only as to the objects to be arrived at but also as to
the methods adopted by Government and other agencies, more especially in the United States of America.

It may be worth while to glance briefly at the vital statistics
published in the United Kindgom in order to see how far they bear
directly or indirectly on ‘‘eugenics’’ and how they might be made ot
greater assistance to such studies. Good ordinary vital statistics of
population, birth and death rates, infant and adult mortality, pre
valence of specified forms of disease resulting in death, overcrowding
shewn by housing conditions—and so on, are of course the indispensable
prerequisite for all studies directed towards social improvement. They
require to be supplemented by the tabulation of all the known facts as
to the prevalent diseases which impair health and working capacity
without resulting in death—‘‘morbidity’’ statistics—-such, e.g. as
might be furnished by the administration of the National Health
Insurance Acts in the United Kigdom. All these sets of statistics
should be systematically related to each other; death rates, and particularly birth rates, with occupation and housing, for instance ,—
for the hygiene of the workshop in modern conditions is no
less important than the hygiene of the home. Even economic conditions, as Major Darwin insisted in his valuable address to the Roval
Statistical Society in Januarv, 1919, are closely concerned with
eugenics. We cannot afford to neglect the effects of the fiscal and
social legislation of the present day in encouraging, on the one hand,
the multiplication of the least fit elements of our population, and on
the other in depressing the level and even endangering the existence of
the intellectual middle classes whose fertility is already disproportionately low. Here also and, generally, in the differential effect of
the possession of ‘‘wealth’’ on the birth rate are subjects for more
eareful study, statistical and other, than has vet been given to them.

Much of this work, of course, is already being done with skill and
completeness, much also in a piece-meal and spasmodic fashion, while
some has hardly been attempted. All of it would fall well within the
competence of a properly equipped public department. Before passing,
however, to the consideration of suggested reforms in registration which
would facilitate progress in the study of eugenics in a broad sense, I
should like to draw attention to a section of the Census of 1911 the
results of which have been recognised in Great Britain as a genuine
contribution to eugenic research, that which dealt with the fertility
of the population, and which, by its inclusion of questions as to the
duration of marriages and the numbers of children born and surviving
has provided material, on a national scale, for analysing the fall in
fertility since 1876 (the year of the highest birth-rate) by social class,
occupation, birthplace, and locality of residence. I am proud to
have been associated , as the official in charge of that Census, with this
novel departure, but the credit for both the initiation and the organization of the work, was due to my colleague, Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson,
C.B.E., Superintendent of Statistics at that time.

An untoward fate seems to attend the tabulation of fertility statisREGISTRATION IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. 98

‘tics, if, as I understand, those collected at the 1900 and 1910 Censuses
of the United States still remain unpublished. In our own. case, at
all events, the tabulation and publication of the results were most
unfortunately delayed by the war, and are not even yet fully available.
But in April 1920, Dr. Stevenson anticipated his report and summed
up its main conclusions, with much important comment, in an address
to the Royal Statistical Society of London on the ‘‘Fertility of Various
Social Classes in England and Wales from the middle of the Nineteenth
Century to 1911.’’ This paper wil] be familiar to students of the subject, and IT need do no more here than touch on one or two main points.

Ry a standardizing process, which serves both for fertility and
child mortality, a means was found of measuring and comparing the
fertility experience of any section of the population throughout the
whole period represented by a considerable number of marriages still
in existence in 1911, i.e. back to the decennium 1851—1860, from
which about 50,000 marriages survived at that date. The selection
of suitable sections of the population to which to apply the method
adopted presented greater difficulties, since the Census makes nu record
of social position, only recording various facts from which this may
be deduced. The test of domestic servants kept was rejected as applying to too small a section, and that of the size of tenement occupied
proved disappointing. It was therefore decided to fall back on the
gradation by occupation which had been used in tabulating occupational fertility and infant mortality from the births registered in 1911,
a classification which was no doubt open to criticism in some points of
detail but which at all events secured comparability with the published
birth registration results. Eight social classes were thus obtained
(see page xli and Table 284 of the Registrar General’s 74th Annual
Report for 1911, Cd. 6578 of 1913), the first five of which correspond
roughly with the social grades of the population beginning with Class I,
Upper and Middle Classes, and ending with Class V, occupations
including mainly unskilled men, while Classes VI, VII, and VIIT,
consisted of textile workers, miners, and agricultural labourers respectively, which it seemed desirable to distinguish separately.

Much of Dr. Stevenson’s paper is taken up with explanations of
the figures given in the tables quoted and with the discussions of such
points as the causes of the low rates of fertility in certain classes and
occupations, the effect of female occupation upon marrvied fertility
and the probability of artificial restraints as the cause of decline;
but the salient fact brought out is that, even when allowance is made
by the method of standardization for the variation in the age of marriage in the different social classes, fertility is found to increase downwards throughout the social scale. In addition to marrying later in
life the more prosperous classes are less fertile when married. The
method used measures the effect of the second difference by eliminating
that of the first, and by this means demonstrates that even if these
classes married as early as the others their fertility would be much
lower. The relatively lower fertility of the more successful and prosperous classes is, of course, no new discovery, but it may be claimed
that this disquieting fact has now been established by evidence on a
wide national basis. |
26 EUGENICS REVIEW.

More formidable from the eugenic point of view is the conclusion
that the relative defect in fertility of the higher social classes is largely
a new phenonenon, dating from the commencement of the decline in
fertility generally. The difference in fertilitv between social classes
is smal] fur marriages contracted before 1861 (so small as to suggest
that if the comparison cuuld have been taken back twenty vears suhbstantial equality in this respect may have existed in all classes),
and it rapidly increases to a maximum for the marriages for 1891—
1896. with a slight subsequent. approximation between the classes.
which may be more apparent than real. |

It is much to be regretted that it has not been found possible to.
repeat the ‘‘fertility’’ questions in the British Census for the present
year; but enough has already been done, as the foregoing paragraphs
will indicate and as will be realized when Dr. Stevenson’s final report
appears, to provide an immense amount of material for eugenic
research and speculation: and it will not be for want of warning that
remedial action, if such is possible and desirable. is not attempted.

T may now turn to the consideration of certain reforms in British
registration methods which are desirable from the eugenic point of
view. ,

As long ago as in November 1916, in my first Presidential address
to the Royal Statistical Society on the Organization of Registration
in its bearing on Vital ‘‘Statistices.’’ T expressed the opinion that we
were nearly at the end of what purely administrative action under
our then existing powers in the General Register Office could do in the
way of obtaining fiirther information on which statistical research
might be based. and gave an account of the particulars in which the
records necessary for the improvement and extension of our vital statistics were either ‘‘altogether wanting or defective in accuracy.’’ To
remedy these defects we required (and still require) two things: (1):
power which can only be given, so far as I am aware, by legislation to
obtain fuller information by way of ‘‘questionnaires’’ on the occasion
of the registration of births and deaths by members of the public: and
(2) a very considerable reorganization of the registration service of the
country. Under the first head I will do no more than refer to the
suggestions made in that address of fertility tables which might be
derived from fuller birth registration information. But T may also
quote—just as one instance—-a paragraph which has a direct bearing
on eugenic study. ,

‘*As a record,’’ I wrote, ‘‘the present entry is defective in that it
either fails to identify completely the person to whom it relates orfails to point directly to the next step in tracing the family history..,
Thus in the death entry of one of the hundreds of John Smiths. there
may he no clue to the marital condition or to any family relationship
of the deceased man, and all we can learn from the record is that a
certain John Smith, aged 54, a carpenter, died at such a place on
such a day of such a disease. If, however, the entry contained statements as to the date and place of his birth, and that he was the husband of Mary Smith, formerly Jones, to whom he was married on such
a date, there would be something resembling a complete indentification of the deceased man and indications from which the family history
REGISTRATION IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. | 27

could be traced by any interested person. In the same way, the birth
entry of John Smith tells us only that he was horn at such a place on
such a date and that he is the son of John Smith and Mary Smith,
formerly Jones, but it gives no clue to the next step backwards in the
family history. If, however, the entry cuntained the date and place
of marriage of his parents it would direct us at once to the documentary
record of that event.’’

The first essential, then, is such an amendment of the law as would
enable the authorities to obtain many more data from the public and
to remedy long standing deficiencies which it would be tedious to
enumeratc here. Under the second head falls the question of the administrative machinery required which is in the main one of purely local
interest; but the suggestion that a system of General or National
Registration should be instituted seems to contain possibilities for
the eugenist which would justify some reference to it here. Impressed
by the success for its special object of the National Registration Act
of 1915, hastily devised though it was as a war measure, I was soon led
to consider the possibilities presented by a permanent organization
on such lines—-and particularly the suggestion that a General Register
might be mace to subserve the purposes, amongst others, both of Births
and Deaths Registration and of Census in a more complete and reliable
form than the present. I therefore put forward this idea in the address
alluded to.

The opportunity was allowed to pass, and I do not know when,
if ever, the proposal may be revived. But it has received a good dea!
of consideration since it was first. suggested, and was even made the
subject of a special inquiry by a Government Committee which examined the question in detail, and prepared a careful and elaborate
Report. |

The scheme then drawn up involved the maintenance, in various
local centres throughout the country. of registers of the local populations. These registers would contain one or more cards or sheets
devoted to each individual], and showing his record from its commencement with the entry of his birth, which would furnish evidence both
of his age and identity. (There are many John Smiths, but presumably
only one born at a certain address on a given date, to parents of recorded
names, ages, and occupations, etc.) To this would be added as time
went on the chief registrable events of his life—changes of address,
‘occupation (as already registered under the National Unemployment
Insurance Act), marriage, the birth of children, etc., etc.,—most of
the information required being already recorded in one official register
or another, but without any provision for the assuciation of the whole.
Such registers of the population are already in existence in some
European countries; and once the machinery is provided for maintaining them in even an elementary form by ascertaining changes of address
and providing for the transfer of the records from one local register
to another as the movements of the persons concerned require, a skeleton is available which can be:clothed with all the information re‘quired for various administrative purposes regarding individual
‘citizens. By this means each separate item of information recorded
‘would acquire greatly increased value from its association with the
28 EUGENICS REVIEW.

other facts recorded for the same individual. It is generally the association of the facts rather than a record of the facts themselves which
is found to be lacking when further statistical information regarding
our population is called for, as we have no organized means as yet of
collating the numerous items of information independently collected
and recorded as a result of the many paternal activities of the modern
state. Thus the scheme amounts to the co-ordination of the numerous
official inquiries and registers now made and maintained independently
of each other into a single system which would provide a dossier for
each individual containing those particulars regarding him which the
State is chiefly concerned to know.

Upon the purely administrative advantages of the scheme, such
as the consolidation of numerous registers maintained for various
purposes, I need not dwell: but the existence of a General Register of
the whole population maintained locally in the several administrative
areas would have an iniportant effect, from our present point of view,
in immensely improving the validity of the existing (or extended) data
derived from the Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages. For
the information supplied by the public on the occasion of a birth or
death or a marriage, now uncontrolled and therefore productive of.
errors, would be checked and supplemented by the records of the
individual or family which would gradually be accumulated in the
General Register, and the production of an identification card containing the name, address, occupation, etc., etc., on each occasion of the
registration of any one of these events, would ensure a uniformity of
statement the absence of which is one of the principal difficulties met
with in the preparation, for instance, of occupational birth and death
rates. Under the present system a man’s occupation may be stated
differently on his child’s birth certificate, on his own marriage and
death certificate, and on his Census schedule, without any change in
his occupation having occurred. When the births of 1911 were tabulated according to the parents’ occupation, it hecame evident that the
return of occupation in the birth certificates differed seriously from
those stated for the same man in the Census of the same year: and this.
applies equally to occupational mortality statistics. A general
registration system would at least ensure that each individual would
have the same occupation at any given time for purposes of occupational registration and registration of marriage, parenthood and death...

Another advantage must be described. The registration of births
and deaths by itself, however carefully carried out, can yield but very
imperfect evidence as to the trend of natality and mortality. In order
to provide the information which has been the foundation of our
hygienic progress, and which is demanded by students and administrators alike on an ever increasing standard of accuracy and elaboration, the number of these events registered must be related to the size
and make-up of the population amongst which they occur. As
authoritative information on the subject is provided only hy the
decennial Census the requirement has to he met during the ten vears.
succeeding that event by estimates of the probable numbers living in
each locality, estimates which in the absence of a count can never be.
satis factory. Many illustrations of extreme over- or under-estimates
REGISTRATION IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. 29

are brought to light at each Census. The existence of a General
Register would at once remove the difficulty which largely vitiates
caleulations of local birth rates and death rates upon which sanitary
progtess so largely depends. With its help we should be able to
ascertain the population of the local area at any given date not only
in mass but in full detail of sex, age and marital condition. This
information would be of such immense value to our vital statistics.
that it might be expected to satisfy the often expressed demand for a
quinquennial Census. For it would in fact provide us with an elementary Census annuallv, or as often as might be required, at a minimum of trouble and expense. Not only, moreover, would the Census
under some such scheme as this form a ‘specially careful and elaborate
revision of the Register, but the existence of the Register would
enormously improve the information contained in the Census. For the
facts stated on the Census schedules would no longer, as now, be the
unsupported statements of more or less careless and irresponsible
pesple, but would represent the revision of a pre-existing record by
which the statements made for Census purposes would be checked and
verified. Further, the facts recorded at the Census would be brought
into harmony with those appearing in all the other records which came
within the scheme of general registration. Obviously such a system
would provide the first requisite of good vital statistics, full and
accurate data.

Tt is time to consider whether such a general registration system, if
instituted. might not be utilized for the furtherance of eugenic research
in a more direct fashion. Some years ago the late Mr. Walter Hazell
propounded before the Royal Statistical “Society (see Journal for June
1914) a plan for recording, from the existing records of births, marriages
and deaths at Somerset House, the life history and family connections
of every individual by making ‘‘life-cards’? for every child which
would provide a connecting link between various members of a family
and even between the several events of an individual life. The idea
was to ‘‘raise the life records of men to the level already attained for
pedigree animals.’’ Various objections were raised in the course of
discussion, some of which, such as the supposed hostility of the population to identification cards and other so-called ‘*inquisitorial’’
arrangements, the experience of National Registration has shewn to be
largely imaginary, while others might well have proved insuperable
in practice if attempted under present administrative conditions.
There can be no doubt, however, that if the scheme for General Registration referred to should ever be adopted it could be made to constitute a
record of life histories on a much more complete scale than that envisaged by Mr. Hazell. That scheme involved the creation of a
simple or skeleton central index register of the whole populatiou fed
from the local registers, for the purpose of maintaining the accuracy of
those registers in the matter of removals and the prevention of duplicate
entries. But this index could, if desired, be made to serve other useful
purposes and among them a complete genealogical record of the whole
population. If to the particulars required merely for identification
purposes there were added notes of the parentage, marriages, births of
children, change of occupation, cause of and age at death, information
80 EUGENICS REVIEW.

would be afforded by which not only could the genealogical history of
each family in time be traced, but from which some inferences at least
could he drawn as to their social status. It is less easy to see how
correct inferences could be drawn from any such records as to the
physical or mental fitness of the individual or family.

Pedigree stock books are designed for the eugenics of animals, and
it ts obviously impossible to press the analogy too far in dealing with
men and women. It is for statesmen and eugenists to decide what
measures can safely and prapcrly be taken to encourage good stocks and
deter the multiplication of the unfit; but it is certain that no action can
be taken without adequate knowledge and it is the primary business of
the statistician to provide the facts upon which action may be based.
It is from this point of view that I have approached the question of
general registration, and I cannot help thinking that in some such
development as T have outlined there may he considerable possibilities
for the furtherance of eugenic science. But even if the admittedly
administrative advantages of a scheme of general registration should
eventually lead to its aduption, 1t would require a much more serious
interest in eugenic cuestions than is at present to be found in government circles in my own or other countries to secure the utilization of the
Register for the purroses suggested in the foregoing remarks. We were
recently told bv a British Minister, as Professor Bateson has reminded
us, that ‘‘in politics, in the affairs with which Governments have to
dea]. it 1s not accurate knowledge that matters, it is emotion.’’ I
do not even know how such suggestions as I have heen referring to
would commend themselves to eugenic students. If, upon consideration, it appeared to them that the facts of ‘‘life history’’ which might
be obtained in this way would be useful, if not indeed essential, to the
progress of their work, then it would be incumbent on them to do what
they could to educate public opinion and bring pressure to bear on the
authorities concerned. It is possible that discussion at the Conference
may do something to throw light on the merits or demerits of this proposal—at present in a purely academic stage.
