THE ANALYSIS OF PHYSIQUE

By J. I. COHEN, M.A., Ph.D.
(From the Psychological Laboratory, University College, London)

HE problems of variation in human

physique or constitution arise in many

fields of science. It is the object of the
present necessarily brief paper to assemble
some of the more important pieces of information on this topic. The conventional
anthropometric methods used by psychiatrists to distinguish psychotic groups and to
measure the association between physical
constitution and psychotic type* vary from
simple inspection of physique to the taking
of detailed measurements. Physical anthropologists follow along the same lines. Numerous indices of body-build have been devised
for this purpose. Many of these indices are
not valid mathematically because the number of anthropometric measurements multiplied together in the numerator of the index
is different from the number in the denominator. So the szze of the individual, as distinct
from his shape or proportions, influences the
magnitude of the index. Two of the best indices of build are

 

Weight? Chest Circumference
Stature Stature
Disease

Fairly convincing evidence indicates that
the individual of asthenic build is predisposed
to tuberculosis, pneumonia, dyspepsia, nervous instability, presbyacusia, schizophrenia,
hyperthyroidism and brain disorders. The
person of pyknic build, on the other hand,
is prone to diabetes, nephritis, apoplexy,
dropsy, circulatory and alimentary disorders,
arterio-sclerosis, cerebral hzmorrhage, cardiac diseases and gall-bladder diseases (3, 4,

_*It is not necessary to give a full review of the
literature on alleged temperamental differences associated with differences in physical type as this may be
obtained elsewhere. See the writer's A Statistical Study
of Physical and Mental Types, 1939; M. Schmidt’s
Korperbau und Geisteskrankheit, 1929; E. Miller’s
Types of Mind and Body, 1926; and D. G. Paterson’s
Physique and Intellect, 1930.

5, 6, 7). Persons of dysplastic physique
suffer from poor health and less sound constitution more frequently than those with
more symmetrical proportions (3).

Fertility

Persons of asthenic physique are said to
have a lower fertility than persons of pyknic
build (5, 8). This claim must be treated with
caution, for it is a well-attested fact that the
average age of unselected pyknics is much
higher than that of unselected asthenics

(3, 9).

Longevity |

There is a clear relationship between
physical build and longevity. At the younger
ages those who are underweight or markedly
overweight suffer from a high mortality. At
the older ages some degree of overweight is
an asset. In general, mortality seems to increase with increase in weight beyond the
optimum. It also increases with an increase in
the excess of abdominal over chest girth (6).

Genetic Influences

Regression towards mediocrity is said to
be more striking in the offspring of fleshy
than of slender parents. There seems to be a
tendency for persons of similar build to
intermarry (5).* Divergences of view exist
as to the relative influences of general and
specific factors in determining body size.
Castle (10) and Shull (rz) support the view
that general factors play the major part,
whilst specific factors (if any) are subordinate. Sumner (12) and Davenport (5) stress
specific factors at the expense of general ones.
Work by the writer suggests that general
factors are more than twice as important as
specific ones (14).

*See the data on somatic homogamy given by

Pearl, R., and Pearl De Witt, R. (1934) Human
Biology, I, 98-222.

81
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Growth and Shape

Perhaps the most important new approach
to the study of physique is that relating
the ultimate size and proportions of the
human body to the processes of differential
growth throughout the developmental period.
The growth impetus of an organism is
largely determined genetically but environmental agencies also play an important part.
Variability in height and weight is a function
of growth rate which is itself a function of
age.* The study of relative growth helps
to bring to light the precise relationships
holding between the growth rate of the
different parts and of the body as a whole.

An investigation carried out by McCloy (1)
to discover the measurements best adapted to
identify body types resulted in the emergence
of three common growth factors which
McCloy calls factors for linear growth, crosssectional growth, and growth of fat respectively. A study (by the writer) of anthropometric measurements of about 350 adult
subjects leads to the conclusion that the
growth rates of the bodily parts may be
regarded, from the standpoint of factorial
analysis, as determined by two major
reactions, one governing magnitude in all
bodily parts, the other governing disproportionate growth in traits of length on the one
hand, or in traits of circumference on the
other (14). More details are given below.
The first factor determining general magnitude seems to be the same as the one called
“ linear ’”’ by McCloy.

The question whether the dates of cessation of growth bear any relation to ultimate
physical proportions merits attention.
According to the White House Reports,
since, as a rule, tall individuals attain their
final stature at least as early as, if not earlier
than, short individuals, the genetically tall
must grow on the average faster than the genetically short (15,16). Others have arrived at
similar conclusions. Nevertheless, although
a person with exceptional stature was probably a precociously big child, this does not
imply that a precociously big child will be
* The relation between retardation of growth rate,

life span, diet and ultimate size are discussed by C. M.
McCay in Problems of Ageing, ed. E. V. Cowdry, 1939.

come of exceptional stature. In the sphere
of mental development the rule of growth
seems to hold both ways, namely that the
highly intelligent adult must have been a
precocious child and, conversely, the precocious child must, in normal conditions,
grow into an adult with more than average
ability. According to Burt, however, short
children owe their shortness to the fact that
they stop growing earlier. This is exemplified in the extreme case of the cretin ; whereas
tall children mature later (18).

It would be interesting to know whether
there is such a thing as a general maturity
factor. Brooks (19) and Gates (20) both
came to the conclusion that maturity is more
or less specific, and that no single mental or
physical trait is symptomatic of general
maturity.

Some Recent Results

The factorial investigation by the writer,
referred to above, suggests the following
conclusions.

(i) All physical measurements, whether in
the vertical, horizontal, or sagittal dimensions, are interrelated. Actually, a general
factor determining magnitude in all the traits,
or growth of the body as a whole, was found
to enter into all the measurements. The
three traits most highly saturated with this
factor or, in other words, most informative of
individual differences in bulk, were pelvic
and waist circumference and pelvic breadth.
It would be worth while finding the relation
between this factor and general fitness. So
far, no acceptable standard of measurement
of fitness seems to have been devised (23). |

(ii) The discriminative value of traits, as
regards their capacity to impart information
of physical growth or magnitude, varies more
in males than in females.

(iii) By removing the first (general) factor,
all the subjects may be reduced to the same
general scale of size.* The effect is the same
as that obtained by selecting at the outset,

* “ Size ’’ here, of course, does not mean height. It
means a magnitude partaking of all the traits studied.
This statement may be criticized on the grounds that
it is not permissible to compare the variability of nonhomogeneous traits.
THE ANALYSIS OF PHYSIQUE 83

a sample homogeneous for size. When this
is carried out a bipolar factor remains indicating a tendency towards disproportionate
development in length traits, on one hand,
or in circumferential traits, on the other.
Circumferential magnitude in chest, waist
and pelvis may be considered to be a consequence of lack of “ growth energy”’ for
length traits. Measurements in this factor
determine a person’s shape or proportions
independently of his general bulk.

(iv) When the specific circumferential
traits are omitted from the analysis, the
bipolar (or type) contrast appears between
disproportionate length (of leg, arm, etc.),
and disproportionate breadth (of pelvis,
chest, head, etc.). In other words, when the
subjects are reduced statistically, to the
same quantity of ‘“‘ growth energy,” in some
it is expended in excessive length and in
others in excessive breadth.

(v) The most reliable traits for distinguishing physical type differences, i.e. the traits
having the highest values in the bipolar
factor, are leg length, and waist and pelvic
circumference.

(vi) The factor determining general growth
and development accounts for about two
and a half times as much of the variance of
the traits as does the factor determining
relatively specific linear or circumferential
growth.

(vii) If traits are studied singly, true type
differences will be obscured by the presence
of a general factor common to a number of
traits. The common factor must first be
eliminated before factors governing type
differences will become evident.

(viii) The order of magnitude of variability
of the traits, as judged by their coefficients
of variation, was found to be as follows:

(a) circumferential and sagittal measurements.

(b) breadth measurements.

(c) length measurements.

(2) head measurements.

(ix) With a sample of forty-seven English
male mental patients, a significant correlation of 0-413 was obtained between a combined weighted measure of arm length, leg

length, waist circumference, pelvic circumference on the one hand, and manic-depression and schizophrenia on the other. The
schizophrenes had relatively longer arms and
legs and smaller circumferential measurements whilst the reverse was the case with
the manic-depressives.

(x) In the case of a group of fifty-one
Jewish female mental patients, a significant
correlation of 0°557 was obtained between a
combined weighted measure of chest depth
and pelvic breadth and manic-depression
and schizophrenia. The manic-depressives
had relatively deeper chests and broader
pelves.

(xi) Observable sex differences in physique
are such that it seems reasonable to assume
two fundamental human types, namely the
male and the female. If one could establish
norms for the physical proportions of males
and females,, one might then be able to
measure tendencies to masculinity or femininity in terms of approximations to these
norms. One might find, however, as Terman
and Miles found in their psychological
measures of masculinity and femininity (21),
that there is a considerable amount of overlap between the sexes, such overlap varying
according to age, temperament, and other
influences.

A comparison was made between the
results of analyzing certain physical measurements of a group of English males with the
results of analyzing the same measurements
of a group of English females. The results
suggest that physical differences in females
as compared with males are to a somewhat
greater extent differences in size than differences in proportion or type. Chest breadth
also appears to be a better index of size in
males than it is in females. Moreover, the
results indicate that the female trunk is
more “‘ rectangular ’”’ than that of the male.
In other words, there is a greater difference
between shoulder and pelvic breadth in
males than in females.

As compared with males, females have
longer legs relative to trunk volume. They
also have shorter arms and shorter and
narrower trunks relative to stature and are
more brachycephalic. °
84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(xii) By the use of Fisher’s Discriminant
Functions (22), a compound measure of four
variates, chest depth, pelvic breadth, shoulder breadth, was found to discriminate significantly between eighty-six adult male schizo
hrenes and eighteen male manic-depressives
(Jewish patients). The patients were first
classified into schizophrenes and manicdepressives by psychiatric diagnosis independently of their physique. It was then
shown that they could be significantly differentiated on the basis of a compound physical
measure. The compound measure is a linear
function of the separate measurements and
maximizes the ratio of the variance between
the groups to the variance within the group.
It thus enables us to predict, with the maximum amount of accuracy, to which psychotic
group any particular patient belongs. The
multiple correlation of mental type with the
four measurements is 0°319 (N = 104).

(xiii) The best single index differentiating
manic-depressives from schizophrenes was
found to be Shoulder Breadth
| Pelvic Breadth
In four pairs of groups studied separately, a
higher value of this index was obtained for
the schizophrenes than for the manicdepressives in every case. In this respect the
trunk of the schizophrene approximates
more to that of the female. However, when
the effect of age was taken into account, the
significance of the difference disappeared.
The relative discriminative values of the
various physical traits was found to vary
according to age, sex and race.

xX I00O.

References

(1) McCloy, C. H. (1936).
Studies in Child Welfare, 12, 2.

(2 (1938). Univ. of Iowa Studies in Child
Welfare, 15, 2.

(3) Pearl, R. (1933). Constitution and Health,
London.

(4) and Ciocco, A. (1934). Human Biol., 6, 4.

(5) Davenport, C. B. (1925). Eugenics Record
Office, Bull. No. 24, Washington.

(6) Dublin, L. I., and Lotka, A. J. (1936).
Length of Life, New York.

(7) Draper, G. (1924). Human Constitution,
Philadelphia.

(8) Boldrini, M. (1931). La Fertilita dei Biotipi,
Milan

Univ. of Iowa

 

 

(9) Wertheimer, F. I., and Hesketh, F. E. (1926).

Medicine, 5, 375-463.

(10) Castle, W. E. (1924).
Sciences, 10, 19-22; 181-2.

(xz) Shull, E. F. (1931). Heredity, London.

(12) Sumner, F. B. (1924). Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sciences, 10, 178-80.

(13) Huxley, J. S. (1932).
Growth, London.

(14) Cohen, J. I. (1938). J. Ment. Sct., 84, 495-512.

(15) White House Conference on Child Health and
Protection (1932). Pt. I, 80-120. |

(16) Baldwin, B. T. (1911). J. educ. Psychol.,
2, 150-2.

Proc. Nat. Acad.

Problems of Relative

(17) Thompson, D’Arcy (1917). Growth and
Form, London.

(18) Burt, C. (1937). The Backward Child,
London.

(19) Brooks, F. D. (1928). J. Appl. Psychol.,
12, 228-41.

(20) Gates, I. A. (1924). J. educ. Psychol., 15,
329-58.

(21) Terman, L. M., and Miles, C. (1936). Sex
and Personality, London.

(22) Fisher, R. A. (1936). Ann. Eugen., 7%,
179-88.
(23) Cathcart, E. P., et al. (1935). I.H.R.B.

Rep. No. 71, London,

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXII, No. 3.
