A SATISFACTORY POPULATION FOR BRITAIN ? 23

heterozygote, it follows that the population
can never be reduced to uniformity. It is
mainly the fertile heterozygotes who are
responsible for producing the next generation, and being a type which never breeds
entirely true to itself it will necessarily
always produce a mixed population. If
the types AA and aa were quite infertile,
and never produced any children, they would
still be constantly renewed in each generation
as offspring of the fertile Aa type. If these
types have only partially reduced fertility,
they will contribute a certain amount to
the next generation, and a state of equilibrium will be set up in which all three types
will be represented, their proportions depending on their relative fertilities. The
study of this type of population is not yet

far advanced, but it is of interest to note
that it is stable and adaptable. A change in
conditions, altering the fertilities of the three
types, will produce a fairly rapid change in
their relative proportions until the new
equilibrium position is reached. If the
conditions go back to their former ones the
population will also change back to its
original state. Perhaps this quality of
adaptability is of value to a population as
well as to an individual.

I should emphasize again that parts of
this paper are rather speculative. If observation and theory advance sufficiently, no
doubt in 50 years’ time much of it will seem
naive. Nevertheless, I think that even what
we now know sheds some light on the
problems of eugenics.

A SATISFACTORY POPULATION FOR
BRITAIN?

By SIR CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B., F.R.S5.

are well aware that there is no generally

accepted or infallible test for the number
of people in any country which will provide
an all-round optimum of well-being, however
that may be expressed. But in this country
we have at least one simple condition which
must be fulfilled before all else, and that is,
we must be fed. And that is a condition
which it is becoming increasingly difficult to
ensure.

To simplify the issue, let us assume—and
the assumption is not an unreasonable one—
that it is not necessary for a country to be
entirely self-supporting in the matter of food,
and that a margin can be allowed, differing in
each case, which will permit of a satisfactory
and legitimate risk which may be taken in
peace or in war. It may also be assumed that
such a risk might, in certain circumstances,

Sem of demographic problems

involve the reduction of the standard of
nutrition down to a rather low level. —

That this country does face a problem of
the kind is evident from the reports which
are published, from time to time, in the
newspapers. These give us facts and opinions
about numbers, food and agriculture, about
migration and employment, about imports of
food and the payment for them; varied
information and varied opinions. Let us
take examples from The Times of a single
date, January 24th, 1950. A leading article
in that issue dealt with the question of the
size of the average family in Great Britain,
which now, according to the Royal Commission on Population is 2:2, and is somewhat
below the replacement figure.

The writer of the article stated that, ‘“‘ The
crux of any population policy for Britain is
not to promote large families but to enhance
24 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the popularity of families with three or four
children.”” The tendency of the article is to
deplore the existence of the habit of having
very small families, and to approve of the
attitude of “‘ the important minority who still
prefer not to limit their families.’’ It was not
intended to advocate a general return to the
very large Victorian family. The Royal
Commission pointed out that ‘‘ An eventual
decline from the nineteenth century rate
of population growth in Great Britain...
was inevitable ... and... it would be
impossible for such enormous numbers to
sustain life in Great Britain in any circumstances now foreseeable.” There is, in fact, a
limit. Is it possible to say what that limit
should be ?

On the same page of the same issue of The
Times there appeared a letter from Professor
John Jewkes, of Oxford, under the title
“ Paying for Food Imports.’”’ He wrote that
the test of whether the dollar crisis continues
or not is to ask: ‘What would happen if
Marshall Aid ceased ?’’ And he stated that
we could not continue to import present
supplies of food from dollar areas, and, at the
same time continue to import our present
quantity of raw materials. ‘‘ And the nearer
we approach the end of Marshall Aid the
graver becomes the crisis.’’ Briefly, we have
some 49 million people to feed and shall
find it difficult to feed them.

In the same issue there was news from
Australia. The Prime Minister of Australia,
speaking at a conference of societies interested in immigration, said: ‘‘While in the
United Kingdom a population of 50 million
was depending on resources adequate, perhaps, for a population 10 million or 15

million fewer, and the same picture was
perceptible in continental Europe, in Australia there was the pressure of enormous
undeveloped resources on an inadequate
population.”’ From this it would appear that
Mr. Menzies would consider a population
of from 35 to 40 million suitable for
Britain.

Here is a possible solution of this problem.
We all know that there is, as a fact, no small
difficulty in paying for our food and raw
material from abroad, even in peace time and
with the help of Marshall Aid. But we know
also that it is reasonable for a heavily
industrialized country to import some of its
food. It is a question of the ratio between
home-grown and imported food. And what
stress should we lay upon the possibility of
war ? Let us fix the ideas by supposing that
we might safely import one-third of all the
food that we eat, so that, if outside supplies
were to fail, we could still rely upon a twothirds full ration.

We must now take the advice of the
experts of the farming community. Sir
James Turner, President of the National
Farmers’ Union, said on November oth, 1949,
that we ought to be able to supply half our
food needs from this country by 1952. If
we take our numbers to be about 49 million
that means that we could feed from our home
resources 244 million people. If we could
import safely one third of all we eat, the
total population that we could feed would be
36°75 million, let us say 37 million, and this
happens to be about the average figure
mentioned by Mr. Menzies. This figure,
37 million, was the population of Great
Britain in 1got.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 1
