The Eugenics Bou Education. Society.

Prestdent : Mayon Leow LEONARD DARWIN. os

ViceePresidents :

Sir Jamas BARR, M.D.

Sir JAMES CRICHTON-BRowne, F.R.S.
BisHop D’ARcy.

Mr. W. C. MARSHALL.

CHANCELLOR STARR JORDAN.
DR. A. PLOETZz. ,
M. EpMOND PERRIER.

Pror. SEWARD, F.R.S..

PROFESSOR Ww. P. BENHAM, F. R. S. os
| Members of Council: :

MR. CROFTON BLACK. Lapy OWEN-MACKENZIE.
Sir E. BRaABROOK, C.B. — ~ Mr. R. Monn.
Mrs. THEODORE CHAMBERS. | Dr. F. W. Mort, F.R.S. Hon. Sir JOHN Cocksurn, K.C.M. G. Mr. G. P. MUDGE.
Mr. R. NEWTON-CRANE. Mrs. G. POOLEY.
Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY. Progr. E. B. POULTON.
Sim H. CuNNINGHAM, K.C.I. E. Mr. W. Rea, M.P.
Dr. LANGDON Down. Dr. A. REID.
Mr. HAvetock ELLIS. Mr: JOHN RUSSELL.
Pror. J. FINDLAY. ‘Dr. ETTIe SAYER.
Mr. WHELER GALTON. F. C. S. ScHILLER, D.Sc.
“Dr. GREENWOOD. Pror. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.
Dr. W. HADLEY. . EpGAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc.
ADMIRAL HENDERSON. Dr. C. G. SELIGMANN.
Major HILts. Pror. J. A. THOMSON.
Dr. INGE, THE VERY Ey. THE DEAN OF Dr. TREDGOLD.
St. PAUL’s. Mrs, ALEC TWEEDIE.
Miss KIrsy. Mr. W. C. D. WHETHAM, ERS.
Mr. Ernest Lane, F.R.C.S. Dr. DoucLas WHITE.
“Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. Dr. A. GORDON WILSON.

Hon. Treasurer: Mx. P. VON FLEISCHL. Hon. Secretary: Mrs. &. C. Goro.
Members representing Branch Councils are nominated by the Branches.

: ee . Birmingbam :
Mr. CAREY GILSON. Mr. HumMpHrReY HUMPHREYS. MR. P. MILLS.
- Liverpool:
‘Mr. R. T. Bopry, Mg, D. Lauriz. § Dr. W. B. WARRINGTON.
Haslemere: - Beltast: Glasgow :

Pror. J. H. Linpsay,

Rew Zealand: .
THe HIGH COMMISSIONER OF NEW ZEALAND.

Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. (To be appointed.)

_

ADMIRAL HENDERSON.

“ Fugenics ts the study of agencies under social control that may improve or impatr
the vactal guaktses of future generations either physically or mentally.”

OBJ ECTS. | 
Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion,
and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human
parenthood under the dominatiofi of Eugenic ideals.

To spgead a knowledge, of the Laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as

that knowledge may affect the improvement of the race.
III.
To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.
SUBSCRIPTION. ~
Membership -- - - - - One Guinea per Annum.
Associate Membership - - - - Five Shillings per Annum.
| PRIVILEGES.

Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.
Members only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.

Forms of Application for Membership and Associate Membership and full particulars of the Soctety
can be obtained of the Hon. Secretary.

OFFICES: Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.
OFFICH HOURS: 10.0 a.m. to 5 p.m., Saturdays 10.0 a.m, to 1 p.m. eer
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ENGLISH.

THE JEWISH REVIEW, July, 1913. Vol. iv., No. 20. /ewish Eugenics.
J. Snowman, M.D. Pp. 159-175. The writer thinks that the
general conception of the purity of the Jewish race requires some
modification. In Germany where the non-Jewish population is distinctly
blonde, the proportion of blonde Jews is 30 per cent. In Arabia, Africa,
and Caucasus where the non-Jewish population is mainly brunette, only
about 1°5 per cent. of the Jews are blonde. The dark Jews of India and
Abyssinia form an extreme instance. What isthe eugenic value of proselytism? The biological utility of Gentile blood to the Jewish race is controlled by the attitude the newcomer and his descendants will maintain
to the Jewish religion. In the past inter-marriage must have determined
some of the anomalies of Jewish physical features, but to-day the Ghetto
system has been relaxed, and forces of assimilation are commonly far less
strong, so that inter-marriage under modern circumstances must constitute a very serious leakage from Judaism.

On the subjects of alcoholism and insanity, the effects of selection in an
urban population, and the prevalence of nervous diseases among the Jews,
the writer is too dogmatic, and makes more definite statements than evidence warrants, and at times seems not a little confused. Eugenists will
be far more interested in his quotations from Jewish teachers showing that
Judaism and Eugenics are as he puts it “in complete accord,” than in
doubtful arguments about the causes of the physical features of Judaism.
Here are some of them:—“A Jew without a wife is no man” (Berachoth 63a). “He who marries a wife unsuitable to him is flogged by the
Almighty and beaten by Elijah” (Kiddushin 7@)—without disrespect we
might ask which process comes first. “He who marries for the sake of
money will have unworthy children” (Nedarhim 20a). The Rabbis held
that in the case of a legally bethrothed woman who concealed physical
defect, its discovery made void the bethrothal. If no inquiry had been
made she might be divorced, her Ketubah unpaid (Mish. VII., Kethuboth 7). Should the husband contract serious physical defect, leprosy
and polypus disease being enumerated, the Beth-Din were empowered to
compel him to divorce his wife (Ibid. Mishua 9). Yebamoth 64 urges
restraint from marriage into a family tainted by epilepsy or leprosy. The
great beau ideal is to marry the daughter of a scholar, a forecast as
to offspring being made by considering the lady’s brothers. Even in the
light of recent research we should not despise this method. “A pretty
wife improves a man’s mental attitude to things in general” (Berachoth
576), and “ Woman only exists for beauty,” are texts we commend to some
of our more strong-minded sisters especially when it is qualified by
“Woman is only the mother of her sons ” (Kethuboth 574). The following
would not perhaps always be true, “Happy is the husband of a comely
wife, the number of his days is doubled” (Sanhedrim 100d) nor does the
full content of the following appear on the surface. “He who marries
a beautiful figure will have a stubborn and rebellious son” (Sanhedrim
1072). These with some old Testament additions will help to explain
much in the matter of eugenics and the Jew. C. S. STOCK.

SCIENCE PROGRESS IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, October, 1913. No. 30.
The Significance of the Piltdown Discovery. A. G. Thacker. Pp. 275290. The author discusses in an interesting manner the inter-relations
of the various species of palxolithic man of which remains have been
found. The fragmentary skull unearthed at Piltdown in Sussex is the
most recently discovered of these, and has given rise to much controversy
as to the characteristics of the race from which its original owner sprang.

Nature and Nurture in Mental Development. F. W. Mott, M.D.,
F.R.S. Pp. 291-323. The first and second of the three Chadwick Public
Lectures, delivered in 1913 by the author.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 375

The Interpretation of Fact in the Study of Heredity. Charles
Walker. D.Sc. Pp. 324-342. The author adduces arguments to support his theory that only recently acquired characters are inherited in
a Mendelian manner and not ancient racial characters. As the function
of the chromosomes is to provide the mechanism for Mendelian inheritance,
it follows that only recently-acquired characters are represented in them.

THE HIBBERT JOURNAL, October, 1913. Vol. xii., No. 1. The Moral
Obligation to be Intelligent. Professor John Erskine. Pp. 174-185. Into
this short paper is packed a fine criticism of the Anglo-Saxon attitude
towards intelligence. “Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be clever,”
illustrates a real and deep-seated antithesis in the English mind. The
author culls examples from Milton, Shakespeare, Thackeray and many
other writers. He points out how characters like Mr. Boffn in “Our
Mutual Friend ” wholly admirable in his station as Dickens has represented him, would have been treated by Balzac. He would have
made us feel not only admiration for the stable loyal character,
but also deep pity that such goodness should be so tragically
bound in unintelligence or vulgarity. This deep-seated habit of
mind is of profound importance to eugenists; it is perhaps their
greatest obstacle. In judging of the goodness or badness of any course
of action they are guided solely by the results, including in results more
than the merely immediate effects. The writer says truly that the great
Englishman who combines intelligence and character, usually seems an
exception to his own people, and is often best appreciated in other lands.
Eugenists will echo the regret and approve the principles of the following passage: “as a race we seem as far as possible from realising that
an action can intelligently be called good only if it contributes to a good
end ; that it is the moral obligation of an intelligent creature to find out
as far as possible whether a given action leads to a good or a bad end;
and that any system of ethics that excuses him from that obligation is
vicious.” The ethical system, implicit in current pronouncements of
some ecclesiastics on such matters as divorce, will come under the censure
of this passage. To use some words of the author they are trying to
make the will of God prevail without using their intelligence to find out
what is the will of God. The profound melancholy of Plato’s words “ that
sin is but ignorance, and knowledge and virtue are one,” sinks deep into
the mind of students of eugenics. C. S. STOCK.

BEDROCK, October, 1913. There are several articles in the current
number of this journal which have an indirect bearing on Eugenics, such
as that of Professor Poulton on “Mimicry and the Inheritance of Small
Variations,” a reply to Professor Punnett’s article in the July issue, and
Sir Bryan Donkin’s paper on the “State Punishment of Crime.” Of direct
importance is Mr. J. E. Lane’s essay on the “Control of Venereal Disease
in England.” Mr. Lane’s experience entitles him to speak with authority on this question, and the reader of his scathing indictment will
probably feel that the belated appointment of a Royal Commission is but
scanty compensation for apathy which for years has characterised the
governing classes of this country with respect to this matter. It seems
incredible that as recently as 1899, when approached by leading bodies of
the medical profession, the Government of the day declined to take any
action on the ground that public opinion was not sufficiently informed on
the subject to justify such a course.

Mr. Lane urges the importance of action along two lines, viz., systematic
instruction both of the laity and the medical student, and increased
facilities for efficient treatment. Under both headings the present state
of affairs is, as he points out, unsatisfactory and there is not a little danger
that the public interest, excited by the appointment of a Royal Commission may subside without any practical results having been obtained.
376 EUGENICS REVIEW.

BIOMETRIKA, October, 1913. Vol. ix, Parts iii. and iv. The first
paper in this issue is a study of pigment anomalies among natives of
Nyassaland by Dr. H. S. Stannus; it is illustrated by numerous photographs and forms a useful supplement to the Eugenics Laboratory memoir
on albinism. The next paper is an ingenious and interesting attempt by
Dr. W. R. Macdonell to measure the expectation of life in ancient Rome
and: certain of her provinces, the data being extracted from the Corpus
Inscripttonum Latinarum of the Berlin Academy. Among the conclusions drawn are the following :—(1) That ancient Rome was extremely unhealthy ; (2) that the expectation of life of females, at ages below 75 was
less than that of males, a result in contradiction to modern experience;
{3) the expectation of life in old' age was greater than in modern England,
a result possibly due to severe selection in early life. The following
paper, by Mr. McMullan and Professor Pearson, is a continuation of a
memoir on the Inheritance of Split-foot and Lobster-claw, published in
Biometrika in 1908, several other members of the family then discussed
having been investigated. We now come to a detailed study of the
Nasal Bridge in the Anthropoid Apes and its Relationship to the Nasal
Bridge in Man, by Miss Ryley and Miss Bell, assisted by Professor
Pearson. A paper on the Calculation of Intra-class and Inter-class Coefficients of Correlation, by Dr. Arthur Harris, is a further contribution
to this authors useful series of memoirs on miscellaneous statistical
methods. Messrs. Greenwood and Brown deal with the Anthropometry of
the Human Viscera, the paper being in continuation of a similar study by
one of the authors, published in 1904. The concluding memoir in the
volume is by Dr. H. De Souza on Pelvic Measurements. The author’s
prediction equations should prove of value in clinical obstetrics. Among
the miscellanea a criticism by Professor Pearson of the recent report on
the diet of the working classes by Miss Dorothy E. Lindsay should be
cited as worthy of special attention.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF MEDICINE, November, 1913.
Section of Epidemiology and State Medicine. The paper read at the
October meeting of the Epidemiological section of the Royal Society of
Medicine by Dr. W. McC. Wanklyn should be carefully studied by all
those interested in eugenics. Dr. Wanklyn has made a careful survey
of working-class home conditions in London, and the state of affairs revealed is, to put it mildly, discreditable to our civilisation. It appears
that one-half of the population of London is housed in tenements in many
cases not affording the conveniences necessary for the maintainance of
a civilised existence, and in some cases incompatible with any standard
of health and decency. We may quote a few passages from Dr. Wanklyn’s
vivid description. After noting in detail the topography of what he regards
as a fairly typical tenement, he writes:—“Added to other depressing
circumstances is the general want of colour and relief in the surroundings. The dinginess and monotony of such houses and streets contribute materially to depressing the health of those who live in them.

“Let anyone who is fairly well off, and robust and well-educated,
attempt house-keeping in these conditions; it is a great strain and a
wearing struggle to be clean and decent. But for those who are ill-paid,
ill-fed and fagged out, the obstacles to decent living are too great, and the
struggle is too unequal. . .”

“The problem for the breadwinner is the same as for any other
business man. If he is not paying his way he must increase his income
or reduce his expenses, or do both. Persons so placed may make some
effort, and wear out body and soul in the process, or they may Just sit
down, as it were, and give it up; the task is too hopeless, too impossible
for any human being. They lose heart, they lose hope, they lose selfrespect. It is an oft-told tale, but none the less true. They become
bankrupt both in money and in self-respect. That is one of the princi.
pal causes of the insanitary conditions found in houses let in lodgings.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 377

The eugenic importance of these results is, zzter alia, that the
characters which have survival value under such conditions are not
necessarily or even probably those which we desire to see perpetuated. We
may, if we please, argue that the insanitary conditions are the effect and
not the cause of the degeneracy, but so long as there is reason to suppose
that any exceptions to this rule occur, so long will it be necessary to
strive for their amelioration as a part of our eugenic propaganda.

THE MEDICAL OFFICER, November ist, 1913. The Santtary Control of

Venereal Diseases in New York. Hermann M. Biggs, M.D., General
Medical Officer, New York City Department of Health. Pp. 213-216.
Dr. Biggs describes the regulations adopted on February 2oth, 1912, in
New York for the notification of venereal diease, and for its diagnosis and
treatment at the public expense. He describes also the reasons which
prompted the Board of Health to adopt these regulations and meets the
various objections which have been urged against them. Finally, he gives
a critical summary of the statistical data which have been collected as a
result of notification and from returns specially asked for from practising
physicians.
__. THE JOURNAL OF STATE MEDICINE, October, 1913. Vol. xxi., No. to.
The Relation of Eugentc Education to Public Health. Mrs. A. C. Gotto.
Pp. 623-631. A paper read at the Paris Congress of the Royal Institute
of Public Health. Together with other papers read before the Eugenics
and Child Study Section, it was summarised in the July number of
the REVIEW.

BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL, November ist, 1913. Hereditary Transmisston of Sarcoma. J. S. Manson, M.B. Pp. 1135-1137. This is a
valuable contribution to the study of inheritance in cancer. The facts recorded are that woman died in 1898 of lympho-sarcoma on the left side
of the neck; she had three sons, of whom the two youngest died in 1913
of the same disease localised in exactly the same place. Neither the
father or mother, or any brothers and sisters of this woman had cancer.
Clinical details of the three cases are given. The author, after a brief
discussion of other hypotheses, concludes that heredity is the best explanation of the facts.

LANCET, September 20th, 1913. The Incidence of Inherited Syphilis
in Congenital Mental Deficiency. J. Leslie Gordon, M.D. Pp. 861-863.
By the application of the Wasserman test to 400 cases of congenital
mental defect Dr. Gordon arrives at the following conclusions: (1) That
syphilitic infection is associated with a considerable number of cases of
congenital mental defect, and that in most cases the infection is due to
inherited disease. (2) Inherited syphilis either by itself or in conjunction
with other factors plays an important part in the causation of congenital
mental defects.

LANCET, November 8th, 1913. Am address on Heredity and Inheritance as they concern the Physician, delivered before the Birmingham
Society for the Study of Heredity. Charles Mercier, M.D., F.R.C.P.,
P. 1299-1303. There is not much to learn from this clever but rather
cynical address, except that Dr. Mercier has little sympathy with the
systematic study of heredity and little knowledge of the aspirations of
eugenists; that he believes the doctrine of the continuity of the germplasm to be inconsistent with the fact that on the whole vigorous people
tend to have vigorous children, and asserts that “there is very little
evidence that idiocy, imbecility, and weak-mindedness are heritable in
the sense that they are passed on from parent to child.” His own theory
of reproduction and development, which he modestly admits has only one
adherent, is described with much humour and vivacity. But the description leaves us in doubt as to whether he had throughout his lecture any
objects but to surprise, amuse, or mystify his audience. “The female
element,” he suggests, “contributes the substance or matter of the
378 EUGENICS REVIEW.

offspring ; the male element contributes the force or energy that animates
the matter.” The sperm is conceived as giving an impetus to the ovum
which, except for accidents, determines the whole course of development
in the same way as the stroke of the batsman determines the flight of a
cricket ball. As development proceeds, the impetus is gradually used up,
but it may be used up in two different ways, either in giving bulk to the
body or complexity of structure to the brain. It thus follows that with
a constant impetus intellect, which depends on complexity of brain structure, will vary inversely with bodily size, so that on the whole we should
expect genius from dwarfs and idiocy from giants. As “evidence” that
this is in fact the case he mentions that Casar, Marlborough, Nelson,
Napoleon, and Wellington were below the average size.

FOREIGN.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE X., 1-2; JanuaryApril, 1913 (published October 3rd).

J. C. H. de Meijere: Zur Vererbung des Geschlechts und der
secunddren Geschlechtsmerkmale (p. 1-36). A further exposition and
criticism of recent theories of the inheritance of sex. (An earlier paper
by the same author appeared in the Archiv, Vol. vii., 1911.) The writer
agrees with Professor O. Hertwig that the sexual differences are frequently so great and appear in so many different parts of the body, that
one must assume that they develop from a large number of different sets
of determinants. He believes that each sex is homozygotic, and contains
within itself the characters of both sexes, and that there is a special male
and a special female complex of determinants, from either of which the
entire soma can develop. He therefore concludes that Mendelian phenomena play no part in the determination of sex. At the most a Mendelian factor might act as a ferment on one or the other complex of
determinants. He objects to a Mendelian theory for the reason that (1)
the expectation of 1:1 is not realised; (2) only on condition that this
expectation were realized would it be possible to prove that a character
is heterozygotic; (3) the determination of sex is often a result of an
alteration in the number of chromosomes, that is to say, of the action of
forces which are not subject to an alternative mechanism of heredity;
(4) because of the frequently anomalous behaviour of the heterochromosomes.

W. Weinberg: Uber die Fahlbeckcshe Degression der Knabenproportion bei im Mannesstamm  aussterbenden und  tiberlebenden
Geschlechtern (p. 37-40). In his well-known book on the Swedish nobility,
Professor Fahlbeck calls attention to the fact that in the case of families
that become extinct, the proportion of males to females born decreases
from generation to generation until it falls considerably below the normal
proportion of 104-105 boys to 100 girls. This Fahlbeck considers to be a
sign of degeneration, and more recently Lenz has suggested that it must
he because the effects of degenerate rudimentary constituents are more
likely to be manifested in males than in females. Weinberg replies that,
since the perpetuation of male lines always presupposes that in each
generation boys must be born, the proportion of boys and girls in all
generations except those last observed must be above the normal, and
that this would of course also follow if the sex of the other children
born to each generation were wholly dependent upon chance, and consequently in the proportion of 105-100. He also shows with the aid of a
formula constructed for the purpose that the same phenomenon would
be observed if the sex of the individual members of a family, premature
deaths, and the failure to marry or to have children were wholly dependent upon chance, so that unless we have evidence to the contrary there
is no necessity for believing that the decrease of the proportion of males
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 379

is due to degeneration. The more children born to a family and the
larger the proportion of males to females, the greater its prospect of
enduring in the male line. Old families, therefore, are the surviving
representatives of such as had a large proportion of males in their early
generations. The moral to be drawn from Fahlbeck’s and Lenz’s conclusions is, that new theories based on statistical evidence are very apt
to be of doubtful value unless carefully tested for the effects of chance.

Mathilde von Kemnitz: Der asthenische Infantilismus des Weibes
in seinen Besziehungen eur Fortpflansungstatigkeit und geistigen
Betatigung (p. 41-66). “Asthenic infantilism is a form of infantilism
that is caused by the transmitted constitutional anomaly ‘ asthenia,’ and
consequently is always accompanied by asthenic symptoms.” The author
dismisses all causes of a social nature, such as the effects of exhaustion,
malnutrition, bad housing, condition of mother during pregnancy, etc.,
and declares that asthenia is entirely a result of injury to the germplasm. Hysteria she believes is largely induced by false education, and
neurasthenia she considers to be an anomaly of the peripheral nerves due
to an exaggerated weakness of the sympathetic nerve. The author, however, stands on firmer ground in dissenting from the views of the late Dr.
P. J. Mobius and Professor von Gruber, according to whom the characteristic symptoms of asthenic infantilism in women who have had a
university training are a result of their intellectual activity, and that
therefore the higher education of women and their employment in the
learned professions is injurious to the race. “ We can state it to be a
scientific fact that women of asthenic habitus who are employed in intellectual pursuits and are incapable of reproduction, were already constitutionally asthenic before they began their studies; they do not become
asthenic because they are engaged in mental work.” Frl. von Kemnitz
agrees with Professor von Gruber that many women employed in the
learned professions are asthenic; but finds the explanation to lie in the
fact that the majority of asthenic women have no natural desire for marriage, and consequently, whenever the choice is open to them, are glad
to engage in some intellectual pursuit. Moreover, according to present
views, only a slight and superficial education is considered necessary to
prepare young women for motherhood, and fathers are in the habit of
giving their daughters facilities for serious study only when there is no
hope of marriage for them. The robust, healthy girl is taught to dance,
the asthenic to develop her intellect.

Felix A. Theilhaber: Zum Preisausschreiben: “ Bringt das materielle
und sosiale Aufstetgen den Familien Gefahren in rassenhygienischer
Beztehung?” (p. 67-92). During the first half of the nineteenth century
the birth-rate of the Jews in Berlin was 33-35 per 1,000 of the population,
and the death-rate about 25 per 1,000. In 1911 the corresponding figures
were 14°16 and 135. The number of births to each 1,000 women between
the ages of 15 and 50 has fallen from 1oo°8 in 1880 to 568 in 1905, and
the average number of children born to each Jewish and Jewish-Christian
marriage has decreased from 3°3 in 1875-81 to 1°8 in 1902-11. At the same
time there has been an increase in the percentage of marriages and of
persons of marriageable age. All this has occurred in spite of the fact
that the religion and tradition of the Jews favour large families. The
Jewish working class is, as one would expect, much more fertile than
the professional and mercantile classes, but it is comparatively small.
The author concludes that the decrease in the fertility of the Jews in
Berlin is simply an adaptation to the requirements of life. The proportion of well-to-do persons among them is very much larger than in any
other class of people in Berlin. “ Under the social conditions of to-day
the deleterious effects on families from the point of view of race-hygiene,
which result from material and social betterment or, as the case may be,
from the desire for wealth and social position, is extreme.” He thinks
380 EUGENICS REVIEW.

that it will soon be time for us to discover new laws which condition
the increase of population. The old ones have become obsolete.

Ernst Schultze: Das Aussterben der Australischen Urbevilkerung
(p. 93-109). It was unfortunate for the Australian aborigines that their
country was settled first by convicts and later on by adventurers in search
of gold. Violence, tuberculosis, small-pox, and venereal diseases, together with the tendency to restrict the numbers of their offspring, have
reduced the native population from perhaps 150,000 at the time of the
first settlement of the continent by Europeans to a little over 40,000 in
1gor. Dr. Schultze warmly defends the Australian natives from the many
slanders which have been cast upon them by prejudiced or uninformed
and irresponsible writers, and ends his paper with a rather perfunctory
sketch of their manner of life, accompanied by a few statistics.

E. Altschul: Studie uber die Methode der Stichprobenerhebung
(p. 110-157). A contribution to the theory and criticism of the representative method of statistical investigation, z.e., the method of obtaining returns by means of samples which are taken as representative of the
subjects investigated.

Kleinere Muiuttetlungen. Hans Friedenthal: Uber beurisste und
willkurliche Beeinflussung des menschlichen Wachsturns (a paper read
before the Berlin Society for Race Hygiene, January 26th, 1912). W.
Weinberg : Zur Frage der Messung der Fruchtbarkeit. A. Ploetz: Neomalthustanismus und Rassenhygiene (read at the International Eugenics
Congress in London).

Among the more important books and papers reviewed are :—A.
Hauptmann: Serologische Untersuchungen von Familien Syphogener
Nervenkranker (Zeitschrift f. d. ges. Neurologie u. Psychiatrie, Vol. viii.,
p. 36-80). Max Picard: Ein Beitrag zur Lues- und Paralysefrage (Dissertation, Frankfurt, 1912). An attempt to discover the prevalence of
syphilis_infection in Freiburg I.B. and its neighbourhood. Richard
Stern: Uber Korperliche Kennseichen der Disposition zur Tabes, Leipzig
und Wien, 1912. Hermann Lundborg: Medizinisch-biologische
Familienforschungen eines 2232 Képfigen Bauerngeschlechtes in
Schweden, Jena, 1913. The most extensive genealogical investigation
from the biological point of view that has yet been attempted. H.
Kurella: Die Intellektuellen und die Gesellschaft, Wiesbaden, 1913. A
contribution to the natural history of gifted families. H. B.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE,
June, 1913. Band 10, Heft. 1 and 2. This number contains three papers
which deal with observations upon inheritance or the results of experiments in breeding, all of which are of considerable interest.

Die Vererbung unpigmentierter Haare und Hautsteilen bei Rind und
Pferd als Beispiele transgressiv fluktuierender Faktoren. A. R. Walther.
Pp. 1-48. The author has collected evidence with regard to markings in
horses and cattle; this evidence he discusses with special reference to the
question of “factors.”

Der Vererbungsmodus der gefillten Levkojen-rassen als Fall
geschlechtsbegrenster Vererbung. R. Goldschmidt. This paper is based
upon Miss Saunders’ work upon stocks. The data there collected is
discussed and reason is shown for thinking that the phenomenon of sex
limited inheritance plays a part.

The Inheritance of certain Quantitative Characters in Tobacco. H.
K. Hayes. The author attempts to interpret observations made upon the
size, shape, and similar characters of the plants with the help of the
hypothesis of the interaction of a multiplicity of factors. The interpretation is of a most complicated nature. The attempt is of interest since
workers in genetics have for the most part up to the present concerned
themselves with qualitative characters.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 385

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE,
July, 1913. Band 10, Heft 3. Untersuchungen wiber den Bastard
Dianthus Armeria x Dianthus deltoides nebst Bemerkungen uber einige
andere Art kreuzgungen der Gattung Dianthus. G. Wichler. This paper
occupies nearly half the number. Whereas previous experiments on
these lines have not, as a rule, gone beyond the F3 generation, in this
case F3 and F4 were obtained. The results agree with those of other
investigators. The F2 generation is not stable, but behaves like a complicated Mendelian hybrid. All the observed facts are said to be capable
of explanation upon the Mendelian hypothesis.

On the Zygotic Constitution of Dominant and Recessive Whites in the
Silk Worm, Bombyx mori. K. Toyama and S. Mori. As a result of
breeding experiments it is concluded that there are six forms of white
and yellow silkworms for each of which a zygotic formula is given.

Variationsstatistische Untersuchungen an Acaritum Napellus.  O.
Schiiepp. A large number of measurements were made of various characters. The variations in one character are for the most part quite
independent of variations in any other character. The author gives the
results of the study of several problems such as the relation between
variations and the habitat, between the structure of organs and their
position in the individual plant.

Uber Mendelsche Vererbung beim Rind. Dr. Kiesel. A small
number of observations agree fairly well with the results to be expected
on the Mendelian hypothesis.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE,
October, 1913. Band 10, Heft. 4. On the Mode of Inheritance of Certain
Characters in Double-Throwing Stocks. FE. R. Saunders. This paper
is a reply by Miss Saunders to certain criticisms of Goldschmidt in a
former number. It is maintained that the results obtained by Miss
Saunders cannot, as Goldschmidt suggested, be explained by assuming that
this is another case of sex limited inheritance. The explanation put
forward by Miss Saunders is that there are two factors which in the “pure
breeding” singles are linked together, but which in the “eversporting ”
singles have become free.

Uber Getreide-spesiesbastarde. F. Jisenko. Crosses between wheat
and rye have been obtained, but only between wheat 9? and rye 6 and
not vice versa. The crosses are generally sterile, but representatives of
F3 and F4 do occur. The results conform to those to be expected according to the Mendelian formula.

ConcorpDiA, November 1st, 1913. Der 1V. Deutsche Kongress fur
Sduglings-schutz. Dr. Fritz Rott. Pp. 424-427. The principal problems
discussed at this congress were the protection of infants in relation to
the decline of the birth-rate, the doctor’s place in the care of infants,
and the position of the illegitimate child according to German law. The
article here cited contains clear abstracts of the papers read and of the
discussions.

Der XIV. Internationale Kongress gegen den Alcoholismus. Dr.
Warnack. Pp. 427-429. A general summary of the proceedings of the
congress.

CONCORDIA, November 18th, 1913. Die unentgeltliche Geburtshilfe
der Stadt Ziirich. M. Giterman. Pp. 438-440. The system adopted in
the town of Zurich for providing attention at child-birth free of cost,
either in a lying-in hospital or at the mother’s own home, is here
described.

Die XI. Internationale Tuberculosekonferens zu Berlin am 22-25
October, 1913. Pp. 440-442. A very much condensed abstract of the
prucescings.

Der Internationale Jugendschutzkongress in Brussel, 23-26 Juli, 1913.
Dr. Wilhelm Bloch. Pp. 442-444. A short indication of the lines on
which this congress worked.
382 EUGENICS REVIEW.

BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE. Tome III.,
Fasc. I. October, 1913. Durée des Martages, Table dextinction des
mariages pour la population de la France (1906-1909). Michel Huber.
Pp. 94-111. This is an interesting statistical study of the average
duration of marriage in France and in other countries. Further,
the married people recorded in the census of 1906 have been classified
according to the duration of their union, and for each class a figure has
been obtained which represents the number of marriages terminated either
by the death of the husband or of the wife or by divorce. Thus 300,000
couples had been married less than one year, and it appears that among
this number of marriages of less than one year’s duration 2,000 are dissolved by the death of the husband, 1,900 by the death of the wife, and
11 by divorce. The seventh and eighth years of married life are those in
which the proportion of divorces is highest. After this they grow
gradually less frequent, but the chance does not completely disappear till
long after; indeed, some people seem to celebrate their golden weddings
that way.

AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST, April-June, 1913. Vol. xv., No. 2. The
Head Forms of Italians as influenced by Heredity and Environment.
France Boas and Helene M. Boas. Pp. 163-188. The material on which
this work is based is Rudolfo Livi’s “ Antropometria Militare.” By a stud
of the variability of the cephalic index in various parts of Italy the following conclusions have been reached: (i.) that the different head forms
which occur in North and South Italy are not blended by imheritance
where they occur side by side in central Italy, but that the ancestral
forms are segregated out; (ii.) that city life exerts a direct influence on
the cephalic type. In order to get over the difficulties introduced by the
admitted inaccuracy of the material, a number of corrections and assumptions have been made which tend to destroy one’s confidence in the soundness of the arguments employed.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, May, 1913. Heredity and the Hall of
Fame. Dr. F. Adams Woods. Pp. 445-452. The Hall of Fame is an
arcade built on the banks of the Hudson in New York. In it are placed
tablets to the memory of the greatest Americans. No mere temporary
popularity can open its doors for none can be so honoured till at least
ten years after his death. Forty-six persons only have been thus distinguished, and the study of the more eminent of their relatives is the
subject matter of this article in which the author deduces fresh evidence of the inheritance of ability. The figures arrived at were included
in his contribution to the proceedings of the Eugenics Congress (Problems
in Eugenics, p. 246), but much more detailed information appears in
the present paper.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, October, 1913. Vol. Ixxxiil., No. 4.
A Problem in Educational Eugenics. Professor Chas. W. Hargitt, of
Syracuse University. Pp. 355-367. The author lays stress upon the
differences exhibited in the human material which is to be educated. The
idea that education is to be the common privilege of all, without distinction, soon leads to the conclusion that education will cure all ills. Education will bring out natural capacity, but can neither implant nor eradicate
natural traits. Our school and college standards have been adapted to
mediocrity, and we have failed to make a proper “selection.” The effect
has been to place a premium on mediocrity and to discourage initiative.
Education for scholarly ends is not for all, and further, the ordinary
school is not for all. Referring to heredity the writer quotes an answer
given to the query “When should a child’s education begin?” “One
hundred years before it is born!” Under the section “Educational
Eugenics” he enunciates some of the principles which should guide us
to a better system. Adequate vital statistics should be available in order
to give the teacher some rough idea of the potentialities of his pupils.
A school, a high school, and a college census should be taken.
NOTES AND NOTICES. 383

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol Ixxxiii., No. 5. November, 1913.
Economic Factors in Eugenics. Dr. W. L. Holt. Pp. 471-484. The
author analyses the economic factors which influence the birth-rate at the
present day. He places them under five heads: (1) The increased uncertainty of a livelihood among the working people; (2) the rise in the
cost of living without a corresponding rise in wages; (3) the ambition
of American parents to give their children better food, clothing, and
in particular better education than they had themselves; (4) the entrance
of women into all professions; (5) the demand for luxuries, especially
luxuries for children. The conclusion to which the author comes is that
economic reform is needed above all things, and that it should aim at
preventing the children of desirable parents from being an economic
burden instead of being, as is desirable, an economic asset.

NOTES AND NOTICES.

New Vice-Presidents and Honorary Members.—M. Perrier, the
president of the Société d’Eugénique Francaise, and Professor Sergi,
president of the Italian Eugenic Committee, have been appointed vicepresidents of the Society, and the following have been elected honorary
members :—

Her Grace the Duchess of Marlborough.
The Right. Hon. A. J. Balfour, F.R.S.
Sir Archibald Geikie, O.M., late President of the Royal Society.
Professor Weismann.
* * * * *

Professor Weismann’s Letter to the President, in which he accepts
the appointment, is likely to be of interest to our readers. We publish
herewith a translation of it :— %

Dear Sir,—The Eugenics Education Society has, as you inform me, done me
the honour of choosing me as an honorary member. I accept the choice with
sincere thanks. Though my great age prevents me from taking any personal
share in your councils, it is a pleasure to express the warm interest which I feel
in your efforts. It is certainly a great step in advance if we are trying to-day to
establish principles for regulating the reproduction of the human race in such a
way that the good and vigorous may multiply more and more and grow stronger
in their better qualities as time goes on. Even if it can only be brought about
slowly that mankind is made more resistant to the many hostile influences which
assail it, nevertheless I have no doubt that this object may be achieved, indeed
that it certainly will be achieved, albeit very slowly, yet in a manner which grows
ever better and more complete. In this view I believe I agree with you and with
the Eugenics Society generally, and may well, on that account, belong to your
numbers. (Signed) AUGUST WEISMANN.

a # # *

The Present State of the Science of Eugenics.— On the 15th October,
1913, Professor Karl Pearson wrote a letter to the Zimes on the subject
of the “ Popularization of Eugenics.” We would, if possible, avoid all
controversy with one who has done so much for our science, and who was,
moreover, so highly trusted by its founder, Sir Francis Galton, as is
evidenced by his will. One sentence, however, cannot be passed ove1
in complete silence, namely, the following : “ But even he (Sir F. Galton)
in the last years of his life saw that the popular movement he had started
was likely to outgrow its knowledge, and feared that more evil than good
might result from it.”
384 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Sir Francis Galton, it will be remembered, died on January 17th,
Igt!, and, in this connection, the following extracts from the many
letters and notes which he wrote to the secretary of this society in 1909
and 1910 may be worth placing on record :—

“It would be just the thing for the Eugenics Education Society to
publish .... being intended to educate in the A. B. C. of biometry
and the like.”—March 22nd, 1909.

“T congratulate you all on the get up of the EUGENICS REVIEW.”—
April 15th, 1909.

“What a good No. II. is brought out. I blush to find my name so
often in it.”—July 17th, 1909.

“ The first page of Public Opinion of this week, which I know that
Mr. Crackanthorpe reads, contains important extracts taken from an
article by a chief Canadian editor taken from the Zoronto Globe, which
would afford useful copy to the next REVIEW. It is very forcible and
fresh.”—-September 18th, 1909.

“JT also suggested to him that he ought to become a member of the
Society. .... ”__October 6th, 1909.

“Similarly I am sadly ignorant of the proper action to take re
agitation for segregation of the feeble-minded. The upshot is that I
shall be much guided by what those do who are active in the Eugenics
Education Society and understand the conditions better than I do.”—
December 30th, 1909.

In 1910, when Sir Francis Galton’s health was failing considerably,
much of the correspondence was carried on by his niece, Miss Biggs. In
October she sent a message to say “. . . . it would be a good subject for
the REVIEW if some Swiss correspondent could get at the truth of the
matter and the subject were well authenticated. Why not write to Daily
Mirror for address of their correspondent, he says.”

In the same month, however, he himself wrote as follows :—

“The enclosed from the New Zealand Herald, August 25th, just
received, is good eugenic news. (A newspaper cutting containing the
following passage : ‘ Professor Kirk’s idea for the formation of a society
of eugenists was enthusiastically taken up, and no doubt Wellington will
soon have a strong body.’) I have written to Mr. C. (Crackanthorpe) about
it, and suggested that Chief Justice Sir Robert Stout ought to be made
an honorary something of our society (I forget what we could give in
that way). I daresay you will keep the ball rolling, and perhaps communicate with Professor Kirk, of Wellington.”

These and other extracts unquestionably prove that Sir Francis fully
maintained his interest in the society and its work until the end. How
far they are relevant to Professor Pearson’s remarks we are not quite
sure; for we have had some difficulty—a difficulty which, we fear, the
general public will also feel—in determining when allusion was being
made to such nonsense as that lately appearing in the Press concerning
the “ eugenic baby,” and when to the work of this society, the Gesellschaft
fiir Rassenhygiene, the Société Francaise d’Eugénique, and other kindred
institutions.

*% * ¥* ¥

New Branches at Edinburgh, Oxford and Brighton.—As a result of
the very successful meeting which was held in Edinburgh on October
3oth, when Major Darwin delivered an address to the Medico-chirurgical
and Obstetrical Societies of Edinburgh, a provisional committee has been
formed for the purpose of organising a branch of the society in that
city. Sir Thomas Clouston is the convener of the committee, and other
members are Dr. Berry Hart, Dr. J. W. Ballantyne, Professor Cossar
Ewart, Dr. Brock, and Mr. Smith, headmaster of Merchiston Castle
School. At Oxford a branch was formed during the autumn with Professor
E. B. Poulton, F.R.S. as president, and Dr. Edgar Schuster as honorary
NOTES AND NOTICES. 385

secretary and treasurer. The inaugural meeting was held in the Hall of
Queen’s College, which was full to overflowing. The Dean of St. Paul’s
delivered an address. At Brighton a committee has been formed for the
purpose of organising a branch of the society. The mayor, Mr. Otter,
is the chairman, and Mr. Wellman the honorary secretary. The first
step arranged is to hold a public meeting in the Pavilion, on January 27th
at which Major Darwin and Mrs. Gotto have consented to speak.
*% % * *

Lectures on the Groundwork of Eugenies in 1914.— Dr. L. Doncaster, Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge, will deliver a course of
eight lectures on “Evolution and Heredity,” at the Imperial College of
Science, South Kensington, on Fridays at 5.30 p.m., beginning January
23rd. He will discuss the general evidences of evolution, the best-known
theories of evolution, variation and mutation, and theories of heredity
both old and new. He will also deal with the relation between heredity
and sex, and will conclude with a lecture on “Heredity in Man,” in which
the bearings of the principles discussed in previous lectures on the
possibility of human improvement will be described. This course will

followed in the summer by instruction in statistical methods as applied
to problems in eugenics, to be given by Dr. M. Greenwood, Junior, at
the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine, Chelsea Bridge Road, S.W.,
on Fridays, at 5.30 p.m., beginning on May ist. Dr. Greenwood will
give an outline of the statistical work and theories bearing on heredity,
and will explain the principal statistical constants, such as means, standard
deviations and co-efficients of correlation. Their calculation will be
practically illustrated on suitable data. These two courses are intended
to form part of one complete scheme of instruction which, though elementary, will be sound and thorough, and equal to the best class of university
teaching. Both lecturers are well-known authorities on the subjects with
which they will deal. The fee for the complete series will be one guinea,
to be paid in advance to the Hon. Secretary, Eugenics Education Society,
Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C., who will be pleased to answer all
enquiries concerning the course. |

¥% * ¥* *

Marriage Regulations.—\We learn from the “ Medical Times” of
September 27th, 1913, that the Ontario Government has prepared a Bill
to amend the regulations relating to marriages, which provides that mentally defective persons shall not secure licenses, and imposes a fine of
4100 or imprisonment on clergymen and issuers of licenses who evade
the law. Where neither of the contracting parties is a resident in the
locality, the license cannot be issued until an advertisement of the proposed marriage has appeared in the public press for three weeks.

*& * ¥ *

The Debate on Eugenies at the Oxford Union.— On November
13th a motion that “this house approves of the principles of eugenics ”
was carried by a majority of 39 votes, having 105 supporters and 66
opponents. But from the three reports of the meeting which we have
been able to collect it is not possible to obtain any idea of the course of
the debate. Our venerable contemporaries, The Oxford Magazine and
The Isis, concern themselves only with the manner of the speakers and
fill a column or a couple of columns with criticisms which are mildly
patronising or laboriously smart. The younger Varsity has been brought
up in the same tradition, but its comments show a livelier wit, and it
does make fragmentary allusions to the substance of the speeches. We
are told, for instance, that Mr. J. B. S. Haldane (New College), whom all
three papers agreed to praise, “ has no fear of eugenics thwarting him of
his lady-love. For a eugenic girl is a healthy girl, and a healthy girl is
an attractive girl.” Eugenics has on many occasions come before debating societies in various colleges, but its inclusion among the few non386 EUGENICS REVIEW.

political subjects discussed by the union is of special significance as an
indication that it has grown largely in esteem during the last few years
as a serious topic.

* * % %

The Birth-rate Commission.—The National Council of Public
Morals has appointed a private commission to inquire into (a) the extent
and character of the decline in birth-rate; (0) its causes; (¢) its effects;
(dZ) and to consider its economic and national aspects. The members of
the commission are: Chairman, the Right Rev. Bishop Boyd Carpenter,
the Bishop of Birmingham, the Duchess of Marlborough, Lord Willoughby be Broke, Lady Willoughby de Broke, Lady Aberconway, the
Bishop of Barking, the Dean of Westminster, the Dean of St. Paul’s, Sir
John Gorst, Sir Thomas Whittaker, M.P., Sir A. Pearce Gould, Sir J.
Macdonell, Sir J. Crichton-Browne, Surgeon-General G. J. H. Evatt, the
Venerable Dr. W. Sinclair, Principal A. E. Garvie, Rev. J. Monro
Gibson, Rev. R. F. Horton, Dr. A. T. Schofield, Dr. Major Greenwood,
Rev. F. B. Meyer, Rev. Thomas Phillips, Professor G. Sims Woodhead,
Dr. A. Newsholme, Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, Dr. J. W. Ballantyne, Dr.
C. W. Saleeby, Dr. Agnes Savill, Dr. Ettie Sayer, Dr. Mary Scharlieb,
Dr. Florence Willey, Rabbi Professor H. Gollancz, Professor L. T. Hobhouse, Mrs. General Booth, Mr. A. G. Gardiner, Mr. Walter Heape, Mr.
J. A. Hobson, Mrs. George Morgan, Mr. R. Donald, and the Rev. James
Marchant (secretary). Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, the Superintendent of
Statistics for the Registrar-General, and Dr. A. Newsholme, Medical
Officer to the Local Government Board, have joined the Commission with
the consent of the President of the Board and the Registrar-General, and
whilst holding themselves free not to sign any public report, will bring the
available statistical data to help the inquiry. It will be seen from this
list of names that the commission appears to be a strong and representative one. We cordially wish it success in its difficult task.

% * * *

Aphorisms on Marriage from the Indian Sages.—We have received
from the secretary of the Saraswati Mandal, a society which aims at
popularising the ancient ideals of marriage, the following translations
from the Indian sages :—

“A girl, who is not descended on his mother’s side within the sixth
degree and does not bear the same family name (Gotra) as his father’s,
is eligible for marriage.” (Mann III. 5.)

“In connecting himself with a wife, let a man studiously avoid the
ten following families, be they ever so great in political power or rank,
or ever so rich in cows, goats, horses, elephants, gold, or grain.”

Mann III. 6.)

“ The family which is not religious, that which is destitute of men of
character, that in which the study of the Veda is neglected, that which has
thick or long hair on the body, and that which is subject to such diseases
as piles, consumption, asthma, bronchitis, dyspepsia, epilepsy, leprosy,
and albinism; because all these faults and diseases are transmitted to the
offspring. Therefore both husband and wife should come from good
(physically, morally, and intellectually) families.” (Mann III. 7.)

“Let a man never marry one who is pale and anzmic, nor one who
is altogether a bigger and stronger person than himself, or has a redundant member, nor one who is an invalid, nor one either with no hair
or too much hair, nor one immoderately talkative, nor one with red
eyes.” (Mann III. 8.)

“It is better that men and women should remain single till death
rather than marry unsuitables, z.e., persons of opposite qualities, characteristics, and temperaments should never marry each other.”

(Mann IX. 89.)
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 387

An Italian Eugenies Committee.— Dr. Mario Carrara, professor of
forensic medicine at Turin, has informed us that on the 24th of March last
the Roman Society of Anthropology considered the question of organising
a section for the study of eugenics, and appointed a special committee
for the purpose junder the presidency of Professor G. Sergi.

Eugenics in Austria.—The Sociological Society of Vienna is starting a section for Social Biology and Eugenics. The inaugural lecture
was delivered in the philosophical faculty of the university, on December
19th, by Dr. Julius Tandler. Further particulars may be obtained from
“ Die Soziologische Gesellschaft,” 3 Bezirk, Jacquingasse 45, Vienna.

* .

Letters of the late Dr. Alfred Russel Wallace.— Mr. James Marchant (Lochnagar, Edenbridge, Kent), who, at the request of the family
of Dr. A. R. Wallace, is arranging and editing a volume of his letters
and reminiscences, would be thankful to those of our readers who have
letters and reminiscences if they would send them to him. The letters
would be safely and promptly returned. . .

* .

Wanted, Eugenies Review Vol. 1. No. 2,—This number is now out
of print, but we continue to receive inquiries for it. If any of our readers
have copies to dispose of, would they kindly communicate with the Hon.
Secretary of the Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House,
Kingsway. Five shillings will be paid for the first copy offered.

*

The American Genetic Association is the name now adopted by the

American Breeders’ Association. Zhe American Breeders’ Magazine will
be enlarged in size and called The Journal of Heredity.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY.

PROGRAMME.
November 6th.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Mr. W.
McDougall on “Psychology in the Service of Eugenics.” Chairman,

Major Leonard Darwin.

December 4th.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Mr. Geoffrey
Smith on “A Contribution to the Biology of Sex.” Chairman, Major
Leonard Darwin.

COMMITTEES.
October 22nd.—Lecture Committee Meeting.
November 6th.—Research sa ms
a 13th.—Research ‘i ”
» 21st.—Executive Council +
December 19th.—Executive ,, 5
MEETINGS.

October zoth.—Mr. Rollaston Stables lectured on “ Heredity ” at the
Eugenic Club, High Holborn, W.C.

October 29th.—Major Darwin delivered an address on “The Need
for Eugenic Reform” before the Medico-Chirurgical and Obstetrical
Society, Edinburgh, with a view to inaugurating a branch in that city.

October 30th.—Major Darwin delivered an address on “ The Need for
Eugenic Reform ” before the Royal Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons,
in the Faculty Hall, Glasgow. Dr. J. A. Adams, president, in the chair.
388 EUGENICS REVIEW.

October 30th.—Mr. John Russell lectured on “ Eugenics, or the
Science and Art of Human Breeding : An Appeal to Potential Fathers and
Mothers” at a drawing-room meeting in the house of Mrs. Maurice
Singer. Mrs. Theodore Chambers in the chair.

November 3rd.—Miss Trench lectured on “ Eugenics ” at a mothers’
meeting in Croydon, kindly arranged by Mrs. Link.

November 7th.—Mr. C. S. Stock lectured on “ Eugenics and Social
Progress ” at the Women’s Institute, Victoria Street, S.W.

November 2oth.—Mr. Rollaston Stables lectured on “ Eugenics and
Social Responsibility ” at the Eugenic Club, High Holborn, W.C.

November 21st.—Mr. E. J. Lidbetter lectured on “ Eugenics and
Social Problems ” at the Women’s Institute, Victoria Street, S.W.

November 22nd.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on “ The Ideal
of Eugenics” at the Workers’ Educational Association, Birkenhead.

November 23rd.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on “ What is
Eugenics? ” at the Birkenhead Men’s Adult School.

November 23rd.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on “ Eugenics ”
at the Rock Ferry Men’s Meeting.

November 23rd.—Mr. C. S. Stock lectured on “Eugenics” at the
Sutton, Wallington, and District Socialist Society.

November 25th.—Mr. C. S. Stock opened a debate at the Ladies’ Residential Club. Proposition : “ Heredity is a Stronger Force than Environment.”

November 27th.—Mr. R. A. Fisher opened a debate at the Pioneer
Club. Proposition: “ The Eugenist can Advocate a Practical Policy.”

December 16th.—Mr. Rollaston Stables lectured on “ The Claim of
the Eugenic Ideal” at the Eugenic Club, High Holborn, W.C.

December 20oth.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured on “ Parenthood
and Patriotism ” at the Anerley Congregational Church.

BELFAST.

On 1oth November, 1913, a public meeting of the branch was held
in the Medical Institute, and the attendance was fair. Professor Lindsay,
M.D., occupied the chair, and introduced the speaker of the evening, Mr.
H. O. Meredith, M.A., Professor of Economics in the Queen’s University,
Belfast. The subject of Professor Meredith’s paper was “ Eugenics and
Economics,” and was handled by him in a very able manner. Although
Professor Meredith gave full credit to the importance of eugenics, he
was disposed to disagree with many eugenists as to the relative unfitness
and fitness of the slum and middles classes respectively. He believed
that the effects of environment would explain many of the differences
found. In the discussion which followed Professor Gregg Wilson, Pro~fessor Lindsay, and Dr. W. James Wilson took part.

JAMES WILSON, Hon. Sec.

BIRMINGHAM HEREDITY SOCIETY.

The annual business meeting of the above society was held on
October 17th. The Committee were able to report a successful year’s
work, and the Treasurer’s report showed that the Society was in a
satisfactory financial condition. The officers and committee were elected
for the ensuing year.

On November 24th Dr. Starr Jordan lectured to the Society, his
subject being “ Eugenics and War.” He emphasised strongly the loss to
a nation of its fittest and best males through the ravages of war, and
pointed out the inevitable effect on the succeeding generation. Sir Oliver
Lodge, who, in the absence of the President through illness, occupied
the chair, made some pertinent remarks on the childishness of war, and
eamtaksesd the thanks of the Society to Dr. Starr Jordan for his interesting

ress.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 389

During the autumn some eight or nine propagandist lectures have
been delivered by members of the Society to various societies in the district, notably a series to the Workers’ Education Society, which was
exceptionally well attended. PERCIVAL MILLS, Hon. Sec.

HASLEMERE.

Two meetings have been held this quarter. On November 6th Mr.
H. R. Stables spoke on “Crime and Eugenics.” On December 12th a
discussion-meeting was held, when Mr. Marshall read a short paper
on “Are Certificates of Health previous to Marriage Desirable?” <A
discussion followed, in which several members took part. The Branch
has sustained a heavy loss in the death of Mr. Edward Nettleship, who
was a member of committee and branch representative on the Central
Council. L. E. Muir, Hon. Sec.

LIVERPOOL.

A Council meeting was held on October oth to consider arrangements
for the winter session. Three lectures have been delivered to the Branch,
which were open to the public. On October 24th Dr. F.W. Mott, F.R.S., spoke
to us at the Medical Institution on the “ Neuropathic Inheritance of Crime
and Insanity ”; on November 12th Mr. R. D. Laurie, M.A., lectured at
the University upon “ Eugenette ”; and on December oth Chancellor D.
Starr Jordan gave an address within the same hospitable walls upon
“Eugenics and War.” The attendance at these lectures has been con.
siderably greater than the previous average, and we are particularly
grateful to Dr. Mott and Chancellor Jordan for visiting us from a
distance.

The Honorary Secretary has given four addresses to smaller audiences: October 13th, to the Hunter’s Lane Literary Society on “ Population Facts and Problems”; October 14th, to the South Church Working
Men’s Club on “ The Scientific Basis of Social Policy ”; November 4th,
on “ Social Structure ”; and December 12th, to the Bootle Branch of the
Independent Labour Party on the same topic. A free discussion followed
in each case. R. T. Bopry, Hon. Sec.

MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT.

The first meeting of the branch this session was addressed by Dr. Herbert on “ Eugenics and its Methods.” There was a good attendance and
an interesting discussion. Good reports appeared in the Press. The
only other meeting of the society was addressed by Dr. Starr Jordan.
Being an afternoon meeting the attendance was the smallest we have
had, but those present expressed themselves as in accord with the views
of the lecturer.

In the first week in November our President (the Dean of Manchester,
Bishop Welldon) addressed a meeting of the local clergy. This meeting
was awaited with keen interest, as it would show to some extent the
attitude of the clergy. One present, reports “it was astonishing what a
cordial reception his remarks met with from all the speakers and from the
meeting at large. The Dean explained the Mental Deficiency Act, and
especially that not merely the parents but others like the clergy could
bring it into operation. Two clergy who were guardians spoke out, and
I think a great impression was made.”

Under the auspices of the Openshaw Brotherhood, Manchester, Mrs.
B. B. McKellen, one of our members, addressed an audience of about 500
at the Whitworth Hall on “ Eugenics,” Councillor Titt being in the chair.
The lecture was received with great enthusiasm, and many questions were
put at the close. The many requests from members of the audience for
a further exposition of the eugenic theory were most encouraging.

The Honorary Secretary addressed a large number of men on the
subject of “ Venereal Diseases.” The attention at times became almost
painful—a measure of the desire for knowledge which may be believed
390 EUGENICS REVIEW.

on this important subject. About an hour was spent in answering the
questions and a number of myths were exploded. From outside information it is evident the address made a great impression, and the subject
was discussed in many works for some time. Another address to young
athletes on the same subject has been arranged.

The Honorary Secretary is booked to address the North of England
Education Conference on “ Eugenics,” and also the Moss Side Forum on
the same subject. J. D’Ewart, Hon. Sec.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Ancient Eugenics, by A. G. Roper. The Arnold Prize Essay for 1913.
(Publisher : B. H. Blackwell, Oxford, 1913. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 76.)

Annual Report on Certification of Lunatics and Observation Wards or
for year ended May 15th, 1913, by J. CARSWELL, M.D. (Publishers :
Beg, Kennedy, and Elder, Glasgow, 1913. Pp. 35.)

The Case for Co-Education, by C. GRANT and N. HODGSON. (Publisher :
Grant Richards, London, 1913. Price 5s. Pp. 325.)

Beauty for Ashes, by LaDy HENRY SOMERSET. (Publishers: Upcott Gill
and Sons, London. Price 1s. net. Pp. 111.) An account of Duxhurst
Inebriate Colony.

Before I Wed, or Young Men and Marriage, by SIR THOMAS CLOUSTON,
M.D., LL.D. (Publishers: Cassell and Co., London, 1913. Price
2s. 6d. Pp. 129.)

Biology, by W. D. HENDERSON, M.A. The People’s Books, No. 3.
(Publishers: T. C. and E. C. Jack, London and Edinburgh, 1913.
Price 6d. Pp. 92.) A highly condensed introduction to biology
which the beginner may perhaps find a trifle difficult to follow on
account of the many technical terms employed.

Contributo allo Studio det Rapporti tra Vintelligenza et fattori biologicosociali nella Scuola, by F. U. SAFFIOTTI. (Estratto dalla Revista di

, Antropologia. Vol. xviii. Fasc. I-II. Pp. 34.)

L’Echelle Métrique de Vintelligence de Binet et Simon modifiée selon le
méthode Treves-Saffotti, by F. U. SaAFFIOTTI. (Extrait de l’Annee
Psychologique. Tome xviii. 1912. Pp. 327-340.)

Economics as the Basis of Living Ethics, by J. G. MURDOCH. (Publishers : Constable and Co., London, 1913. Price 8s. 6d. Pp. 373.)
Ellen Key, by LOUISE NYSTROM-HAMILTON. (Publishers: G. P. Putnam’s

Sons, New York and London, 1913. Price 5s. net. Pp. 187.) A few
lines from the introduction by Havelock Ellis sum up Ellen Key’s
position. Because woman is the mother, and the future of the race is
in her hands she needs complete freedom of development to exercise
the function of motherhood in the wider sense of the word. Eugenists
will be mainly interested in her educational work in connection with

sex and marriage.

English Church Law and Divorce, by Str LEWIS DIBDEN and SIR CHADwick Heaty. (Publisher: John Murray, London, 1913. Price 5s.
Pp. 180.

La F ane t rancaise et son Evolution, by Louts DELzous. (Publisher :
Armand Colin, Paris, 1913. Price 3 frs. 50. Pp. 292.)

The Family Among the Australian Aborigines, by B. MALINOWSKI. (Publishers : Hodder and Stoughton, London, 1913. For the University of
London Press. Price 6s. Pp. 326.)

From Girlhood to Womanhood, by Dr. E. SLOAN CHESSER. (Publishers:
Cassell and Co., London, 1913. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 141.)

A Guide to the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, by J. and S. WORMALD.
(Publishers: P. S. King and Son, London, 1913. Price 5s. Pp. 145.)

The Health and Physique of School Children, by A. GREENWOOD. (Publishers: P. S. King and Son, London, 1913. Price 1s. Pp. 94.)
PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED. 391

The Healthy Marriage, by G. T. WRENCH, M.D., B.S. (Publisher:
Churchill, London, 1913. Price 3s. 6d. Pp. 300.)

An Imaginative Child: Studies in a Child’s View Point, by A. A. HILTON.
With an introduction by H. Lee. (Publisher: R. Allenson, London,
1913. Price is. 6d. Pp. 144.)

Life, Emotion, and Intellect, by C. B. ANDREWS. (Publisher: T. Fisher
Unwin, London, 1913. Price 5s. Pp. 95.)

Life and Its Beginnings, by Dr. H. WeEBB. (Publishers: Cassell and Co.,
London, 1913. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 137.)

Mechanism, Life, and Personality: An Examination of the Mechanistic
Theory of Life and Mind, by J. S. HALDANE. (Publisher: John
Murray, London, 1913. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 139.)

Note Psicologiche su due Gemelle, by F. U. SAFFIOTTI. (Estratto dalla
Rivista di Antropologia. Vol. xviii. Fasc. I.-II., 1913. Pp. 11.)

The Old-Fashioned Woman: Primitive Fancies about the Sex, by ELSIE
CLEWS PARSONS. (Publishers: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and
London, the Knickerbocker Press, 1913. Price 6s. net. Pp. 373.) A
brightly written book, giving an account of some of the habits and
customs of primitive and uncivilised peoples which specially concern
women and tracing their equivalents in modern civilised races.

Our Ancestors, by R. G. MacLaGan. (Publisher: T. N. Foulis, Edinburgh, 1913. Pp. 448.)

The Patnted Lady, by ARABELLA KENEALY. (Publishers: Stanley Paul and
Co., London, 1913. Price 6s. Pp. 380.) The inherited hobby of
Lord Chelmers, one of the principal characters of this novel, is to run
the village of Eugenia. This he is enabled to do successfully, because
from a careful study of the works of Sir Francis Galton he had arrived
at a principle which he states in the following words: “ Take care of
nurture and nature can take care of herself!” Eugenists will find
plenty to criticise in Eugenia, and plenty to enjoy in the excitement
and interest of the well-told tale in which it figures.

Pedagogical Anthropology, by M. MOoONTEsSsoRI. Translation by F. T.
Peek) (Publisher: W. Heinemann, London, 1913. Price 14s.

p. 508.

Practical Eugenics, by WILLIAM J. ROBINSON, M.D. (Publishers: The
Critic and Guide Company, New York, 1912. Price 50 cents.
Pp. 93.) A lecture advocating the rational control and limitation
of offspring ; certificates of freedom from venereal and mental disease
before marriage; the sterilization of the feeble-minded, degenerate,
and criminal; venereal prophylaxis.

A Primer of Soctal Science, by Right Reverend Monseigneur HENRY
PARKINSON, D.D., Ph.D. (Publishers: P. S. King and Son, London,
1913. Pp. 276.)

The Principles of Evolution, by J. MCCABE. (Publishers: Collins’s Clear
Type Press, London, 1913. Price 1s. Pp. 264.)

Problems of Genetics, by W. Dareson, M.A., F.R.S. (Publisher: H. Milford, Oxford University Press, London, 1913. Price 17s. Pp. 258.)

Problems of Life and Reproduction, by Marcus HartoG. (Publisher:
John Murray, London, 1913. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 362.)

The Purpose of Education, bv ST. GEORGE LANE Fox Pitt. (Publishers:
The Cambridge University Press, London, 1913. Price 2s. 6d.

Pp. 83.)

Report of the Proceedings of the English-Speaking Conference on Infant
Mortality, Caxton Hall, Westminster, August, 1913. (Published by
the National Association for the Prevention of Infant Mortality.
Price 3s. Pp. 456.)

La “Scala Metrica dell’Intelligenza di Binet et Simon” Studiata nelle
Scuole communale elementari di Milano, by F. U. SAFFIOTTI and Z.
TREVES. Publisher: C, Civello, Milan, 1911. Pp. 67.)
392 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Sexual Disease and its Medical Prevention, by H. N. ROBSON, M.R.C.S.
(England), L.R.C.P. (London). (Publishers : Simpkin and Marshall,
London, 1911. Price 3s. 6d. Pp. 104.) This small book is written
in a plain, straightforward manner, and would be readily understood
by almost anyone. It can be recommended as a useful handbook of
the subject.

The Small Family System: Is it Injurious or Immoral? by C. V. DRysDALE. (Publisher: A. C. Fifield, London, 1913. Price 1s. Pp. 119.)

Social Renewal, by G. SANDEMAN. (Publisher : W. Heinemann, London,
1913. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 1

Soctalism Rejected, by BERNARD “SAMUELSON. (Publishers: Smith, Elder
and Co., London, 1913. Price 7s. 6d.)

Some Suggestions Regarding the Care of the Feeble-Minded under the
Mental Deficiency Bill, 1913, by A. R. DouGtas, L.R.C.P., L.R.S.C.
Reprinted from the /ournal of Pe 6) Science, July, 1913. (Publisher : Adlard, London, 1913. 6.

Suggestions for Amendment of C 5 solldated Orders and for Improvement
in Poor Law Administration, by J. T. DoDD, M.A. b P. (Publishers :
P. S. King and Son, London, 1913. Price 3d. Pp. 23.)

Transactions of the National Association for the Prewntice of Consumption and Other Forms of Tuberculosis, at the Fifth Annual Conference; August, 1913. (Publisher: Adlard, London, 1913. Price 4s. 6d.

Pp. 222.)

What’: a Boy Should Know, by Dr. A. T. SCHOFIELD and Dr. P. VAUGHANphe (Publishers: Cassell and Co., 1913. Price 2s. 6d.
Pp. 118.

% * ¥ * * *

We included in the July number a notice of a book entitled “ The Three
Gifts of Life,” by Miss Nellie Smith, but omitted to state that it is
published in England by Messrs. Cassell and Co. ., Ltd. They have
now pointed out this omission to us, and we take this opportunity of
rectifying it.
