FAMILY SERVICE UNITS FOR PROBLEM
FAMILIES

By DAVID JONES

Secretary, Family Service Units

NUMBER of terms are used to
A describe the families with which

Family Service Units is working—
problem families, social problem group,
derelict families, unsatisfactory households,
etc. Although they all no doubt mean
roughly the same thing, it may well be that
to regard them as interchangeable only adds
confusion. In particular, it may be premature to regard the terms “ social problem
group”’ and “ problem families ’’ as completely synonymous.

Membership of the “social problem
group ’’ would seem to be determined largely
by the presence of subnormal or abnormal
individuals, particularly mental defectives,
ina family. By “ problem families ’’ on the
other hand, Family Service Units denotes

families exhibiting certain kinds of attitudes 
and behaviour. No account is taken of the
causes of their conditions, of the type of
treatment they require, or of the probable
results of treatment. I do not propose to
define the problem family but will instead
outline the conditions they exhibit.

Problem Family Conditions

Their lives are characterized by dirt, disintegration and disorder. They are often
shiftless, apathetic and irresponsible to an
almost incredible degree. Here, indeed, are
found “ conditions of life at their worst.”

Financial mismanagement is rife. The
husband often retains a disproportionate
share of the income. One man with a wife
and five children, 15 to 4 years old, earning
a wage of {5 10s. a week, gave his wife {2 15s.
with which to keep him, herself, and the five
children—and most likely expected her to
provide him with fares and cigarettes at the
end of the week. Such situations are by no
means uncommon. The family income is
often grossly mis-spent. An _ excessive

171

amount may be wasted on drink ; not that
drunkenness or alcoholism are usually a
problem, but a great deal can be spent on
drink short of drunkenness. Mis-spending
on cigarettes is as serious, as much as {1
or {2 disappearing from quite small incomes
in that way when both husband and wife
are smokers. Money is lost at the “ dogs ”
and wasted on cinemas, comics, children’s
pocket money, prepared foods, etc. These
families are a prey to various forms of
commercial exploitation.

As a result of this mis-spending they are
constantly in debt and in arrears with their
payments for rent, clothing clubs, gas,
electricity, insurances, hire purchase, etc.
They run up ‘“‘tick” at shops. In an
attempt to balance their budget they resort
to borrowing from neighbours and friends,
to pawning clothing and bedding (the proverbial phenomena of father’s suit coming
out on Friday and going back again on
Monday) and to the money-lender—usually
an unlicensed money-lender, who charges an
exorbitant and quite illegal rate of interest.
When they receive their weekly income most
of it is used to repay debts, leaving the
family a totally inadequate amount on
which to manage, and the round of borrowing has to start once again. Many families
live on next week’s money.

Their sleeping habits are bad. They sleep
many to aroom and many to a bed ; in winter
often huddling together owing to lack of
bedding. Sheets are rare, blankets usually
scanty; and sometimes old clothes are the
only bedding. They go to bed late and inevitably get up late. Asa result, they are bad
time-keepers at work, the children do not get
to school, the mother starts her work when
the day is half done. What sleep they have is
disturbed with vermin—fleas and bugs—with
which many of their homes are infested.
172

Their meals are irregular. Owing to their
poverty and financial mismanagement they
have insufficient food. They have little idea
of food values and what food they do have
is lacking in nourishment. Some of their
homes have no proper cooking facilities and
often they are devoid of utensils.
they have the means they often do not know
how to prepare appetizing meals. Sometimes they have no table, and seldom are
there sufficient chairs, crockery or cutlery
for the whole family. The staple diet of tea,
bread, margarine, cheap cake and chips is
taken at odd times and standing up.

Clothing is poor in quality and inadequate
in quantity. Neither the parents nor the
children have any underclothing, night
clothing or change of clothing ; and such as
they have is rarely washed or mended.
Usually they have only one pair of shoes or
boots and wear these until they cannot be
repaired.

The most serious consequences of these
conditions is their effect on the children,
who are dirty and verminous. The bad
feeding, sleeping and clothing habits cause
bad health. Skin diseases and illnesses are
prevalent and often untreated. But as
serious as the physical, is the emotional or
psychological neglect. Discipline is absent
or varies erratically between over-indulgence
and over-harshness. Disobedience and wildness are the inevitable result and often very
young children are out of the parents’ control. Their school attendance is irregular ;
through lack of training their habits are
often insanitary; they exhibit behaviour
problems. Among these families juvenile
delinquency is common. Deliberate cruelty
is rare but child neglect in this broad sense
is nearly always present.

The presence of any one of these characteristics does not make a problem family,
nor are they all found in every problem
family. But in any problem family it is
usual to find many of these characteristics
inextricably interwoven and each augmenting the others.

Causes of Unsatisfactory Conditions
Problem family conditions are not the

Even if:

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

result of any one cause. Environmental and
material factors—bad housing, overcrowding, poverty, lack of home equipment—can
make any decent standards almost unattainable.

A number of factors, to some extent at
least outside the control of the family, are
often important in bringing about a deterioration in conditions. The temporary or permanent absence of one or other of the parents
from the home owing to death, divorce,
separation or working away can lead to
disastrous consequences for the family. Illhealth or incapacity are most important
causes: in the father they mean irregular
employment or a life on relief ; in the mother
they mean she is unable to care for the
family or the home properly. Misfortune of
one kind and another, particularly when
associated with other factors, can sometimes
start a decline into bad conditions.

Many families, however, have to face
adverse material circumstances, while most
families suffer misfortune at some time or
other, yet they do not allow their conditions
to become like those of the problem family.
It does seem that something more is required
to bring about such conditions and, through
contact with individual families, one comes
to realize that there is usually some factor,
personal to the family or the parents, which
is important in bringing about their conditions.

Backwardness, used here to cover anything
from dullness to actual mental deficiency,
leads to incapability. So often the parents
just do not know how to bring up children,
how to organize their lives, how to spend
their money wisely. Weakness of character
is important. The members of these families
often express the best of intentions, frequently quite sincerely, but they rarely live
up to their intentions. In any situation you
can only rely on them taking the line of least
resistance. Temperamental instability, used
here to cover anything from minor maladjustment to actual neurotic and psychotic
states, leads the family from one crisis to
another in their affairs and sometimes to
complete disintegration. Marital disharmony
is prevalent in these families. When it is
FAMILY SERVICE UNITS FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES

realized that they are often facing very
difficult circumstances, the effect of lack of
co-operation or antagonism between the
parents can be imagined.

In any particular instance the causation is
complex, and no one cause is usually sufficient
to bring about the problem family. Generally both environmental or material factors
and personal factors are present ; and factors
from both these classes converge to bring
about the conditions found in these families.
The members of problem families are often
no more inadequate than many people
managing fairly well and presenting no
problem. The circumstances in which they
are placed, however, are difficult, circumstances that would often test the most
capable. The parents being below-standard
physically and/or mentally are just unable
to cope with their problems, and conditions
consequently decline. Declining conditions
in turn have an adverse effect on their
ability to grapple with their increasing
difficulties resulting in yet further decline.
The family is caught in a vicious circle from
which it is almost impossible for it to
extricate itself unaided. The deterioration
in conditions is closely related to the number
of children in the family. Although the
parents may be incompetent with none or
only one or two children, it is not until there
are three, four or more that their inadequacy
results in serious deterioration in standards.
The mother, her health and vitality already
sapped, is unable to deal properly with her
growing burdens and becomes increasingly
discouraged, apathetic and indifferent to her
failures.

A Special Service :

Since there is no one cause there is no
panacea. If problem family conditions are
to be eradicated a total approach is necessary. General social improvement has
already achieved a great deal and conditions
which were once widespread are now confined to a few substandard families. Education has a vital part to play, both in the
more formal sense of school education and
the nursery school and, in a wider sense, of
social education through clubs and com
t73

munity centres, through Press, radio and
cinema, through publicity. The standards
of a considerable section of the community
need to be raised. Behaviour and attitudes
typical of the problem family are still
common among a much wider section of the
community.

Problem families, however, fail to utilize
or benefit from such facilities as exist at
present ; and the immediate effect of general
social improvement is not to eradicate them
but to disclose them more clearly as a
minority who do not benefit from such
measures. To take simple examples: so
often one finds that the family fail to act
on, or even obtain, the medical advice and
treatment available to them. Benefits are
not claimed and they do not utilize the
various services that exist to help those in
trouble. They do not become members of
clubs and most social effort passes them by.

This situation arises because so much of
the problem in problem families is due to
personal deficiencies which are untouched by
large-scale social change. Problem families
must be approached family by family—the
individualizing approach of social casework
is essential. But with these families something more is required than can normally be
provided by a caseworking agency. Such
services exist for everybody and the necessary
time and detailed attention cannot be given
the abnormal families. Yet, if normal family
life is to be restored, extra help must be
given. It is with such an experimental
development of social casework to meet the
problems presented by the problem family
that Family Service Units is concerned.

The Work of the Units

The families assisted are referred to the
Units, in the main, by other social working
organizations, both statutory and voluntary
—Health Visitors, School Care Committees,
Hospital Almoners, Housing Managers, Probation Officers, Family Welfare Association
Workers, etc., who have come across the
families in the course of their own work and
feel they would benefit from the specialized
type of service provided by the Units. Overlapping is avoided and families within the
174

scope of other organizations are referred to
them.

Since families do not apply from a conscious realization of failure, but are referred
by others who consider that intensive work
is needed, the offer of help comes from the
Unit to the family. Nor has the worker any
official powers or authority and the family
can at any time ask him to withdraw.

It is therefore imperative to gain the wholehearted voluntary co-operation of the family,
and the approach is thus necessarily one of
friendship. Friendship is, in fact, the
foundation of the work of the Units—a
friendship without condescension or aloofness, neither forced nor superficial. Friendship must be maintained by the worker in
the face of apathy, or even active resistance,
and yet it must never be allowed to degenerate into sentimentality. The friendship is
a controlled, a professional one ; a friendship
with a purpose. The worker is there to
assist the family towards independence and
self-respect. This purpose must, as far as
possible, be made clear in the relationship
and must in any case be kept in the forefront
of the worker’s mind. While friendly contact is easily made, a purposeful relationship
necessitates the overcoming of resistance to
the worker’s function or his suggested plans
and the gaining of an active co-operation.
Ill-will, repeated failure or even deterioration must be met as part of the problem, and
not merely condemned as “ sin ”’ or used as
_ a reason for writing the family off as ‘‘ hopeless.” Patient and understanding goodwill
is essential if the members of the family are
to believe that their welfare is important to
the worker, that they are accepted as they
are, and that, with the worker’s assistance,
improvement in their conditions is both
possible and desirable. The family must be
inspired to change, then shown the way and
supported through times of crisis until rehabilitation is effected.

In the relationship the worker’s own faith
is the dynamic. The worker must believe in
the possibility of regeneration, however
apparently hopeless the family.

The majority of problem families are
known to many social services—housing,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

health, relief, education—and each tackling
a ‘limited aspect of the problem or the family,
make little progress towards its general
improvement. Different workers or organizations may in fact be following different or
even contradictory policies. An example is
that of a woman with two children, where an
official concerned with relief was urging her
to go to work and support herself and the
children, while a health visitor, who was also
calling, was insisting that she stay at home
and look after the children. In a number of
instances we have found one set of workers
attempting to remove the children from their
home or keep them away, while another set
were striving either to keep them at home or
return them to their home.

No one symptom or member of the family
can be singled out and treated in isolation
if the whole welfare of the family is to be
improved. The family must be approached
as an integrated whole, and every aspect of
their often complex problems dealt with as
far as necessary.

The specific means to deal comprehensively with all the problems of the family ~
obviously cannot, and need not, be concentrated in any one body. One organization
or worker must, however, accept responsibility for the whole welfare of the family.
When specialist treatment or particular
services are necessary it then becomes the
worker’s duty to obtain them. Not only
must the treatment be both possible and
practicable, but the worker must ensure it is
applied, despite failure on the part of the
family or others concerned. When the
treatment is unsuccessful an alternative
must be found. Whatever happens, the
worker must regard himself as responsible
for the welfare of the family. The rehabilitation of problem families demands an
adaptable and imaginative service, which can
cope effectively with all the complexities of
family life without the limitations of red
tape or orthodoxy.

Work based on these principles is very
intensive. Intensive in the amount of time
devoted to each family, in the closeness of
the relationship entered into, and in the
amount of assistance provided. Only in
FAMILY SERVICE UNITS

intensive casework over a prolonged period
can sufficient impact be made to change the
habits of years or deal with the intractable
problems presented by the problem family.
The majority of families need close contact
over many months, home visits often exceeding twice weekly and, at times of special
activity, families are visited daily.

The friendly relationship between the
worker and the family does not grow in a
vacuum : it is established and developed in
the process of working with the family in a
practical attempt to overcome their problems. All the many facilities that exist to
help those in difficulties are mobilized to
meet the problems presented by a particular
family. The co-operation of other bodies
concerned with any aspect of the family is
sought and an attempt made to work out
with them a practicable and consistent
policy. Such co-operation is normally ensured by close and continuing consultation
between the Unit and any other workers concerned, although at times Special Case Conferences between all the workers interested
in a particular family or families may be
necessary.

Existing services are utilized to the full
and the families’ own powers used in the most
valuable way. If possible, the environment
is adjusted to assist improvement. Where
specialist help, e.g. psychiatric treatment, is
required, it must be obtained. Material
assistance is usually necessary so that the
family may have the means to live decently.
The Units, however, are not _relief-giving
bodies and normally such needs are met from
existing sources. The value of material
assistance lies in its use as a tactic in the
whole process or rehabilitation. The same
considerations apply to the manual and
practical work performed by the Units.
Mis-spending is tackled by detailed budgeting of income and expenditure with the
mother. Children and adults are escorted
to schools, clinics, offices, etc., in order to
ensure full and proper use of existing facilities. Improved living habits are inculcated
by practical help with children and with
domestic duties, including shopping and
cooking ; by repairing, scrubbing and decora
FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES

175

ting. A child’s head might be disinfested
with the mother, for instance, as a means
of driving home the necessity for greater care
in this respect and of showing the mother the
way to do the job herself. Such work not
only provides a form of assistance not obtainable in other ways, but its educational
and psychological effects, and the stimulus
given to the family to make the required
effort themselves, are of great importance.

Although assistance can do much to help
problem families and individuals, it has its
maximum impact only in the medium of the
friendly relationship and when used as a
reinforcement of changes in attitude and
habits effected in that relationship.

The members of these problem families are
childish, immature, frightened people: life
has been too much for them and they take
refuge in apathy and indifference. The only
way they can deal with a difficulty is to
ignore it. If they are in rent arrears they
lose the rent book; if they have an unpleasant job to do they “ forget it.”

The relationship with the worker gives the
family security in which, with the help and
encouragement of the worker, they can face
their problems and inadequacies and thus
begin to meet them. The worker assists by
clarifying their difficulties and desires and
presenting to them the real situation in
which they are placed. Assistance is offered
as a means by which they can advance—in
a sense, the worker offers him or herself.
Because of the confidence and trust that the
family places in the worker, advice can be
given and suggestions made which will be
acted on. In the relationship a more definitely didactic function is also performed.
Where ignorance is so common, social
education in all branches of family welfare
and home management is an urgent need ;
and, in the medium of the relationship and
in the home, this can be imparted naturally
and almost unconsciously and related practically to the day-to-day concerns of living.
Social education can also be illustrated and
reinforced by actual manual and practical
work,

These methods are not of routine application to all problem families. What is done,
176

and how much, depends on the capabilities
of the parents and the situation in each
family. Diagnosis, evaluation of treatment,
assessment of individuals, planning of work
must proceed simultaneously. In some instances a wide variety of help is required,
involving material assistance, practical work,
specialist treatment and prolonged supervision and constant education for better
standards of home and child care. In other
cases the tonic effect of real friendliness,
combined with guidance and minor forms of
help, is sufficient to arouse the family from
apathy and enable them to overcome their
difficulties largely by their own efforts.

The Brown Family

The Brown family illustrates the type of
help provided by the Units. When we first
met them they were living in two very
dilapidated rooms over a woodyard. A
rickety staircase led directly into the livingroom, which was furnished with a small table
and two chairs. A wall cupboard had been
pulled down and used for firewood. On the
table amid a debris of broken biscuits, a tin
of milk, some margarine in its paper, a loaf
and some sugar, were a dirty cup and a plate,
two forks and a knife. Apart from this, the
total cooking and feeding equipment of the
family consisted of a saucepan, a frying-pan,
a teapot and a tin jug. There was no lighting—apart from candles—and any cooking
had to be done over an open fire. A small

scullery with a sink led off the living-room, |

but the waste pipe was blocked and the sink
unusable. A lavatory opened on to this
scullery ; this also was broken and, when
flushed, flooded into the woodyard below.
The other room was used as a bedroom. It
contained only a single bed, and the iron
frame and wire spring of this were broken
and propped up with a stool. The bedding
consisted of an old torn mattress and two
thin blankets, and was made up with old
clothes and coats.

The family was not typical of those dealt
with by the Units for it was both very young
and very small, consisting only of the father,
aged 23 years, the mother, 22 years, and an
illegitimate daughter of the mother, aged 24

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

years. The father had had infantile paralysis
which had left him with a pronounced limp.
He also suffered from stomach trouble. He
was frequently unemployed and often
earned a meagre living rag-gathering. An
official described him as “a lazy, drunken
lout.”” The mother was dirty, undernourished and painfully thin. Her clothing
and that of the child was scanty and
ragged, and both their heads were infested
with lice and covered in sores. The mother
was incapable in the home and spent a
large proportion of the family income on
cigarettes. They were in debt and there were
£12 rent arrears. An eviction order had, in
fact, been made and they were to be put out
in three days’ time. Both parents were
completely overwhelmed by the situation
and were sunk in apathy and despair: they
were doing nothing to remedy the position
or to find alternative accommodation.

The parents were obviously most inadequate ; but both expressed a desire to improve
their conditions and, after a searching interview with them, intensive assistance was
given. The parents were stimulated to find
accommodation and, with Unit assistance,
managed to obtain a room with an aunt who
had a house of her own. Their furniture was
disinfested and repaired ; and the Unit moved
them into their new quarters by handcart.
The father had been unable to help with this
as he had been encouraged to find work and
had, in fact, started the morning the removal
was done. The room was thoroughly cleaned
before the furniture was moved in, and with
a double bed loaned by the aunt it looked
fairly adequately furnished. The accommodation was a great improvement, for the
house was in good condition and situated in
quite a pleasant area ; there was electric light,
a gas stove, a bath and running hot water.

The mother and child were sent to a
hospital and the child was admitted as an
in-patient, while the mother had her head
shaved and attended as an out-patient. A
grant of clothing was made to the parents,
it being pointed out to them that in future
they would have to meet these needs by their
own efforts. When the child was discharged
from hospital another organization made a
FAMILY SERVICE UNITS

grant of clothing ; and the mother started to
take her to a clinic regularly, arranged for
welfare foods, etc. With the father working,
the family’s financial position was improved
and the Unit commenced collecting savings
from them each week. Debts were paid off ;
and with the savings a fireguard, a cot and,
later, a double bed were bought.

Both parents were friendly and _ cooperative and responded well. Advice and
suggestions were acted on and conditions
improved. The father, in fact, responded
rather quicker than the mother, to such an
extent that he started to criticize her
““ shoddy habits ’’ and poor cooking ability.
There were mutual recriminations and the
marital relationship deteroriated.

The whole situation was therefore discussed with the parents, and an attempt was
made to get them to understand each other
better, to make allowances for each other,
and to realize that if they were to deal with
their problems they would have to work
together. A woman worker was also introduced, who called regularly to give the
mother advice and instruction in purchasing,
cooking, household management, child care,
etc., and regular budgeting of income and
expenditure was instituted. Gradually the
situation improved and the mother started
to take a real interest in the home, to plan
a daily and weekly routine, and to develop a
pride in the child.

That was some time ago now. Conditions
have improved further since then and the
improvement has been maintained. Their
material situation is a great deal better and
the parents have regained self-respect and
pride. There is good reason to believe that
they will be able to manage their own affairs
in the future as a fairly normal and independent family.

Results

As yet, generalization regarding the results
of treatment is perhaps premature, though
it can be said that by these methods some
improvement can usually be effected, even in
difficult cases. In a few, particularly those
with low mentality allied with temperamental instability, the improvement is either

FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES 177
temporary or insufficient, and there seems no
alternative but to split up the family and
make the best possible arrangements for the
children. Where it is felt that the harmful
effects of placing them in an institution and
separating them from their families is outweighed by the harmful effects of the home,
the Unit might well recommend such a course
to the appropriate authority. The decision
to take such action, however, is a difficult
one as often, even in the worst cases, there is
a strong bond of affection between the
parents and the children.

At the other extreme are those families
where help has enabled them to take their
place as normal, self-respecting members of
the community within a comparatively short
time. The reasons for such “ successes ”’
cannot be tabulated, but the absence of
serious temperamental instability in at least
one of the parents, the possibility of favourable material circumstances, and the establishment of a good caseworking relationship
are certainly important. With other families
it is possible to improve their habits and
standards and they seem able to maintain
such improvement unaided; but their conditions are still not wholly satisfactory,
although they may be making the best
adjustment they are capable of in the
circumstances.

The remainder need some form of continuing care if improved standards are to be
maintained. Some will need only occasional
contact in a crisis, while a few require fairly
regular supervision for long periods—perhaps
years in some instances. Even in these
extreme cases the support given is justified
in terms of children saved from needless
suffering and given a better start in life.

But although much can be done to regenerate those families who have lived, often
for years, in conditions of squalor and degradation, the most fruitful line of approach is
undoubtedly the prevention of deterioration.
Instances can be cited where disintegration
was avoided by timely aid, and Family
Service Units hope to develop this preventative aspect of its service. In order to
provide a sound basis for such development,
Family Service Units also aims to study the
178

causes which lead to this appalling disintegration of family life. The need for such
research is stressed by all who have worked
with or written about problem families.

Organization

Family Service Units is a new national
voluntary organization, established to develop
the work with ‘‘ Problem Families ’’ successfully pioneered in Liverpool and Manchester.
At present there are three Units in operation
—in Liverpool, in London, and in Manchester.

The Units consist of teams of whole-time
family caseworkers—both men and women
—based on Hostel Centres conveniently
placed to the areas in which the work is
‘being done. Most of the workers are resident
and accommodation is provided for students
and visitors. The Centres, which are staffed
at all times, are used extensively in the work.
They provide not only office, interviewing
and storage space and a residence for workers,
but are friendly Centres adaptable to whatever purpose might seem constructive for
those assisted. Children and adults are constantly calling and many were entertained
for meals, some actually being resident for
short periods.

Each worker, under the supervision of the
Fieldwork Organizer, is responsible for work
with from twelve to twenty-five cases at
any one time, depending on the nature of
the cases. He or she must use initiative to
meet the families’ changing needs. Hours
of work are inevitably long and irregular.
The work makes great demands on the
workers, and tenacity, cheerfulness and
resourcefulness are needed to overcome the
frequent setbacks and disappointments.

Is It Worth It?

Owing to the comparatively small caseloads handled by each worker the service is
inevitably expensive. Apart from any
humanitarian considerations, however, successful work results in financial saving, as
illustrated by the following examples and
figures :

(a) Father, mother and four boys referred for

assistance because of child neglect and the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

danger of the children having to be removed.
Intensive work by the Unit was very
successful and conditions have since been
maintained at a high level. If these four
children had been removed the cost of their
maintenance would have been between {£600
and £700 a year, and the expense would
probably have continued for several years.

(6) Five children were removed from home
owing to the appalling conditions. Their
care cost the Local Authority approximately £16 a week. Considerable assistance
was given by the Unit, conditions improved
and the children returned home. The
family have since been able to maintain
normal standards without assistance.

It costs £164 Ios. a year to keep a man or
woman in prison; £209 2s. 2d. to keep a
young person in Borstal. The cost of maintaining a child at an Approved School might
be as much as £300 a year. These figures
represent only part of the cost of Problem
Families to the community. Costly social,
educational and health services are misused.
Time, money and energy are wasted in piecemeal efforts to mitigate the effects of their
anti-social behaviour. They act as centres
of infection, physical and moral, to decent
families who are their neighbours.

What Charles Booth said of the “ submerged tenth ”’ at the end of the last century
remains true of the problem family to-day:

It seems time that we should find some
means to carry voluntarily on our shoulders the
burthen which otherwise we have to carry
involuntarily around our necks.

In the British Social Hygiene Council’s
Occastonal Paper No. 2 Dr. C. Frazer
Brockington stated that the problem family
“is a common source from which springs
much of the evil we seek to prevent ”’ ; while
Dr. C. P. Blacker wrote that “it will increasingly pre-occupy those responsible for
the country’s social and educational services.” The Under-Secretary of State for
Home Affairs recently admitted in the House
of Commons that “ there was a gap on the
mechanism of the social services for dealing
with such cases.” The Women’s Group on
Public Welfare in their survey, The Neglected
Child and His Family, recommend the provision of “‘ an extended specialized casework
FAMILY SERVICE UNITS

service.’ Family Service Units provide such
a service.

It is not suggested that Family Service
Units is the complete answer, either to below
standard living conditions or even to the
individual problem family. It is felt, how
FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES 179
ever, that the Units have an essential contribution to make.

For the well-being of both the individual
families, and the community as a whole, a
concentrated attack should be made on this
serious social problem.

POPULATION STUDIES

A Quarterly Journal of Demography

Editor: D.

Vol. II. No. 2

CONTENTS

Vv. GLASS

September 1949

A. HENDERSON. The Cost of Children. Part I.
M. GOTTLIEB. Optimum Population. Foreign Trade and World Economy.
YOU POH SENG. Practical Problems in Sampling for Social and Demographic Inquiries in

Undeveloped Countries.

D. A. PERCIVAL. Some Features of a Peasant Population in the Middle East.
J. W. B. DOUGLAS and GRISELDA ROWNTREE. Supplementary Maternal and Child Health

Services. Part I: Postnatal Care.

Part IT:

Nurseries.

NOTICE. United Nations Seminar on Social Welfare.

Subscription : 30s. net per volume.

Single Parts tos. net

Published for the PoPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
by the Campripce UnrversiTy Press, 200 Euston Roap, Lonpon, N.W.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 4
