WAR AND THE BIRTH RATE
By RICHARD M. TITMUSS

“ Tf T is to be hoped that one of the results
[« the terrible struggle in which we are
engaged will be to direct more serious
and widespread attention to the falling birthrate and the risks involved.” This hope, a
limited and by no stretch of the imagination
a utopian one, was voiced twenty-six years
ago by Professor J. A. Thomson within the
framework of an admirable lecture on the
eugenic and social influence of war.* To-day,
in the midst of a struggle more widespread,
more terrible and more expressive of a
climax in the social development of man, we
must repeat that hope. Unlike Professor
Thomson’s day when the war might have
been expected to lead to a permanent
change in the trend, there is now, I suggest,
no escape; we must understand what is
happening. Not only has the birth-rate been
falling in this country for more than fifty
years but one difference between the 1914
war and the present conflict is the difference
between two nations at war, one more than
replacing its numbers, and the other with a
reproduction rate 25 per cent below replacement.

Since the last war we have given insufficient attention to the population problem.
Apart from the short-lived influence of a
little sensationalism the general public
remains ignorant of what is happening. Much
the same may be said of the Administration ;
witness the intellectual level of the Commons
Debate when the Statistics Act was introduced. It is curious that the Governments
we have had in the past twenty years have
shown so little interest in the future size and
quality of the population. Yet when the
root causes determining a long and uninterrupted fall in the birth-rate wherever
civilization has bestowed its mixed blessings
have been unravelled and analysed, we have
gone a long way to understanding the nature
of both individual and collective conflict.

*‘ Eugenics and War.’’ The Second Galton Lecture.
February 16th, 1915. (EuGENIcs REVIEW, 1915, 7, 1.)

49

During the last war our birth-rate interrupted its steady decline to fall suddenly and
sharply from 24-1 to 17-7 per 1,000 population. In Germany the fall was much steeper
from 28-3 to 14-3. After a temporary rise
following the end of hostilities the rate in
this country then resumed its steady downward trend. In 1938 the rate was 15-1 (a
figure well below the lowest point reached
during the 1914 war), in 1939 it stood at
14-9, in 1940 at 14:6. It is well to remember
that this crude birth rate is only a very poor
approximation to the truth but as we cannot
compute a more accurate index without the
necéssary Statistics we shall have to make do
with it during the war. However, we may
probe a little deeper into the material we
have.

By the use of a base line to represent the
quarterly birth-rates for the decennium
Ig2I-30 and then expressing the 10-year
rates as 100 for each quarter we obtain the
following ratios :

ENGLAND AND WALES

1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940
March . 78 7 77 82 80 80
June 80 8I 83 83 83 84
September 83 83 83 83 84 78
December 81 82 81 81 79 77

The regular course of the quarterly ratios
should be noted. The first sign of a change
is the September 1940 ratio. The reduction
is large and is significant. That the change
should occur at this point is interesting
because the births taking place during June
to September 1940 are those conceived from
September to December 1939—the first
three months of the war. A very rough
approximation shows that there were 9,000
fewer births in this quarter than in the
average of the corresponding quarters of
1935-9. The September-December 1940 ratio
shows a smaller drop and a corresponding
loss of roughly 5,000. These births were
conceived during December-March 1940
when the rush of anxiety due to the war had
50

somewhat diminished and a period of semi‘ normality obtained. The decline in the last
six months of 1940 caused the drop in the
annual rate from 14-9 in 1939 to 14:6. If no
change had taken place from July to December there would have occurred instead a
slight rise. It is significant therefore that the
decline did not arise as a result of a uniform
decrease spread over the whole year. It
should be remembered that these figures do
not reflect the influence of the fall of France
and, what may prove to be more important,
the effects of heavy and sustained day and
night raiding.

REVIEWS
STATISTICS

Peters, Charles C., and van Voorhis,
Walter R. Statistical Procedures and
thety Mathematical Bases. London,
1941. McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.
Ltd. Pp. xiiit+516. Price 31s. 6d.
net.

As the authors state in the foreword, this
is not a comprehensive treatment of the
mathematical bases of statistics. But to
have given it the title Some Statistical
Procedures and a Little Insight into the
Mathematical Bases of a Few of Them would
perhaps have been a little too modest.
Most books on statistics addressed to the
research worker give the methods cut and
dried, as in cookery books. At the same time,
most research workers without special mathematical training find the more comprehensive
texts somewhat indigestible, largely because
the derivations are usually given in too
condensed a form, omitting intermediate
steps in the development as “ obvious,”
obvious, that is to say, for the mathematician, though not necessarily for a biologist.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We cannot yet estimate the weight of
these factors, for the Weekly Returns of
Births only apply to towns and urban
populations. As a result of population
movements and evacuation the published
data for urban communities alone are clearly
of little value. For Scotland the Returns to
the end of 1940 show exactly the same
pattern :' little change during the first six
months but a decided fall from July to
December, which had the effect of producing
the lowest annual birth-rate ever recorded
for that country.

OF BOOKS

The present work gives the derivations of
formulz in great detail and thus makes a
real understanding of the working tools of
statistics easy. A particularly’ useful idea
was to open the book with a chapter on “A
Little Calculus,” which is a model of simplicity and clearness. The book deals with
statistics mainly on the classical large-_
sample lines, an understandable procedure,
as it is mainly addressed to workers on
educational and sociological research, where
samples are rarely small ; but some space is .
also given to the more modern treatment of .
small samples so often encountered in>
experimental work. Thirty pages of statis- .
tical tables conclude the work. If I were
asked which of the two books to buy, R. A. Fisher’s Statistical Methods for Research
Workers or this book, I should answer : both. ©
They are in many ways complementary, and
there can be little doubt that Peters and van
Voorhis’s clear exposition of the origin of
statistical procedures will help the research
worker to apply the formule more safely
and intelligently than if he is taking them for
granted.
P. F. MILLer.
