MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN

His Contribution to Eugenics and the Society
By Professor E. W. MACBRIDE, D.Sc., F.R.S.

HE present number of this Journal

contains the Galton Lecture by our

honorary president, Major Darwin;
and it may possibly be his swan-song.

As one looks back over the eighteen years
of his active presidency a feeling of longing
and regret surges up in the mind—a certainty that although future presidents may
wisely govern the Society and contribute
much to its influence none can ever exactly
fill his place. ‘‘ Later loves may right dear
prove yet they liken not first love.”’ For
Major Darwin, though not the actual first
president, was the first who, so to speak,
reared the Soctety from babyhood and
sketched out for it a coherent policy.

I had made my first contact with the
Society in 1912, when Major Darwin and the
then secretary, Mrs. Gotto, realizing that
sound eugenic thought can only be built on
a foundation of biological knowledge, established in the Imperial College a series of
afternoon classes in elementary biology for
the instruction of eugenic neophytes. In
these classes I was asked to help. When I
joined the Society in 1913 I had very vague
ideas about the aims of eugenics. At the
time I imagined that the ideal of eugenists
was to select healthy young men and women
and subsidize them to mate in order to produce healthy children. Some such view
had actually been adumbrated by Sir
Francis Galton. But in June, 1913, I
heard the Presidential Address delivered by
Major Darwin, and my whole view about
eugenics was changed, and I realized that it
was based—as indeed all science ought to be
—on sound common sense.

In that address Major Darwin pointed out
the burden upon society and the contamination of its blood, caused by its failures in the
shape of mental deficients, criminals, and

the physically incapable. He showed that
in natural species it was precisely this element which was eliminated by the struggle
for existence, but that in human society
these groups of the unfit were not only preserved but encouraged to propagate. It was
against this propagation that Major Darwin
protested. The aim of the Eugenics Society
was then to endeavour to maintain a high
general average of physical and mental fitness, not to aim at producing exceptional
people by forced mating. This reasoning
went straight to the heart of the biologist,
although in the comfortable pre-war days,
when it was first promulgated, the man in
the street would not listen to it. But in the
terrible war days that were approaching the
merciless logic of events drove the lesson
home. In 1914, owing to the enterprise of
the President and the Secretary, Dr. Binet,
joint author with Dr. Simon of. the famous
Simon and Binet Mental tests, was induced
to come to London and deliver an address to
the Society. This address drove home the
conviction of the inborn nature of mental
ability. During the war the ordinary
monthly meetings of members were intermitted, and the whole energies of the Society
were directed to propaganda amongst elementary school teachers. This propaganda
was one of the most valuable and successful
efforts ever made by the Society. In 1917
when the appalling losses of the very cream
of our young manhood were causing deep
apprehension to all thoughtful persons,
Major Darwin, who had served in Parliament as member for a Midland constituency,
headed a movement in the Society to ask for
relief to income-tax payers in the task of
bringing up their children. Owing to the
respect and affection with which he was
regarded by all political parties, this move
8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was successful. It is within the recollection
of all the present members that another move
in the same direction was initiated two or
three years ago by Major Darwin ; and this
request, although at first refused by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, commanded
such a large amount of sympathy amongst
the Conservative party that the Chancellor
had to yield.

Eugenics, although by this time dissociated in the public mind from Galton’s
ideas of forced mating, was still confused
with irrelevant matters. In some quarters
it was supposed to consist mainly in a campaign against venereal disease, in others,
even in certain sections of the Society itself,
it was visualized as an endeavour to produce
more babes cottte-qui-cotite. Patiently, line
upon line, precept upon precept, Major Darwin pressed home the idea that the basis
of eugenics was just ordinary common heredity, and that mental ability as well as physical fitness was inherited. There was no
point in producing more babies unless those
babies were of good stock. In all these
efforts Major Darwin was warmly seconded
by the Dean of St. Paul’s, whose clear, incisive intellect cut through the false sentimentalism that luxuriated immediately after
the war. Against the opposition of a certain section of the Society, Major Darwin
induced the Dean to give what may almost
be called his iconoclastic Galton Lecture of
1920—a lecture afterwards incorporated in
his Outspoken Essays. ‘This lecture
might be compared to a salutary cold douche
applied to the British public—then wallow
‘ing in a warm bath of unreal, mawkish

emotion. We were behaving, as the Dean
said, as if we had come into a fortune, not as
if we had just spent £8,000,000,000.

Any society such as the Eugenics Society
whose object is social reform, is sure to
attract to its ranks a number of extremists
and faddists who seek its countenance for
their aims. As eugenics is necessarily connected with reproduction, people with morbid and abnormal views on sexual matters
had a tendency to become vocal at its meetings, and Major Darwin had a difficult task
to restrain their effusions. He stood like a
rock for the sanctity of marriage and the
validity of the ordinary rules of morality.
In so doing he was not only expressing the
soundness and cleanness of his own character, but he was also doing the greatest possible service to the Society, for if eugenics
is ever to gain wide influence, it must attract
to itself the support of the ordinary respectable Englishman. He also laboured with
great perseverance to induce scientific men
to join the Society, so as to obtain for it the
prestige of a solid phalanx of scientific
opinion. In this he had only a moderate
amount of success. ‘Though deeply respected by scientific men, he was unable to
convince many of them that the Society was
purged of faddists. Even Dr. Bateson, the
prophet of Mendelism and the inventor of
the word “‘ genetics,’’ could not be induced
to join it. It will, we fear, require the still
nearer approach of schemes of fostering the
unfit before scientific men in general rally
to our support.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.
