THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS

and never taking advantage of a fault to
appear clever at the other man’s expense.
Some may have thought it strange that
Bramwell should have chosen a _ business
career. That he would have made a good

_ Igt

lawyer or a good teacher is without question ;
but we who worked with Bramwell will
always be thankful that he chose business
and that we had the great privilege of being
associated with him.

 

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS:

The Utopia of the Eugenists*
By PAUL BLOOMFIELD.

MIEL wrote in his wonderful diary :
A: Improve man, make him more just,
more moral, more humble, more pure
—this is the only reform which has no
correlative drawback. Institutions are worth
no more than the value of the man who
uses them.” (‘‘ Les institutions ne valent
que ce que vaut homme qui les applique.’’)
Governments on the whole behave as if
people owed—and, still more, will in future
owe—their character and ‘ worth”’ to institutions, but without going as far as Amiel
most of the Utopian writers from Plato to
Bernard Shaw have believed that reform, or
what we call progress, requires us to pay
some attention to breeding. Since piety for
the past is a virtue somewhat wanting just
now, it may be fair as well as useful to recall
the suggestions, made by some of those remarkable prophets, for supplying society
with improved men instead of only supplying men with an improved society. It is true
that eugenic principles occasionally sound
out of tune with the precepts of the great
moralists. The discord is usually only
apparent, the impression we get being due to
the fact that moralists emphasize more the
individual’s relations to God, eugenists more
his ties to past and his responsibilities to
future generations of men. At any rate the
Utopian writers were moralists themselves,

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on September 28th, 1948.

some of them in the small flight of the
world’s greatest.

Ancient Wisdom

The mysteries of kingship early in history
bore upon mankind the significance of
“blood.” Folklore and fairy tales attest to
it, and the Bible abounds with genealogies.
Plato must not be expected to have fallen
into traps which still catch prominent men
with less intelligence. He neither regarded
the human stock as stabilized, with the good,
the beautiful, the capable and the strong reproducing themselves in an invariable ratio
to the others, nor did he feel that any blind
process of selection could be depended on to
populate his ideal republic with an ideal race.
So he had recourse to eugenic measures. The
brave and the fair were to be encouraged to
mate—but not to bring children into the
world after the brave were fifty-five or the
fair forty. Plato’s persistent speculations as
to the right age for getting married showed a
scientific habit of mind which was soon to be
abandoned for hundreds of years; not,
indeed that other paragons of ancient wisdom or of medieval common sense failed to
notice for themselves, as Ecclesiastes had
put it, that “ to every thing there is a season,
and a time to every purpose under heaven.”
Though the Jewish sage specified “‘ a time to
embrace and a time to refrain from embracing,” his exact meaning is obscure.
192

Plato made himself quite clear. If his marriage laws had bound posterity we should not
have had Napier, the inventor of logarithms,
son of a boy of sixteen, nor Charles James
Fox, and those other brilliant Napiers, who
were descendants of Sir Stephen Fox and
the second wife whom he married at the age
of seventy-seven. Probably of Plato’s guesses
that for the best upper age-limit for men to
procreate is the one least likely to be supported by modern eugenists. Still, he was
wise to give thought to this question of age.
As it turns out the mother’s age, I understand, is not only a factor in determining the
frequency of extra toes in guinea pigs, but
also, among human beings, in predisposing
‘children to certain mental defects. The
width of the margin of safety is no reproach
to Plato’s intuition.

The Renaissance

Nearly two thousand years passed before
another great man, or any man, wrote a
second Utopian book. To appreciate the
liberal-mindedness of this English gentleman, Sir Thomas More, who was also a
Catholic martyr, we need to cast ourselves
back in imagination to a time when the
terms Catholic and Protestant had not the
meanings we assign to them. It was as a
child of the Renaissance that the Blessed
Thomas could allow divorce in his ideal
State, which was a highly patriarchal one,
quite unlike Plato’s. In his approval of large
families More was in accord with Jewish and
Christian sentiment, and with the views of
the Eugenics Society to-day. His more
original contribution to eugenic lore was particularly bold, it seems to me. He emphasized the importance in marriage of physical
compatibility—or how else would one interpret his stipulation that before a betrothal
could be clinched ‘“‘a sad and an honest
matron showeth the woman naked to the
wooer,” and “a sage and discrete’’ man
exhibits the wooer likewise to his provisionally minded? Even to-day physical compatibility is a neglected factor of human
happiness, one that affects children as well
as parents. More deserves credit for opening
the subject. It would have been phenomenal

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

if it had crossed his mind—living when he
did—that before deciding to marry people
ought to be told anything that was known
about their future partner’s ancestors’ bodily
and mental health records ; for there is a
deeper compatibility which concerns the race.
A quarter of a century after More’s execution was born Tommaso Campanella (15611626). An intractable Dominican like
Giordano Bruno, he was a Utopian writer of
unequal parts who had brilliant flashes of
prescience. Certainly his Civitas Solis would
have been one of the most disagreeable of the
“‘ ideal’ States to live in. For using lipstick
a girl was sent to the scaffold, if you please!
But in spite of all the nonsense and applied
astrology Campanella had a remarkable
eugenic policy. Out of solicitude for the
preservation of the mean, in which health
seemed to him to lie, he ruled that fat women
should marry thin men, tall women short
men, and so forth. More striking are these
points: citizens of the sun were to have
been given a thorough education by the age
of ten—and they lived, we are told, to be
two hundred. We have, then, in this renegade monk, a forerunner of Bernard Shaw.
This is the best of Campanella, better than
his arrangement for the State to be governed
by a council of conjurors presided over by
the Metaphysicus, the man who came out
top of all his nation in a general knowledge
examination. Yes, but absurd as this may
sound, it is not as far as all that removed
from Plato’s plan for philosophers to be
kings, and when we come to Galton’s own
Utopia we shall see that he also, like Campanella, picked his senators by means of
competitive tests, though not merely tests
of knowledge. Let us not be duped by
ideological propaganda into believing that
the choice of leaders before us is between the
capitalist, the commissar and the yogi.
The Utopia, Bensalem, in Bacon’s famous
New Atlantis was a kingdom with a parliament of scientists, a philoprogenitive land in
which “‘ the king is debtor to no man buf for
propagation of his subjects.”” The Bensalemite who lived to see thirty descendants
of his body was given the title of Tirsan and
a feast at the public expense. Thirty will
THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS

appear a modest figure if we consider that
Lady Temple of Stowe, a contemporary of
Bacon’s, is reputed to have lived to see seven
hundred descendants of her body. Modern
eugenists, at any rate, agree with Bacon in
approving of large families—provided, of
course, they are eugenic. Modern statesmanship, however, is not very successful and even
‘less discriminating in translating into action
such concern as it may have for human
fruitfulness. In England the new bloodless
revolution of the last decades has hastened
the decline of the rate of increase of population in general, and particularly among the
educated bourgeoisie on whose side Lord
Keynes said he would be found if it came to
a class war. The price of thirty cigarettes a
week for each child after the first is a mild
measure, unlikely to encourage the more
eugenic sort of parents to have large families.
It is the same five shillings for the third
feeble-minded child that ought never to have
been born as it would be for the second intelligent and healthy boy or girl which some
conscientious couple refrained from bringing
into the world. Our democracy has still to
work out a just compromise in these matters.

The Age of Reason

The miraculously creative seventeenth
century passed; the eighteenth affirmed
man’s original virtue. This doctrine, so true
in respect of our core of spirituality, so false
in respect of ourselves as social beings,
inspired Morelly’s characteristic Utopia, The
Floating Islands. In this Arcadia love was to
be free. We must make allowances for the
superficiality of Morelly’s treatment of his
subject because, in fact, love had got to be
set a good deal more free than it was—from
money interests and caste prejudice—before
it could be invited to discipline itself a little
for the sake of the race. As we shall see, the
later nineteenth-century Utopians carried
this argument further. Meanwhile the early
nineteenth-century optimist, Eugene Cabet,
wrote a Utopian book which represented the
apotheosis of the steam engine, and he followed it up by founding a Communist Icaria
in America. It was not a success, and Cabet
returned to France and the fold of Chris
193

tianity. For the Utopian Icaria, a place
beset with terrible ‘‘ controls,’ he had nevertheless laid down some sensible eugenic rules.
People with certain diseases were forbidden
to marry, and Cabet, like Campanella, was a
believer in the mean, so he wished young men
from the mountain heights to be encouraged
to court the maids of the plain. Furthermore, sound foreign types were to be “‘ imported ” in infancy for inter-breeding with
the native Icarian stock.

After Galton

Then came Darwin, and his half-cousin
Galton. Their epoch-making books had been
published by the time the American Bellamy,
the Englishman William Morris and the
Austrian Hertzka wrote their so very different Utopias. Bellamy amended Morelly’s
free love to marriage only by inclination ;
Morris, who detested Bellamy’s materialism
but was like him a radical, made the very
important point that after marrying (or I
had better say mating) by inclination a
woman was not to become absolutely dependent on her husband or lover, and
Hertzka, a professional economist, agreed
with this and went on to work out the financial details. Now although eugenists like
families to be united, not the whole time
glorying in their right to separate if they
want, it is clear that unless men and women
are as free in their marriage relations as these
Utopian writers made them, positive eugenics
could not be voluntary, and if it was not
voluntary it would be intolerably despotic,
more particularly no doubt for women.

A touch, not indeed of despotism, but of
Platonic severity distinguishes the Modern
Utopia of H. G. Wells, the first great mentor
of the twentieth century. We are in deeper
waters here, because Wells was also the first
Utopian familiar with Darwin and Galton.
He laid down that a couple not licensed—
because not eugenically fully qualified—to
produce children would be liable to sterilization after the birth of a second defective
child. I suppose the most Galtonian and
progressive biological provision in his ideal
State was that which obliged engaged
couples to show each other their personal
health records ; an advance on More’s plan
for them just to strip. The next step but one,
and ‘how significant it would be, would consist of declaring their heredity records. But
these, of course, would first have had to be
compiled.

So lastly Shaw, and back to Methuselah.
Wells had relied on selection. The lamarckian
Shaw declares for a mutation, the effect of
will, which shall make us live long enough
not only to be able to learn by experience
but to have time to re-create human nature
in the light of our new wisdom. I feel sure,
by the way, that biologists will not have
heard the last of the dan vital, etc., even
when the food-preferences of stick-insects
have been accounted for by normal evolutionary principles.* God is the great opportunist. And since Shaw’s book is by far the
most read of any I have mentioned except
Plato’s Republic, I will say no more about it
here except that, from Galton on, eugenists
have stressed the importance of members of
the best stocks living a long time. Longevity
is transmissible—there are already relatively
long-livers among us. Thus the famous
stock-breeder, Coke of Norfolk (a descendant
of the great Elizabethan lawyer) who died at
eighty-three, married a second time when he
was sixty-seven, and the average age of
himself and his two successors (the second
and third Earls of Leicester) was ninety ;
their line has taken only nine generations to
span the last four centuries instead of the
normal twelve.

Let there then come an age when everyone
will love life and be able to make the most of
it, and when the fifth Commandment will
make excellent sense if the word “‘for’’ is
substituted for the word ‘‘ that.” ‘‘ Honour
thy father and thy mother, for thy days may
be long in the land that the Lord thy God
giveth thee.”

Enough if our thought reaches as far as
that.

THE UTOPIA OF THE EUGENISTS
For eugenists as for philosophers the
cardinal question about Utopia is this:

*See J. S. Huxley, Evolution, third impression,
P- 459.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

What kind of people ought we to hope to find
living there? Not so much, what laws will
there be in the new Golden Age, as what sort
of people will be there to obey them? Nor,
again, will the constitution in those days be
republican, oligarchical or what you will, but
what qualifications will be required of the
men and women who are to do the necessary
work of governing ?

The Ideal Couple

It is nearly sixty years since the publication of the book by which Galton founded the
systematic study of human heredity. Lately
the Eugenics Soctety has defined as the ideal
eugenic parents the couple who “‘ in a community which provides good prospects for
the future welfare of children, which encourages family life and inculcates a sense of
its responsibilities, produce, by intention and
design, a family large enough for replacement and provide for it a happy and healthy
home.”’

On first reading this I at once said to
myself: ‘‘ Yes, but where are we to find a
society like this? ’’ There was, I thought, a
puzzling suggestion that the social climate,
the Utopia, must be a prerequisite for producing what could only be produced dy it.
But, needless to say, the Eugenics Soctety
does not fail to describe the horse which I
am alleging had been put behind the cart.
Their standards of eugenic value for individuals, then, are the following: (1) good
health and physique; (2) intelligence ; (3)
social usefulness or good citizenship; (4)
freedom from genetic taints; (5) membership of a large and happy family and fondness
for children. They are quite ready to
acknowledge that great contributions have
been made to human progress and happiness
by people who were not up to these standards,
as by being frail, like Mozart, or tainted, like
Swift, or very moderately fond of children,
like Galileo—who made no bones about
packing off his illegitimate girls to a nunnery. And it is not hard to see that in order
to be truly eugenic an individual has got to
be more than ostensibly good in himself as a
moral and physical being, more than merely
good as a phenotype (to use the technical
THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS °

word), since all the time he may be carrying
harmful recessive genes. To be a sound genotype he must not only possess but also be
likely to transmit good qualities. But since
the whole good does not lie in genetic
potentiality, the point is soon reached when
eugenists have to start trying to make up
their minds what human values they want
brought to light, and not only darkly perpetuated.

Eugenics and Ethics

We notice meanwhile that of the five
eugenic standards only two, or one and a
half, relate to ethics, and it seems a little
hard to see where sensibility comes in. It
would be irrelevant to complain that “ virtue ’’—just like that—does not figure in the
list, since it is not, like certain forms of intelligence, heritable. ‘“‘ Social usefulness,’’
which smacks of ethics, is allowed to pass
presumably because it goes with health and
intelligence more often than not, if only
rather negatively. I should, however, like to
put in a reminder that “ good citizenship ”’
is as unmoralized a quality in itself as intelligence : both can be applied to evil, and
for that matter dysgenic ends.

As for large families—we cannot want
everyone to have them, or before long there
would be a really terrible population problem, and even if the overcrowding was with
perfect eugenic Venuses and Adonises life
would be embarrassed and would not be the
good life. Galton was boundlessly indignant
with the medizval Church for imposing
celibacy on its servants, and so depriving
the world of their invaluable posterity. I
believe he said a little too much; good
people, good genotypes, too, sometimes for
altruistic reasons choose to remain single.
Galton himself married—but had no children. He was justified by his works, and so,
no doubt (and by faith), were a good many
men and women who have had benefit of
clergy. I no more mean this as a complete
contradiction of his opinions about clerical
celibacy than I should support Campanella’s
Metaphysicus in compulsorily divorcing
Galton and his wife and marrying them off to
new partners in case they had only been

195

mutually sterile, like and
Josephine.

Very well: the five standards of eugenic
value have been affirmed, and accepted as
more or less axiomatic. They are, however,
vague in certain respects, so eugenists go on
to make two kinds of inquiries in order to
clarify their, position. They ask : What are
the eugenically desirable types—exemplifiers
as well as carriers of good qualities—and
they set about isolating and measuring the
qualities which are features of personality.
These may not always be measurable; or
they may not be innate, but more a product
of nurture than of nature, and in this case we
cannot exactly breed for them. We shall see
that it is impossible to discuss ‘‘ desirable
types ”’ lucidly without considering how they
are to behave, that is, without an appeal to
certain other standards, namely, ethical ones.
The significance of behaviour naturally
depends on our ideas of good and evil.

Ethical Standards

Such ideas have been crystallized for us by
a handful of great moralists. When Tzuchang asked Confucius what “ the five great
good qualities ’’’ were, Confucius answered
‘‘ courtesy, breadth, good faith, diligence and
clemency.” Socrates said one ought never to
do harm, even to one’s enemies, and that the
truth was to be pursued wherever it might
lead. On the whole, Confucius and Socrates,
who lived much longer and moved in
altogether more educated circles than Jesus,
were more inclined than Jesus to hold up a
sophisticated ideal. Still, they would not
have found a great deal to criticize in the
Sermon on the Mount if we take it (as not
everybody will) to have enjoined simplicity
of manners, charitableness, resistance to
sensuality, avoidance of aggressiveness and
standing up bravely for one’s convictions.
This is not speaking the language of eugenics.
But obviously the “ types ’’ who would be
“‘ eugenically desirable ’’ and worth breeding
for would have to have, among other things,
a native disposition to realize the kind of
character approved by the great moralists.
We have noticed that one and a half ethical
qualities, or quasi-virtues, have been treated

Napoleon
196

by representative eugenists as eugenic.
“Social usefulness ’’ is ambiguous ; “ fondness for children,”’ in so far as it means one’s
own children, is a quasi-virtue which the
human race for the most part has in common
with eagles and foxes. Of the classic cardinal
virtues the only one implicit in the Eugenics
Society’s definition of a eugenic couple is the
least—how shall I put it ?—generous of
them: prudence.

The Desirable Types

Not long ago the Soczety conducted a symposium on eugenically desirable types.*
Now it might- appear that the solution of
many human problems would be easier if
certain psychological types came to outnumber other types. But psychological
types are not the same as eugenic types,
because temperament—in the usual sense of
the word, which is in fact not very different
from its technical definition—is too complicated to be regarded as a heritable factor.
On the other hand again, we should be justified in working on the hypothesis that suchand-such eugenic types, in a favourable
environment, will beget more and more of
the desirable psychological types ; we shall
see in a moment that eugenists do, very
properly, go reconnoitring across the frontiers of their province. So back to the
symposium.

Dr. Newfield was squarely for adding
longevity to the five standards, and said that
“the most dependable recipe for long life is
well known : it is to choose parents belonging
to long-lived stocks.’”” He was against
Bernard Shaw’s alternative method—of
(somehow!) creating a long-lived mutation
aS a sport in a short-lived society—not
because Shaw is a lamarckian of Samuel
Butler’s kind and a seer, but because mutations are so often found to be harmful. I will
take Dr. Newfield’s third additional standard
before his second: it is the eugenic value
which can be “‘ surmised ” from the eugenic
record of a person’s ancestors. Fair enough,
and in keeping with mankind’s ancient
appreciation of ‘‘a chip of the old block.”
The importance of Dr. Newfield’s second

* EuGEenics Review, October 1946, p. 133. ‘

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

point is that by begging the question he
involves us in human values, for when he
says that any couple “ that has produced a
richly endowed family” has proved its
eugenic worth, he must expect us to have
made up our minds what rich endowment
itself consists in. ‘‘ Social usefulness ’’ is

_much too vague a criterion. A master spy is

socially useful, but his works are not good
and do not conduce to any kind of Utopia.
I wish educationists and others more regularly showed that they noticed that
“ society ’’ is not unanimous about values,
and that a vast amount of “ good citizenship ”’ goes to perpetuate the world’s ills. . . .
It is a different matter when Dr. Blacker
suggests that having had two “ eugenically
sound ”’ children should entitle a couple to
get State aid if they need it. Then we can
admit (without for the moment stopping to
argue how the soundness has been reckoned)
that this would be eugenic policy—which

‘paying five shillings a week for all children

up to the age of fourteen, born after the first
one, is not: it is a measure of social justice
or. compassion.

Speaking after Dr. Newfield, Mr. Eley
reasonably envisaged Utopia as a three-class
society of leaders, lieutenants and other
ranks, with fewer non-conformists and more
co-operators than hitherto. With the last
part of this I non-conform, as I believe that
the best co-operators are non-conformists
after the causes for their non-conformity have
been removed. One of the latest analyses of
psychological type is Dr. Sheldon’s, quoted
with great approval by Aldous Huxley in
The Perennial Philosophy. Can Mr. Eley’s
three classes, I wonder, be identified with
Dr. Sheldon’s ectomorphs (whom Plato
would perhaps have chosen for his rulers),
endomorphs (the lieutenants, which they
would not have been in Wells’s Utopia, on
account of their tendency to run to fat) and
mesomorphs (to whom the routine jobs would
fall) ? I have my own strong doubts about
all this.

The Quest for Serenity
After Mr. Eley, Mrs. Bosanquet. She
seems to me to have had some excellent
THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS

things to say. To begin with she also asks
for more inborn co-operativeness, and then—
and this is where the interest quickens—she
confesses her faith in a factor of a kind of
emotional warmth, a transmissible lovingkindness. She adds a third quality which
may or may not, like warmth of feeling, be a
genetic trait, namely serenity of temperament. Now I feel she is a thousand times
right to probe in this way, to plumb these
depths. And that they are, even I dare say,
for the greatest experts. What, in plain
words, am I talking about ? I suppose I am
asking with Mrs. Bosanquet whether
‘serene’ people marrying one another and
having decently large families will tend to
increase the number of serene members of the
community in proportion to the rest. I
should like to ask a little more than that.
Might it be in nature for them to be
able to do so even if their community does
not provide those “‘ good prospects’’ for
children, and does not encourage family
life ?

Again, it is most important to be as clear
as possible. Don’t we as a matter of fact
often think of serenity as something
achieved in the teeth of all sorts of trials?
I think we do; it is usually an acquired
quality, one which, like virtue itself, may
distinguish persons belonging to any of the
psychological types, the endomorph and the
mesomorph as well as the more spiritually
inclined ectomorph. This is a reason why
psychologists who try to measure socially
valuable qualities find it so hard to decide
whether any of them—apart from a sort of
brain-power (Spearman’s “‘g”’ factor and a
number of primary abilities) are specific to
particular situations or general, that is inherent in personality. At this point we have
to reckon with the theological principle of
grace. (Or call it ‘‘ x,” as Professor Haldane
does.) Whatever grace may be, it certainly
doesn’t “‘inhere.”’ By their terms of reference the statistical psychologists seem to have
to ignore that inner light which, for example,
transformed the brutal Cromwellian sailor,
Thomas Lurting, into something like a saint.
Doesn’t the spirit have its mutations, too?
I believe so. And they are sometimes dele
197
terious, like the other ones; sometimes,
however, not. .

Now far be it from me to use mysticism
like a spanner for throwing into the works.
If seeing the light is a characteristic it is an
acquired one, I have already made haste to
admit. But this does not quite dispose of it
from a eugenic point of view, since those who
are illuminated may be impelled to look for
kindred spirits and may marry them and
bring into existence a very special kind of
community such as the Quakers. The
Quakers’ feelings about family life have had
some highly significant results for eugenic
breeding.

The Third Force in Evolution

You see I am still wondering about
“serenity.”’ There it is. How do we find out
whether it can be transmitted ? Suppose we
take it as a hypothesis that it can be, the
practical question is : How are certain kinds
of people, the serene ones, to be encouraged
to find each other in the crowd, and to like
each other enough to propose marriage? It
can only happen in a rather mysterious way,
at any rate at first. There has to be an
interposition of something like the Quakerish supra-temperamental enlightenment, a
mutual concern for certain values. This, I
believe, is what brings out those necessary
affinities, those secret affinities—which
would be hidden from even the most disinterested eugenist not-in-the-know.

Without trying to make out that there
are any other agencies of physical evolution than nature and nurture, I hope I
have sufficiently stressed a moral impulse
that enters into the process. To-day still, of
course, far too many people think that
nature can look after itself and that when one
has said “education’’ and “equality of
opportunity’ the subject of nurture is
exhausted. But there is also breeding, in the
now rather unpopular sense, the family
sense, the sense in which I have been using it.
This we must continue to distinguish and
save if we can from foolish insinuations and
bad laws. The Utopia of the eugenists

' would, however, be populated by people

drawn together by influences which had
198

enabled them to resist and overcome the
opposition of an unfriendly society... .
There would be my horse before the cart.

Kantsaywhere

To end, a word about Galton’s own
Utopia, Kantsaywhere—known to me only
through Dr. Blacker’s very lucid summaries.
But is it not by the way very suitable, and
very appropriate, that Galton himself should
have been born into just one of those Quaker
families we have been discussing, whose
members picked their husbands and wives
with such a care for moral compatibility ?
Indeed, he was descended from the greatest
of Quaker sires, Robert Barclay.

His Utopia was ruled by an academic
Senate with an inner cabinet of three.
Senators were people who had gained more
than seventy marks in four tests : anthropometric, esthetic and _ literary, : medical,
ancestral. It is a notion full of interesting
possibilities. And after all, half marks for
ancestors would not disqualify anyone who
came out well in the other tests. Every

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lineage has to have its genesis. Even in an
un-Utopian society an ambitious man can
say with Napoleon, “‘ I am an ancestor,” but
in Kantsaywhere it would be unnecessary—
and for that matter extremely difficult—for
him to convulse the world in order to prove
it. One of the beauties of Galton’s notion is
that it would mean a restoration of pride of
race, revised, and would give people such a
sense of their inborn dignity that they
would not countenance Napoleonic or Hitlerian pretensions. Public opinion would be
intelligent.

Public opinion is something we have seen
a good deal moulded one way and another in
the last thirty years, largely in the interests
of that most formidable of institutions, the
modern State. “‘ Improve man... this is
the only reform which has no correlative
drawback.”’ I conclude as I began, with these
wise words of Amiel’s. “ Improve man... .
Institutions are worth no more than the
value of the man who uses them.”’

It is going to be hard to persuade people of
it, but we must try.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Chicago.

In the January 1949 number:

ANALYSIS OF SOME PHASES OF MELANOBLAST MIGRATION IN BARRED PLYMOUTH ROCK EMBRYOS. By Marjorie
H. Fox.

DOMINANCE IN WINTER FLOCKS OF JUNCOS AND TREE SPARROWS. By Wourrep S. Sasine.
GROWTH OF PROTOZOA IN GLASSWARE CLEANED WITH SULPHURIC ACID-POTASSIUM BICHROMATE SOLUTION.

y Henry W. ScHOENBORN.

THE EFFECT OF SEITZ FILTRATION ON THE PROTEIN CONTENT AND PRECIPITIN REACTION OF DILUTED
ANTIGEN SOLUTIONS. By ELEANorR Ditxs and Harotp R. WOLFE.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October

Subscription $10 a year Single copies $3

Canadian postage 20c.

Foreign postage 48c.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 4
