THE HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

Its Bearing on the Bases of Human Society

By Professor E. W. MacBRIDE, D.Sc., F.R.S.

UMANITY is distinguished from the

rest of the animal kingdom, partly,

no doubt, by certain anatomical features, but above all by the fact that all
human beings are organized into societies.
It is this organization which gave mankind
their power of survival when menaced by
competitors far larger and more powerful
than themselves, and which enabled
humanity to win step by step its present
dominating position in the organic world.
All our religious and moral ideals are based
ultimately on our relation to one another in
societies. ‘‘It was not man that made
society, it was society that made man.”’

Now there are various types of society at
present in the world; and there are many
who think that society can be moulded from
without, according to some ideal plan. In
the past society has not so been moulded,
but has grown. Like other fundamental
things it is based on great primary instincts, and it seemed to me worth while to
make a comparative study of the development of these instincts in the higher
animals, in other words to seek to discover
why animals of the same species associate
in groups—what in fact the herd instinct 1s
and how it .has arisen.

Mankind belongs to the great phylum
vertebrata, which comprises all animals
with a jointed backbone, a tubular nerve
cord, a brain and eyes, ears and nose. This
phylum is divided into the five classes of
Fishes, Amphibia, Reptiles, Birds and
Mammals, and of these classes Fish are the
lowest and most simply organized, and we
shall therefore begin our study of the herd
instinct with them.

Now, if we confine our attention to the
British herring fisheries, we find that when
the herring are approaching our shores they
are taking no food, but that the genital

97

organs of both males and females are at
their full development. It is, therefore,
the call of sex which brings the vast
crowds contained in these shoals together.
The females lay their eggs on gravelly
bottoms in shallow water; the males deposit their milt on the eggs after they are
laid, and the eggs adhere to the stones by
means of a glutinous envelope. The parents
then scatter and leave the young to their
fate. The young hatch out as tiny threadlike creatures, which require to grow for
three years before they, in turn, are ready
to lay eggs; how they pass the intervening
time is not well known, but once they have
attained maturity they return to spawn year
after year, and they may live to be ten or
twelve years old. When one considers
that a full-grown herring will lay in one
year 20,000 eggs, it can be seen what a
gigantic family one prosperous herring pair
may have before they terminate their
careers,

That is, however, not the whole story of
the herring. Off the coast of Norway, there
is another migration of the herring, halfway between successive spawning times. At
these times they are spoken of as ‘“‘ fat herring,’ because the flesh is rich and oily but
the genital organs are shrunken. They are
then following the shoals of minute crustacea on which they feed and are having a
royal time. There is food and to spare for
all, and whatever struggle there may be to
escape the enemies which prey on them,
there is no struggle amongst the herring
themselves for food. At times, however,
when they are not spawning and food is
relatively scarce, each herring separates as
widely as possible from its neighbours, and
hunts for itself.

The salmon have a history somewhat
similar to that of the herring. They live
98

and grow in the sea, and there they lead isolated lives, for if caught at all they are only
found singly ; but they must obtain plenty of
food in the sea because the lines of growth on
their scales show a very rapid increase in
size. The scales of a fish grow like the
rings of a tree. Every year a fresh ring
appears on the scale and by the width of the
scale one can tell how much the fish has
grown since the last year, for the growth
of the body is in proportion to the width of
the ring. ‘Then, when they are about three
years old they begin a spawning migration
towards the coast, nosing along it looking
for their favourite river. They then run
up the rivers, fighting against the currents,
surmounting the smaller waterfalls by
gigantic leaps, till they assemble in shallow pools in the upper reaches. Here the
female chooses a gravelly spot for her eggs
and then she looks out for a male, and
brings him to the spot; then the eggs are
laid and the milt deposited on them. The
exhausted parents then run down the river
one by one and recuperate during the winter
in the sea.

During their stay in fresh water the salmon eat little, but they will take an occasional fly as a tit-bit, otherwise there would
be no fun in angling for salmon. After the
young are hatched, they live for two years
in fresh water and during this period grow
but slowly: they are only the size of a
small herring when they enter the sea. In
Britain the salmon return to spawn several
times in succession, but in British Columbia
after a successful spawning they die, and
they enter the rivers so gorged with food
that they disdain even flies. This is given
by Canadians as the reason why Great
Britain surrendered Oregon to the United
States. The Commissioners sent out to
negotiate, thought that the territory in dispute was worthless, for the ‘‘ salmon would
not rise to the fly.’’

Do the salmon really return to the river
in which they were hatched? ‘The fishermen were always convinced that they did,
but this point has only quite recently been
fully established. Along the northern
shores of the Irish county in which I was


THE EUGENICS REVIEW

born there is a prosperous salmon fishery.
The fish are caught as they are going along
the coast to find two rivers up which they
run. These rivers are the Bush and the
Bann. The Bush drains a region inhabited
by Roman Catholics, whilst the people living in the Bann valley are mostly Protestant. When the net is emptied, the fisherman will pick out a fish and say: ‘‘ That
is a Papist,’’ and of another ‘‘ He is a Protestant,’’ according as the fish in question
belongs to the Bush or the Bann race respectively. I might say that it has been
established that about 70 to 75 per cent.
of salmon hatched in a river return to it to
spawn, but there is an odd 25 to 30 per
cent. of more adventurous souls who look
for fresh rivers. This return of salmon to
the river of their birth is a marvellous instance of memory.

We shall now examine another instance of
the spawning community habit which, to
my mind, is the most wonderful of all, that
is the life story of the eel. We Londoners
are familiar with Eel-pie Island above Richmond, and we realize that in its adult and
edible condition the eel is a freshwater fish.
As it is most voracious and will eat almost
anything, it grows to a very considerable
size and is a valuable article of food. It can
pick up a living even in a small pond. But
when it is fully grown, a strange craving
for salt water comes over it, and it starts
on a long journey to the coast. It will leave
the water and wriggle over damp meadows
by night to get from pond to pond. I caught
one two years ago in a wet spot in a field a
few yards from the sea cliff in Cornwall.
Once plunged in the sea, the eels from every
river not only in England but in all Europe,
nay even from Morocco and the Levantine
shores of the Mediterranean, make their
way across the Atlantic to the same spot
about 100 miles south of the Bermuda
Islands. ‘There in mid-water the females
shed their eggs, which float, and the males
emit their milt amongst them. The young
as they hatch rise to the top. They are
blade-like transparent creatures with white
blood, so unlike their parents that they
received a different name, and it required
HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

the genius of the Italian investigator,
Grassi, to discover their true nature. These
slender, opalescent fish begin to fight their
way back to the river of their birth, a
journey which requires three years to accomplish. As they approach the coast their
shape changes, they develop red blood and
become cylindrical, and then in the spring
they swarm up the rivers, keeping as far
as possible under the shelter of the banks.
They are no thicker than a small pencil, and
it is this circumstance which has given rise
to the fable that eels developed out of horsehairs.

RACIAL MEMORY OF EELS

Eventually they reach ponds and sluggish reaches in the upper parts of the rivers,
and here they feed and grow fat. Since no
eels ever return after having once gone down
to sea to spawn, the young can have no
acquired memory of their former home, and
they must be directed by an inborn or racial
memory. One of the most remarkable facts
is this—that to the same place in the Atlantic
not only European eels but American eels
come for their great nuptial celebration but
when they have spawned and the young
hatch out, the young American eels know
their way back to America and do not
attempt to come to Europe, and the young
European eels have to find their way back
to Europe whence the parents came but to
which they never return.

So far we have been discussing fish which,
when once they have deposited eggs, take no
further interest in them but leave them to
their fate. Indeed, the adult cod are
amongst the worst enemies of their own offspring, and the first concern of the cod fry
is to escape from the attentions of their own
parents. In such fish the community
spirit is based merely on the call of sex, and
when the demands of sex have been satisfied
the community breaks into its constituent
members. But there are isolated cases,
known principally amongst fresh-water fish
in which one parent at least watches over the
welfare of the offspring. One of the best
studied of these is the familiar fresh-water
stickleback. In this species the male

99

acquires in the breeding season a bright
rosy tint on his breast, so that he is
familiarly known as a robin. Then he
proceeds to build a nest with fragments of
water-weed, and having set up his family
residence, sallies forth in search of a mate.
When he has found one, he guides her into
the nest and stands guard whilst she deposits the eggs, which he then fertilizes. He
continues to watch over the eggs till the
fry hatch, and does not desist from his
fatherly care till the young are able to look
after themselves. During this period he
betrays no ‘‘ community spirit ’’ whatever,
and is ready to attack fiercely any other
fish, whether belonging to his own species
or not, that ventures near his home.

AMPHIBIAN COMMUNITY LIFE

If we now ascend in the animal scale to
the Amphibia, a class which includes our
frogs, toads, and newts, we find much the
same state of affairs as in fish and for the
same reason: the mother never takes any
care of her offspring. Most of us regard
frogs, toads, and newts as pre-eminently
adapted for life in water ; and whilst that is
normally true for a few isolated species, the
vast majority are land animals. But all,
with a few isolated exceptions, go to the
water to lay their eggs, and the young are
for the first period of their existence fish—
breathing by gills and propelling themselves
by their tails. If we take the common
newt, for instance, we find that the young
live in the water for six months, and then
lose their gills and migrate to land. They
continue to live on land for four years till
they have reached their full adult size.
Then, and then only, do they return to the
water. The male begins to court the female
by gambolling around her and occasionally jumping over her and flicking her with
his tail. When he has worked her up into
a suitable state of excitement, he deposits
his spermatozoa in a packet on the ground.
This packet is called a spermatophore and
the female, walking on the trail left by the
male, picks up the spermatophore with the
lips of her genital opening and thus
fertilizes her own eggs.
100

In the common newt development does
not begin until the egg is laid, but in the
allied genus Salamandra development begins inside the mother, and the young are
born as little four-legged creatures with
feathery gills. But in the case of both
salamanders and newts once the sexual play
is over and the eggs are laid or the young
brought forth, community life ceases and the
adults resume their life on land where they
lead isolated lives, each hunting in its own
beat.

Amongst frogs and toads there is, as is well
known, a similar resort to the water in the
spring and a vigorous community life, accompanied by loud croaking on the part of
the males. They appear to rival each
other in the loudness of their calls. There
will be a period of silence and then one male
will begin croaking : this seems to act as a
challenge to the others, and a fresh general
outburst of song will take place. Some
observers assert that each male takes up one
particular position, a ‘‘ calling station ’’ as
it is termed, and the females make their
way to the male by whose song they are
most attracted. The male embraces one
of them, clasping his forearms round her
waist and mounting on her back. ‘There
he remains for a varying period, which may
be as long as two weeks, and all the time
he is in a state of wild excitement, giving
vent to his joy in continual croaking.
Finally the female attains a condition in
which she is able to lay her eggs. The male
then deposits his sperm on them, and the
embrace ceases; both partners scramble out
of the water and take up their life on land,
where they begin their beneficent work of
feeding on flies and keeping insect life in
general within moderate bounds.

When we reach the level of reptiles (tortoises, turtles, crocodiles, lizards, snakes)
we encounter for the first time animals
thoroughly adapted to land. They all lay
comparatively large eggs with tough shells
which contain so much food in the shape of
yolk that, when the young one hatches, it is
ready to take up the same habits of life
as those pursued by its parents. Consequently the chief aim of the mother is to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hide her eggs away in some secluded spot
where they will not be discovered by any
enemy. Owing to the nature of the egg
shell, it is necessary that the egg should be
fertilized before it is laid, and in some
lizards and snakes development goes on
within the mother: the egg shell is burst
and absorbed before birth, and the young
are brought forth as little lizards or snakes,
as the case may be. Some may ask how we
can assert that reptiles are adapted to life
on land when many of them, like turtles and
crocodiles, pass the greater part of their
lives in water. But turtles and crocodiles
have the same kind of smooth horny scales
in their skins as lizards and snakes possess ;
their skins are totally unlike the moist
slimy skins of amphibia. The fact is that
turtles and crocodiles are land animals
which have learned to hunt in water, whereas amphibia are really water animals which
have learned to hunt on land. Consequently,
crocodiles and turtles come to land to lay
their eggs, and it is here that the community life involved in mating takes place.
Of maternal care after birth there is little
or no trace; some snakes, however, give
protection and warmth to their eggs by curling themselves round them, but these maternal attentions cease when the young are
hatched. It is on the occasion of the great
assemblages for pairing and egg-laying
that the turtle-hunters secure their harvest.
Whilst hunting, however, there is no community life. But amongst lizards at least
—as my friend Major Flower informs me—
there is an individualistic partition of hunting ground. He has observed at Cairo that
each particular lizard has its own beat; one
does not infringe on his neighbour’s territory. But if a lizard be caught and thrown
down amongst other lizards, a tremendous
battle ensues which lasts until either the
newcomer is chased away or one of the
original lizards is ejected from his territory.

When we leave reptiles and consider
birds, we make an enormous step upwards
in the scale of life. Birds resemble reptiles
in producing large eggs, furnished with
abundant food supplies and protected by
having shells from which the young are
HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

hatched in an advanced state of development. These eggs, though fertilized internally, accomplish only the first beginnings
of development within the body of the
mother; and in all but the most primitive
birds, the mother has to provide them with
warmth after they are laid, by brooding over
them. During this period, in the case of
many birds, she has to be fed by her partner, so that the duties of the male are by
no means finished when the act of pairing
has been accomplished; indeed, his duties
may then be said to have only rightly begun.
After hatching, both parents share in the
task of feeding their young, and swallows
are known to work 17 hours out of the 24
hunting for flies, not only to support themselves, but in order to satisfy the voracious
appetites of their growing family. Since
birds are warm blooded—indeed, as compared with us, they live at fever heat—their
output of energy is far greater than that of
the cold-blooded reptiles, and the consumption of food is consequently far greater.
Owing to their warm blood and their
ability to retain their warmth, however cold
their surroundings may be, birds can live
all over the world, and they abound in every
climate. Their enormous powers of flight
enable them to colonize remote oceanic islands which no mammal or amphibian can
reach. ‘Their graceful shape, harmonious
song, and wonderful skill in flight, have
attracted the sentimental attention of amateur naturalists, and so they have been more
completely studied than any other class of
animals. We therefore know more about
their individualistic and community life than
we do of the corresponding phases of the
life of our nearer relatives, the mammals.
Birds, however, for all their intelligence
and display, are simply glorified lizards:
their gorgeous feathers are nothing but
the overlapping horny scales of lizards with
the overlapping part greatly extended and
frayed out; their wings are merely the fore
limbs and, in some primitive birds, still
carry claws. The beaks of the earliest
known birds were provided with rows of
teeth, and in these same birds there was a
long tail like that of a lizard. When, how
IOE

ever, we compare the short darts of the
lizard with the wonderful flight of a swift
or a swallow or even a sea-gull, one realizes
what an enormous stride has been made by
evolution. The distance across the Atlantic
from Newfoundland to Ireland is over 1,600
miles, and I have traced the same species of
sea-gull accompanying the steamer for over
800 miles.

THE FIRST HOMES

The art of building a nest which shall
serve as a home for the young during childhood, is only fully attained by the most
highly developed birds, and, in the case of
these birds, the young ones are born blind
and naked ; but the chicks of the more primitive birds, such as the ostrich, emerge from
the egg as vigorous youngsters well able to
run about and look after themselves. I
may remark that the ostrich is unjustly condemned in the book of Job in which she is
accused of hiding her eggs in the dust and
forgetting that the foot may crush them,
for both sexes take it in turn to brood on
the eggs until they are hatched.

Next to the ostrich and its allies (the
rhea, emu, and cassowary) in the scale of
organization come the game birds—a group
including our domestic fowl, the pheasants,
grouse, partridges, and ptarmigan; and in
this group too the young are born able to
run about and feed themselves. The chicks
accompany the mother for some time after
birth and seek the protection of her wings
in time of danger, but there is no exertion
necessary on the part of the parent to find
food for her offspring. The only community
life in such species is, as in reptiles, at the
time of pairing. Then the males display
their attractions, such as gaudy wings or
tail-feathers, before the gaze of the assembled delighted females, and the most attractive males secure the largest following of
females, for the males in such species are
polygamous. Since they undertake no
responsibilities in rearing their families,
they can afford to have an indefinite number
of offspring. In the case of the black-cock,
there are in the breeding season regular
102

parade grounds, up and down which the
males march in order to show off their
points.

When we ascend above the level of the
‘game birds we find the beginnings of rude
nests. These may be in the case of the
penguins mere circles of stone; amongst
storks they are rough platforms of sticks,
and the same is true of eagles, hawks, and
similar birds of prey. The nest of plovers,
terns, sea-gulls, oyster-catchers, etc., may
be a mere dimple in the beach ; but however
rudimentary it is, the young stay in it after
being hatched and are fed by the parents.
Where suitable ground for nesting is limited, a great many pairs may make their
nests close together, and in this way veritable bird towns are built up. These
settlements, however, are for the most part
found amongst sea-birds: for these birds
find their food in the open sea where delimitation of territories is impossible and
supplies of food are practically unlimited :
if land birds were to build their nests close
together, disputes might arise as to the
delimitation of hunting grounds.

A stage above birds with such rudimentary nests is furnished by birds which live
in holes, such as our kingfishers, owls, woodpeckers, and chimney swifts. Here the
protection afforded to the young is very
much greater than in the case of plovers and
terns, and the home is not so likely to be
raided during the absence of the parents on
their hunting expeditions. The hornbill,
which is a large Asiatic bird with an enormous bill, improves even on this arrangement: the male imprisons the female in a
hole in a tree and closes the entrance by
daubing it with mud, leaving only a small
hole through which he feeds his partner
during the time she is sitting on the eggs.
Finally, in the case of the passerine or
perching birds we reach the highest level
of bird-life. This order includes all our
singing birds and, in addition, swallows,
crows, jackdaws, and jays. In them the
big toe functions as a thumb, its tendon
being completely free from the tendons
which control the other toes, and so the bird
can use the foot as a hand in dealing with

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the twigs, moss, and grass which it weaves
into its complicated nest.

If we contrast birds with the animals
lower in the scale of structure, we find that
the main difference consists in the enormously greater amount of energy which
birds devote to caring for their young and
feeding them after they are hatched. This
introduces a style of home life which is completely wanting in the lower forms, and with
this goes a great increase in intelligence.

AVIAN LANDED PROPERTY

Another peculiarity of birds is their great
powers of locomotion. These powers introduce the factor of migration, for whilst some
species remain the year round in the same
locality, this is the exception rather than
the rule. The year for many species is
divided into two great periods, feeding time
and rearing time. When the summer comes
to an end and the next generation are successfully started in life, all—parents and
children alike—take their flight to warmer
climates where they can continue to feed
during the winter. Even in the case of
species which appear to remain all the year
in the same place, it will often be found that
they consist of Northern and Southern
strains, and that the Southern strains leave
our shores in the winter and are replaced by
the Northern strain which comes south to
our shores to pass the winter.

During the winter feeding time, an almost
socialistic amity reigns between the members of the same species. Except where
food is unexpectedly scarce, they seem to
feed in flocks, and neighbour does not
attempt to snatch the food from neighbour.

When, however, the species migrates to
the breeding grounds in the spring, the
whole aspect of affairs changes. The males
arrive first and each male immediately proceeds to seize a territory—in a word, to
possess himself of landed property. The
godwit, a sandpiper, flies round his estate
starting from a fixed point and returning
to it again; in fact, he beats the bounds.
When the available territory has been disposed of, the unfortunate late arrivals try
HERD INSTINCT IN

to infringe on the settled estate, and fierce
combats ensue, which last until one of the
two combatants is driven off. Then, a little
later, the females arrive and each marriageable male early secures a mate. ‘There does
not appear to be amongst nest-building birds
a contest amongst males to secure a particular female. Indeed, in many cases, when
the females arrive and find a male established, they may fight for the privilege of
being his wife.

The territory is a hunting ground, within
which the happy pair can secure food not
only for themselves but for their prospective
families. Once set up in life, pairing takes
place, nest-building follows, and then brooding on the eggs and lastly, after these are
hatched, the feeding of the young. Sometimes a bachelor male arrives even after
mating has been accomplished, and then
both partners, male and female, may combine to drive him out, but in most cases this
is effected by the male whilst the female sits
by awaiting the result.

The delimitation of hunting ground can
be splendidly seen in some of our birds of
prey as, for instance, in the wind-hover or
kestrel hawk. These birds are instantly
recognizable by their peculiar hovering
flight, periodically interrupted by sudden
swoops to the ground. As one walks along
the turf covering the tops of the cliffs around
the Cornish coast, one sees a pair of windhovers, or it may be only one. ‘Then, a
quarter of a mile further on, one encounters
another pair, each pair keeping rigidly confined to its own beat. Sometimes the territory coveted may be not so much a hunting
ground as a suitable place for a nest. Seabirds, such as guillemots and razor bills,
whose so-called nest may be a circle of
stones or shells or even a suitable piece of
bare rock, select the nesting place with great
care, choosing ledges on inaccessible cliffs,
or on skerries or barren islets far out to sea.
Here, naturally, ground is dear and eagerly
sought after, and nests are built close together. Often fierce combats arise for the
possession of these coveted building sites,
and one combatant may be killed and pushed
over the edge.

ANIMALS 103
LANGUAGE AND REASON

In the case of birds like woodpeckers,
which nest in holes also, the supply of suitable holes is limited and violent contests for
the possession of these holes may ensue. But
it would be a mistake to suppose that once
a pair of birds have settled down and are
engaged in the task of rearing a family their
interests are necessarily entirely confined
to themselves and their offspring. Where
many couples nest near each other, there is
a dawning sense of the community of interests, which, after all, is the foundation of
the modern State. If a cat discovers a
number of swallows’ nests under the eaves of
a house and proceeds to raid one, not only
the outraged couple but all their neighbours
will raise a desperate outcry and unite in
mobbing and driving away the cat. If in
a wood in which a colony of rooks are nesting, a hawk is descried, the rooks give a particular kind of cry which warns the whole
colony. If they discover a fox or a cat
stealing between the trees, they raise another kind of cry and the colony is on the
alert to adopt the proper way of driving
away the intruder, so that the cries really are
a rudimentary form of bird language.

That great nineteenth-century naturalist
Eimer gives a wonderful instance of this
community spirit in one of his writings. He
was desirous of obtaining a large number of
sparrows for purposes of dissection, and so he
constructed a trap which he thought suitable
for the purpose. This consisted of a long
tunnel which bent at the end at a right
angle so that the inner end which contained
the snare could not be seen from the outside.
The birds were induced to enter by a number of baits set along the length of the tunnel and no bird that went to the end of the
tunnel ever escaped. The first year Eimer
caught quite a large number of sparrows.
The second year he caught only seven, and
those were all young birds, and the third
vear he caught none! He noticed during
the second year that whenever a young bird
approached the opening of the tunnel the
older birds began to sound loudly the appropriate danger cry, and in most cases dissuaded the young one from entering.
104

Numerous problems which lie outside the
scope of this paper are raised by this observation. How did these older birds know
that there was danger connected with the
entry to the tunnel, seeing that they themselves had never been inside it? If they
had watched their friends and neighbours
during the first year disappear into the tunnel, and fail to return, and had deduced that
an evil fate had befallen them, can we deny
to them the glimmerings of reason?

MAMMALIAN BEGINNINGS

When we leave the birds and approach the
last class of vertebrata—the mammals, we
reach the group to which anatomically the
human race belongs. We emphasize the word
** anatomically ’’ because the difference in
intelligence between the highest ape and the
lowest living race of mankind is so colossal
that many, including Alfred Russell Wallace (who with Darwin put forward the
theory of evolution by natural selection),
have felt that we have here an instance of a
real discontinuity due, as he put it, to a
new ‘* spiritual influx.’’ Whatever may be
our opinions on that subject, it is undoubtedly true that the vast majority of
mammals are no more intelligent than birds ;
indeed, it might be said that most of them
are not so intelligent as birds. Mammals,
like birds, have been evolved from reptiles,
but they branched off earlier than did birds,
and their ancestors were a primitive grade
of reptiles of which no living representatives
survive. For, although the hair or fur so
characteristic of all mammals is nothing buta
modification of the horny overlapping scales
of reptiles and is formed of the same material, yet mammals have retained a series of
glands in the skin which keep it moist (as
on a hot summer day we all know to our
cost), and these glands correspond to the
glands in the skin of amphibia.

All mammalia provide milk to feed their
young after birth, and the milk is secreted
by milk glands which are nothing but the
enlarged oil glands such as are found at the
bases of individual hairs. The suckling of
the young involves a period of care for and
protection of the young which may be pro
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

longed for a year, but there are few instances
of the parental care being prolonged after
this period is past.

The lowest mammalia—the so-called Prototheria, which include only the spiny anteater and the duck-billed mole—lay eggs
with thin horny shells. The mother broods
on the eggs till they hatch, and after that
suckles the young. In the case of the
duck-billed mole, she remains during this
period hidden away in a hole excavated in
the bank of a river. The suckling period
may last as long as six months.

In the next highest group of mammal, the
young are carried about by the mother after
birth in a pouch. ‘The young are brought
forth alive, but they are exceedingly small.
The new born baby of a 6-foot kangaroo,
for instance, is only about 134 inches in
length. The whole process of parturition
has been followed in the case of the Virginian
opossum. The mother in this species has
sixteen nipples which, as in the case of the
other pouched mammals, are situated in the
pouch. She produces 18 young at a time,
but the tiny babies are no larger than
beetles, and as soon as they are born they
scamper through the mother’s fur to get into
the pouch. In this condition the mother,
so far from caring for them, regards them
merely as a nuisance, and sometimes
scratches them off with her toes. If, however, they escape this fate, each seizes hold
of a nipple and remains attached to it continuously for some months. Since there
are more young than nipples some of the
young inevitably perish.

Maternal love awakes after the suckling
has begun. Even after the young are old
enough to leave the pouch and to feed for
themselves, they return to it for some time
for rest and shelter, so that a pouched animal may be said to carry its nest about with
it. The opossum lives in America, and is
the sole representative of the pouched mammals there; but the rest of this group, including kangaroos, wallabies, wombats,
native bears, phalangers, native cats, Tasmanian wolves, etc., live in Australia and
the adjacent islands.

The highest grade of mammal bring forth
HERD INSTINCT IN ANIMALS

the young as comparatively large babies,
and nourish them by suckling. But the
size of the baby as compared with that of the
mother varies with the number produced at
a birth. The human baby at birth is 18
inches long—between one-third and onefourth as large as the mother. The rabbit
produces seven or eight young at a time and
these are not more than one-sixth of the
mother’s length.

The nature of the community life developed depends largely on the relative helplessness of the young at birth. In the great
group of the grazing animals—including
horses, cattle, deer, sheep, and goats—the
young are born at an advanced stage of
development and are able to run about
almost immediately after birth. As soon
as suckling is finished they have no diffculty in finding food which is everywhere
spread around them ; but in the group of the
flesh-eating animals such as cats, dogs, and
bears, the mother, and sometimes both
parents, must teach their children to catch
prey and at first procure it for them and
bring it home to them.

In the first instance, we find that usually
only one and in any case not more than two
are born at a time, whilst in the second case
the family may be as large as seven or eight.
In the first case we find that there is a kind
of socialistic herd ; in the second case there
is necessarily a den or home and some kind
of family life. The socialistic herd is necessary for mutual protection and especially for
the protection of the young. The young in
their helpless state are the natural objects of
attack by wolves and bears. When a herd
of North American buffalo is threatened
with a wolf attack, the adult cows put the

calves in the centre and walk round and

round them so long as the wolves are in
sight, so that these never get a chance of
attack. Of course the most efficient defenders are the males, which are especially
armed with horns and tusks; but the social
conditions within these herds are arranged
so that there is usually only one powerful
male in each herd, which may be regarded as
his polygamous family, for this male brooks
no competitors in his relations with the cows.

105

As his sons grow up, however, this supremacy is disputed and sooner or later the old
male is driven away or at any rate reduced to.
a subordinate position,

The association of these herds of animals
is obviously a measure for mutual protection. Their principal enemies are wolves
and animals of the cat tribe, such as lions,
tigers, leopards, etc. But these foes,
although they are always on the alert to
destroy laggards and diseased animals, seldom if ever make a direct frontal attack
onthe herd. A charge or stampede of a herd
of buffalo or of such deer as moose or caribou.
will trample in pieces the fiercest wolf.

HEALTH AND NATURAL SELECTION

The Swiss Government established a
national park in which chamois were preserved, and from which they excluded all
carnivorous animals. Asa result, the herd
of chamois became diseased. They then
introduced a certain number of wolves, and
the herd improved in health, since the
weak and diseased members were wiped out
and no longer mated with the healthy.

The herd instinct—as everyone knows—is.
also exhibited by wolves, and, of course, im
this case it is a combination to enable them
to master large prey which a single wolf
could not tackle. Nevertheless, in the breeding season every female has her own mate,
and whilst she is suckling her young and for:
some time afterwards she has her den which
is her home, and her mate hunts for her and’
brings home prey for her alone.

These dens—and also the holes of the burrowing animals, such as rabbits, rats, and
mice—correspond in a general way to the
nests of birds, but inasmuch as the majority
of mammals have paws and not hands or feet
like those of the perching birds, there is:
little or no architectural skill displayed in
their construction. Nevertheless, the polar
bear, when about to bring forth her young,
scoops a hole in the snow which she lines.
with her own fur, and in this retreat, which
soon becomes cosy and warm, the young are
sheltered till they can hunt for themselves.
Polar bear cubs born in a cool damp room—
as we know from sad experience in the Zoo106

logical Gardens—soon die of pneumonia.
‘The domestic mouse constructs for itself a
nest under the flooring, which it lines with
torn up paper.

HHERD SPIRIT IN MONKEYS

Leaving, however, the three great groups
of the grazing, flesh-eating, and burrowing
mammals, we come at last to the group
of the tree-climbing mammals or monkeys,
which are anatomically most closely allied to
man. Here we find the fore-limb terminated
by a hand which is capable of grasping
objects, and here too we find in some cases
an approach to the bird’s skill in building a
nest. But unfortunately monkeys are a
tropical group of animals; they have not
attracted to themselves the attention of that
crowd of devoted amateurs who have studied
the ways of birds, and their home life is
difficult—not to say dangerous—to observe,
so that our knowledge is really very scanty.
Nevertheless, a little is known; we have
kept for several years a herd of baboon
on the mass of artificial rocks known as the
Monkey Hill in the Zoological Gardens.
‘The baboon is, however, an exceptional monkey in that it has given up climbing on trees
and lives in holes in rocks. It walks, in
consequence, on all fours. The baboons
hunt in troops : they often raid gardens and
they are most dangerous animals to encounter. Recently in West Africa a native
farmer, defending his plots, was torn in
pieces by them. The jaws, powerful in
all monkeys, are especially so in the
baboons, where they are prolonged into a
dog-like muzzle. The troops hunt under a
leader and, if one of them is injured, the
others come to its assistance. A case is
recorded where one member of the troop had
been struck down by a leopard. Instead of
running away, the rest of the troop surrounded the leopard snarling at him with
menacing jaws, and the frightened animal
retreated, abandoning its prey. Then two
powerful male baboons swooped down,
seized their wounded comrade by the arms
and bore him away to a place of safety.

Nevertheless, although the herd spirit is
strong when the baboons are organizing a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

raid, when it comes to raising a family they
seem to be strictly monogamous and individualistic. Our herd in the Zoological Gardens originally included 61 males and nine
females. The nine females were promptly
appropriated by nine of the strongest males
—no male took more than one female—and
for some time married life proceeded
smoothly, and comparative peace reigned on
the hill, Then one of the males who was
happily married died, and his unfortunate
widow was at once set on by about six other
males and was literally torn in pieces in the
conflict for her possession, which arose between them. The sympathetic Council of
the Zoological Society decreed that the inequality in numbers of the sexes must be
remedied. So 36 females were imported and,
after resting in quarantine for a few days,
were introduced to the hill in the dawn of a
summer morning. Nothing happened for
some hours and then the most tremendous
uproar and conflict occurred and five females
and thirteen males were killed, after which
things settled down, and peace again reigned
on the hill.

The chimpanzee and the gorilla divide
between them the honour of being most
nearly allied (anatomically) to man, and a
good deal is known about their habits.
Kohler kept a small group of chimpanzees
in captivity in Teneriffe for seven years, and
studied their habits minutely, and he has
recorded his impressions in a book that will
become a classic, entitled The Mind of the
Ape. ‘The chimpanzees did not breed, so
that he learned nothing of their relations
to their young; but he says that a chimpanzee separated from its companions is not a
true chimpanzee, and when one chimpanzee
was attacked the others flew to its assistance even when the attacker was a big
human.

About the gorilla more is known. The
gorillas move about in family parties consisting of a male with a female and young,
and several family parties may be associated
together. The female and young are sent
up into the trees to sleep whilst the male
keeps guard at the foot. The male, indeed,
has ceased to be able to climb trees and
HERD INSTINCT IN

walks on the ground with a limping gait.
Both sexes construct beds for themselves by
weaving together interlacing boughs, but the
families are continually on the move so that
the beds are usually occupied only for a
night or two. The great man-like apes of
Malaya—the ourang-outang, also live in
family groups. They are rather more
remote in structure from Man than is the
gorilla, and keep more constantly to the
trees. They construct nests or ‘“‘ platforms ”’ of branches, and on these the whole
family lives. A male belonging to the Zoological Society escaped some years ago and
was at large for a whole night, but it was
eventually tempted back toits cage. It had
taken refuge in the trees in Regent’s Park,
and had already constructed a typical platform there.

Our survey of the herd instincts of the
higher vertebrata is now finished, and we
may now ask what light they throw on
human conditions. It is clear that animals
of the same species may live together in
comparative amity when food is abundant
and easily obtained, and when there is no
question of marriage or the bringing up of a
family. Even then the amity is comparative
only, and the individuals scatter over the
feeding ground, not interfering too much
with each other ; but as soon as food becomes
scarce the stronger drive away the weaker—
and for the good of the species this is as it
should be, for only the stronger are fit to
carry on the race. When reproduction intervenes, a fierce individualism breaks out and
the parents fight fiercely for their families.
The ablest parents rear the strongest and
most numerous children—and this, again, is
as it should be, for in this way the next
generation is strengthened. It was left for
modern civilization to evolve the suicidal
idea of fostering the families of the less able
and more reckless members of the community by plundering the resources of the
families of the thrifty and competent.

Primitive man—from all the evidence at
our disposal—was a nomad ranging from
place to place in his endeavours to gather
food. For this purpose, just as in gorillas,
several families were organized into a tribe.

ANIMALS 107
Early man difiered from the gorilla in the
type of food which he sought, for whereas
both gorillas and chimpanzees live on vegetables, early man was a game hunter.
Therefore, since the prey was obtained by
the exertions of all, a just and equable shareout of the proceeds was natural. Since,
moreover, the successful prosecution of hunt
by organisms not so swift as the hunted
required forethought and guile, obedience
to a wise leader was essential.

THE TOOL-MAKING FACULTY

The evolution of a leader had already begun among the higher mammals. The North
American Indians maintain that when herds
of deer and buffalo migrate south at the
approach of winter, and for this purpose
have to cross frozen rivers, they are led by
an old male of exceptional strength and cunning. We have already seen that the troops
of baboons follow a leader. If we search
for a mark of humanity, other than their
flesh-eating propensities, which discriminates them from their nearest animal relatives, we find it in their capacity to make
and use tools. There is a great deal to be said
for Bergson’s view that reason is fundamentally a tool-making faculty, and grew pari
passu with increasing skill in producing
tools. To combine families in a tribe and
to have the tribe governed by old men of
long experience and skill was the first great
““conquest of culture ’’ over the purely
animal urges of primitive man.

The development of a hunting community
into a pastoral community and further into
an agricultural one may have been largely
the work of women. When the males
were absent on the chase, the females had
to stay behind to care for the young. When
the hunters occasionally brought home the
young of the slaughtered animals, the
maternal instinct of the women may have
induced them to rear them, and these homebred animals became a valuable source of
food when the chase failed. Similarly, the
seeds of grass plants growing near the camp
in richly manured soil were also seized on
to stave off the pangs of hunger ; and as this
108

source became more and more propitious
primitive agriculture was born—the protecting deity of the crops is in primitive religion
always a woman.

So long as mankind were always on
the move, property consisted only in what
could be carried about, and was therefore
small in amount. Agriculture brought a
more settled life; but in primitive agriculture a portion of forest is burnt down;
the soil, fertilized by the ashes of the conflagration, is thoroughly exploited for some
years till it is exhausted, and then the tribe
moves on into a new section of forest. This
is the condition of agriculture in Africa today. But in the course of his wanderings
primitive man reached the valley of the
Nile—and here, owing to the continually
renewed fertility of the soil, produced by
the annual inundation, he was enabled to
stay on in the same place and to accumulate
property. This is the beginning of real
civilization and culture, and it was at
once evident that it was utterly unjust
to allow the lazy and incompetent farmer
to live at the expense of the thrifty
one, so private property in land grew
up and with it the science of mathematics, for geometry means simply measurement of land, and originated in Egypt.
The priesthood of the sun, which laid the
foundations of the Egyptian religion, originated in the setting apart of a group of wise
men whose duty it was to predict from
astronomical observations the onset of the
annual inundation.

As soon as any group of people such as
the Egyptians began to accumulate property, they became the target for the attacks
of the half-starving nomad tribes around

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

them, and the history of Egypt is largely
an account of the wars necessary to ward
off these raiders.

PRIVATE PROPERTY AND THE FAMILY

The history of civilization is, for the most
part, the history of the efforts to protect
private property.

The primary desire to accumulate property is due to the impulse to provide for the
family, and to secure them against disaster.
This impulse is strongly developed in the
passerine birds, as we have seen. ‘The
family is, therefore, the great force which
opposes the advance of disaster; and it is
to be regretted that certain peoples have
made the desperate attempt to abolish marriage and the family altogether. The
deep-rooted instincts of their own peasants
have frustrated the full execution of this
purpose, but they have done unspeakable
harm. The children, separated from their
parents, have degenerated almost into animals, large numbers have died, and the survivors constitute packs of wolfish halfstarved savages, whose dreadful appearance
has shocked all observers.

The establishment and perpetuation of a
healthy family—this seems to be the goal
towards which all evolution so far has
striven, and mankind will advance only in
proportion as this goal is kept steadily in
view. ‘This goal is the avowed aim of the
Eugenics Society, and it has the highest
possible sanction, for did not St. Paul say:
“‘ He that provideth not for his own, especially for those of his own household, hath
denied the Faith and is worse than an
infidel.’’

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
