REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 2I!I

the child of the maternal uncle, or of the paternal aunt when differing
in sex from the speaker, but this word is also used by a man for his
wife’s sister and his brother’s wife, and by a woman for her husband’s
brother and her sister’s husband.

The connection between such a system of reckoning kinship and the
practice of cross-cousin marriage is unmistakeably clear, but Dr. Rivers
reinforces it by examples of the kinship systems among races having
peculiar marriage customs; such as for a man to marry the wife or widow
of his mother’s brother, as occurs in the Banks Islands, or the extraordinary customs of the Island of Pentecost of marrying the eldest
daughter of one’s own daughter, or perhaps more probably of one’s
brother’s daughter. By means of this connection between kinship terms
and marriage customs, Dr. Rivers is able to throw much light on the
primitive customs of South India. Here the three languages—Tamil,
Telagu and Canarese—all suggest cross-cousin marriages, such as are
still practised among the Todas.

In its broad aspect Dr. Rivers’ work is of importance in showing that
the classificatory system is naturally associated with an exogamous tribe
organised in two moieties, while the descriptive systems of Celtic and
Scandinavian, as well as Lithuanian and Esthonic are appropriate to a
large circle of kindred. From this latter is derived such a system as our
own, in which the four classes of uncles are undifferentiated, while all
distant collaterals are grouped under the one heading of cousins. This is
the natural effect of the narrowing of family life, which has progressed
continuously in Europe.

The whole book is of more than ordinary interest. The subject is
treated with studious caution and fairness. The exposition is beautifully
clear, and Dr. Rivers has been particularly happy in the selection of
relevant material to exemplify his arguments. It is a book which all
could read with ease, and is of exceptional interest to students of
marriage customs. R. A. FISHER.

Lamarck, J. B. Zoological Philosophy. Translated, with an introduc
tion, by Hugh Elliot. Macmillan and Co.; 1914; pp. 410.
BoTH the translation and the introduction will be very welcome to English
readers. The latter aims at being a clear account in modern language of
Lamarck’s opinions and achievements; while the former, true to the
historical value of the work, is exceedingly literal. The distinction is a
very necessary one in view, on the one hand, of the difficulties which both
the style and the scientific ideas of the eighteenth century present to the
modern reader, and, on the other hand, of our need to pay a juster tribute
to the greatness of Lamarck’s contribution to Science, than is done by
the associations of his name in modern controversy. The life-work of a
great man is not to be summed up in a single error. We owe to Lamarck
the first modern statement of the doctrine of descent with modification;
and though he guessed a cause of modification which has since proved
to be illusory, we have no right to judge which side he would have taken
in the controversy when the point became of importance more than half
a century later.

Lamarck’s limitations are clearly apparent in his Philosophie Zoologigue. Having entered upon a vast and unexplored domain of thought,
he did not succeed in evolving a consistent theory by the careful examination of the consequences of a single set of fundamental postulates. Instead, his powerful imagination led him to numerous inconsistencies. His
attempt to classify the whole animal kingdom in a linear series (a very
convenient plan for writers of Natural Histories) is in itself discordant
with his theory of the inheritance of characters acquired as adaptations to
environment. Although he was much hindered, and often led astray,
through lack of accurate scientific information, it is clear that as a
philosopher he did not make the best use of the facts at his disposal.
