LORD MOYNE
M.A., F.R.S.L.

The Guinness Family’

the mists of a not very remote antiquity.

The first Guinness of whom there is an undoubted record is Richard Guinness of Celbridge,
county Kildare, who was born about 1690 and
was living in Leixlip in 1766. Efforts to trace the
origin of the family beyond him have met with
no success; conjecture, supported by inconclusive pieces of evidence, has led principally in
the direction of the Magennis family of county
Down and of the Gennys family of Cornwall.

Richard Guinness of Celbridge is described in
legal documents as agent or receiver to Dr.
Arthur Price, Archbishop of Cashel. He first
married Elizabeth Read of Oughterard, county
Kildare, and his eldest son Arthur became a
brewer and the ancestor of the brewing side of
the family, while his second son Samuel became
a gold-beater and the ancestor of the banking
side of the family.

The Archbishop died in 1752 and left £100
each to Richard and to the first Arthur. The
latter acquired the lease of a small brewery in
Leixlip, county Kildare, and soon afterwards, in
1759, the lease of the brewery at St. James’s
Gate which was to become famous for its stout.
The lease, which was for 9,000 years at a rent of
£45 a year, describes the premises which covered
about an acre of land as “‘a commodious dwelling
house with a large pleasure-garden and fish
pond, the brewery with copper kieve and mill,
two large Malt houses, stabling for twelve horses
with loft to hold 200 loads of hay, and an
uninterrupted supply of water free from tax or
pipe money.” To defend this water supply from
interruption by the Dublin Corporation, the
first Arthur became involved in litigation, and
even, it is said, had to menace the men of the
Corporation with a pick-axe; but in 1784 he
was granted a lease of the water for 8,975 years.

Ts ORIGINS of our family are hidden in

* Reprinted, with kind permission, from a supplement
to The Times, November 20th, 1959.

31

The first Arthur also built flour mills at
Kilmainham outside the city, and is on record as
often riding out to visit them when over 70.
He was the father of some twenty-one children,
not all of whom survived their infancy. He
married Olivia Whitmore in 1761. She was the
daughter of a Dublin merchant, and it was
through her that his descendants became “of
Founder’s Kin” at Winchester.

Church Connections

Of the first Arthur’s many children mention must
be made of his eldest son, the Reverend Hosea
Guinness, who was first of the many Guinnesses
to go into the Church. He was born in 1765 and
was for thirty years rector of St. Werburgh’s
and became Chancellor of St. Patrick’s
Cathedral. His descendants are the eldest line of
the Guinness family. Among them was Miss
May Guinness, the distinguished painter, who
died in 1955, aged ninety-one. She won the
Croix de Guerre for her bravery under bombardment as a nurse at Vadelaincourt, near Verdun,
in the first world war. A disciple of André
Lhotte, she was an accomplished artist with a
strongly individual style.

Hosea’s youngest son, Francis Hart Vicesimus
Guinness, emigrated first to India and then to
New Zealand, where a numerous family of his
descendants is to be found to-day. His eldest
son, Sir Arthur Robert Guinness, became
Speaker of the House of Representatives in 1903.

The second son of the first Arthur, usually
known as Arthur Guinness of Beaumont,
assumed command of the brewing business, in
which he was helped by his brothers Benjamin
and William Lunell. He was also a director of
the Bank of Ireland, and in 1820 became its
Governor. As early as 1797, when Ireland was in
a most unsettled state, he publicly championed
the cause of Catholic Emancipation. None the
less, he was later involved in a political dispute

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1960, 52, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with supporters of Daniel O’Connell, from
which a temporary boycott resulted, in spite of
O’Connell’s condemnation of such measures.
It is said that the development of the brewery’s
export market—especially to India—dates from
the time of this boycott.

The second Arthur Guinness had three sons
by his first wife, Anne Lee. He was succeeded
in the direction of the brewery not by his eldest
son, the Reverend William Smythe Lee Grattan
Guinness, who went into the Church, nor by his
second son Arthur Lee Guinness, who was a
dilettante, but by his third son, Benjamin Lee
Guinness, who had worked in the brewery since
the age of sixteen. He became Lord Mayor of
Dublin, and restored St. Patrick’s Cathedral from
a ruinous condition. He was a Member of
Parliament for Dublin City from 1865 until his
death in 1868.

Sir Benjamin Lee Guinness had three sons.
The eldest, who was to become Lord Ardilaun,
inherited a partnership in the brewery which he
sold in 1876 to his younger brother, Sir Edward
Cecil Guinness, later the first Lord Iveagh.
Lord Ardilaun, who was M.P. for Dublin from
1868 to 1869 and again from 1874 to 1880, is
particularly remembered there for the gift to
the city of St. Stephen’s Green which he made
jointly with his brother Edward.

Racing Motorist
A grandson of Sir Benjamin Lee, through his
second son Lee, was Kenelm Lee Guinness, the
racing motorist, who invented the K.L.G.
sparking plugs for his own use, and successfully
organized their manufacture on a larger scale
when required to do so during the first world war.
In 1886, ten years after becoming sole owner
of the brewery, Edward Cecil Guinness converted the enterprise into a public company.
He retained control of the company until his
death in 1927. By his marriage to his cousin,
Adelaide Guinness, daughter of Richard Samuel
Guinness of Deepwell, Blackrock, county Dublin,
he brought together the descendants of the first
Arthur, the brewing branch of the family, and
the descendants of the first Samuel, the banking
branch of the family. As there were three other
marriages between Guinnesses in the nineteenth
century, inter-relationships are complicated.

32

The descendants of the first Samuel, the goldbeater, were mostly either barristers or bankers.
One of his sons, Richard Guinness the barrister,
married Mary Darley (an aunt of George Darley
the poet) and Richard Samuel Guinness, of
Deepwell, was their son. His elder brother,
Robert Rundell Guinness, in partnership with
John Ross Mahon, founded the merchant bank
of Guinness & Mahon in Dublin in 1837, the
firm’s name being changed subsequently to
Guinness, Mahon & Company. The founder’s
elder son, Richard Seymour Guinness, who is
reputed to have been employed by the firm at
the age of fifteen, subsequently moved to London
in 1874 and opened an office there in 1887.
Two of the founder’s great-grandsons and also
two of his great-great-grandsons are partners
in the firm at present.

Edward Cecil, the first Lord Iveagh, spent
much of his time in England, and his benefactions were divided between the two countries.
In 1890 he founded the Guinness Trust to provide housing for working people in London and
Dublin at a low rate of interest which, being
retained for the trust’s purposes, would by
degrees enable further housing to be built. In
1903 the Dublin and London funds were divided,
and the Dublin fund named the Iveagh Trust. At
present the Guinness Trust houses 3,669
families, and the Iveagh Trust 945 families.
Family tradition has it that the first Lord Iveagh
maintained that public authorities should provide such housing, and that he would show both
private investors and public authorities how it
could be done. In Dublin he provided what is
now called the Iveagh Hostel, a poor man’s hotel
on the lines of Rowton Houses in London (Lord
Rowton was the first chairman of the Guinness
Trust), and later on a play-centre for children,
one of the first of its kind. He also laid out as a
park the slum area north of St. Patrick’s
Cathedral, and built the Iveagh Market for the
stall-holders displaced by the clearance. In
England he endowed the Lister Institute of
Preventive Medicine and with Sir Ernest Cassel
founded the Radium Institute, which is now
amalgamated with the Mount Vernon Hospital.

~ In 1921 he founded the Chadacre Agricultural
Institute at Hartest, near Bury St. Edmunds, to
THE GUINNESS FAMILY

provide training in agriculture for the sons of
farm labourers, small-holders and small farmers
in Suffolk and the adjoining counties. In 1925
he bought Ken Wood as a gallery for the more
important part of his collection of pictures. This,
together with the house and the surrounding
land, have all passed by the terms of his will to
the London County Council.

It is noteworthy that his benefactions were
largely of a continuing kind, and planned so as
to be self-supporting. Responsibility for their
direction and that of the brewery was assumed
on his death by his three sons, the eldest of
whom, the present Lord Iveagh, is chairman of
the brewery, Guinness Trust, Iveagh Trust and
Chadacre. In his youth the present Earl was well
known as winner of the Diamond Sculls in 1895
and 1896. He was one of the founders of the
R.N.V.R. and was a Member of Parliament
from 1908 until obliged to retire by his father’s
death in 1927. His brother, Ernest Guinness,
who died in 1949, played a prominent part in the
brewery and the trusts, as did his other brother,
my father, in so far as his active political career
permitted. As Walter Guinness he represented
Bury St. Edmunds from 1907 to 1931. He was
Financial Secretary to the Treasury from 1923
to 1924, and Minister of Agriculture from 1925
to 1929. He was chairman of the West Indies
Royal Commission of 1938. In the first world
war he won the D.S.O. with Bar, and in the
second world war he met his death as MinisterResident in the Middle East at the hands of
assassins of the Stern gang.

Interest in the philanthropic enterprises of
the first Lord Iveagh has been well maintained
by his descendants. Six of his grandchildren
and three great-grandsons are trustees of the
Guinness and Iveagh Housing Trusts. Chadacre
Agricultural Institute has upon its governing
body two of his grand-children and a greatgrandson. On the governing body of the Lister
Institute he is still represented by his son and a
great-grandson. The derelict area of the Breckland at Elveden in Suffolk, which he bought as a
sporting estate, was turned into good agricultural land by the pioneering methods of his
eldest son; and his Dublin house, 80 St. Stephen’s
Green, was in due course presented, also by his
eldest son, to the Irish Government, who use it
both to house the Department of External
Aflairs and as a centre for Government
hospitality.

The brewery in Dublin was purchased in 1759
by the first Arthur Guinness. It is possible that
the £100 each left to him and to his father by
Archbishop Price helped them both to realize
an ambition, and that they were not unmindful
of the parable of the talents. Their venture has
this year culminated in the bicentenary of a great
industrial company with ramifications extending
over four continents. Perhaps it is not too much
to believe and to hope that the prosperity which
has followed the fortunes of the company may
in some part be due to the fact that for seven
generations the family of Guinness have regarded
it, not merely as a source of wealth but as a trust
handed on to them by their forefathers.

33
