REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 77

Eueken, RupoLF. Matin Currents of Modern Thought; a Study of the
Spiritual and Intellectual Movements of the Present Day.
Translated by Meyrick Booth. London. T. Fisher Unwin;
1912; price 12s. 6d.; pp. 488.

WE have not been able to discover in Prof. Eucken’s erudite and bulky
volume any direct reference to eugenics, nor even anything that bears
directly on the problems with which eugenics is proposing to grapple,
beyond some rather vague generalities (p. 264-5) about the “law” of the
increase of population. It would be natural to infer from this that Prof.
Eucken either does not consider eugenics to be one of the “ spiritual and
intellectual movements of the present day ” which is being floated by any
of the “main currents of modern thought,” or that his own work is
not so “ modern ” as its title alleges. The latter is doubtless the true
explanation, as Prof. Eucken’s book has been before the public a considerable time (since 1878), and has not been brought up to date in other
points also; but it is to be feared that his neglect of the eugenical movement and his blindness to its social, ethical, and spiritual import is one
more instance of philosophic incapacity to assimilate the new knowledge
with which the sciences are now flooding the old problems. Metaphysics
and logic have not yet adjusted themselves to the discoveries of Darwinism,
and similarly philosophic ethics will find it repugnant to replace the
hackneyed sterilities of their academic disputes by a courageous consideration of the means of ensuring that the “ good man” shall also be “ wellborn.” And yet the eugenist can justly trace his descent from Plato,
one of the oldest, greatest, most stimulating, and spiritual of thinkers,
who is still a “ pioneer ” because the philosophers for over two thousand
years have paid no heed to his suggestions. F. C. S. SCHILLER.

Lodge, SIR OLIVER, F.R.S. Modern Problems. London. Methuen ;
I9I2; price 5S8.; pp. vil. + 320.

THOUGH Sir Oliver Lodge’s interesting volume of essays does not deal
expressly with eugenics, it contains two notable passages which show
that he is not unaware of this important development of human thought.
On p. 71 he doubts whether the existing education of women constitutes
an adequate preparation for life, and points out that they “can perform
a service to the State more vital, more arduous, and therefore more
honourable than any other; many believe that their instincts would lead
the majority of women to fulfil this duty adequately and responsibly
and heartily if the State were wise enough to free them and educate them
for its due accomplishment; and some are impressed with the conviction
that a right understanding of the laws of heredity, the management of
infancy, and the judicious training of childhood would have a more direct
and beneficent influence on the future of the human race than any other
reform that is within reach of accomplishment.” Again, he says on
p. 187 that “hitherto man has applied processes associated with care
and culture to the quadrupeds and to the birds, he has not yet applied it
(them (?)) to the fish of the sea, nor has he altogether learnt how to
apply it to his own species.” Both these pronouncements may seem to
enthusiastic eugenists obvious and cautious to excess, but they should
realise how gradual and laborious a process it necessarily is to hammer
even the least novelty in truths into the human mind, and how often
it must be stated to be even recognised as “new.” Even such a qualified
measure of support as Sir Oliver Lodge gives should be welcomed, and
may lead, it is to be hoped, to more energetic approval. It is of vital
importance to the progress of eugenical ideas that educationists and
moralists should co-operate with biologists in their realisation.

F. C. S. SCHILLER.
