J. M. TANNER

Department of Growth and Development, Institute of Child Health, University of London

Galtonian Eugenics and the

Study of Growth:

THE RELATION OF BODY SIZE, INTELLIGENCE TEST SCORE, AND
SOCIAL CIRCUMSTANCES IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS*_

GALTON IN 1904 DEFINED eugenics as “the
science which deals with all influences that
improve the inborn qualities of a race; also with
those influences that develop them [these inborn
qualities] to the utmost advantage’.

In this definition “eugenics” has clearly its
older, pre-Batesonian meaning. It refers to the
whole span of reproduction and development
and not exclusively to events which precede the
formation of the zygote. (The usage still persists
in the title of the Journal of Genetic Psychology
which deals with development, not genetics in
the modern sense.) Admittedly Galton puts
prominently first the phrase about the inborn
qualities; “‘factors developing them” have a
place only below the semi-colon. But it seems
likely that this just reflects Galton’s circumstances
and time. In the favoured atmosphere of the
upper classes of optimistic expansionist Victorian
England, the black squalid back-to-backs, the
vast orphanages, the men like pit-ponies must
have seemed purely transitory, even when they
were noticed at all. Galton’s gaze was set on the
more distant horizon, a horizon we are beginning
to approach in the cold neon light of our
meritocratic dawn.

But the eugenic horizon, like the real one,
always retreats as we approach it. We are far
from providing each zygote with the environment
which ‘“‘develops its inborn qualities to the
utmost advantage’. And we understand better
than the biologists of Galton’s day the illusory
nature of any division between heredity and
environment. Zygote and environment interact,
develop together. Galton was, perhaps, more
aware of this than the generation of geneticists

immediately following him. So in commemorating this very wise, humane and attractive man
I want to draw your attention to this interaction
by way of an example from my own field of
research. I shall describe and try to analyse the
way in which mental ability, physical size and
social circumstances are related in children and
adults. I shall use this example to develop the
thesis that it is precisely at the interphase of
heredity and environment that positive eugenics
may make a significant impact. The positive
eugenist’s attention, I believe, should be
increasingly directed at providing the environmental stimuli most appropriate to evoke and
derive from each zygote those potentialities
which would best enrich and humanize our
present culture.
Let us now turn to my example.

Body Size and Mental Ability

(a) In Children. In 1892 William Townsend
Portert (then Professor of Physiology at St.
Louis Medical College), organized a survey of

* The Galton Lecture, delivered in London on
Ist June 1966.

t Porter (1862-1949) at this time aged thirty, later
became a famous figure in American physiology. His
work on children caused Henry Bowditch, the first
Professor of Physiology at Harvard, and the first serious
student of children’s growth in America, to call him to
Harvard the following year as Assistant Professor of
Physiology. He later became Professor of Comparative
Physiology at Harvard (1903-28), founder, first editor
(1898-1914) and financial sponsor of the American
Journal of Physiology and founder of the Harvard
Apparatus Company. His long obituaries make no
mention of his pioneer work on human growth,

122

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1966, 58, 3.
GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

the heights and weights and various other
measurements of some 33,500 boys and girls in
the public schools of St. Louis. The school
classes were organized in grades, and a pupil
moved up a grade when he had successfully
completed the work of the previous grade,

55

50

45

40

Weight, kg.
a

w&
o

25

average figures: Porter, a close follower of
Galton, who invented percentiles, calculated
the 20th and 80th percentiles in higher and lower
grades and showed that the whole distribution of
weight of pupils of the higher grade was shifted
upward.)

 

  

Age, years

FIGURE 1

Weight of boys and girls of above-average grade and below-average grade in schools
of St. Louis in 1892. Cross-sectional data. From Porter (1893).

irrespective of his age. (The same system was
used in England at that time and the schools
were known as Grade Schools: furthermore in
England the teachers in the schools were paid
according to the number of pupils who passed
each grade exam each year!) Porter (1893) found
that the pupils in the higher grades were taller
and heavier than pupils of the same age in the
lower grades. (Not only was this true of the

Figure 1 is redrawn from one of Porter’s
papers. It shows the weight at each year of age
of children who were above-average in grade and
children who were below-average. Though in the
Figure the difference does not look very impressive, it corresponds to the amount an average
child grows in about six months. The data, of
course, are cross-sectional. (The figures for
height are similar: for example twelve-year-old

123
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

girls in Grade II are 5 cm. shorter than twelveyear-olds in Grade V. Ten-year-old boys show
the same difference between Grades I and IV.)
Size in children, then, appeared to be linked in
some way with ability.

Porter was the first to demonstrate this fact,
except for two Russians who independently
in the previous year wrote theses describing the
same phenomenon in Moscow children (Porter
very correctly gives them credit in a footnote).
Porter’s finding raised incredulous but illdocumented opposition then as, sometimes, now.
Porter (1893) thought that physical strength,
which he equated with size and weight, conditioned the amount of mental effort that a
child could make, and wrote “precocious
children are heavier and dull children lighter
than the mean* child of the same age. This
establishes a basis of precocity and dullness’.
By precocious, however, he did not mean
temporarily advanced, but rather the opposite
of dull; we might say bright. He pointed out that
the growth curves of precocious and dull
followed a parallel course and that the adolescent
increase in weight occurred at about the same
age in the two groups. He thus indirectly inferred
(though I cannot find him committing himself
so directly as Boas implies) that these differences
of size and mental ability would persist into
adult life.

To this conclusion Franz Boas, the greatest
American anthropologist of his generation and
the foremost pioneer of studies of human growth,
objected strongly (see Tanner, 1959, p. 82). “I
should prefer to call the less favourably developed
grade of children retarded, not dull” he wrote
“‘and these terms are by no means equivalent, as
a retarded child may develop and become quite
bright . . . furthermore I do not believe that the
facts found by Dr. Porter establish a basis of
precocity and dullness, but only that precocious
children are at the same time better developed
physically. ... Dr. Porter has shown that mental

* By mean Porter meant median. In this he followed
Galton’s terminology, in Natural Inheritance, in a way
=uX

confusing to us nowadays. Our modern mean (Fz)

was referred to as the average. Boas also used this
terminology in some of his papers prior to 1900.

124

and physical growth are correlated, or depend
upon common causes; not that mental development depends on physical growth”’ (Boas, 1895).
Boas was the first man to realize fully that
children developed at different rates; it was he
who invented the phrases tempo of growth and
developmental age. Thus naturally he saw the
relation between ability and size as probably
caused by differences in rate of development,
some children being advanced both physically
and mentally and others retarded. If so, then by
adulthood the ‘“‘retarded’”’ child would have
caught up the “‘advanced”’ and there would no
longer be any difference between them either in
physique or ability.

After seventy years the controversy still
continues. Only very recently have we made any
substantial progress towards clarifying what,
after all, is an important and practical issue, to
educationists as well as human biologists.
Porter and Boas were writing a decade and more
before Binet published his work, yet even now
intelligence tests are constructed and usually
interpreted entirely on the basis of “‘bright’”’ and
“dull”. They do not distinguish between the
advanced child who will end up, early, with
average ability and the bright child who is not
advanced and who will end up, at the average
age, with high ability. Worse, they fail to pick
out the slowly-developing child of potentially
high ability. Such a child may fall through the
apple-sorting machinery of an age-linked examination like the eleven-plus, and as a result may
not have the educational opportunity to “develop
his inborn qualities to the utmost advantage’’.
Modern longitudinal studies of intelligence
test scores indicate clearly that differences in
rates of maturing occur in mental ability just as
they do in height and weight. (Bayley, 1956 and
see Tanner, 1961, p. 92).

Porter’s factual observations on the relation of
body size to school grades have been repeatedly
confirmed over the years. Boas himself found
that children in Worcester, Mass. who were one
grade ahead were on average bigger by about
six months’-worth of height growth than their
co-evals a grade below. When psychological
testing was introduced and the school system
reorganized so that promotion was less dependent on passing graded examinations, the
GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

relevant statistic became the correlation between
height* and test score, or IQ, at a given age.

In 1947 a sample of 6,490 pupils drawn at
random from all eleven-year-old Scottish school
children, gave a correlation of 0:25-+0-01
between height and score in a Moray House
group test of attainment (the effect of age
differences from 11:0 to 11:9 having been
allowed for) (Scottish Council, 1953). An
approximate conversion of the test scores to
Terman-Merrill IQs leads to an average increase
of about 0-67 IQ points for each cm. of height
or roughly 14 points of IQ for each inch. In
1959 and 1960 amongst approximately 4,000
ten- and eleven-year-old pupils in London there
was a correlation of 0:23 between height and
verbal reasoning test score (Moray House Test
61 or NFER Test 9B). The correlation does not
look high, but the effects can be very significant
for individual children. In the ten-year-old
girls there was a 9-point difference in IQ between
those whose height was below the 15th percentile
and those whose height was above the 75th
percentile. This is two-thirds of the standard
deviation of the test score, and in the 11+ exam,
for instance, corresponds to a difference of about
15 percentile ranks at the level usually used for
pass or fail.

The children of the National Survey of Health
and Development provide measurements at
ages eight, eleven and fifteen. This Survey consists
of a stratified sample of all boys and girls born
in the first week of March, 1946; the sample
considered comprised 2,864 children. At each
age four pencil-and-paper tests were given; the
heights were taken by school doctors. The
correlations between height and the results of
these tests were 0-14 at eight years, 0-14 at
eleven years and 0-12 at fifteen years (Douglas,
Ross and Simpson, 1965). (Actually height was
taken at age seven and the first test at age eight,
but the results were adjusted for this.)

None of these data tell us, however, whether
the correlation represents simply co-advancement in height and in ability and hence will
disappear in adult life, (Boas’s view) or whether

* It is likely that the true relationship is with body
size rather than height, in children and in adults. Weight,
however, is a poor measure of size, since it is so affected
by fat. .

it represents something more persistent (Porter’s
view).

Longitudinal studies have shown that earlymaturing children—that is children with an
early puberty—do score higher in tests than
late-maturing children from at least age six (see
Tanner, 1962 p. 211 for references; also Nisbet
and Illsley, 1963). They are also, of course, taller
since on average children with an early puberty
are advanced throughout all their growing
period, from early infancy. But for a number of
reasons this does not settle the matter. First, the
longitudinal data, as so often, become very poor
after about age fifteen and for this reason we
cannot really be sure what happens at full
maturity. Shuttleworth’s (1939) data (illustrated
in Tanner, 1962 p. 212) suffer from a sharp
reduction in numbers at the older ages, due to
causes which very probably introduce bias; the
same is true of Abernethy’s (1936) and Freeman
and Florey’s (1937) data. The National Survey
of Child Health and Development data show the
usual higher scores in early maturers, and
additionally demonstrate that this holds good
even for children matched for occupational
category and number of siblings (see below).
At age fifteen the difference has not diminished;
indeed it is slightly greater, in both boys and
girls, than it was in the same children at ages
seven and eleven (Douglas, Ross and Simpson,
1965). Thus it is dubious whether the difference
between early and late maturers disappears in
adulthood. And secondly, even if the difference
does disappear completely, that still would not
prove that a// the relation of height and score in
childhood was due to co-advancement, only that
some of it was.

Most writers on the subject however (including
at one time myself) have adopted Boas’s view
that the correlation probably represented only
co-advancement and would disappear at maturity.
This view has important consequences for
education. According to it, early developers are
at an advantage in tests such as the 11 plus, for
admission to selective education. Furthermore
they obtain an increasing educational advantage
thereafter, simply as a result of passing these
tests. Hence they would remain always ahead,
an example of the classical self-fulfilling prophesy
or positive feed-back. This effect would also

125
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bias the results of a longitudinal study to
maturity, unless allowances could be made for
differences in educational opportunity.

However, we might perhaps have thought
twice before adopting this view too wholeheartedly, even though Boas’s side in an
argument very seldom lost. Nancy Bayley, one
of the most profound of all students of the
development of mental abilities, in 1956 published correlations between height and intelligence test score at each year of age from eleven
to sixteen in a group of about forty children
followed longitudinally in Berkeley till age
twenty-one. The correlations were high, mostly
between 0-30 and 0-50, and showed no tendency
to drop between seven and sixteen, in either sex.
Furthermore Dr. Bayley developed an absolute
score for the intelligence test, so that it was
possible to compute for each individual the
percentage of his final twenty-one-year-old score
attained at each age. Similarly the percentage
of mature height attained at each age was
calculated. The correlation between these two
measures, of mental and physical advancement
respectively, turned out, in these admittedly
limited data, to be slightly negative. There was
no evidence that an early-maturing boy or girl
in the height-growth sense was early-maturing
in the mental attainment sense. Indeed there
was a Slight suggestion that children who were
slower in physical maturing reached their
twenty-one-year-old intelligence sooner. Or, put
the other way around, the less able, though slow
in maturing physically, nevertheless reached
their twenty-one-year-old intelligence relatively
early, slowing down in mental attainment as they
approached adulthood. (This could wholly or
partly be a result of poor teaching associated
with the poor social circumstances, which could
also lead to slow physical growth.) This study,
then, provides some evidence against the coadvancement hypothesis. *

(b) In Adults. However the main argument
against co-advancement as the sole cause of the
height-ability correlation in children rests on
recent data about the same relationship in adults.
The older literature,} summarized in Patterson
(1930) concerned mainly students. The restricted
nature of their intellectual range (in the statistical
sampling sense, that is) makes them a poor guide

126

* Perhaps a model will help clarify this slightly
confusing situation.

CHILDHOOD ADULTHOOD
JA advanced-ht. ——-— average ht.
Tall children G
A \ tall-as-adult ——-—tall
D H
A advanced-test ——average IQ
I

High-scoring children E
B “w high test as adults—high IQ
F J

Tall children may be divided into those who are
advanced and will end up average as adult and those who
are tall and will end up tall, as explained above. We can
classify the high-scoring children similarly. (In practice
no such crude dichotomies can be made of course; the
true situation is a continuum.) Our information is that
there is a connection (on average) between A and B.
This must come about either by connection between
C and E, D and F, C and F or D and E. C-E represents
the co-advancement or Boas’s hypothesis, D-F the
adult-persistent or Porter hypothesis. We must assume
that C and D, and E and F are independent. We know that
this is very nearly true of C and D; in fact advanced
children end up very slightly shorter than others, so there
is very small negative interaction, larger in girls than boys.
About E and F we know nothing, except possibly from
Nancy Bayley’s study quoted above. This might incline
us to think E and F could be if anything negatively
interacting too.

What now can we say about these connections? We
have to remember, ruefully, that though we can distinguish C and D in childhood (by bone age and pubertal
age) we cannot as a rule distinguish E and F. We cannot

‘therefore say anything about the connections except by

reference to the situation at adulthood, in the right-hand
column. The adult correlations indicate that on average
tall adults have high test scores. Thus H is connected
with J. This then is evidence that D, the generator of H, is
connected with F, the generator of J, since we know
C and H are practically independent and we suppose that
E and J are likewise. Hence we have, of course, the
connection D-B.

The evidence for the C-E or co-advancement connection
is, on the whole, less good. In most data the connection
C-B exists, though whether it is more or less important
than D-B is not clear. In the National Child Health
Survey data D-B was probably more important, since
the height-ability correlation was scarcely at all lowered
by allowing for different stages of puberty, that is
eliminating the effect of C (Douglas, Ross and Simpson,
1965). But assuming C-B to exist, our problem is whether
this is via C-E, C-F, or both. The evidence on C-F is
conflicting. Early maturers may perhaps have persistent
high test scores when they are adult. If so, then the
connection C—E need not necessarily exist at all. Nancy
Bayley’s data suggest directly that C and E are independent or slightly negatively related and carry the consequence that in her small series the connection C-F
does exist.

+t Galton’s views on this subject were characteristically
vigorous. In Hereditary Genius (1869) he wrote “I do
not deny that many men of extraordinary mental gifts
have had wretched constitutions, but deny them to be an
essential or even the usual accompaniment. ...A
collection of living magnates in various branches of
intellectual achievement is always a feast to my eyes;
being as they are, such massive, vigorous, capablelooking animals’’.
GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

to the population as a whole. There is certainly
a difference in height between individuals
belonging to different socio-economic groups,
and there is also a similar difference in intelligence
test scores. Thus one might expect to find a
positive correlation between height and test
score in the population at large. This seems
indeed to be the case. Husen (1951) reported a
figure of 0-22 for 2,250 Swedish conscripts;
Schreider (1956) 0-29 for 566 French conscripts
and a similar figure for industrial workers;
Scott, Illsley and Thomson (1956) 0:24 for a
random sample of Aberdeen women pregnant
for the first time (Wechsler test); Udjus (1964)
0:16 for twenty-year-old Norwegian conscripts.

These figures undoubtedly reflect to a large
extent the association between occupation, or
socio-economic class, and both height and
intelligence (Udjus, 1964; Schreider, 1964). But
even within a given occupational group the
relation persists to a significant degree. In Udjus’s
data high school graduates averaged 179-7 cm.
in height, compared with a general mean of
177-5 cm. Nearly all were in the top three out of
the nine ranks given by the intelligence tests.
But those in the top two ranks of the test were
still about 2 cm. taller than those in the third and
lower divisions. (Indeed the regression within
this educational group was no different from the
general regression though its members contributed only about 50 per cent of the top two
divisions and 17 per cent of the third one.) When
the Aberdeen women are classified by husband’s
occupation, the height-ability correlation disappears in Registrar General’s Groups I-+-I1; but
it persists significantly in the less well-off
occupational groups, being 0-16 in Group III,
and 0-25 in Groups IV+V.

-We can fairly confidently assert, then, that
there is currently a small but significant tendency
for taller adults in the population to score
higher in some intelligence tests than short adults
of the same sex, even within certain, if not all,
crude occupational categories, such as “unskilled
and semi-skilled workers’.

It is at this point necessary to dispose of an
objection sometimes raised by tall men on behalf
of their shorter, and admittedly brighter friends.
Hard cases make bad law, and soft friends make
worse statistics. Just because on average large

boys do well in school it does not follow that
every large boy is a paragon of educational
virtue. On the contrary schoolteachers frequently
query the statistical relationship because they
have had the experience of a large, unintellectual
uninhibited boy who remains obstinately in the
memory when the visions of more tractable
pupils have long faded. Similarly with adults:
the correlation is far too low, of course, for it
to indicate anything as applied to individuals.
Perhaps the best analogy is with accident
statistics. No-one can tell if he personally will
be killed driving on the road next week; yet the
total number of people who will be killed in
this period can be rather accurately predicted.
Equally the correlation we are discussing, like
road deaths, tells us something of sociological
but nothing of individual importance. It is a
sociological symptom calling for diagnosis and
perhaps treatment. |

We may sum up the situation to date by saying
that probably in most data both the Boas and
Porter links between height and ability exist;
both the co-advancement link and the adultpersistent link. Their relative importance probably varies according to circumstances. We
have now to clarify these circumstances and at
the same time to consider how each of the links
is brought about.

The Number of Children in the Family

One factor that is clearly associated with the
height-ability relationship in childhood is the
number of children in the family. In all surveys
reported, children are taller if they have few
sibs* and shorter if they have many. This is
illustrated for data from the London County
Council (Scott, 1962, Table 1) in Figure 2. The
data are also quite consistent on the subject of
intelligence test results; here again children with
fewer sibs score higher, as shown in Figure 3
(LCC data, Scott, 1962, Table 1: the test was
Moray House Test 61, standardized to a mean
of 100 and SD 15).

Hence all or part of the childhood correlation
between height and ability might be associated

* By “‘sibs’’ most surveys in fact mean children living
in the same household, whether or not they are brothers
and sisters.

127
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with differences in number of sibs. In fact in the
LCC data about half of the correlation is so
associated and half is not. Figure 4 shows the
regression in families with one, two, three, four
and more children (Scott, 1962, Table 4).

146

145

S Age 11-25

se L.C.C.
Girls ~,
‘

1446

“=
>
Ww

Height, cm

_
a
ND

141

 

Total children in family

FIGURE 2

The relation of height and number of children in the
family in boys and girls aged 103 to 117. London County
Council 1959. (From Scott, 1962, Table 1.)

Figure 5 shows the regression of height on test
score in families of one or two children only.
(Scott, 1962, Table 3). The average correlation
in these data is 0-17, in comparison with the
correlation of 0-23 in all children irrespective of
sib number.

The association with number of sibs certainly
seems unlikely to spring from factors present in
the zygote. Probably it reflects differences in
nutrition affecting height, and differences either
in nutrition or, more likely, in parental attention
affecting attainment. The height relationship is
established probably by 44 (Douglas and Blomfield, 1958), and certainly by six (Grant, 1964).
The National Survey of Child Health and
Development data show a difference of height
between girls with no sibs and girls with three
or more amounting to 3-6 cm. at seven, 3-2 cm.

128

at eleven and 1:3 cm. at fifteen, suggesting that
by full maturity the association might have
disappeared. But for boys the figures were
1-6, 2-5 cm. and 2-3 cm. (Douglas and Simpson,
1964).

Udjus’s Norwegian data show that at age
nineteen men with no sibs or one sib averaged
178-0 cm. tall, those with two or three sibs
177-7 cm. and those with four or five sibs
176-9 cm. The regression is therefore small.
Further, a follow-up study showed that on
average the conscripts grew about a further
0-8 cm. to maturity; hence it could well be that
the many-sibbed conscripts were a little delayed
and caught up the 1-1 cm. deficit in the ensuing

104

Age 11-25
L.C.C.

102 -7 \

V.R. test score

 

Total children in family

FIGURE 3

The relation between verbal reasoning test score and
number of children in the family in boys and girls aged
103 to 113. London County Council 1959. (From Scott,
1962, Table 1.)

years. In twenty-year-old French army recruits
in 1946-48 there was still a difference of 2 cm.
in height between those from families of one or
two children and those from families of five or
more (Trémoliéres and Boulanger, 1960). But
at this time probably full adult height was not
reached by age twenty, owing to the years of
war.
GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

The intelligence test score relations with
number of sibs are established by age eight
(Douglas and Simpson, 1964; Douglas, 1964)
and probably persist into adult life (Vernon,
1951).

110

     
  
  
   

_

eS 9 SB

=. 3

p>
7/

132-5

108

»

106

104

°
&
+

Total children in family

102

100

VR. test score

98

Girls L.C.C.

96 Age 1025

94

137-5
Height, cm

130-0

142-5

»145-0

FIGURE 4

Regression of verbal reasoning test score on height for
children in 1-child, 2-child etc. families. London County
Council 1959. (From Scott, 1962, Table 4.)

All in all, it seems likely that the sib-number
effect is concerned chiefly or entirely with the
co-advancement link of height and ability and
not with the adult-persistent link. If the effect is
purely environmental in origin, as we suppose,
then it ought to be less in the well-off than in the
poor. This appears to be the case. The children
of the upper middle class families in the National
Survey of Child Health and Development
showed no relation at all between height and
number of sibs, either at seven, eleven or fifteen.
In girls the regression was present to much the
same degree in lower middle, upper manual and
lower manual groups, but in boys it became
progressively greater as parent’s social class
declined. In the same data the regression of
intelligence test score on sib number in the upper
middle classes is about half the amount that it is
in the other three groups, between which there is
again little difference. This is at ages eight and
eleven (Douglas, 1964). In the Scottish elevenyear-olds it is striking that the only occupational
group besides the professional-managerial not
to show a decline of height and weight with

increasing numbers of children were the farmers
and agricultural labourers (Scottish Research
Council 1953, Tables 32 and 33).

Ministry of Food Statistics show that families
in the UK spend less per head on food as the
number of children in them increases. Recently
Abel-Smith and Townsend (1965) have produced
data which challenge the widely held notion
that in the UK poverty, and particularly poverty
in children, is a thing of the past. Defining
“‘poverty”” as the level of living of National
Assistance Board applicants, they showed that
one-third of all the poor were children. As many
as 25 per cent of households with four children
or more were poor, 10 per cent of households
with three children and only 6 or 7 per cent of
households with one or two children. Thus there
is ample reason for supposing that a substantial
number of children in large families in the poorer
classes are not adequately fed. Children in these
circumstances also have a higher incidence of
childhood disease such as bronchitis, though
whether this causes a retardation of growth is in
dispute (for discussion see Tanner, 1962, p. 130).

148

wt
~~

Height, cm
> 5
ane
x
%
‘,
“
‘\
\

r. * Age 11-25 L.C.c,
e
Families of 1-2 children only
142 Boys
e

1
80 90 100 110 120 130
V.R. test score

   

FiGure 5

Regression of height on verbal reasoning test score in
boys and girls of 1-child or 2-child families only. London
County Council 1959. (From Scott, 1962, Table 3.)

The under-nutrition and possibly the disease may
well account for retardation of growth in height,
and even, perhaps, for smallness at maturity.

129
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

But whether sub-optimal feeding can have any
effect on either the rate of development of mental
ability or on the level of mature ability is really
quite unknown. Opinion has for many years
been quite against any such notion, except
perhaps in cases of extreme starvation in early
infancy. However, opinion is a poor guide and
controlled observations are lacking.

To summarize then: according to present
data, children with many sibs in the house are
retarded in their height growth from an early age
compared with children of the same social class
with few sibs. This is especially true of children in
poorly-off families. They also score lower in
tests of intelligence or attainment. By the time
adulthood is reached they have caught up, or
very nearly caught up in height; they have not
caught up in intelligence tests (Vernon, 1951)
but this may be the result only of the vicious
circle in educational opportunity described
above. The sib number effect on height seems to
be due to sub-optimal nutrition. The effect on
intelligence in childhood may be a direct consequence of the retardation of physical growth
rate, factors underlying mental development
being perhaps to a small extent linked with rate
of development of body size; or it may be simply
due to the influence of parental contact, this being
less in many-sibbed families. The sib number
effect explains to some extent that part of the
height-ability relationship present in childhood
and due to co-advancement, but it does not
explain that part which persists into adulthood.

Occupational or Socio-economic Class

To explain this we must examine the association of height and intelligence test score with
occupational, or socio-economic class. (We
have never to forget, in this section, that
occupational groups are enormously heterogeneous in terms of income and of social
behaviour, which is what chiefly matters.
Occupational classifications really need supplementing with assessments of maternal efficiency,
child-centredness and sociological affiliations,
but these are not available for large-scale data.)
Here we have a different situation from sib
number, for occupational class differences
clearly persist into adult life. They begin in

130

early childhood. In the five West European
longitudinal studies co-ordinated by the International Children’s Centre (at London, Paris,
Brussels, Zurich and Stockholm) children in the
better-off classes were already a little longer at
age one, (though not at one month), and by age
five the difference in height between those in the
top two and those in the bottom two out of
five classes amounted on-average to some 3 cm.
in boys and 14 cm. in girls (Graffar and Corbier,
1966; Graffar, Asiel and Emery-Hauzeur 1961).*
In the 1947 Scottish eleven-year-old boys this
difference rises to about 6 cm.; it is independent,
or nearly so, of the number of sibs. Not all of it
persists into maturity; some is due to advancement in height growth in the better-off classes.
But some part does persist (for reference see
Tanner, 1962, pp. 139, 140). Udjus’s nineteenyear-old conscripts, for example, show a difference of about 3 cm. between sons of fishermen,
farmworkers and unskilled labourers on the one
hand and sons of white-collar executives on the
other. This difference is clearly too great to be
eliminated by growth after nineteen.

The same difference arises and persists in
intelligence test scores. In the International
Children’s Centre Studies, Terman-Merrill [Q’s
at three and five already showed a marked
differential (Graffar and Corbier, 1966). At age
seven clear differences in reading and arithmetic
attainment tests are present in the children of the
National Child Development Study 1958 Cohort
(whose yet unpublished data are quoted by kind
permission of Professor N. Butler and Dr. M.
Kellmer-Pringle, Co-directors, and Mr. H.
Goldstein, of my department, statistician to the
study). They are also present at this age in the
Aberdeen children (Illsley, 1966).

Social Stratification and the Steady State

A good deal of the adult-persistent correlation
between height and ability is associated, then,
with differences in social class. We now have to

* Numerous studies, including the Perinatal Mortality
Survey, have shown small differences in birth weight
between classes to exist. But in the International Children’s
Centre studies the weight differential at one month was
insignificantly small. In most data there is a significant
correlation between birth weight and later (e.g. age
seven) IQ (Illsley, 1966)
GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

consider two further curious facts. (1) People
who migrate from one part of the country to
another as children or as young adults are taller,
and score higher in tests of mental ability than
the stay-at-homes. (2) Women who migrate
upwards in social class on marriage are taller,
as well as brighter (and perhaps prettier too?)
than those who do not. |

Concerning the first of these facts the major
reports are those of Martin (1949), and Vernon
(1951); (see also Lee, 1957 and Scottish Council,
1953). Martin showed an average difference of
0-8 cm. between soldiers who on call-up in
1939 resided outside their county of birth and
those who still resided in it. Vernon showed a
corresponding difference of about three points
in intelligence test score. People who move away
from their place of birth are evidently taller and
more intelligent, on average.

10

=

Aberdeen primiparae born to skilled manual workers

¢Nen-man.

=
uw

i,

*Sk.
oSk.
—

oUnsk.

Percent under avi in height

oe ion
before
earings RTC

FIGURE 6

Percentage of daughters of skilled manual workers
under 5 ft. 1 in. tall taking non-manual and manual jobs,
and marrying men in non-manual, skilled manual and
1380) manual occupations. (Redrawn from Thomson,

Concerning the second fact the classical
demonstration is that of Baird and his associates
in Aberdeen (Scott, Illsley and Thomson, 1956;
Thomson, 1959). In 1950-57 they measured the
height of some seven and a half thousand women
pregnant for the first time and showed that
whatever the occupation of the father, the taller
women take before marriage a more skilled’ job
and the shorter a less skilled job; and whatever

the job before marriage the taller women marry
husbands with more skilled jobs and the shorter
women husbands with less skilled jobs. At each
choice-point, so to speak, the tall rise in the
social scale and the short sink. The effect is best

. Shown in the daughters of skilled manual workers

(Figure 6). Of these 23 per cent were below
5 ft. 1 in. in height. Of those who before marriage
took unskilled jobs 28 per cent were under
5 ft. 1 in. contrasted with only 17 per cent of
those who took non-manual jobs. Some of these
girls in non-manual jobs married men in similar
jobs, and others married skilled manual workers.
Of the former only 10 per cent were under 5 ft.
1 in. in height; of the latter 19 per cent.

It is a pity of course that it was not possible
to measure and test the sisters of these women,
to see what happened to taller or shorter women
brought up in the same family surroundings.
A greater proportion of the height differences
between sisters is genetically controlled than
differences between women in different families,
naturally. Thus if the taller sib rose socially
more than the shorter one, we could more
clearly infer, at least in the absence of prenatal
differences, that this was due to something
associated with the inherited element in height,
if not to simple height itself. *

Recently Schreider (1964) in an excellent
discussion of the whole problem, has tabulated
the results of the country-wide Perinatal
Mortality Survey (Butler and Bonham, 1963) to
show the same thing. Figure 7 shows the
percentage of women 5 ft. 5 in. and over in
height according to the occupations both of
father and husband. Height increases as husband’s occupation is more skilled. Furthermore
this occurs in women of all social origins,
judged by father’s occupation. Thirty-one per
cent of women coming from unskilled labouring

* Recently this approach has been used by Laycock
and Caylor (1964) in relation to the height-ability relation
in children. They studied children of IQs 120 or over who
had an older or younger sib with an IQ at least 20 points
less. The gifted sibs were bigger in all five body measurements taken, but the differences were insignificantly
different from zero. The average height difference was the
equivalent of about 0-5 cm. for instance. Some objections
can be raised to the details of this study—for example the
sibs should ideally be measured each at the same age—
but it does support the notion that much of the heightability correlation is due to factors operating between,
rather than within, families.

131
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

homes (throughout the whole country) who
married professional husbands were 5 ft. 5 in.
or over in height. Only 24 per cent who married
in their class or origin were this height. On the
other hand, of the women born into professional
homes who married semi-skilled or unskilled
labourers only 32 per cent were 5 ft. 5 in. or over
compared with 46 per cent of those who married
in their class of origin.

9 British women, perinatal mortality survey

Upper middle

45

40 Lower middle

Father's occupation

35

   

Unskilied manga!

Percent 5°5” and over in height

\AA

Shilled Lower Upper
manuel middle middle

 

 

 

Husband's occupation

FIGURE 7

Percentage of British women 5 ft. 5 in. and over in
height according to occupations of father and husband.
Data of Perinatal Mortality Survey (Butler and Bonham
1963) tabulated by Schreider (1964).

The same process is reflected in the data on the
weights of fourteen-year-old school boys reported
by Berry and Cowin (1954). There were consistent weight differences associated with parents’
social class amongst boys in grammar schools
and amongst boys in secondary modern schools
in the same town. But still larger differences
existed between grammar and secondary modern
school boys whose fathers had the same type of
occupation. The process of social selection had
apparently begun. Similarly Parnell (1954)
showed that Oxford University students from
state schools were not only considerably taller
than the average of young men from such schools,
but actually a little taller even than the private
school ex-pupils who failed to get to University.

One must evidently think of social migration
or selection acting for body size as it does for

132

intelligence. Gibson and Young (1965) quote
data showing that some 30 per cent of persons
per generation now move from one broad
division of class into another and that it is the
less intelligent who move down and the more
intelligent who move up. Evidently the same is
true of height. We have a steady state in the
population such that the mean height rises only
very slightly at present from one generation to
another, while the persons contributing to that
mean reassort themselves so that a social class
gradient is always maintained.

There are probably other examples of such a
steady-state process in social selection. Some
years ago Morris and Heady (1955), Morris
(1959) pointed out that though since 1911 infant
mortality had greatly decreased in all social
classes, the gap between the classes had,
surprisingly, not narrowed. At the same time,
while the overall incidence of various adult
diseases had risen or fallen, their social class
affinities had not changed at all.

It is easy to understand why people who are
clever tend to rise in the social scale, but much
harder to see why tall people do so. Surely
tallness of itself carries no social cachet. It is true
that the perinatal mortality in tall mothers is
less than that in short ones, even of the same
social class (Illsley, 1966), so that there is
selection at birth acting in favour of the tall.
The effect may well be balanced by an excess of
tall women who do not produce children; in
any case it would only influence the general
level of height in the next generation and not the
ability of a given tall child to rise in the social
scale.

It seems likely in fact that tall people rise
because they are marginally better at certain
mental tasks. Schreider (1964) puts this accurately
when he stresses that the height correlation is
probably with certain aptitudes only, not with
some measure of global intelligence. The
Aberdeen women showed a higher correlation
between height and Wechsler score than between
height and the score on the Progressive Matrices,
(Scott, Illsley and Thomson, 1956) perhaps
because the Wechsler is more verbal. In the
National Child Development Survey 1958
Cohort preliminary results suggest that there is
a significant relation at age seven between height
GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

and reading ability, independently of sex, sib
number and social class; but none at all between
height and skill at arithmetic.

All this may be interesting, but still leaves us
in the dark about whether the tall bright upwardmoving children are this way chiefly because of
excellence of antenatal and postnatal care, and
of intelligent and responsible feeding and
upbringing, or chiefly because they inherited a
gene complex which was predisposed towards
developing in this direction.

We have no formal estimate of the proportions
to which heredity and environmental factors are
concerned. There is the curious fact that in all
countries students are the tallest group in the
population (Parnell, 1954) and mental defectives
are the shortest (Mosier, Grossman and Dingman, 1965). Amongst the latter the degree of
shortness and the degree of mental defect are
correlated. This does seem to argue that on
average lack of complexity of brain is linked with
lack of skeletal growth. (Perhaps it is significant
that in Figure 4 above, there may be indications
of a threshold for test score above a height of
137-5 cm. in families with few children. The
relationship may be chiefly that a significant
number of small children are low in ability.) We
are totally unable to say whether such a link
reflects genetic factors or minimal brain damage
during intra-uterine development. Certainly
what Sir Alan Moncrieff has recently called
*‘Antenatal paediatrics” may have great importance in this field. In principle intra-uterine
damage could provide a phenocopy of any
genetic predisposition; but to what extent the
small, not very bright and socially-sinking
persons in the community represent phenocopies
and to what extent the workings out of gene
complexes we cannot yet tell. We are ignorant
too, to what extent bad maternal care in the
early years can irrevocably fix the constitution
of the infant.

We can, I think, say that some of the effect
must be genetic. Consider those small unintelligent women who fall from grace to marry two
social classes below: they cannot all be daughters
of drunken eccentric academics whose homes
are in squalor and whose wives are incompetent.
Many must have received excellent childhood
care, but were unable to benefit fully from it.

ER——K

On the other side, there are plenty of persons~
academics especially—who, born into squalor
and penury, yet emerged not only with outstanding minds but outstanding physiques as wel..

These two examples lie at the end of the
spectrum of genetic/environmental interaction.
As humanists and eugenists we can perhaps do
little to help the first extreme, and need only
admire the second. But the vast majority of
persons lie between the extremes. For genetic
reasons alone, numerous children would be a
little smaller and a little less bright than average,
but from conception onwards the environment
may also be hostile to physical and mental
growth and thus even their genetic potentialities
fail to be realized. Heredity and environment
interact positively in a vicious circle. It is
these children, and even more the genetically
gifted child born into similar surroundings,
whom we can help, by locating the areas and
families concerned. Once located, these children
should be given nutritional and educational
opportunities sufficient to offset their home
environment. This is, of course, the philosophy
behind the maternity services, the school meals
service and that part of the nursery school
movement which particularly concerns itself with
socially deprived children. In its latest and perhaps most practical form this approach is
manifested in a proposal to designate certain
areas as educational priority areas and to give
these areas better teacher-pupil ratios and more
nursery schools.

Finally, I want to develop the thought that
such action may be genetically advantageous as
well as socially imperative. Development consists of an intricate sequence of interactions
some between one part of the animal and
another part, others between the animal and its
environment. Some sequences are critical so that
animals may only develop properly if the
environment can be relied on to provide the right
stimulus at the right time. In this sense, animals
are born into “‘expected’’, indeed into “‘required”’
environments. A duckling will follow the first
large object seen at a certain time after hatching.
This is usually the mother; if it happens to be
Professor Konrad Lorenz the duckling follows
him and remains pathologically attached to
humans for the remainder of its life.

133
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We do not yet know to what extent such
critical periods occur in the development of
children. At least cuddling and optical stimulation are probably essential in early infancy for
proper development to occur. And it needs little
extension of this notion to lead to the whole of
the modern concept of education. Clearly as
eugenists we have the duty to seek to improve
not only the gene complex, but also the quality
and reliability of this interaction. But can we
go further, and assert that improving this
interaction will result in an actual improvement
in the gene pool, through the mechanism of
assimilation so elegantly described by Waddington?

I think perhaps we may. Consider a desirable
quality (such as the capacity to do differential
equations) which though based on certain
genetic foundations becomes developed only if
certain optimal stimulation is provided by the
environment. The genetic bases may be present
in only a few persons; when the stimulation is
not provided the result is nil. But when the
stimulation becomes frequent—that is, when
modern mathematical notation is invented and
taught—then the quality becomes apparent in
a number of people. Classically, in animal
genetics, the quality must then confer a selective
advantage; if so, then its basis will be gradually
assimilated into the gene complexes. of a large
number of the species.

This can only occur when the more gifted
members of the community leave more viable
offspring than the less gifted; but my point about
interaction refers, I believe, to the definition and
ascertainment of the gifted. Positive eugenics
is most effective against a background of the
optimal environment, for only in the optimal
environment can ascertainment be complete.
We all, I think, are searching for some effective
way to contribute to the improvement of human
quality, to become positive eugenists as well as
merely negative ones. The study of geneticenvironmental interaction may provide one of
the means by which we can realize this aim.

Summary

1. Amongst children of school age there is a
significant though low correlation between body

134

size and scores in various tests of ability and
attainment, such that larger children score more
highly than smaller children of the same age.
Though the correlation between height and
test score is only 0-15 to 0-25 the chance of a
large child passing an exam such as the 11+ is
substantially greater than that of a small child.

2. This correlation diminishes when maturity
is reached but does not disappear entirely. In
samples of young adults representing the whole
population correlations of up to 0-2 remain.
Thus the height-ability relation in children is
partly due to co-advancement in both physical
and mental growth, but it is also partly adultpersistent.

3. The greater the number of children in the
family the lower their height and the less their
scores in mental tests. This effect is probably
entirely due to co-advancement and disappears
when maturity is reached. It is greater in poor
families than in rich ones.

4. There are also differences in height and
mental ability between children in different
socio-economic groups and these persist to a
large degree into adulthood.

5. On average taller women tend to rise in the
social scale, both in getting jobs and in marriage;
and shorter women, on average, tend to sink.
This is probably due to height being related to
ability. The social structure represents a steady
state in which socio-economic group differences
remain while individuals change from one group
to another.

6. We do not know in what proportions
heredity and environment contribute to these
effects. Minimal intra-uterine damage may well
be important. It is argued that positive eugenics
should pay increasing attention to the interphase
between heredity and environment, that is to
those factors necessary to evoke and derive the
full potentialities from the zygote. More
efficiency in doing this might also result in
changes for the better in the gene pool, by a
process of assimilation.

Acknowledgement

I am most grateful to Dr. Cedric Carter and Mr.
Harvey Goldstein, who read the manuscript, made
most valuable suggestions and drew my attention
to several points and papers with which I was
unfamiliar.
GALTONIAN EUGENICS AND THE STUDY OF GROWTH

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abel-Smith, B., and Townsend, P. 1965. The Poor and the
Poorest. London, Bell.

Abernethy, E. M. 1936. Relationships between mental
and physical growth. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Develpm.
1, No

Bayley, N. 1956. Individual patterns of development.
Child Develpm. 27, 45-74.

Berry, W. T. C., and Cowin, P. J. 1954. Conditions
associated with the growth of boys, 1950-51. Brit.
med. J. i, 847-51.

Boas, F. 1895. On Dr. William Townsend Porter’s
investigation of the growth of the school-children of
St. Louis. Science N.S. 1, 225-30.

Butler, N. R., and Bonham, D. G. 1963. Perinatal
Mortality. Edinburgh, Livingstone.

Douglas, J. W. B. 1964. The Home and the School.
London, MacGibbon and Kee.

Douglas, JW. B., and Blomfield, J. M. 1958. Children
under Five. London, Allen and Unwin.

Douglas, J. W. B., Ross, J. M., and Simpson, H. R.
1965. The relation between height and measured
educational ability in school children of the same
social class, family size and stage of sexual development. Hum. Biol. 37, 178-86.

Douglas, J. W. B., and Simpson, H. R. 1964. Height in
relation to puberty, family size and social class.
Millbank Mem. Fd. Quart. 42, 20-35.

Gibson, J., and Young, M. 1965. Social mobility and
fertility. In Biological Aspects of Social Problems.
Ed. J. E. Meade and A. S. Parkes. Edinburgh, Oliver
and Boyd.

Graffar, M., and Corbier, J. 1966. Contribution a l’étude
de l’influence socio-économique sur la croissance et le
développement de l’enfant. Courrier, 16, 1-25.

Graffar, M., Asiel, M., and Emery-Hauzeur, J. 1961.
La taille et le périmétre cephalique pendant la premiére
année de la vie. Acta paediat. belg. 15, 61-74.

Grant, M. W. 1964. Rate of growth in relation to birth
rank and family size. Brit. J. prev. soc. Med. 18, 35-42.

Husen, T. 1951. Undersékninger rérande sambanden
mellan somatiske f6r hallanden och _intellektuell
prestations formaga. Militar. Hdlsovdnd, 76, 41-74.

Illsley, R. 1966. Early Prediction of perinatal risk.
Proc. roy. Soc. Med. 59, 181-84.

Laycock, F., and Caylor, J. S. 1964. Physiques of gifted
children and their less gifted siblings. Child Develpm.
35, 63-74.

Lee, J. A. H. 1957. Regional variations in intellectual
ability in Britain; a discussion of their importance and
of the possible effects of selective migration. Eugen. Rev.
49, 19-24.

Martin, W. J. 1949. The Physique of Young Adult Males.
Med. Res. Council Memo. No. 20. London, HMSO.

Morris, J. 1959. Health and social class. Lancet, i, 303—S.

Morris, J., and Heady, J. A. 1955. Social and biological]
factors in infant mortality. V. mortality in relation to
father’s occupation. Lancet, i, 554-60.

Mosier, H. D., Grossman, H. JS. and Dingman, H. F.
1965. Physical growth in mental defectives. A study in
an institutionalized population. Paediatrics, 36,
465-579.

Nisbet, J. D., and Illsley, R. I. 1963. The influence of
early puberty on test performance at age eleven.
Brit. J. educ. Psychol, 33, 169-76.

Parnell, R. W. 1954. The physique of Oxford undergraduates. J. Hyg. 52, 369-78.

Paterson, D. G. 1930. Physique and Intellect. New York,
Century.

Porter, W. T. 1893. The physical basis of precocity and
dullness. Trans. Acad. Sci. St. Louis, 6, 161-81.

Schreider, E. 1956. Taille et capacités mentales. Biotypologie, 17, 21-37.

Schreider, E. 1964. Récherches sur la stratification
sociale des caractéres biologiques. Biotypologie, 26,

5-35.

Scott, E. M., Illsley, I. P., and Thomson, A. M. 1956.
A_ psychological investigation of primigravidae. II.
Maternal social class, age, physique and intelligence.
J. Obstet. Gynaec. Brit. Emp. 63, 338-43.

Scott, J. A. 1961. Report on the Heights and Weights
of School Pupils in the County of London in 1959.
London County Council.

Scott, J. A. 1962. Intelligence, physique and family size.
Brit. J. prev. soc. Med. 16, 165-73.

Scottish Council for Research in Education. 1953. Social
Implications of the 1947 Scottish Mental Survey. London,
University Press.

Shuttleworth, F. K. 1939. The physical and mental
growth of girls and boys age six to nineteen. Monogr.
Soc. Res. Child. Develpm. 4, No. 3.

Tanner, J. M. 1959. Boas’ contributions to knowledge
of human growth and form. In The Anthropology of
Franz Boas: essays on the centennial of his birth,
Ed. W. Goldschmidt. Mem. Amer. Anthropol. Assoc.
No. 89. (Amer. Anthropol. 61).

Tanner, J. M. 1961. Education and Physical Growth.
Implications of the study of children’s growth for
educational theory and practice. London, University
Press.

Tanner, J. M. 1962. Growth at Adolescence. 2nd edition.
Oxford, Blackwell.

Trémoliéres, J., and Boulanger, J. J. 1950. Contribution
a l’étude du phénoméne de croissance et de stature en
France de 1940 a 1948. Rec. Trav. Inst. nat. Hyg. 4,
117-212.

Udjus, L. G. 1964. Anthropometrical changes in Norwegian
men in the twentieth century. Oslo, Universitatsforlaget.

Vernon, P. E. 1951. Recent Investigations of Intelligence
and its measurements. Eugen. Rev. 43, 125-37.
