EUTELEGENESIS’
By HERBERT BREWER

HE present concern of eugenics is

with the elimination of defect. Its

greater mission, however, lies in the
creation of excellence. If man has arisen
from a simian stock then we may be the
forerunners of beings as superior to ourselves
as we are to the apes. It is difficult to give
precision to the idea of such exalted beings.
Nevertheless the idea exists and gives to
eugenics its most powerful inspiration.

Yet superman remains a dream, as elusive
as that of Messiah. ‘‘ When shall Messiah
come?’’ asked the Jewess of Braniza.
‘When all the Jews have become either
altogether virtuous or altogether vicious,”
was the reply. The biologist is apt to reply in
somewhat similar terms to the eugenicist.
Mankind may one day create something
better than itself. But first it is necessary to
unravel the complexities of Mendelian inheritance in man, and to assess a myriad
genes as good or bad. Even H. G. Wells, so
daring elsewhere, gives no encouragement
here. “‘ The deliberate improvement of man’s
inherent quality,” he says, ‘‘is at present
unattainable.”

Yet facts from wide fields of experience
support a challenge to these views. Few
great advances of any kind have waited upon
sure calculations and complete knowledge
for their inception. If action is dependent on
knowledge the converse is also true. The
physicist might have waited in vain for his
data but for the trial and error initiatives of

the workshop. Racial advance may be

regarded as an adventure entailing risks

* The views expressed in this article do not appear
among the Aims and Objects of the Eugenics Society
(EucEenics REviEw, July 1934, page 133); nor have
they been submitted for the consideration of the
Council. Fellows and Members will have an opportunity of discussing them on October 22nd, when Mr.
Brewer will read a paper on “ Eutelegenesis” at the
Rooms of the Linnean Society. The Eugenics Society
accepts no responsibility for opinions expressed in
contributions to the Review.—Ep.

commensurate with the great reward which
success would give.

The difficulties indeed appear immense.
Intensity of selection must govern the rate of
biological change. Since man is a slow
breeder, any appreciable rate of advance
requires a selection not less effective than
that which is applied to domesticated
animals. The creation of superior breeds of
livestock has only been possible by preferring
a few out of thousands or more. In the best
strains of highly bred animals 40 to 60 per
cent. may have to be culled merely to
prevent the standard from deteriorating.
Similar selection in the human species might
well seem possible only by a ruthless overriding of individual preference and by
annihilating most of what is connoted by
love and marriage. |

But entirely new possibilities exist in the
application of invention to the mechanism of
reproduction. Contraception has already
begun to show how far-reaching may be the
effects of such inventiveness. Through
contraception the emotional satisfactions of
sexual union have become dissociated from
the ends which that union was evolved to
fulfil—i.e. the fusion of male and female
germ cells. Here it may be noted that it is
through coitus that reproduction is involved
in the turbulent emotions of sex. Yet coitus
is but a means, the real end being fertilization. The intense consciousness aroused by
the means is in contrast with the entire lack
of it in relation to the end itself. The emotions .
which might appear to constitute insuperable
obstacles to radical departures in human
reproduction therefore are linked to accessory
rather than to fundamental factors.

Contraception makes physical love independent of fertilization, but not the reverse.
In the mind of primitive and semi-civilized
man conception, as Hartland* has shown, was
frequently believed to be independent of sex

* Hartland, E.S., 1909. Primitive Paternity.

I2I
I22

unfon. Positive eugenic advance may well
depend upon whether civilized man can
recapture the outlook of our forbears who
held these beliefs. For science has transformed primitive fiction into modern reality.
To-day generation without antecedent sexual
union is not only an experimental fact but
a practice which is being widely and successfully applied to stockbreeding.

The first authentic case of the artificial
insemination of a mammal was that of
Spallanzani, who, about the year 1780,
succeeded in fertilizing a spaniel bitch with
injected semen. Towards the end of the last
century similar experiments were extended
to horses and cattle. Later, Iwanoff in
Russia greatly developed the practice. Working mainly with horses he obtained a greater
percentage of conceptions than with natural
methods. His work, interrupted by the war,
was only resumed in 1923. Since then great
progress has been made. According to
figures of the Moscow Experimental Station,
giving results up to 1932, two million cows,
three million ewes, 650,000 mares and 200,000
sows had been successfully impregnated by
artificial means.* A discussion of the problems involved, with much reference to
Russian data, may be found in The Technique of Artificial Insemination, by A.
Walton. By transferring spermatozoa to
suitable solutions maintained at temperatures below body heat, it has been found
possible to preserve their vitality for some
time outside the body. Milovanovt reported
a normal percentage of conceptions in cattle
with sperm kept up to two days. Walton
was able to preserve the fertilizing capacity
of rabbit spermatozoa for about seven days.t
Lebedeva§ has noted motility in ram sperm
kept for twenty-nine days. Belonoschkin]|,
working with bull and rabbit sperm, records
motility for fifteen days.

* Moscovits, E., 1934. Int. Rev. Agr., XXV, 105.

¢ Milovanov, V. K., 1932. Probl. Zhivotn, 3, 10-13.
Anim. Breeding Abst., 1, 2, 90.

{ Walton, A., 1930. Brit. Journ. Exp. Biol., 7, 201-19.

§ Lebedeva, N. K., 1934. Probl. Zhivotn, 4, 125-9.
Anim. Breeding Abst., 3, 1, 37.

|| Belonoschkin, B., 1932. Zettschr fiv. Biol., 92,
542-4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The problem of diluting semen to facilitate
its maximum degree of employment has
received much attention. Walton* has
diluted rabbit sperm 188 times without loss
of fertilizing capacity. Russian workers have
devised solutions giving maximal dilution of
320 times for cattle and 1,000 times for
sheep, though the optimal degrees are less.
By these means there are said to be no
technical obstacles to breeding in one season
I,200-1,500 calves or 2,000 lambs from one
male animal. These achievements will probably be surpassed by the application of the
results of the researches now being made on
sperm physiology and the inducement of
cestrus and ovulation by endrocrinological
methods.

Since John Hunter’s first case in 1799,
artificial insemination has occasionally been
employed in the treatment of human sterility.
Rohledert enumerates 123 cases of which
only about one-third were successful, and
these usually after repeated trials. This relative failure has been attributed by Havelock
Ellisf and others to the absence of erotic
stimulation. A more probable explanation
lies in the suggestion of Rohleder that human
insemination is only attempted as a rule upon
subjects of low fertility. Normal subjects
would probably yield different results. It
may be noted here that human spermatozoa
may be preserved for long periods outside the
body. Belding,§ using Baker’s buffered glucose solution maintained at 8 degrees
Centigrade, was able in a series of experiments
to preserve vitality for 153 hours, and in one
case for twenty-six days. It would appear
that only lack of opportunity prevents artificial insemination being applied to the
human subject as successfully as it has been
to animals.

Have these facts any implications for
eugenics? It is suggested that they have
and that it is worth considering tentatively

* Walton, A., 1933. The Technique of Artificial
Insemination, p. 43.

t+ Rohleder, H., 1924. Normal, Pathologische und
Kiinstliche Zeugung beim Menschen.

¢ Havelock Ellis, 1910. Studies in the Psychology of
Sex, Vol. VI, p. 632.

§ Belding, D. L., 1933. Amer. Journ. Obs. and Gyn.,
XXXVI, 6, 868.
EUTELEGENESIS

what these implications may be. For the
process of reproduction from the germ cells of
individuals between whom is no bodily contact, I propose the name telegenesis. The
possible application of this process to the
eugenic breeding of man may be termed
eutelegenesis. Many psychological objections may be aroused at the mere mention
of such a project. But for the moment only
its physical aspects will be considered.

In the human male reproductive system, as
in that of other mammals, there is an enormous margin of wastage. The spermatozoa
in a single emission average about 226
millions, a normal man producing, between
the ages of twenty-five and fifty-five, something like 339,385 millions.* Since coital
capacity is set aside as a limiting factor,
artificial insemination renders feasible an
immensely increased multiplication in relation to the male. If only one spermatozoon
out of each thousand were utilized, this great
wastage would yet enable one man in a year
to fertilize five million women. Such a
standard is not yet technically possible with
animals. But there seems no reason why
with improved technique it should not
ultimately be so.

We may consider the results which might
follow an experiment in human reproduction
carried out by using the germ cells of a few
highly selected males to impregnate the
general body of females. Such a process
might produce a great and rapid improvement in the hereditary qualities of the race.

A genetically similar method has been
applied to animals with remarkable results.
According to Winters: t ‘“‘ Improvement is
made very rapidly by the use of good pure
bred sires. Since the sire is mated to all the
females, it is through him that improvement
is most economically made. By the continued use of pure bred sires, in a few generations the stock will have all the appearance,
action and practical value of pure breds.”’
Cumulative crossing with a superior breed
in this way means that in each successive

* Marshall, F. H. A., 1922. Phystology of Reproduction, p. 169.
t+ Winters, L. M., 1925. Animal Breeding, p. 205.

123

generation the proportion of inferior inheritance is halved, thus: |
2nd

1st 5th

Generation 3rd | 4th

 

 

 

 

Percentage of
Inheritance
Unimproved) 50 25 | 12°5 | 6°25 | 3:12
In terms of Mendelism similar results may
be shown. Suppose a population consisting
of homozygous dominants to be all crossed
with a homozygous recessive, and that each
succeeding generation is back crossed to the

latter, then the proportion of homozygous
ni

‘ ‘ : ‘ Z2recessives in the nth generation will be >

Such a system of reproduction would
transform the problem of negative eugenics.
The authors of the Brock Report observed
that the crux of the problem of the hereditary
transmission of mental disorder and defect
was the carrier, and that the carriers in these
cases probably outnumbered the visibly
affected by at least ten to one. With relatively rare genes the ratio becomes greater.
Where with random mating a defect dependent on a duplicated recessive factor is
exhibited in one per ten thousand, 198 per
ten thousand will be heterozygous (i.e.
carriers) for the same defect. Though mating
may not be entirely at random, it is evident
that the existence of a great reservoir of
latent defectiveness is responsible for the
frequent appearance of unpredictable degeneracy. To attempt the elimination of such
degeneracy by sterilizing it as it appears is
like clearing a river of fish by catching the
few which jump from the water. The method
now in view would meet the problem by
sweeping out of existence the whole inextricable tangle of latent defect in a few
generations, replacing it concurrently with
hereditary material of the highest excellence.
The carrier female, on this view, need not be
denied the gratification of her maternal
impulses, which with women in general must
be regarded as fundamental to self-realization and happiness. A vast store of maternal
energy would thus be conserved and canalized for racial progress.
124

Applied to the purpose of creating homozygous types of the highest excellence in
respect of heredity, and to the rapid diffusion
of advantageous mutations as they occur,
eutelegenesis might accomplish in a few
generations what otherwise would require
millenia. ‘“ What is now most wanted from
science,’’ said Major Leonard Darwin,* “‘ is
that she should demonstrate that a comparatively wide and rapid advance in nearly
all human qualities is now at all events a
possibility.’’ Eutelegenesis would appear to
furnish an answer to that question.

It is frequently assumed that any farreaching scheme for the eugenic breeding of
humanity can only be accomplished by compulsory measures. Compulsion, in the
opinion of the writer, is both wrong and unnecessary. Eugenic advance must be the
voluntary adventure of free men and women,
or nothing. Eutelegenesis might be such an
adventure. All it need ask of society is that
people with courage and imagination enough
to make a new experiment for human progress should be left alone. Compared with
Plato’s eugenic methods, eutelegenesis is
mild and conservative. It does not require
the abolition of marriage and the family.
Men and women who, mutually attracted in
the customary ways, desired to marry and to
have children would not be denied. The difference would be that when a child was
decided upon, man and wife would act upon
the simple moral principle that the welfare of
the child must be the first consideration. The
logical consequence of that principle is that
the best hereditary endowment possible
should be chosen for the child. All that would
be needed to finally implement the decision
would be a simple manipulation, less painful
than drawing a tooth and no more unchaste
than an ante-natal examination, carried out
by a qualified physician.

At this point one may meet the objection
that eutelegenesis means breeding human
beings like animals. Exactly the contrary is
the case. Eutelegenesis means that, instead
of reproduction being the blind consequence

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1934, XXvi, 257.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of an animal mating, it is an act of deliberate
creativeness to which animal life holds no
parallel. It is hardly necessary to add that,
though in eutelegenesis there is a conscious
dissociation of reproduction from coitus, this
does not imply that sexual love has no part
to play in satisfying the deep emotional needs
of mankind.

To bring eutelegenesis from the realm of
theory to practice, some organization would
be required. This would call for the services
of geneticists, psychologists, physiologists,
and other experts. Its function would be to
provide, for prospective parents who sought
its assistance, the widest choice in the way of
superior human types whose germ cells were
available for eutelegenesis. There might be
included such types as saints, philosophers,
scientists, poets, artists, musicians and
athletes. If there was an effective demand for
politicians and film idols, even this should, if
possible, be satisfied! But a preliminary selection of a stringent character would have to
be carried out by the experts. Freedom from
hereditary diseases and deformities, more
positively, the possession of a harmoniously
balanced physical organism of high vitality,
healthy nervous tone, a predisposition to
longevity, these are the sort of qualities
which among the physical factors one
imagines as fundamental. As regards mental
traits, regard would probably be paid to a
high order of general intellectual capacity,
rapid responsiveness and keen sensory discrimination. Temperamental and moral
qualities, so far as they could be tested,
should be taken into consideration. In
addition to satisfying such tests, it should be
required that the superior male should have
distinguished himself by actual achievement
in some field of human effort, for instance,
in science, art, government, or exploration.
That conspicuous personal achievement is in
general correlated with hereditary gifts
seems extremely probable. The qualification
of achievement, however, would be something more than a eugenic test. If eugenic
selection is to overcome egotism and inertia
the inequality of men must be demonstrated
in a completely convincing fashion. So long
EUTELEGENESIS

as selection between classes is concerned that
must be exceedingly difficult, if not impossible. But to pick out a few superlative
individuals who, by the exercise of their
gifts, have conferred immeasurable benefits
upon their fellows, and thus won honour in
their eyes, is to put selection in a very different
light. There is no dishonour or humiliation
in accepting, in common with the multitude
of men, the position of second best to the
ideal. Thus eutelegenesis might render a
highly stringent selection acceptable to the
general body of men.

The information in the hands of the
eutelegenetic organization would form the
basis on which prospective parents would
exercise their choice. No personal contact
between the putative parents and the superior
men chosen would be either desirable or
necessary. The investigation of the genetic
qualifications of the superior men who were
willing to co-operate would necessarily involve them in certain inconveniences. But if
a eugenic conscience and aspiration may not
be found in the intellectual leaders of men, it
must be vain to seek it elsewhere.

An important work of the organization
would be the keeping of records and pedigrees. If for no other reason, this would be
necessary to avoid conflicting with the
marriage laws regarding consanguinity. Reasons of expediency would render it desirable
to obviate the marriage of half-sibs through a
eutelegenetic father. On such lines as these,
I suggest, eutelegenetic reproduction might
be applied to humanity.

Objections and difficulties would appear to
centre chiefly round a possible reluctance on
the part of the ordinary man to delegate, so
to speak, his procreative functions. Masculine egotism and jealousy have undeniably
played an important part in sex relations,
both animal and human. In mankind, however, these impulses seem extremely variable
and anthropology yields many examples
where they have been attenuated or submerged. Ethically, jealousy must be regarded
as a quality appropriate to the animal rather
than tothe human. “Il yadansla jalousie plus
d’amour propre que d’amour,” said de La
Rochefoucauld. In relation to eutelegenesis,

125

it would appear absurd for a man to feel
jealous of one with whom his wife enters into
no consciously personal and emotional contact whatever. .

Much is likely to be said about the possibility of the putative father feeling that the
eutelegenetic child is in a real sense his own.
There is reason to believe, however, that in
so far as the paternal sentiment rests upon an
instinctive basis, it is entirely a matter of
association. The germinal continuity of sire
and offspring could not possibly have been
appreciated in the mind of the anthropoids
from which man arose. Hartland* has shown
that ignorance of the dependence of birth
upon sexual intercourse was general in
primitive man. Various Australasian and
Melanesian peoples have. retained their
ignorance until modern times. Definitely
paternal behaviour patterns, however, are
present in these cases. Even in apes and
monkeys adult males display a friendly and
protective attitude to the infant members of
their group, and this seems a rudimentary
form of paternal behaviour. That association
plays a major part in evoking the paternal
sentiment in civilized society is supported by
facts relating to child adoption. So far as the
instinctive basis of the paternal sentiment
is concerned, therefore, it would appear
that eutelegenesis would leave it unaffected.

As regards the ideological aspect of paternity, the putative father might feel himself
bound to the eutelegenetic child in an even
deeper sense than if the child were derived
materially from himself. For, conjointly
with the mother, he might feel himself to
have created, by the deliberate exercise of
his will and thought, a being in whom his
ideal aspirations were embodied. In coming:
to understand its true relation to its creative
father a unique gratitude and love might be
evoked in the child towards those who had
given it the most precious of all gifts, a
splendid hereditary nature.

The question of how far the ordinary man
and woman might be disposed to accept
eutelegenesis is considerably elucidated by

* Hartland, E.S., 1909. Primitive Paternity.
126

a recent inquiry in the U.S.A. by J. H.
Caldwell,* who collated the experience of 200
physicians in regard to inquiries made by
sterile married couples as to the possibility
of artificial insemination. He concluded that
the total of requests for artificial insemination with donated sperm in the U.S.A. was
between 1,000 and 3,000 a year and that
these showed a tendency to increase, particularly during the last few years. He
estimated that 10,000 to 20,000 was probably the annual potential demand if the
possibility were more generally known and
physicians were prepared to do the work.
When actual progress in eugenics is so painfully slow, can eugenists afford to throw
away the possibilities arising out of situations
of that kind ?

It is just to disclaim here a priority in the
idea of applying artificial insemination to the
purpose of racial progress. That would
appear to belong to Marion Piddington who,
about the year 1916, published a pamphlet
called Sctentific Motherhood, in which artificial insemination was advocated as a means
of populating Australia, and creating a race

* Caldwell, J. H., 1934. Scientific American, March
1934, 124-5.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

combining high moral worth with sound
physical development.

In a short paper, the treatment of the farreaching questions raised by eutelegenesis is
necessarily brief and inadequate. Much
might be said for the view that the reorientation of custom and tradition demanded must be immensely difficult. I
believe that none of the obstacles are entirely
insuperable.

If egotism, prejudice and the blind behaviour patterns inherited from our animal
ancestors are destined for ever to dominate
sex and parenthood, then indeed eutelegenesis has no chance. It will be dismissed as
contrary to common sense and human
nature, as an idea capable of taking root
only in the minds of cranks and perverts.
But if mankind comes to realize its imperative mission to create out of itself something
infinitely nobler and better, if sex can be
envisaged as the instrument of a profoundly
religious purpose, if mankind can perceive
the full implications of the truth that
biologically, as otherwise, we are members of
one body, then eutelegenesis will become a
new evangel. And in applying it to the
creation of its children, mankind will
journey, with pride and joy, along a short
road to superman.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.
