   

. wt - ame 7 ._
: x EM of eis fs 4 : .

3 . ce Fr eS .
mo Jot Va Wee fee en i So is

a : w 8g a a, aD»)
pb fe ee noe '
") ‘ <
oP os ’

INTELLIGENCE TESTS

  

EARLY twenty-five years ago, when
: the Binet-Simon tests were first
N coming into vogue, I endeavoured to
oxamine, in two articlesin this REVIEw, their
merits and limitations as a means of measurg innate intelligence.* Since then they
have been used throughout the country by
eachers, psychologists, and school medical
officers to test the: abilities of pupils and to
discover the dull; the backward, the potential
scholarship winners, and, most-important of
all, those who are certifiably defective.
Meanwhile, psychologists themselves have
made several attempts.to improve the scale,
and to eliminate, so far as possible, the
obvious defects of the earlier version.

The Old Scales” | ou
In London, with Binet’s express perission and. in consultation with his colleague,
Dr. Simon, an investigation was started by
the Education Department of the County
ouncil with a view to restandardizing the
priginal French arrangement for use with
English children. This was finally published
a Handbook.of Tests for Use in Schools,+
and made the basis for a survey of the
listribution of intelligence in typical areas
of the County. During the same period,
Professor Terman in California was making
an independent. adaptation of the scale for
American schools. Although both English
and American revisers had been working
with little or no knowledge of the detailed
findings-of each other, it turned out that

 

*“ The Measurement of Intelligence by the Binet
ests,” EUGENICS Revirw, 1914, vi, 36 and 140.
| FP. S. King &' Son, 1923. ° The results of our experiments were ‘summarized from time to time in the
peports of. the. Psychologist. to the Council. The final
standardization’ was issued ‘by the L.C.C. in ‘a long
ficial Report entitled ‘‘ Mental and Scholastic Tests ”
1 1921; and .the new age-assignments were also
appended to the: Board of Education’s Report of Tests
of Educable.Copacsty (1924, pp. 200-3)...

   
 

_. By CYRIL BURT, ma., dsc.

both had been led to make very much the
same changes. There were, however, a few
big differences. In particular, Terman added
a number of ingenious and original tests at
the upper end of the scale for the examination of brighter children and adults. In
London, therefore, a second investigation
was started to examine, and if necessary

restandardize, this further version. Professor

Terman generously gave permission to publish an English adaptation ; but added that
he was contemplating a complete re-investigation of the tests himself. Accordingly, the
full adaptation of the first Terman version
was only issued privately to clinics: the
most essential changes—the new assignment
of ages—were published as an appendix to
the Jowmt Report of the Board of Education

and the Board of Control on Mental Deficiency.

The New Scale

Terman’s new revision is now at length
available ;* and those whose work entails
the assessment of intelligence are inquiring
whether the new version is, as it claims to be,
genuinely superior to the older versions, and
whether it has successfully eliminated the

defects that had become obvious in the first

scale without destroying any of the merits.
A large committee, comprising all the leading
educational psychologists in Great Britain,

together with representatives or members of

every body or institution engaged in mental
tests, has been set up to work through the
wording of the new revision, test by test, and.

to check the age standardizations on the
_ basis of extensive experiments all over the

country. A provisional “ translation ’”’ (if I
may so call it) is now available, and may be
obtained from the Psychological Department,

 

*L. M. Terman and Maud A. Merrill, Measuring

_ Intelligence, G. G. Harrap & Co., 1937.
255 . |
256

University College, London, for private

experimental use.

Thanks to the prompt co-operation of
teachers, psychologists and medical officers,
a large mass of data has already come to
hand; and it may be of interest to summarize briefly the chief conclusions that
emerge from a first preliminary survey of the
results. To the eugenist perhaps the most
interesting outcome will be the light thrown
by such data upon the distribution of innate
intelligence among the general population
and the changes in the mental level (if any)
revealed by the present survey as compared
with those carried out twenty and twentyfive years ago. But before any answer to
such questions can be sought, we must
scrutinize more closely the validity of the
scale as such. The old set of tests formed a
convenient and practical method for quick
clinical diagnosis rather than a reliable
scientific instrument for statistical surveys.
And the publication of the new version has
revived the ancient criticisms in an even
more emphatic form;* “the prolonged
worship of the Binet scale,’’ says Dr. Cattell,
“has left us with an encumbering heritage of
erroneous conceptions, especially in matters
concerning the distribution of intelligence
and its role in society.’’ So far the dispute
has turned largely on @ prorz principles, but
is none the less valuable for that; here I
propose to rely mainly on actual figures.

The Main Differences

As regards the chief practical purpose of
the scale—the diagnosis of dull and defective
children—there seems little question that the
new revision is decidedly more efficient than
the old. As regards the wording and the ageassignments of the numerous tests that have
been retained, the new revision frequently
accepts the modifications proposed in the
former London version. The principle of
“internal grading,’ too, which was advocated
in this REVIEW, has been far more freely
used—notably, in the vocabulary test.

 

*p. E. Vernon, ‘“The Stanford Binet Test as a
Psychometric Method ’’; R. B. Cattell, ‘‘ Measurement

versus Intuition in Applied Psychology,” Character and

Personality, 1937, vi, 99.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

    

Many of the problems, however, are entire
new; and here the American age-assion
ments and even the American wording see,
often far from appropriate to Enpijc
children. The second “ Paper Cutting test» |
which Terman assigns to the third or highey _
level of ‘‘ Superior Adults,” we find can
done at age 14; on the other hand, “ Givi)
Similarities between three Things,” whig,
cannot be done by the average Londone
until age 14, Terman assigns to age y
Between the ages of 4 and 14, out of 66 test,
32 would appear to be misplaced by at leas
a year. It would, therefore, be unwise fo
teachers, medical officers, or field workers ty
commit themselves rigidly or finally to the
scale until the requisite modifications ar
known.

The Need for Item-Analysts

The ideal plan would be to take each
separate test-problem, and examine it,
special value as a criterion of intelligence,
Curiously enough, this has rarely bee
attempted: no doubt, the labour of separ.
ately evaluating eighty or ninety (or with
the new scale 130) tests deters the eager
investigator. With the original Binet scale
we worked out, both for defectives and fo
normal children, a “‘ coefficient of colliga.
tion ’’ between each separate test and
intelligence as assessed by ‘competent
teachers.* This was, I believe, the first
experiment in what is now called “ item.
analysis ’’; but, since those early efforts,
the mathematical technique has been considerably refined. In the revised scale, most
of the poorer tests that figured in the original
scale (e.g., “‘ Suggestion,” ‘‘ Months,” “‘ Age,”
“Sex,” “Surname’’) have silently been
dropped. The newer tests inserted in their
place are based on accepted psychological
principles; nevertheless those principles
have really been derived more from group
testing than from individual examinations.
An intensive item-analysis for each test
separately is thus an urgent requisite. Such
an investigation, however, will call for a
long and patient research. Meanwhile, we
may usefully attempt a more _ general

* L.C.C. 1921 Report, Table XXXI.°
  

(HE LATEST’ REVISION OF THE BINET INTELLIGENCE TESTS 257

estimation of the merits of the new revision
* fT pointed out in my original examination of the scale,.its difficulties and defects
arise largely from the adoption of the plan
of “ external ’’ instead of “ internal grading.”
This plan proves convenient for the practical
examiner; but makes it far from easy to
test the tests themselves. With “‘ internally
graded’. tests we can arrange the persons
tested in order according to their ability
jn each test, and so correlate the tests with
-each other or with an independent criterion
‘in the ordinary way. With “ externally
graded ” tests, we can only say whether each
person passes or fails, and so at best estimate
‘the correlation between test and intelligence
‘from fourfold tables by a ‘‘ coefficient of
colligation ’’ or the like—never a very satisfactory procedure.

Variability of the Order of Difficulty

With an externally graded scale, like the
Binet-Simon series, everything turns upon
the relative difficulty of the test-problems.

The standardization of each problem in

terms of a mental age assumes that the
order of difficulty is constant for the two
‘sexes, for different social classes, for different
ages, for different types of child, and above
all for different localities. Thus, if a child
repeats four. numbers backwards, Terman
would give him.a mental age of 9; if he
repeats six numbers forwards, i.e., in the
order in which they have been recited to
him, he would get a mental age of 10. Now
with London children it is found that the

latter test is actually easier than the former. 
And so with many other tests: the order of
difficulty is often reversed. Worse still, when
we experiment with the scale as a whole,
there seems to be no fixed order at all: what
is easier for one child may be harder for
another. Indeed, the early critics of the
scale were constantly pointing out how no
two editors of Binet’s scale ever agreed over
the relative difficulty of the several tests.
The orders of. difficulty seem to vary with
different examiners as well as with different
emaminees. oO |

At the very outset, therefore, in examining

the validity of the whole proposal, the task
of the psychologist must be to compare
these different orders, and see whether they
vary so widely as to invalidate the very
foundations of the scale. The lay critic is
generally content to exhibit one or two
glaring examples of discrepancy, and base
his argument on those. The scientific
investigator endeavours to assess the amount
of agreement or disagreement shown over
the scale in its entirety. He sums the discrepancies between the orders to be compared,
and so obtains, by a simple formula and ina
single figure, an exact measure of the total
disagreement. This means, to use a familiar
distinction, that his statistical evaluation
must depend mainly on “ correlating persons ” instead of ‘“‘ correlating tests.’’ The
results are expressed in terms of what may
be called “ consistency coefficients.” *

—————_— Ke

* The method is by no means new, though it has
recently given rise to much discussion. There are several
minor difficulties, which, however, can very easily be
met. When (as here) we start with a rectilinear ‘‘ order
of difficulty ”’ instead of with a normally distributed set
of marks, we have to base our coefficient of correlation
on the displacements in the orders, i.e. the “ rankdifferences *’: must we square them (according to the
product moment formula) or should we leave them unSquared (according to Spearman’s much-criticized
‘‘ footrule ’’) ? Now, when we correlate persons the first
or “‘ total’’ correlations, calculated by the product
moment formula, often appear exceedingly high—so
high as to be somewhat misleading to those who are
more familiar with correlations between tests ; with the
rank-squaring method, extreme divergences are heavily
weighted; -89 (for example) of the “ footrule’’ becomes -99, and minor variations near this point are apt
to be obscured. Hence, in some of my earliest reports,
though I used the footrule method introduced by
Spearman, I did no# apply what would generally
be regarded as the necessary correction. But, after
all, our coefficients are no more than a convenient
device—a mode of averaging the differences (and
often blurring them), whereas the real point of interest
is the differences themselves. Consequently, if we are
studying correlations between children, it is both safer
and more instructive to rely on the detailed table
of rank differences than on a small table of coefficients,
however obtained. For the correlations between
examiners the rank-squaring method was used.

As some readers might feel a little dubious about the
validity of correlating orders for persons, I attempted at
the same time (by means of Yule’s colligation formula)
to estimate the correlations between the tests (loc. cit.,
Table XXIX). The results are in entire agreement.
Moreover, the group-factors found by either method
with the Binet tests are similar to those revealed by
analysing correlations between scholastic tests: e. g.
the verbal and non-verbal types stand out discernibly
in both (cf. L.C.C. 1917 Report, pp. 58-9).
258

Consistency Coefficients for Examsinees —

In the earliest inquiries the persons correlated were the examinees. Binet’s method,
as we have seen, merely requires the examiner
to note whether the child “ passes” or
‘* fails.” Nevertheless, in preliminary trials,
it is not difficult, with a full record of the
child’s performance, to sort the particular
tests that have been given to him in order of
their apparent difficulty for him, and then
compare these orders as obtained . from
different individuals. As noted in my
previous paper, the results with the earliest
form of the scale seem decidedly unfavourable, for the correlations were far from
perfect. Binet had obviously underestimated
the extent to which children vary in kind of
ability as distinct from amount. Of two
children possessing the same general intelligence one may be far better at the memory
tests, another at the manual tests ; one may
be quick at perception but too impatient to
reflect ; another may do well at tests of
reflective reasoning, but prove as_ unobservant as he was unpractical. A formal
statistical analysis of the tabulated results
disclosed, not only a main “ general factor ”’
of intelligence, but also secondary ‘‘ group
factors ’’ classifying the children into groups
or “‘ types.”’ :

As the number of children ran to hundreds
and then to thousands, it became impossible
to correlate all the individual orders. They
were accordingly correlated by batches: for
example, by using average orders based on
the percentages of failures, we can compare
normals with defectives, boys with girls,
children from the poorest social classes with
children from the best, and children of one
nationality with children of others. The
group-differences are then discovered to be
much smaller than the individual differences.

Sex and Social Dt ferences

This will become clear if we turn for a
moment to the data obtained from the
original scale. For example, if we first
correlate the individual orders obtained from
a large number of boys with those obtained
from a large number of girls, it appears that

. . age . : . . ze sa ages F oy “ \ = : hee thes ie age Ree vat wee, ~ Lote,
. ye Th’ - ee Be RAS 0 8 a As
é y - . J : _ > 5 ie : tg . git i "pats ; Sty oS etn, oa at
. * . . © . . .

   

the orders of the girls agree much more closq
with each other (averaging, when Obtaing
by the footrule method, -78) than th,
agree with the orders of the boys (-66), :
and similarly for the boys. If now we oo.
relate the average orders for either sex, i,
correlation rises to -867. The correlatio,
between children of superior social status ang
those coming from the slums was found to},
higher still, namely, «890. On the other hanj :
the correlation between normal children anj_
defective was only -849. | |
At first sight these coefficients may seen
high ; and so they would be, if they wep:
correlations between tests instead of betwee,
persons. Let us therefore examine the orden
themselves ; it will then be seen that th
detailed amount of divergence exhibited by
the correlated. orders is still quite serioys
With only 65 tests, the total of the “ rank.
differences ’’ amounts to 176 (between the
two sexes), 153 (between the two soci
classes), and 211 (between normals an
defectives. On tabulating the discrepancig
according to their size and then examiniy
the nature of the tests concerned, we cap.
quickly ascertain what are the ‘chief causes:
once again, the tests are evidently revealing
not merely differences in degree of intel}.
gence, but also differences in mental quali
or type. The girls, for example, being rathe
of a verbal type and good memorizers 4
well, do better at all tests involving memon#
for words—e.g., reading, dictation, namiy
colours ; the boys do better at the nox
verbal or mechanical tests — arrangiy
weights, drawing from memory, counting y
coins.* - ee | !
Now the original Binet scale had a heay
verbal bias ; and such a bias is particularl
hard upon the mentally defective child, wha
as every teacher. knows, is better at practic:
things than he is at reading, writing, spelling
and rational conversation. .This defect i
Binet’s own series has, of -course, nd
escaped Professor Terman: and, ‘indeed
the chief difference between the forma
Terman series and the new is that, whereg
*See L:C.C. 1919 Report, Tables II and III, ad
1921 Report, Tables VIII, XXVIII, XXIX ; also thi

. 4 
REVIEW, loc. cit., pp. YGo et seq.
 

a x * % * Sey . . . . . g Me
eK UELTD bhakti ME ec “ets * one tan’ Qh etc) a ak Loo coun et Si euch ot: | es Bed oak 7 " 7 " ‘ . CO f bog
} THE: oy abo B : _ ‘a: ;
' ate’ S ve =, Bw wd ey : :
- . ae . ’ a
see Bl. Be We . pike,
a i Pegi Sg Lety om: ¥en ay: ‘ ae . : a . ®
= cs tye oe A gata ie Ne ye 6 ayy, = 4
‘ , , it , wae . j < :
5 4 . n uae vo ee &. re _ 7 :
the , Ort <a) e mo: Me a i ooo .

verbal tests, ‘the .new is, if anything, ‘over| weighted. with; practical or manual tests. .
C onsistency ‘Coefficients for Examiners
But the order.and age-assignments of the
several tests vary-not only with the per
sonality of. each child, but .also with the

“ personal equation ”’ of the examiner. If,
for example, in testing my pupils, I utter my
instructions less distinctly than Binet, will
not this make the verbal tests seem harder
in my series than in Binet’s? And however
carefully the examiner’s procedure is laid
down in the manual, there are bound to be
differences in technique and approach. How
are we to gauge ‘their influence ? Once more
we “ cortelate persons”: and this time the
persons are the‘examiners. Broadly put, our
question is this: are the examiners’ orders,
though never precisely the same, at least
consistent enough for us to assume that one
main general factor is operative in all, or do
differences of nationality, language, indivi} dual procedure-and the like deprive the tests
of all comparability ? Let-me once again call
ito mind the figures obtained with the earlier
form of the tests. For the original scale the
answer was given by printing a table of
intercorrelations. The different examiners
had obtained their several results in France,
Germany, Italy, America and various parts
jof Great Britain: yet their average interorrelation was -873—~i.e., there seemed a
high degree of general agreement. The
English examiners agreed with each other
o the extent-of between -97 and - 99: with
the different: American examiners to the
extent of -72 to -94: with Terman himself
o the extent of -93.

  
   
 
  

he General Factor for Examiners

But this is not enough for the psychologist. He attempts what is called a “‘ factoranalysis ” to discover whether or not the
ngreement is attributable to a single factor
running through all: after all, the agreement
between the English and American might be
Hue to their common language and the
Agreement. between the French and English
© something quite different—e. g., their

 

BINET INTELLIGENCE TESTS 239

geographical proximity. This point must also
be “tected, After making ‘the necessary
calculations it was concluded that the table
of figures thus analyzed ‘‘ strongly suggests
a single central factor, underlying and
determining (though in sli ghtly different
proportions) all the various orders.” * To
put it in a technical fashion, 88 per cent. of
the “ variance ”’ (i.e., of the variations in the
individual figures) is attributable to something common to all examiners, I2 per cent.
to specific influences more or less peculiar
to a few or possibly only to each particular
one. With the new Terman revision. agree-~
ment is higher still: the correlation between
his order and ours (only a provisional one as
yet) rises to -96. |

The Influence of Verbal and N on-Verbal
Iypes )
On the other hand, it seems as if the con
trast between the verbal type of child and the

non-verbal will be shown up almost as clearly
as before. Teachers and psychologists have
frequently argued that, if the Binet scale
contains such a strong verbal -bias, then it
cannot be trusted as a measure of general
intelligence. More than one Critic has

objected that the tests might often send a

normal child to the special school simply

because he was of a practical rather than of a

scholastic type. So, too, on seeing the new

‘erman revision, many are tempted to ask

of sllicit conversion. Let us, therefore, apply Professor
Godfrey Thomson’s own recent criterion : it turns upon

the fact that in a table of a given size it is an arith
certain calculable boundary unless there is a general
factor running through all the items correlated. If N is
the number of items correlated (here persons), and if #
is the number of persons in whom the factor appears,
then the average correlation cannot be greater than

%—2 |
No Here there were ry persons correlated ; hence

N—1is 10. The average correlation is over -87, i.e.
nearly .%. Thus n—2 must be at least 8, possibly 9g.
Consequently we infer that the central factor must go
through at least (8-+- 2) =10 out of the 11 arrangements,
and quite possibly through all of them. —

 
260

whether it is not a mistake to retain tests of
reading and of arithmetic in a scale that is
meant to test not learning but . innate
capacity ; and others have inquired whether
the new mechanical and manual bias will
have the opposite error to the old, and make
the scale more suited for discovering children
for trade schools than scholarship winners
for secondary schools.

Ihe General Factor for Examinees

Once again it is largely a problem in what
the psychologist calls “factor analysis.”
Put into technical terminology the question
is this: how much of the total “ variance ”’
(i.e., of the variations in performance due
to any and every type of cause) is attributable to a single general factor common to all
children, and how much is due to specific
and irrelevant factors—sex, social opportunity, school teaching, and above all perhaps
‘qualitative difference in mental type?

The data that have already been received
enable us to give some first provisional
answer to this question. For this preliminary
survey the correlations have been calculated,
and the coefficients factorized, by the same
methods as were used in the original research
—namely, on simple “ two factor ’”’ principles. The following table shows what
proportions are attributable (i) to the
“common factor’’ and (ii) to all other
influences in the three main London revisions
to which I have referred.

The figures for the first two revisions are
taken from earlier papers and are based on
fairly wide investigations. Those for the last
are so far based on but comparatively few
cases: but, so far as they go, they indicate

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Taste SHowync -RgLatIvs .CONTRIBUTIONS oF Dr.
FERENT FACTORS TO THE VARIATIONS IN THE REsutt,

- oF Tae Binet Scatts .
(Factor-Analysis based on Pooled Correlations be:
Persons :

children aged 8 to ‘13 onty) a

    
       
      
    
   

(i) First or. (ii) Remaini,
. General Or Specific’ |
Factor ~Factorm |

London Revision of 
Original Binet Scale, . | 98 |
1921 72 per cent. | 28 per

Original Terman Scale, 6 ak.
1928 “ 7 per cent. | 33 per ce

New Terman Seale, ee nt.
1938 ee --- | 76 per cent. | 24 per cent, .

aaa :
that the new scale is appreciably mop.
reliable than the old. But far more numero,
data are needed.

We should therefore. be. extrataily grate. |
ful to any teachers, psychologists, medicy.
officers, and others using the: new scale, why).
would be good enough to. co-operate in this
preliminary statistical work... After all, th
whole diagnostic value of the scale turns
the way we shall ultimately ‘Answer thi
preliminary question : how far is our orde
of difficulty trustworthy. and how far is tha
order—and consequently our whole schem:
of age-assignments—liable to be. disturbe
by wholly irrelevant conditions ?
With a little ingenuity we may perhay
turn the defect into a merit, and eva
ultimately make the scale do two things a
once : measure the child’s general intelligeng
with a rough but’ reasonable degree 4
accuracy and at the same time throw sid
lights on the kind as well as on the natun
and extent of ‘the special abilities or th
special defects that he displays. |

 
  
  
  
  
  
   
  

Bugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. |
