THE INHERITANCE AND NATURE OF
EXTRAVERSION*
By H. J. EYSENCK

Introduction
EVERAL years ago the Eugenics Soctety
S gave their support to an investigation
of the inheritance of neuroticism. This
work, carried out by D. B. Prell and the
present writer,? gave strong support to the
view that hereditary factors played a vital
part in determining ‘the degree of neuroticism shown by the children taking part in
our investigation. It seemed desirable to
follow up this study by another in which the
hypothesis was tested that extraversion and
introversion were similarly determined by
hereditary influences to an appreciable

degree. The present paper is a brief report
of such an investigation.

In the neuroticism study use has been
made of the so-called twin method. In this
method advantage is taken of the fact that
there are two types of twins, identical and
fraternal. In identical twins there are no
differences in hereditary endowment, as both
are descended from the same fertilized ovum.
Fraternal twins, on the other hand, are no
more alike than ordinary brothers and
sisters as far as hereditary factors are concerned. It follows from this that any differences observed in a pair of identical twins
must be due to environmental differences.
Differences between members of a pair of
fraternal twins, however, might be due either
to environment or to heredity. It follows

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on December 7th, 1955.

The work on the inheritance of extraversion-introversion reported here was carried out by Drs. D. B.
Blewett and H. McLeod and the details are recorded
in their Ph.D. theses (1, 14.) The results of that part
of the study dealing with intellectual functions have
been reported elsewhere by Dr. Blewett?. A detailed
account of the whole experiment, with particular reference to the non-cognitive factors, has been given by
the writer’. The research was generously aided financially by the Eugenics Society.

that when we compare difference on psychological tests of a pair of identical and a pair
of fraternal twins, and if we find that fraternal twins are no more different from each
other than are identical twins, then it is
difficult to avoid the conclusion that heredity
has played no part in the determination of
this difference. If, on the other hand, iden-tical twins are much more alike than are
fraternal twins, then hereditary determination of the trait under investigation may be
postulated. Quite generally, the greater the
difference in the degree of similarity between
identical and fraternal twins respectively,
the greater is the influence of heredity.
Attempts have been made, mainly by Holzinger,'* to convert this general statement
into a numerical one. As May?* has shown,
the assumptions which have to be made in
order to arrive at such a formula are too
unrealistic to enable us to accept the result
as a correct statement of the contribution
made by heredity. In spite of these imperfections, the twin method is about the one
best suited to our purpose, however, and it
was accordingly used in this study.

The Genetic Experiment

Our sample of twins was drawn from four
metropolitan boroughs of South London,
namely those of Camberwell, Southwark,
Lambeth, and Lewisham. The London
County Council, whose co-operation is gratefully acknowledged, wrote to all the headmasters of all the secondary schools in these
boroughs requesting a report of any twins on
their registers. Of those located, fifty-two
pairs were finally tested, giving equal numbers of male identical, female identical, male
fraternal, and female fraternal twins: A
thorough check was carried out to avoid
various well-known sources of error in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1956, 48, 1.
24 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

selection of a sample ;
in detail by Blewett.?

The criteria used for determining the
nature of each twin pair were practically
identical with those used in the Eysenck and
Prell study. They include scales for rating
similarity of facial features, general habitus,
hair colour and distribution, iris pigmentation, shape of ears and teeth; height and
weight were also measured as well as the
ability of the subjects to taste phenol-thiocarbamide. In addition, blood groups and
finger-prints were taken into account.

As regards the tests used, an attempt was
made to make use of as wide a variety of
different methods as possible. [Fifty different test or sub-test scores were used in
our final analysis, including the following
groups:

(1) Intelligence Tests. Here we used the
verbal, number, space, reasoning, and fluency
scales from Thurstone’s primary mental abilities tests, as well as the Porteus Maze test
and the Nufferno tests.

(2) Projective Tests. The main test in
this section was the Rorschach Ink Blot test.
This was chosen primarily because Rorschach
himself has discussed a personality dimension, contrasting the extratensive with the
introvertive type of personality. This dimension appears very similar to that of extraversion-introversion and it seemed desirable
to test this hypothesis formally.*

(3) Autonomic Tests. Several writers

these are discussed

 

* The writer has frequently criticized the Rorschach
test, and its inclusion here may therefore appear a little
surprising, yet there is no essential contradiction. The
Rorschach test may be used in two entirely different
ways. In the first place it may be used as a “‘ global ”’
test of personality, subjectively interpreted and evaluated. As such it appears to be almost entirely useless,
and the experimental literature leaves little doubt that
validation studies of the test used in this fashion nearly
always give negative results.

It is possible, however, to use the Rorschach as an
ordinary psychometric device, scoring it in a reasonably
objective manner for such features as R (total number
of replies), W (total number of responses determined by
the whole blot), M (so-called movement responses), and
so forth. Rorschach’s hypothesis of the extratensive
and the introverted personality was expressed generally in terms of this more objective type of determinant,
and criticisms applying to the global-intuitive method
do not necessarily apply to this psychometric method
of analysis.

have postulated a correlation between extraversion - introversion and the functioning
of the, autonomic nervous system; this
literature has been reviewed by the author.!
Consequently tests were included of systolic
and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate after
resting and after stress, sub-lingual temperature and finger temperature, and also dermographic latency.

(4) Ratings have frequently figured in
the literature in connection with introversion-extraversion. Use was made here. of
newly developed rating scales filled in by
the teachers of the children concerned, dealing with a variety of personality traits related to neuroticism and extraversion-introversion.

(5) An attempt was made to obtain selfratings from the children by the use of
questionnaire scales also developed for the
special purpose of this inquiry.

(6) Socitometric Examination. In view of
the importance given to the trait of sociability in connection with the literature of
extraversion-introversion, it seemed desirable to have psychometric measures of this
trait and two special measures were accordingly obtained.

(7) Objective measures of personality
formed the most important part of the examination. These were taken from previous
work with adults, *, ‘ and include measures
of suggestibility, finger dexterity, rigidity,
persistence, expressive movement, speedaccuracy in track-tracing, and sense of
humour.

All these tests were administered to the
twins in our sample and were then intercorrelated, and the resulting matrix of intercorrelations factor analysed. The reason
for this procedure was as follows. In thecase of each of the tests included as measures
of extraversion-introversion we had a definite hypothesis stating, for instance, that
extraverts would be more sociable on the
sociometric test, would have lower M scores
and higher D scores on the Rorschach test,
would be speedier but less accurate in a
track-tracing task, and so forth. If our predictions are correct, then we would expect
these tests to correlate in a certain manner,
“THE INHERITANCE AND NATURE OF EXTRAVERSION | 25

and it is in an attempt to test this hypothesis
that we performed correlational and _ factorial analysis.

Results |

The analysis disclosed three major factors.
Two of these are of comparatively little interest in connection with our major problem.
These two factors had high grading reéspectively in the intelligence tests and in the
autonomic measures, and could accurately
be defined as intelligence and autonomic
lability respectively. Of much greater interest here is the third factor, which bore
out a considerable number of the hypotheses
regarding extraversion-introversion we had
formulated, and which, therefore, may be
interpreted as an extraversion-introversion
factor.

We next proceeded to give every child in
our sample a score on the three factors
isolated so that in the final analysis we had
scores for each one of our twins on extraversion-introversion, intelligence, and autonomic lability. These scores were found to
be quite independent of each other, all correlations between them being insignificant. We
then proceeded to determine the intra-class
correlations on these factor scores for identical and fraternal twins respectively. As
had been expected, the correlations for identical twins were considerably higher than
those for fraternal twins in each case; in
other words, with respect to extraversion,
intelligence, and autonomic lability, identical
twins are more like each other than are
fraternal twins. Statistical tests of the

significance of this difference were carried

out and disclosed that all differences were in
fact significant. It is interesting to note
that the greatest difference between identical
and fraternal twins was observed with respect to the extraversion factor ; this suggests that extraversion is determined by
heredity to at least as large an extent as is
intelligence. The large sampling errors
attaching to both means and correlations
in a study such as this where relatively small
numbers are used make it impossible to regard this conclusion as definitive, and it
would seem highly desirable for a repetition

of this study to be carried out. Even so,
however, it seems reasonable to conclude
that extraverted behaviour is determined to
a significant extent by genetic factors.

The type of study described in the preceding sections 'elies entirely on a descriptive
kind of approach. Results of the study
suggested strongly that the cause of the
observed behavioural patterns might be
found in the biological constitution of the
individual, and it seemed desirable, therefore,
to attempt to test certain hypotheses regarding the nature of this constitutional cause.
In this way we might hope to improve our
selection of tests for a later repetition of our
genetic study, by weeding out those not
causally linked with our dimension of extraversion-introversion, and by including more
direct measures of the underlying determinants for extraversion-introversion. A certain amount of progress has been made in
this attempt to go over from the nosologicaldescriptive level to the etiological-causal
level. An extended discussion of this new
theoretical approach has been given elsewhere* ; here we can only review briefly
the main lines of this approach.

The Nature of Extraversion

A hint as to the possible theory comes
from two sources. Jung has formulated the
hypothesis that extraverts who have a nervous illness tend to show symptoms of
hysteria, while introverts under similar circumstances tend to show symptoms of a
dysthymic nature (anxiety, reactive depression, obsessional disorders). This hypothetical relationship has been verified by the
writer in a long series of researches summarized elsewhere.‘ The second clue has
been given us by Pavlov.1* As is well known,
this great experimentalist became interested in the last years of his life in the
problem raised by psychiatric disorders.
After lengthy observation, he concluded that
hysterics showed predominantly symptoms
which appeared to be analogous with behaviour patterns shown by a certain kind of
dog on which Pavlov had carried out his
experimental work, and which had _ been
characterised by excessive cortical inlubition.
26 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conversely, dysthymic patients, 1.¢. those
showing symptoms of anxiety and depression, were found by Pavlov to resemble in
their behaviour another group of dogs,
namely those in whom cortical inhibition was
insufficient, and cortical excitation predominant. It appears possible, therefore, that
we may find the answer to our problem in
terms of the excitation-inhibition ratio. Let
us study these concepts for the moment and
see whether it 1s possible to design experiments which can test this very general
theory.

Modern learning theory has attached very
definite meanings to the terms excitation and
inhibition, These are illustrated in Fig. I.
This figure gives in diagrammatic form the
results of a learning experiment. The task
the subject has to perform is a relatively
simple one. An electric motor drives a
turntable into which is set a small metal
disk. The subject holds an articulated rod
with a metal tip in his preferred hand. As

 

Figure 1.—Diagrammatic representation of the improvement of performance (P) as a function of excitatory potential (E) minus inhibitory potential (1). Also
shown is the reminiscence phenomenon as a function
of the dissipation of inhibition during the rest period.

the turntable spins round at a uniform speed
it is his task to follow the movement with
his stylus and to try and keep its point in

contact with the metal disk. Whenever the ©

subject succeeds in touching the disk, an
electric connection is made and the current

activates an electric clock which ‘records the
amount of time during which contact has
been maintained. The subject goes on
without a break for five minutes; at the
end of this period he is given a ten-minute
rest and is then tested again on this pursuit
rotor. Huis performance is recorded at the
end of every ten-second period in terms of
the percentage of this time during which he
succeeded in maintaining contact.

The solid curve marked P for performance
illustrates a typical learning curve under
these conditions. The curves marked E and
I respectively are theoretical curves which
illustrate the concepts of excitation and inhibition. While the subject is practising he
is forming connections in the central nervous
system which will facilitate performance on
this task. It is this connection-forming
activity which goes by the name of excitation.
Conversely, at the same time that these
connections are being formed in the subject’s
nervous system, he also accumulates a certain amount of inhibition. This concept of
inhibition is similar to that of fatigue ;
according to this hypothesis every time that
the neural impulse goes through a set of
neurons and synapses it produces a certain
amount of fatigue in these structures which
works against the easy passage of another
impulse. On this conception, performance
is the end product of an interplay between
excitation and inhibition, being proportional
to the total amount of excitatory potential
minus the total amount of inhibitory potential.

At first sight it may appear unnecessary
to involve such a complex interplay of
theoretical conceptions in order to explain
the very simple curve of learning we have
obtained. However, there are many facts
which cannot be explained without recourse
to a complex system of this kind. One of
these phenomena, which at the same time
concerns us as a measure of inhibition, is the
fact of remimscence. Inhibition, being as it
were a fatigue product, quickly dissipates in
time ; excitation, as a habit, does not. The
end point of our performance curve was given
us in our theory by subtracting the total
amount of inhibition accumulated by the
THE INHERITANCE AND NATURE OF EXTRAVERSION | 27

subject from the total amount of excitation.
Our theory demands that when we now interpose a ten-minute rest period inhibition
should dissipate, while excitation should remain just about where it was before the
pause. It would follow, as can be seen
quite clearly from Fig. I, that after the rest,
performance, which is no longer depressed by
the inhibitory potential now dissipated by
the rest pause, should go up to the level of
the excitatory potential. Thus we should
observe experimentally a rise in performance
consequent upon the interpolation of the rest
pause. It is this rise in performance which
is referred to under the title of reminiscence,
and there is incontrovertible evidence for its
occurrence in connection with many different types of task. It would be extremely
difficult to explain reminiscence phenomena
without having recourse to some such theoretical construct as inhibition, and it should
be remembered that there are many other
facts in the experimental literature of learning which also require the postulation of
inhibition." |

The Experimental ‘Evidence

It has already been noted that in this
theoretical assessment we can use the
amount of reminiscence as a direct measure
of inhibition. (In modern learning theory
the type of inhibition here discussed is often
referred to as reactive inhibition or Ir.
There is another kind of inhibition referred
to as conditioned inhibition or slr; this
will not be discussed here as it does not
affect our argument in any direct manner.)
If the theory that extraverts tend to produce
more reactive inhibition than introverts is
correct then we would here have a possible
method of proof. It would follow from the
theory that reminiscence effects should be
stronger and more pronounced for extraverts than for introverts. Fig. II shows the
general result of an experiment carried out
on fifty university students in an attempt to
test this deduction. There are three periods
of practice on the pursuit rotor each lasting
for five minutes ; these periods are separated
by ten-minute rest pauses. The reminiscence phenomenon is obvious after both

Percentage
Decrement
14

        

Control 30° 60" 90" 120° " .
Stimulation 5 Res! 0

Figure 2.--of 50 university students during three practice periods
separated by 10 minute rest periods.

Average performance on the pursuit rotor

rest pauses ; initial performance in periods
2 and 3 is clearly superior to final performance in periods I and 2 (there are other
phenomena in these curves such as the steep
initial rise in periods 2 and 3, and the subsequent decline in performance in these curves,
which can only be explained in terms of
additional concepts such as slr; no attempt
will be made to do so here). When individual differences in reminiscence were related to the position of the fifty subjects on
the extravert-introvert continuum as determined by means of a specially designed
questionnaire, a highly significant relationship was established in the predicted direction, thus showing the possibility of making
verifiable deductions from our general hypo
thesis. *

Another prediction which may be made
directly from the Pavlovian assessment relates to ease of conditionability. On Pavlov’s
showing, dogs in which the excitation-inhi-_
bition balance is tilted in the direction of
greater excitation are relatively easy to
condition, whereas dogs in which the balance
is tilted in the opposite direction are relatively difficult to condition. If our general
theory is correct then we should expect
extraverts (and hysterics, the neurotic form
of the extravert) to be more difficult to
condition than introverts (and dysthymics,
the neurotic prototype of the introvert).
2 =... THE EUGENICS REVIEW

These two predictions relating to the superior conditionability of normal and of
neurotic introverts as compared with normal
and neurotic extraverts have been experimentally investigated in this department by
Franks.1!. The experiment was carried out
in a sound-proof conditioning laboratory
used for this purpose at the Institute of
Psychiatry.1° The reflex to be conditioned
was the eye-blink occurring as the response
to a puff of air administered to the eyeball.
The rubber tube carrying the air duct to the
eye was imbedded in a spectacle frame worn
by the subject ; the eyeblink itself was recorded by means of a light-sensitive cell
affixed to the spectacle frame and activated
by the change in the amount of reflected
light produced, by the closing of the eyelid.
The conditioned stimulus was a tone transmitted over a pair of earphones ; all signals
and responses were electrically recorded.
The procedure used was as follows. After
establishing that the tone by itself did not
produce the eyeblink reflex but that the puff
of air did so, the two stimuli were presented
in combination a number of times, the tone
always preceding the puft of air by a fraction
of a second. Eighteen trials were intérpolated in this series in such a way that during
these trials only the tone was given but no
puff of air. The eyeblink occurring as a
response to the tone alone was accounted as
a conditioned response, and it will be seen
that the possible number of conditioned responses varies from zero to eighteen. At
the end of the conditioning period, the
acquired reflex was extinguished by a nonreinforced repetition of the tone for ten
trials. Here again, the number of conditioned responses occurring in each stage
constituted the score for each subject.

In Fig. III are given the results of carrying
out this experiment on twenty hysterics,
twenty dysthymics, and twenty normal
people. It will be seen that, as required by
the hypothesis, the dysthymics are in all
stages, both of the acquisition and the extinction trials, superior to the hysterics. In
other words, hysterics are much more difficult to condition than are dysthymics.
Normals are intermediate between the two

Degree of
Conditioning

 

Conditioning Extinction
st :

«
Figure 3.—Growth and extinction of conditioned
responses of dysthymics, normals, and hysterics.

neurotic groups, as might have been expected ; if chosen at random they are likely
to be intermediate between extraverts and
introverts. Fig. IV shows the actual scores
made during the acquisition period by our

hysterics and dysthymics, i.e. the number of

HYSTERICS

 

0123 45 6 7 8/9 10 li 12 13 14 15 16 I7 18

|
|
|
DYSTHYMICS
|
|
|
{

 

012345 6 7 819 IO It t2 (3 14 15 16 17 18°
CUTTING POINT

Figure 4.—-Conditioning scores of hysterics and
dysthymics respectively.

times during the eighteen trials that each
person in these groups responded to the conditioned eyeblink. It will be seen that the
separation is reasonably good. When the
results of this experiment were combined
with another conditioning experiment using
' THE INHERITANCE AND NATURE OF EXTRAVERSION 2g

the psychogalvanic response, the two groups
were discriminate at a 100 per cent level,
ie. there was no overlap whatsoever between the groups.

A similar result to the one outlined above
was found in connection with a normal
group of sixty university students. They
also were administered the eyeblink test and
their level of conditioning determined. Their
personality was assessed by means of the
questionnaire already mentioned, and a
highly significant relationship observed in
the expected direction, introverts being
easier to condition than extraverts. . Here
also then we find considerable support for
our general hypothesis. |

The other prediction made in terms of our
theory relates to what are commonly called
figural after-effects. This term, introduced
by Kohler, refers to the effects of a hypothetical satiation during prolonged exposure
to sensory stimulation. These satiation
‘effects are very similar to the effects of re‘active inhibition in the learning field, and
the writer has argued elsewhere that if both
reactive inhibition and satiation can be
shown to be due to identical single processes
then a considerable degree of unification and
simplification in psychological theory would
be possible.*®

The figural after-effects have been studied
most widely in the visual field. In a typical
case the subject equates the size of the two
circles or squares which appear to the right
and left respectively of a fixation point. He
is then asked to look at an inspection figure
slightly smaller than the test figure previously shown and appearing to the left of the
fixation point in the same position as the
previous test figure. After five minutes or
so, the inspection figure is removed and the
test figure, i.e. the original two circles, is
brought back. This time the satiation
effects produced by the inspection figure will
result in appearing to push outwards the
contours of the left circle which are adjoining
the field stimulated by the inspection figure,
but will leave in order the contour of the
right circle. To the subject, therefore, the
left circle will now appear larger than the
right, and the extent of the difference can

be used as a measure of the degree of association achieved.

If we identify association effects and reactive inhibition then it follows from our
general theory that extraverts and hysterics

 

 

um mv

Figure 5.—Figural after-effects as a function of
different periods of stimulation for hysterics and
dysthymics respectively.

should show more pronounced figural aftereffects than do introverts and dysthymics.
An experiment along these lines has been
reported by the present writer, using, however, a kinesthetic rather than a visual type
of task. Changes resulting from four different inspection periods (30 seconds, 60
seconds, go seconds, and 120 seconds) are
shown in Fig. V for a group of hysterics and
a group of dysthymics respectively. Also
shown are the after-effects of stimulation
when rest pauses of varying lengths (5
minutes,1o minutes) are interpolated. From
the diagram it will be seen that the reactions
of the hysterics are much more pronounced
than those of the dysthymics. Here again,
therefore, we found results significantly
supporting our general theory. .

Conclusion

There. would be little point in going
thoroughly into a detailed discussion of
experimental findings supporting this general
theory ; enough has probably been said to
give the reader an idea of the type of theory
which is being developed here, and the
methods used for making deductions from
the theory. So far deductions have all been
30 , THE EUGENICS REVIEW OO

successfully verified by experiments, and it
seems unlikely, therefore, that our theory
can be altogether erroneous. However, until a great deal of further work has been done
in connection with this verification no more
will be claimed for it at this point than that
here we have a possible causal hypothesis
which can account for a great number of
facts descriptively collected under the title
of extraverted behaviour patterns. If future
research should go on supporting this view,
then we would indeed seem to have available
a very powerful tool for investigating the inheritance of extraversion-introversion. We
would now be concerned, not so much with
the kind of test described in the first part of
this paper which can only trace its relationship to extraversion-introversion through
the long and haphazard way of correlational
analysis, but would rather be in a position
to use tests measuring in a much more direct
way the underlying properties of the nervous
system which give rise to the type of behaviour which formed the starting point of
our inquiry. Studies carried out on that
basis should give us much more clear-cut,
much more secure, and much more definitive
information than is available at present.
The main advance, therefore, which the
writer would claim as the outcome of the
present series of studies would be not so
much that the final answer has been found
for the problem investigated, but rather that
we are now in a position to carry out such
an investigation with improved tools, improved theories, and a better knowledge of
the underlying dynamics. It would be un
reasonable if we expected a much more
positive outcome of a pioneering investigation. a

References

1. Blewett, D. B. (1953). ‘‘An experimental study
of the inheritance of neuroticism and intelligence.”’
Ph.D. Thesis, University of London.

2. Blewett, D. B. (1954). ‘‘ An experimental study
of the inheritance of intelligence.”” J. ment. Sct.,
100, 922-33.

3. Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The Scientific Study of
Personality. Routledge & Kegan Paul.

4. Eysenck, H. J. (1953), The Structure of Human
Personality. Methuen.

5. Eysenck, H. J. (1955), ‘‘ Cortical inhibition, figural
after-effect, and the theory of personality:.”” /.
abnorm. Psychol., 51, 94-106.

6. Eysenck, H. J. (1955), “A dynamic theory of
anxiety and hysteria.”’ J. ment. Sct., 101,
28-51.

7. Eysenck, H. J. (1956), ‘‘ The inheritance of extraversion-introversion.’’ To appear: Acta Psychologica.

8. Eysenck, H. J. (1956), ‘‘ Reminiscence, drive and
personality theory.’’ To appear.

9. Eysenck, H. J., and Prell, D. B. (1951), “‘ The
inheritance of neuroticism; an experimental
study.”” J. ment. Sci., 97, 441-65.

10. Franks, C. M. (1955), “‘ A conditioning laboratory
for the investigation of personality and cortical
functioning.’ Nature, 175, 984.

11. Franks, C. M. (1956), “‘ Conditioning and personality. A study of normal and neurotic subjects.”’
To appear: J. abnorm. soc. Psychol..

12. Holzinger, K. J. et al. (1937), Twins : A study of
heredity and environment. Chicago University
Press.

13. May, J. (1951), ‘‘ Note on the assumption underlying Holzinger’s h? statistic.”’ J. ment. Sct., 97,
466-7

14. McGeoch, J. A., and Irion, A. L. (1952), The
Psychology of Human Learning. Longmans,
Green.

15. McLeod, H. (1953), ‘‘ An experimental study of
the inheritance of introversion-extraversion.”’
Ph.D. Thesis, University of London.

16. Pavlov, I. P. (1927), Conditioned Reflexes. Oxford
University Press.
