‘a10Y JI soNpoIdal 0} UOIssTUIOd IoJ [NJoe1s3

ole 3M ‘JuoWlddng saw1y Copung ev Ul InOj[Od UI parvadde yorym suo Wo poydepe si dew oy
"poystinousopun 9q 0} A[OyI] 91e OYM aIdood jJUasaIdal soTIOTeD COZ‘Z MO[9Q SB po}eoIpuUl
svole oy, ‘ueder pue visouopuy] ‘eIpuy ‘uleyIg poyefndod-Ajasuep jo sozis ssusWUT ATOATYeIedUIOS
oy} ‘eljensny pue epeues poyerndod Ap\y3I] Jo zis [Jews 94} 9OIJON ‘9104} BUIAT] o[dood Jo Joquinu
9} SMOYS YOIYM s[VOS & UO UMBIP Ud0q Sey AIJUNOD Youd asnvoog WSULIIS SUVAddV dVW SIHL

QTYOM AYONNH V dO AdVHS GHLYOLSIG AHL

ajqdjl0AO jou OJOQ [7
$alu0jo2 OOg‘'2 MoOlag CZZZA
$a10l0. OOL'2-002'2 EEeEEg

$3110109 OOZ'Z 420 BRRRRY
ONV1V3Z M3N

mw
vitvaisny Rod 7

NOTA39
Y, By
VA f : »
ae “(
N-L31A f] FEZ noon PT:
Santali WHANYONY A a fy dad
a | : 3 SVYNGNOH
neo eed Eg -VIVN3LYN

    

    

      

   
            
   

                    
 

          

    
 

 

           

 

 

    
  

             
      

   

 

SON
OOK
SOR KKKE
OKRA DOW’L
eR RORY
Aine gt gt et et AACS K ALL SANSAL
BOK KS
TARR VOVNVO
ORI
ROR ROLL ERR
LEST KOR
ROK OLY
ROD R

  

 

80
SIR JULIAN HUXLEY
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.

Education and the
Humanist Revolution’

HAT IS EDUCATION ? Dorothy Parker

\ | \ | once said that it was casting sham pearls

before real swine. But this splenetic out
burst is hardly fair, and could only represent the

views of a harassed and overburdened teacher in

a difficult neighbourhood. My grandfather,

Thomas Henry Huxley,® once defined an educated man in the following famous passage:

That man, I think, has had a liberal education who
has been so trained in youth that his body is the
ready servant of his will, and does with ease and
pleasure all the work that, as a mechanism, it is
capable of; whose intellect is a clear, cold, logic engine, with all its parts of equal strength, and in
smooth working order; ready, like a steam engine,
to be turned to any kind of work, and spin. the gossamers as well as forge the anchors of the mind; whose
mind is stored with a knowledge of the great and
fundamental truths of Nature and of the laws of her
operations; one who, no stunted ascetic, is full of life
and fire, but whose passions are trained to come to
heel by a vigorous will, the servant of a tender conscience; who has learned to love all beauty, whether
of Nature or of art, to hate all vileness, and to respect
others as himself.

Elsewhere, in the same address, after enumerating the biased arguments of the politicians, the
clergy, the manufacturers and the capitalists, he
wrote with deep feeling of education’s central
mission of enlightenment:

A few voices are lifted up in favour of the doctrine
that the masses should be educated because they are
men and women with unlimited capacities of
being, doing, and suffering, and that it is as true now,
seve it was, that the people perish for lack of knowedge.

But I want to treat education as a social pro
* The ninth Fawley Lecture delivered by Sir Julian
Huxley, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S., on November 22nd, 1962,
It is printed here by kind permission of the author and
of Southampton University. A shortened version appeared
in Nature, No. 4862, January Sth, 1963.

cess. For me, education is an organ of man in
society, whose basic function is to ensure the
continuity and further advance of the evolutionary process on earth by the transmission and
transformation of tradition. It exists in rudimentary form in higher vertebrates, but only

becomes of major importance in our own species,

where it transmits the knowledge, the skills and
beliefs, the attitudes and ideas which are necessary for the maintenance, achievement and development of man in society. Much of education
in this broad sense is unorganized, acquired
through Press and radio and public meetings, or
through individual self-education. Here I shall
confine myself to organized systems of education (though clearly these can be so planned as
to encourage and gear in with various kinds of
unorganized education).

Education and Evolution

To look at education in the perspective of evolution is good for many reasons. Firstly, it shakes
us out of over-preoccupation with the multitude
of specific and immediate difficulties that beset
us. Secondly, it provides a necessary corrective
to the tendency of our neotechnic industrial
civilization to think and plan in terms of quantity rather than quality—a tendency which is
having unfortunate effects on education, both
on subject-matter (think of the emphasis on the
physico-mathematical sciences and technology
as against the life and earth sciences and conservation), on curriculum (think of the emphasis on
subjects which can easily be examined in), on
evaluation (think of the emphasis on examination standards and marking systems) and on
methods (think of teaching aids). Finally, while
stripping education of much sentimental and
idealistic mystique, it gives new dignity and im
81

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1963, 55, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

portance to the whole educational process, new
inspiration for all those engaged in teaching, new
clarity to the aims and principles of education.

Education involves the transmission of experience and its results across the gap from earlier
to later generations. There are three stages of its
evolution, two of them pre-human. In the most
primitive, transmission bridges only one generation-gap between parents and offspring. This
stage is found most obviously in carnivores like
fox or lion, where the young animal, after a
period of self-education by play, learns to hunt
by accompanying one or both of its parents.

The second stage is marked by the beginnings
of tradition, a set of social habits peculiar to a
single population, which endures through a number of generations. Rudiments of such prototradition are found in various social mammals
(and perhaps a few birds); but the most striking
example is that of the Japanese monkey, Macaca
fuscata, summarized by Dobzhansky in his book,
Mankind Evolving :? in this species, each monkey
colony or social group has its own traditional
food-habits, but these are occasionally modified
by adventurous innovations, which take two or
three years to spread through the group. Here
we see how even a proto-tradition can evolve by
incorporating new elements. But it involves no
real educational system—no special arrangements for educating the young animals in and
through the tradition.

The third stage is found only in man. It is the
stage of a truly cumulative tradition, based on
conceptual thought and communicated by artificial or arbitrary symbols that have to be learnt,
as well as by imitation and by simple signs that
are genetically determined. As the tradition grows
more complex and its symbolic system of communication correspondingly more elaborate,
organized education becomes necessary as part
of the machinery for its transmission down the
generations.

Cultural Evolution

Cumulative tradition based on _ conceptual
thought and true symbolic language provides
man with a second mechanism of continuity and
change—in other words of inheritance and evolution—superposed on the primary geneticevolutionary mechanism of his chromosomes

82

and germ-cells, and often overriding it. As a
result, man has moved across a critical threshold,
the threshold from the biological to the psychosocial phase of the universal evolutionary process. In this new phase, evolution is manifested
primarily in cultural change, secondarily and less
obviously in genetic change in constitution. To
take one example, only negligible genetic change
in man’s intelligence or other capacities have
taken place since the Neolithic period (and quite
possibly since Cro-Magnon times), but almost
incredible changes in his cultural apparatus and
achievements—religion, art, science, law, technology, literature, social organization and the
rest.

One of the novel characteristics of the psychosocial phase is its new tempo of change. Not only
is cultural evolution much faster than biological,
but it shows acceleration. In the lower Paleolithic it took perhaps 100,000 years to effect a
major cultural change; in the early civilizations
a few hundred years; and now barely a single
decade—bringing new problems for education.

And yet, in spite of this new speed of change
and of the astonishing new achievements that it
has permitted, we must remember that man is an
extremely recent phenomenon. Man asa hominid
in the broad sense, including the ape-man Pithecanthropus and his immediate ancestors, cannot
be much more that a million years old, and a
million years in the perspective of life’s two and
three-quarter thousand million years is less than
half a minute out of a twenty-four-hour day;
while the whole of civilized man’s history has all
been compressed within one tick of the cosmic
clock. What is more, he is a sadly incomplete
phenomenon. He is an unfinished type, needing
a great deal of improvement before he can
qualify as a satisfactory product of evolution
and do his cosmic job properly. And human individuals are all too obviously unfinished when
they are born into the world: they need radical
improvement before than can qualify as satisfactory social beings and perform their functions
in life adequately. And their improvement as
individuals, as well as the improvement of man
as a type, depends to an important extent on the
improvement of education.

Improvement during biological evolution is
manifested in the improved construction, work
N
EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

ing and behaviour of animals and plants. As
Darwin pointed out so clearly in his great book,
it is the inevitable result of the blind and nonpurposeful agency of natural selection, which
operates via the genetic mechanism of transmission and transformation, the gene-complex
in the chromosomes.

Improvement during human evolution, on the
other hand, is manifested primarily in cultural
terms, in the organization, workings and achievements of human societies and cultures. It is
brought about primarily by the collective agency
of psychological and social forces which we may
conveniently label as psychosocial pressure, and
this operates via the psychosocial mechanism of
transmission and transformation, which includes
tradition in the broad sense, the diffusion of ideas
and cultural products, and, of course, education.

We are only beginning the detailed scientific
exploration of these basic agencies and mechanisms of human evolution, but some broad
principles are emerging. Those most relevant to
my subject are these. First, that it is the general
idea-system, the ideological pattern of ideas and
knowledge, values and beliefs, which essentially
characterizes human societies and cultures, and
indeed is the prime determiner of their social
organization, their material substructure and
their achievements. The psychosocial process is
a unitary one, simultaneously and indissolubly
both material and mental, in which the material
machinery and the social structure are constantly
reacting back on the ideological pattern. But
mind dominates the process, and it is the ideological pattern which is primary.

Secondly, with the extension of our understanding of the psychosocial process now and in
the past it is becoming clear that everything in
human history which deserves the title of advance or progress, every improvement or hope
of improvement of the human lot and man’s
hard destiny, has sprung from the discovery and
dissemination of new knowledge and new ideas.

Let me clarify this point a little. I am using
idea in a broad and loose sense to cover beliefs
and values as well as general and scientific concepts. Ideas are real phenomena, part of man’s
psychosocial equipment. Before new factual
knowledge can become effective it must be organized, incorporated in, or related to an idea.

ER—D

Ideas, of course, grow out of our experiences,
both external and internal, but differ a great deal
in what may be called their scientific or objective
validation. Where detailed and scientific validation is meagre or not available, ideas can still
exact strong psychosocial effects: for instance,
the idea of monotheism, or of personal salvation
through religious faith or sacred ritual. But in the
long run those ideas will prevail which are scientifically validated and are backed by a mass of
established factual knowledge.

The psychosocial process is a cybernetic one,
full of feedback mechanisms, so that new ideas,
and the new knowledge of which they are the
vehicles, not only must operate within the contemporary idea-system, but will modify it. Thus
the basically new idea of domesticating foodsupply by growing crops interacted with the
general ideas of the time and became part of a
general ideological framework concerned with
agricultural prosperity, fertility ritual and sacred
priest-kingship, which in turn modified social
structure.

Major advance in evolution takes place in a
series of steps, by means of a series of dominant
types, each new one embodying an improved and
therefore successful pattern of organization, with
the older ones often persisting in an inferior
position and reduced numbers. During biological
evolution, what is improved is bodily organization—of structure, function and behaviour. A
fish has a higher organization than a worm, a
worm than a jelly-fish: during the last 300 million
years, amphibians, reptiles, mammals and finally
man succeeded and largely replaced each other
as dominant types of land life. But in human
evolution, what is improved is psychosocial
organization—the organization of thought and
beliefs, of knowledge and ideas, and of the cultures and social systems related to them. The industrial national type of organization is higher
than the literate barbaric, that in turn higher
than the illiterate tribal. Magic, myth, polydaemonism, monotheism, science, succeed and
largely replace each other as dominant patterns
of human thinking.

The knowledge explosion of the last hundred
years since Darwin is giving us a new vision of
our human destiny—of the world of man, and of
man’s place and role in the world. It is an evolu
83
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tionary and monistic vision, showing us all reality
as a self-transforming process. It is a monistic
vision, showing us all reality as a unitary and
continuous process, with no dualistic split between soul and body, between matter and mind,
between life and not-life, no cleavage between
natural and supernatural; it reveals that all
phenomena, from worms to women, from radiation to religion, are natural.

It will inevitably lead to a new general organization of thought and belief, and to the development, after centuries of ideological fragmentation, of a new and comprehensive idea-system.
The Middle Ages had a comprehensive vision
and a comprehensive idea-system, and so does
Marxist Communism to-day; but neither was
founded on comprehensive knowledge. To-day
is the first period in history when man has begun
to have a comprehensive knowledge of stars and
atoms, of chemical molecules and geological
strata, of plants and animals, of physiology and
psychology, of human origins and human history. The knowledge is highly incomplete; new
and surprising discoveries are being made every
year and will continue to be made for centuries
to come. But it is comprehensive, in the sense of
covering every field, every aspect of reality.*

Its upshot is clear. Man is not merely the
latest dominant type produced by evolution, but
its sole active agent on earth. His destiny is to be
responsible for the whole future of the evolutionary process on this planet. Whatever he does,
he will affect that process. His duty is to try to
understand it and the mechanisms of its working, and at the same time direct and steer it in the
right direction and along the best possible course.

Evolutionary Humanism

This is the gist and core of Evolutionary
Humanism, the new organization of ideas and
potential action now emerging from the Humanist Revolution of thought, and destined, I prophesy with confidence, to become the dominant

* IT should except the field of so-called parapsychology.
If the existence of telepathy, ESP, and the rest is firmly
established, their scientific investigation could well lead to
a revolution in our thinking about the nature of mind.
But this is still quite hypothetical, and meanwhile it is our
obvious duty to work out the implications of the very
comprehensive knowledge we already possess.

84

idea-system of the next and critical phase of
psychosocial evolution.

What are the implications of this new pattern
of thought and belief? In the first place, the
operation for which he has sole responsibility is
a natural one, and he must not sit back and expect supernatural aid. Its overriding aim so far
as I can see, must be defined positively, in terms
of fulfilment and achievement—greater fulfilment (and therefore less frustration and misery)
for more human individuals, interlocking with
fuller achievement (and therefore less muddle
and failure) by more human societies. And this
can only be secured by a better understanding
and a fuller realization of human possibilities.
Further, in pursuing this aim, man must remember that he is a part of nature, and must learn to
live in harmonious symbiosis with the environment provided by his planet, a relation of responsible partnership instead of irresponsible exploitation. If he is to make a success of his job
as guiding agent for evolution, he must abandon
the arrogant idea of conquering and exploiting
nature; he must co-operate and conserve. Here,
too, he must set himself to understand possibilities and try to realise them more fully and fruitfully, but here they are the possibilities not of
human, but of external nature.

If this new view of human destiny is essentially
correct, then clearly our educational system and
methods must come to terms with it, for, after
all, education must be concerned with man’s
place and role in nature, and its raw material is
man himself. As I wrote in my Huxley Lecture®
twelve years ago:

The most important, if not the most urgent, task
of our times is the development of a new set of integrative, directive and transmissive mechanisms for
human societies and for their continuity down the
generations. These must include systems in which the
community at large can share—systems of shared
interpretation, shared belief, shared activity and
shared faith.

A New Educational System

Most educational systems are highly resistant to
change, because they are controlled by dogmatic
religious organizations, or because they are
closely linked with the established social order,
or just because of inherent conservatism. To-day
we need a radical change of system; and clearly
EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

the new system must itself be evolutionary, not
change-resistant but change-promoting. It must
transform as well as transmit. In part, this can
be achieved through appeals to morality—by
showing growing boys and girls a comprehensible but high aim in life, making them understand the moral duty of helping and guiding the
evolutionary process in a desirable direction.
But preaching is not enough: something more
practical is needed. If, as I maintain, our essential aim be greater fulfilment, then the next step
in psychosocial evolution must assuredly be from
the Welfare State towards a Fulfilment Society.
A humanist educational system will not only put
the idea of the fulfilment society before children,
but will provide them with opportunities for
actual personal fulfilment in every possible way
—through knowledge (I remember Bertrand
Russell once exclaiming, “How nice it is to know
things!”); through disciplined adventure on
mountain or sea; through expeditions and travel;
through painting and acting and making
music; through enjoyment of nature and beauty;
through fun and games; through inner peace;
through study projects and organized discussions; through responsible participation in group
activities. It will have a curriculum of experience
as well as a curriculum of subjects.

In adapting our old educational system to our
new vision, a lot of cargo will have to be jettisoned—once noble but now mouldering myths,
shiny but useless aphorisms, utopian but unfounded speculations, nasty projections of our
prejudices and repressions. Thus, man was not
created in his present form a few thousand years
ago. Mankind is not descended from Adam and
Eve, or any other single couple. Children are not
born with a load of original sin derived from the
Fall, nor with a tabula rasa of a mind ready to
be inscribed with whatever message educators
wish. There never was a Golden Age, nor a
Noble Savage. There are no pure races, nor any
Superior or Master Races. Mind and Body are
not separate entities. There are no Absolutes of
truth or virtue, only possibilities of greater knowledge and fuller perfection.

On the contrary, mankind is a single species,
which originated from a population of ancestral
apes about a million years ago. His evolution
since then has been marked by the increasing

complexity and improvement of his material,
social and psychological organization, but at the
same time by the increasing magnitude of his
crimes and follies. Children are not a set of uniform tabulae rasae but highly complex and varied
psychosocial organisms engaged on theextremely
difficult task of developing into satisfied and
satisfactory members of a social community.

The educational process has to cope simultaneously with several distinct problems—the
imparting of knowledge, practical and theoretical; the learning of skills and social habits; the
transmission of traditions and beliefs, religious
and secular; the formation of character and personality; moral as well as intellectual development; and the crucial passage from childhood
to responsible adult life.

In tribal societies, there is nothing that can be
called a curriculum. Children gain the knowledge
they need for the practical activities of life by
watching and imitating the adults and by actual
participation. Punishment is rare. What may be
called their theoretical instruction, in tribal myth
and morality and in forms of adult behaviour, is
imparted by selected elders, often with the aid of
esoteric and awe-inspiring ceremonies. This takes
place during a special period of preparation, culminating in a painful and frightening ordeal
which usually includes sexual mutilation. There
is no examination to test their knowledge, only
an ordeal to prove their adulthood; no certificate
to frame and cherish, only the fact of acceptance
as full members of the tribe.

Things have changed since then. But we still
inflict a painful and frightening ordeal on our
children, in the shape of a whole series of examinations; and we still celebrate their successful
survival of these ordeals by ceremonial activities,
most elaborately by the solemn pomp of university commencements and degree days. Most psychiatrists, I am sure, would agree that one important reason for the stiffness of examinations
is psychological—the subconscious desire of the
adult to revenge himself for past ordeals by subjecting the young to the same unpleasant trials
to which he himself was subjected: and assuredly
the gorgeous robes of the academic procession
are worn not only to impress the community
gathered for the occasion, but as a permitted
outlet for donnish egos (it certainly was so for

85
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mine!). And yet it is still true, as Professor Elvin‘
has pointed out in his chapter on “An Education
for Humanity” in The Humanist Frame, that a
tribal boy’s education may be a better preparation for life in a tribal society than is our education for life in our vaunted technological society.

There is need to-day for drastic change. Education must come to terms with Humanism over
its curriculum, over its relations with society,
and over its methods of fostering the development of personality.

As regards curriculum, the solution is, in principle, simple. The advance of knowledge has at
last given us a unified or unitary picture of phenomenal reality: clearly the curriculum must reflect
this unity and itself become unified instead of
consisting of a number of unrelated fragments
called subjects or activities.

Simple in principle, but not so simple in practice! The first difficulty is a quantitative one—
that the mere growth of knowledge, not only
scientific but also historical and sociological, is
too large for any single curriculum to unify.
However, the prime function of education is not
to impart the maximum amount of factual information, but to provide comprehension, to
help growing human beings to a better understanding of the world and themselves. And for
this we need what may broadly be called ideas.

Ideas in this broad sense are mental machinery
for dealing with bodies of experiential fact, the
necessary tools of comprehension. Readers of
Helen Keller’s autobiography will remember the
dramatic moment when the deaf, dumb and
blind child suddenly realised that “everything
has a name’’. This is the basic idea underlying
human language and human thought; and for
her it was the master key which unlocked her
latent understanding. Ideas can facilitate understanding in boys and girls during their education
just as much as in scientists in their research or
professional men in their careers. But they must
have a sufficiency of facts to work with: in education, the child must be provided with the right
mixture of facts and ideas.

As with material machines, some ideas are
better than others—they can handle more apparently disparate phenomena, can bridge larger
gaps, can simplify greater diversity. Thus the
single idea that the planets move round the sun

86

in ellipses relegated all the fantastic ptolemaic
machinery of cycles and epicycles to the scientific
dustbin, and with one stroke simplified for all
later generations the whole working of the solar
system. Again, the abandonment of the scholastic
idea of two conflicting principles of heat and cold
in favour of the scientific idea of a single scale of
temperature, was (and still is) a great aid to our
understanding of physical phenomena.

Evolution—or, to spell it out, the idea of evolutionary process—is the most powerful and the
most comprehensive idea that has ever arisen on
earth. It helps us to understand our origins, our
own nature, and our relations with the rest of
nature. It shows us the major trends of evolution in the past and indicates a direction for our
evolutionary course in the future.

Since the process of evolution involves the
constant inter-adjustment of organisms with
their environment, the evolutionary idea gives
us a new view of our relations with our planetary
habitat and its resources, and with the other
organized life-communities with which we share
it. It gives us a new perspective in time, and a new
sense of universal interrelatedness. Above all, it
unifies our knowledge and our thought. We are
part of a total process, made of the same matter
and operating by the same energy as the rest of
the cosmos, maintaining and reproducing ourselves by the same type of mechanism as the rest
of life, unique only in having been pushed further
along life’s general road to reach the psychosocial stage.

Thus the evolutionary idea must provide the
main unifying approach for a humanist educational system, and evolutionary biology could
and should become a central or key subject in its
curriculum. As I said in an address to American
high school teachers at the Darwin Centennial
Celebration at Chicago in 1959:?

Not only is evolution the necessary background
for any proper understanding or exposition of biology ; but I, with many of my colleagues, feel strongly
that biology is the necessary basis for understanding
ourselves and nature and our place in nature.

Evolution is important for understanding ourselves
as animal organisms, for instance in connection with
food, health, and disease. Evolution is essential for
understanding ourselves in relation to our environment and other organisms in that environment—in

other words, for understanding human ecology. Evolution is also essential for understanding ourselves as
EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

organisms which develop—in other words, for understanding human embryology and ontogeny; the most
spectacular phenomenon in life is the development
of adult human beings from microscopic bits of
nucleated protoplasm. Embryology links up with an
understanding of human reproduction and with an
understanding of that rather difficult but important
subject, the genetic basis of our life. Finally, evolution helps us to understand ourselves as unique
organisms equipped with a new method of evolution
—cultural evolution—based on the cumulative transmission of experience through language and symbols.

Embryology, reproduction, and genetics reveal all
sorts of extremely exciting facts. “Exciting” is the
right word, for knowledge of these facts does excite
interest and wonder in our minds. I use the word
*‘wonder” deliberately, for I believe that to excite
wonder and interest in the variety and richness of
life is important in education. So far as I can see,
biology is the best scientific subject for eliciting a
sense of wonder and an immediate interest in the
strange, the unusual, and the exciting. Biology may
not stir the interest of all the mechanically minded,
but it does arouse the interest of a great many children, probably the majority.

Biology has the further advantage that through it
you can enlist the born naturalist as well as the born
laboratory experimenter—the boy or girl who is interested in the variety and the wonder of things as
they are, as well as the child who is interested in finding out how they work. It is no coincidence that all
the great evolutionists have had an interest in natural
history and that most of them started as naturalists.

Too often, perhaps especially in the U.S.A.,
owing to religious pressure or plain conformist
timidity, evolution is not allowed into the curriculum, or is admitted under some specious alias
like “racial development”; whereas in the
U.S.S.R., in spite of the setback due to Lysenkoism, evolution occupies an important place in
education. But for further facts and ideas on
this, I must refer my readers to Professor H. J.
Muller’s admirable article, ““One Hundred Years
without Darwinism are Enough”.

Ecology
Evolutionary biology provides us with another
unifying idea of the greatest importance—the
ecological idea. Ecology is scientific natural history; it is the science of relations par excellence
—relations between organisms and their environment, and of organisms with each other. It
helps us to understand how life makes a living.
It deals with what is commonly called the
balance of nature. But its central concept is
that of the organized ecological community—a

patterned assemblage of different vegetational,
animal and microbial types, inter-adjusted to
give optimum utilization of the resources of a
particular habitat. If the dynamic pattern of
relations is interfered with, the entire habitat
and the ecological community living in and on
it may be damaged. The most obvious case is
deforestation with consequent erosion; another
is the introduction of domestic cattle coupled
with reduction of wild herbivores, which may
disrupt the ecological pattern of savannah and
turn it into desert. From earliest times, man has
been interfering with more and more natural
habitats and has exploited their resources more
and more pitilessly. He has already converted vast
areas of once fertile land, in the Mediterranean
and the Middle East, in China and in India, into
arid semi-deserts or treeless infertility. Now that
his exploding population is subjecting more areas
to ever more drastic and more technologically
efficient exploitation, he is in danger of becoming
the cancer of the planet instead of its guide.

In the educational systems of underdeveloped
territories, children should be introduced to
science by the biological way of ecology and
physiology and their applications in conservation and health, not by way of physics and
chemistry and their applications in technology
and industry. And in all countries, ecology is
essential as a basis for good land use and productive development.

Man lives in a triple tier of environments,
material, social and psychological. Ecology in
the customary sense deals with man’s relations
with the forces and resources of external nature.
Social ecology deals with man’s social relations,
both within and between human societies. And
what we may call psychological ecology is concerned with man’s individual and collective relations with the forces and resources of his inner
nature and the environment of ideas, beliefs and
values which he has created and with which he
has surrounded himself.

A New Curriculum

How should the new humanism’s evolutionary
approach take effect in education? The overriding need is that it should put an end to the
fragmentation of the present system. Education
must be comprehensive, in dealing with every

87
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

aspect of life; it must also have a unitary pattern,
reflecting the unity of knowledge and the wholeness of experience. It must attempt to give growing minds a coherent picture of nature and man’s
role in it, and to help immature personalities
towards integration and self-realization.

To give a coherent picture we need, in the first
place, an integrated curriculum instead of a
patchwork, a curriculum focused on the pattern
of man’s relations with nature and the psychosocial process, instead of on separate aspects of
nature like physics or botany, and on separate
aspects and activities of man like literature or
history.

Once we begin to think along these lines, we
find that different “‘subjects” can link up with and
reinforce each other. Physiology links up with
chemistry and heredity, ecology with geography,
soil science with agriculture and meteorology.
The study of development leads on to biological
evolution; evolution, in turn, links back to
geology, astronomy and cosmology, and on to
man’s origins, to archeology and human history.
History, in turn, links up with economics, social
studies and citizenship. Art and architecture, law
and morality, science and technology, are best
treated as functions of man in society: they, too,
evolve and accordingly profit by being treated
historically, not merely as separate and complete
packages of facts and principles.

Just how to plan and introduce such a curriculum is a matter for the educational profession.
Of course, it will not be easy, in face of the competitive claims of traditional subjects and established university departments on the one hand,
and on the other hand of the portentous growth
of factual knowledge and theoretical scaffolding,
notably in the sciences, but also in the humanities. It will mean scrapping a great deal of dead
wood and dead weight: it will mean some sacrifice of specialists’ amour propre and curricular
claims: and it will take much ingenuity and a
great deal of goodwill. But it must be done, and
I am sure that it can be done.

Indeed, the process is already beginning.
Medicine is throwing overboard a mass of unnecessary anatomical detail: universities are
introducing first-year courses of general studies:
sixth forms are taking steps to correct earlier
over-specialization: the American Institute of

88

Biological Sciences! (and see Hurd®) has worked
out a remarkable integrated curriculum for High
School biology, embodying many new ideas and
methods, and the Gulbenkian Foundation is
doing something similar in this country. But
these are sporadic and isolated attempts. The
task will only be satisfactorily achieved when we
realize that, here as elsewhere, unity brings
strength. In a properly unified curriculum, separate subjects will not compete for prestige and
place, but can reinforce each other.

This could give a new dynamic to the educational process. Children in general have a natural
interest and curiosity: they want to know more
about this strange and wonderful world, about
human life and how to live it, and to find out
what it all means. If their education is designed
to help them in this instead of setting up a number of hurdles in their way, they will enjoy it, and
will become willing co-operators instead of reluctant or obstructive victims. And education
will acquire a new social dynamic: from being
merely a preparation for life, it will become an
integral part of life, an instrument of man’s
evolution.

The other prerequisite for a humanist education is that it should help children to realize more
of their capacities, and to develop into wellintegrated personalities. For this, in addition to
the integration of subjects, we need an integration of activities. The educational system must
set itself not merely to surmount obstacles—to
bypass frustration, to overleap apathy, to resolve
conflict—but to provide opportunities for active
living, for satisfying achievement, for feeling
significant, for fulfilment. This again will not be
easy. Apart from difficulties of staff and facilities,
and the difficulty of linking school life, home life
and social life, there is the difficulty of time. Once
more, however, it not only must, but can be done.

Here again, unification leads to mutual reinforcement. So-called extra-curricular activities
can be made to serve curricular ends, and vice
versa. Children, in general, have a natural desire
to achieve, to exercise their capacities, to count
for something in life. If they find that their education is designed to help them in this instead of
treating them as temporary inmates, to be dealt
with by a combination of bribery and punishment, they will become willing participants.
EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

A further important implication of the evolutionary-humanist approach is that the mindbodies the educator has to deal with are not all
alike. Far from it! They are extremely diverse:
in technical terminology, they exhibit a high
degree of variance, both genetic and non-genetic.

Environment and Heredity

Unfortunately, ideological warfare between the
environmentalists and the hereditarians is still
rampant over all the broad territories of the
social sciences, including the domain of education, with the environmentalists still maintaining
a vigorous offensive campaign. In order to bring
the two parties together, the biologist must point
out that their dispute is as silly and nonsensical
as that between the Bigendians and the Littlendians in Gulliver’s Travels. The simple and fundamental fact is that neither environment nor
heredity is the more important. Both are necessary: and all characters of all organisms are the
result of their joint effect. When organisms differ,
whether children or chrysanthemums, their
differences may be due either to differences in
environment—the conditions in which they have
grown and developed—or to differences in heredity—their genetic outfit of chromosomes and
genes. But the share of either party in the combined operation may differ markedly in magnitude. Thus, the share of genetic determination is
high in mammalian hair- and eye-colour, in
human colour-blindness and various forms of
mental defect, while that of environmental modification is high in size in flowering plants, or
health and physique in human beings. One of
the most striking effects of the last war in Britain
was the notable improvement in the physique
and mental energy of children, especially in the
lower income brackets, due to the special rations
of milk and vitamins that they were given—and
this, of course, has had obvious implications for
their education.

If a diversified population is made genetically
uniform, as when man makes pure strains of
dogs or wheat by inbreeding and selection, more
and more of its visible variation will be modificational, due to differences in the environment.
Conversely, if its environment is made more uniform, as when an unselected strain of plants is
grown in carefully controlled conditions, more

and more of any visible variation will be genetic
in origin.

All these points are highly relevant to our subject. Thus, it is no good training a colour-blind
child as a painter or a signalman, or trying to
give mental defectives the same educational
treatment as normal children.

Perhaps the most surprising recent modificational change in man has been the secular trend
towards earlier maturity, summarized by Dr. J.
M. Tanner in his book, Education and Physical
Growth,? which has been going on in Western
countries for over a century. The onset of
puberty, as measured by the age of girls at
menarche, has been advanced by some four
months every decade, from over seventeen years
in 1850 to about thirteen years to-day. This is
correlated with a marked acceleration of growth.
During every decade of the seventy years since
systematic measurement was undertaken, Western adolescents have become bigger and heavier
by about one inch in height and four pounds in
weight; and maximum stature is now achieved by
the age of sixteen to seventeen in girls and
eighteen to nineteen in boys, as against nearly
twenty-five in 1850. Whatever its cause (which
must certainly be sought in environmental factors, such as nutrition and healthy upbringing),
this trend has various interesting consequences
for education. Thus, boys’ schools are faced with
a shortage of trebles for their choirs; and an
average boy of fifteen is likely to be taller and
heavier than his woman teacher, and is pretty
certain (on the basis of Kinsey’s findings) to have
stronger sexual urges. And the average girl of
fifteen is now physiologically and psychologically
a woman. The adolescent crisis, with all its problems, has been shifted to an earlier age, and educational systems must adjust themselves to this
fact.

Genetic Differences and Education

Then there are various kinds of genetic difference
for the educational system to cope with. There
are large quantitative differences in general intelligence, from potential genius to mental defect.
There are also large quantitative differences in
the genetic rate of mental development, notably
between quick learners and rapid developers on
the one hand and slow learners and maturers on

89
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the other (this, of course, has nothing to do with
modificational changes in rate, such as the trend
to earlier maturity I have just discussed). More
research is needed to determine how far rapid
learning is correlated with general genetic intelligence and with high final performance, and
whether slow learning may not sometimes give
more solid later achievement; but clearly our
educational system must take account of these
differences.

There are also qualitative differences in the
way children’s minds handle the raw materials of
experience,* notably between visualizers, auditory types, concrete manipulators, and abstract
verbalizers: the traditional verbal type of education is not very good for visualizers. Then there
are differences in creativity and in the capacity
for absorbing and regurgitating academic knowledge. The two are not by any means always
strongly correlated—indeed, a recent American
study has come out with the sweeping assertion
that “the class standing of a student has no correlation with his performance in later years”, and
that the U.S. educational system, based as it is
on scholastic achievement, may actually be eliminating some of the best creative talent.

And there are psychosomatic differences, of
anatomy and temperament. After Sheldon’s work,
not even the most aprioristic theorist could expect
that a skinny ectomorph would react to the educational process in the same way asacomfortable
endomorph with perhaps double the ratio of guts
to muscle and a radically different pattern of
hormones being squirted into his bloodstream.

The problem is how to be educationally fair to
the whole range of these and other variant psychophysical types. Here, as in so many fields, the
abnormal may shed light on the normal. Let me
give two examples of abnormality and how
society can deal with it. Myopia—short-sightedness—is mainly genetic in origin: in a form
severe enough to be a handicap in ordinary life
if uncorrected, it occurs in well over 1 per cent
of human children. It may have been of selective
value during early stages of man’s history, when
fine craftsmanship was needed and craftsmen
were kept out of the fighting; but in the modern

woe a general discussion of this subject, see Huxley,
8

90

world it is a severe handicap. However, the
modern world has found a way to circumvent the
genetic handicap, by correcting the defect with
spectacles: by this means the abnormalis brought
within the range of the normal.

My second example concerns schizophrenia.
This disordered condition of mind, which all too
often leads to certifiable insanity, affects nearly
one in every ten of all human beings, in every
country and in every type and level of culture.
Recent work shows that it almost certainly has a
genetic basis, and is due to a metabolic error
which (among other things) causes the discharge
into the blood of an abnormal compound related
to adrenalin. This interferes with the working of
a very important bit of the brain’s machinery for
building up the chaos of sensations into an
orderly system of perceptions. The confirmed
schizophrenic’s perceptual world is a disorderly
one, not unlike that into which a normal person
makes a brief entrance by way of mescalin or
lysergic acid.

The educational relevance of this is becoming
evident. The genetically schizoprone child begins
to manifest overt schizophrenia when the disorderliness of his perceptual world throws him
thoroughly out of gear with the ordered “normal” world of his fellow human beings and his
society. As one might expect, this usually happens during the adolescent crisis. Psychiatrists
are busy devising chemical tests for the schizophrenia-provoking compound in the blood urine
and psychological tests for its effects on the percept-building functions of the brain. These tests
could best be carried out in the school. And then
the schizoprones could be given special educational treatment designed to correct their defective
picture of the world and reconcile it with that of
their normal fellows. They need corrective spectacles for their defect of inner vision, as myopic
children need them for their defect of external
vision. For many, perhaps most of them, this
should not be too difficult. Meanwhile, the possibility of lifting the heavy burden of schizophrenia from the shoulders of humanity is a
notable challenge to the educational profession.

The general challenge of human diversity remains. Man is the most diverse and variable of
all organisms—variable anatomically and physiologically, intellectually and temperamentally,
EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

genetically and environmentally. And-a large
degree of diversity is a source of strength to
human societies, especially to high civilizations.
Successful psychosocial evolution demands a
variety of gifts, temperaments and talents. A
humanist society needs men of action and men
of thought; scientists and artists; brain-workers
and labourers; saints and policemen; adventurers and stay-at-homes; eccentrics and established civil servants; leaders and led.

It would be a good thing if the numbers of the
too abnormal and the too defective could be reduced, those of the more intelligent and more
gifted increased; and perhaps one day eugenics
will get busy on this.* Meanwhile, the problem
is how to utilize the existing and potential diversity of people to the best advantage of society
and of themselves. As Dwight Ingle has written,
individuality must be a parameter of the educational process.

The Texan anatomist, Roger Williams,1® who
has done more than anyone else to establish the
full range of man’s anatomical and physiological
diversity, has proposed Free but Unequal as the
motto of a modern society. Freedom in inequality
is a good basis for an educational system to work
on: but as a goal for it to work towards, I would
suggest Varied Excellence.

In any case, educationists must assuredly
struggle against conformism and must resist the
imposition of all dogmatisms, including their
own. They will remember that cultural and individual diversity is precious in itself, and will
strive for vivifying variety and against monotonous mediocrity. They will try to ensure that the
more gifted children are not bored and frustrated
by being kept back to the level of the average, the
less gifted not made to suffer by being pushed
beyond their capacities. They will try to provide a
range of opportunities to meet their pupils’ range
of aptitudes. But they will hold fast to the
humanist vision of variety in unity, and will endeavour to provide a common ground of thought
and action, a unitary vision and framework of
ideas which all human variants can share.

One point deserves special consideration. The
increasing complexity of modern societies de
* See my Galton Lecture, ‘‘Eugenics in Evolutionary
Perspective’? (Huxley, 1962).8

ER—E

mands an increasing number of men and women
of great ability and high competence to run
them. It should be a prime duty of our educationalists to meet this demand. For this, genetics
and education must join hands. We need a comprehensive selection system to catch as many
potential geniuses and top people as possible,
and, once caught, we must give them an education
designed to help and permit them to realize their
capacities to the full. Failure to do this will lead
to a running down of national efficiency and
national achievement. It will also be a lamentable
waste of that most valuable ofall human resources,
mental and spiritual power, and will prevent
many potential geniuses from developing their
precious talents.

In doing justice to human variety, educationalists will be accused of encouraging an élite, and
of aiding new class differences. That must be
faced. Nature is not egalitarian; societies must
always be stratified in some way; and, whether
you call them an élite or anything else, outstanding people are needed at the top.

Human Development

Since education sets out to promote the right
development of human beings, a proper understanding of the developmental process is important both for educators and for their political
masters. Development is a natural process and
must be studied as such, not in the abstract or
scholastic terms of some presumed intrinsic vital
principle or ideal purpose, nor merely in terms
of its elements and origins, real of postulated. In
regard to human (and animal) behaviour, the
reductionists are still very vocal. Orthodox
psychoanalysts spend most of their time searching for origins, overzealous behaviourists and
neurologists proclaim that mind does not really
exist or is merely an epiphenomenal resultant of
matter, the Skinnerian school asserts that
nothing but learning is of much importance in
behaviour.

We must beware of all such ‘“nothing-buttery’. Whenever anybody says or implies that
something is “nothing but” something else, or
is explicable “‘merely”’ in terms of its elements or
origins, we can be quite sure that he is wrong. In
opposition to reductionism 1 suggest eductionism
as a rallying cry to constructive thought. It

gI
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

means that when we are considering any development process of biological or human development (including, of course, evolutionary as well
as individual development), we must begin with
its operative function—its organized end-result
and how well or badly it works in the business of
life. Then we can analyse it into its elementary
components and search for its origins. Finally,
we must study the operation of the process itself
to find out how it educes its end-result out of its
original components—in more general terms,
how it actualizes its potentialities. Only then shall
we be in a position to set about improving it.

The first and obvious fact about human development is that it is not a mere unfolding of a
miniature model; the developing human being
passes through a series of radically different
stages—infancy, childhood, boy- or girlhood,
adolescence, maturity, each of them demanding
different educational treatment. Yet many educational systems have insisted on treating the
child as a miniature man, and others as so much
blank or plastic material, to be written on or
moulded at the educator’s will.

In reality, the development of man, like that of
all other organisms, is what biologists call epigenetic. It is a cybernetic process full of feedback
mechanisms, and produces both complexity and
emergent novelty. The modern science of development has shed the title of Embryology in
favour of Epigenetics.

To-day we are beginning to explore the
mechanisms by which the genetic code inscribed
in the chromosomes of the egg is translated,
through the co-operative interaction of the genes
and their environment, into bodily and mental
organization, and are discovering various of the
principles at work. One of the most important of
these is what Waddington” has called the canalization of development into a number of channels,
each leading in a definite direction towards a
specific kind of end-result, while any departure
from their “right”? course is automatically corrected. They thus have a high capacity for self
regulation—perhaps self-direction is the better
term.

Such processes Waddington calls creodes,
meaning, by creode, “‘a pathway of change’
which is equilibrated, in the sense that the system tends to return to it after disturbance. Some

92

creodic systems provide alternative but sharply
distinct pathways: thus, the creode concerned
with the development of our reproductive organs
can be switched by means of the sex-hormones
into one or other of the pathways leading to
normal male or to normal female organization.
And, of course, many creodes can be somewhat
deviated by the environment without giving an
abnormal result: sunlight can deviate our skincolour from pale to dark, exercise can lead to
muscular development.

Other creodic canalization systems may be
more plastic and permit the organism to wander
off in various directions over the developmental
landscape. This applies especially to the behaviour-systems of higher vertebrates, whose learning capacities permit them to adjust their activities to their experience; and most notably to that
of man. The creodic system concerned with
human behaviour is so widely and deeply plastic
that it not only provides for an extensive range
of wandering and branching in later stages of
development, but can be radically influenced at
its early roots and in the main trunk of its
growth.

It has to integrate competing and even conflicting basic drives and desires into some sort of
wholeness. Integration can be prevented by depriving the child of some basic ingredient for his
psychosocial development, as John Bowlby? has
shown with maternal deprivation. It can be traumatically distorted by internal conflict culminating in repression, which then leads to the projection of one’s own guilt and repressed aggression
outward on to others, or sometimes inward on to
oneself. An excess load of infantile guilt may
produce anything from a cruel superego and a
harsh and unforgiving morality to an inferiority
complex and an over-meticulous conscience. A
load of sexual guilt at adolescence coupled with
frustrating failure to achieve satisfactory social
adjustment may lead to an amoral and asocial
bored indifference, to a retreat from the social
world into neurotic depression or, at the other
extreme, to an assertion of the ego’s significance
by violent and anti-social actions: meaninglessness is the parent of delinquency. Clearly educational systems cannot supply psychoanalytic
treatment, nor can they take over from parents
the job of looking after the early development of
EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

their babies. But they can do much to correct
infantile distortions, to bypass adolescent frustrations, and to replace meaninglessness with
significance. They can do so by providing opportunities for fulfilment and satisfaction in all sorts
of ways, and, in particular, through activities
which make boys and girls feel that they matter
that they mean something to themselves and
other people.

In general, educators should try to provide
children with what I may call integrative creodes
—developmental processes which will steer
themselves towards more effective integration of
knowledge and behaviour. This does not just
mean the “moral education’ that conventional
educational systems aspire to give: it means providing children with more effective systems of
canalizing their own moral, intellectual and
spiritual development.

How to achieve this aim properly is a matter
for much research and experiment, though clearly
a good deal can be done to avoid frustration by
providing channels of fulfilment within the educational system. Group projects can obviously
help in giving a feeling of signifiance. But we
want to know what sort of project and what
type and size of group gives what degree of significance to what kinds of boys and girls. Already,
both sociologists and ethologists are busy studying the general problem of social groups and
their working; the time is ripe for educators to
combine with their colleagues in tackling the
special problem of the role of groups in education.

Group Behaviour
Ethology is giving a useful lead, by studying the
formation and function of behavioural bonds in
animals. In higher vertebrates, such as geese,
jackdaws, monkeys and chimpanzees, such
bonds involve emotions: so they do in ourselves,
but in ourselves they can be reinforced by empathy, which seems to be present only in rudimentary form in animals. They include the bond
between parent and offspring, the pair-bond tying
mated birds together, the gregarious bonds in
bird flocks or caribou herds, the social bond
operating in a wolf pack, rookeries or baboon
communities.

Some important points are emerging. First, all

behavioural bonds have a genetic built-in basis,
but only develop to full effectiveness through
some sort of learning under the impact of experience. Thus, the original basis of the offspringparent bond in monkeys, as Professor Harlow
has shown, is merely the experience of something
soft and furry: but to convert it into an operationally effective bond between a mother and her
offspring, a long further chain of reciprocal experiences is needed.

Secondly, close and intimate relations between
individuals usually involve an element of hostility, and therefore of aggression as well as of
attraction. This is true of the relations between members of a mated pair as well as between
members of a social group, and often between
parents and their young. Thus, in what is often
misleadingly called the courtship of birds, the
attitudes of the mates as they approach each
other are the resultant of a mixture of attraction,
attack, and escape. As ethologists like Lorenz!
and Tinbergen!* have so beautifully shown,
these attitudes have then been (metaphorically)
seized upon by natural selection and turned into
formal displays serving as moves in the reproductive game. Or, to take an example from a
mammal which (like man) is both social and
fierce, fights between wolves are prevented from
leading to a really serious outcome by means of
a special ceremonial attitude. If a younger and
weaker wolf is in grave danger during a fight, he
crouches and presents the vulnerable back of his
head to his more powerful enemy; and this automatically inhibits the aggressive urges of the
attacker. The basis for this socially valuable bit
of behaviour is built-in to the genetical equipment of the species.

All such behaviour has been largely ritualized
—turned into formal activities of functional
value; and my third point is that in this process
of ritualization, the element of aggression is
made to serve some useful purpose, whether by
redirecting it against other objects or by utilizing
its energy in the performance of the bonding
ceremony. Rituals are thus methods for transforming frustrating conflict situations into biologically significant activities. Clearly, something
similar could be achieved in education. Many
conflicts could be acted out in ritual form, many

93
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

activities could be given added significance by
putting them in a formal setting.

The Adolescent Crisis

All primitive societies cope with the adolescent
crisis of their young people by elaborate rites de
passage laden with significance. Can our overintellectual and over-technological societies not
devise something similar? Could not all the
adolescents of one age-group be called on to
undertake some challenging individual exploit,
as with the boys at Gordonstoun? Could not
another age-group be called on to embark on
group adventures and projects; and yet another
to undertake some sort of service to the community? Could not the end of school life be
celebrated in a more formal and expressive way
than now?

The broader question proposes itself: cannot
the passage to the adult stage be linked with the
larger community of the nation and the world, in
something which would really deserve the title of
a national, or even international, service? The
rudiments of such a service are there, in organizations like the Peace Corps, the Organization for
Relief and Development, and the Youth Conservation Corps, in exploration societies and
travel studies. We should get on with the jobof
seeing how to link them all up in some flexible
and imaginative scheme which would give outlets for many types, would provide some sense of
significance and direction to many chaotic lives
and would become an important part of the
country’s educational system.

In this, as in many other ways, our education
could be made a more integral process, and the
split between its two functions of intellectual instruction and professional training on the one
hand, and moral education and character-formation on the other, which began over two
thousand years ago with the rise of the Sophists
in Greece, could be bridged.

An Education Council

Education, in spite of all the hot air expended in
lip-service to its importance, still has an unfortunately low status in our competitive technological world. Yet it has a crucial and very special
role to play in helping the technological world
through its present crisis. If it is to raise its status,

94

the educational profession should devote a great
deal of thought and energy to understanding the
nature of that crisis and devising methods to
meet it. As a result of the knowledge explosion of
the last hundred years, the evolutionary process,
in the person of post-Darwinian man, is at last
becoming conscious of itself; it is time that the
educational process, in the person of the educational profession, should become conscious of
itself as the essential psychosocial organ for
transmitting and transforming human culture.

A first step, it may be suggested, would be the
establishment of an Education Council, on a par
with the Arts Council, the Medical and Agricultural Research Councils, and the D.S.I.R.,
though with its own special functions. If the
Government were chary of giving it the same
financial aid as the other Councils, the educational profession ought to set it up on its own,
confident that, once in being, it would speedily
prove itself and attract official support.

The overriding question for such a body to
consider would be this: how can education help
in bringing coherence, significance and direction
into our chaotic, fragmented, and bewildered
world? It could do so in two distinct but interdependent ways, one primarily concerned with
knowledge and the handling of outer experience,
the other with personality and the handling of
inner experience. The first aims at providing a
meaningful picture of the outer world and a
coherent pattern of ideas to help in understanding it and our relations with it: The second at
promoting the development of a meaningful and
coherent inner world, and providing a pattern of
activities and opportunities to help in achievingit.
Various projects of this sort are already being
initiated. Thus, the Gulbenkian Foundation is
organizing a series of conferences on education.
The Universities Quarterly contains a report on
proposals made at one of these conferences, for
a Social Science Research Council which would
tackle the problems of higher education in
Britain. The new University of Sussex is hoping
to undertake a large-scale research investigation
of its own operations. And we have had the
provocative Crowther Report.

An obvious and immediate task is to hammer
out the details of a general curriculum which, as
I have suggested, would reflect the unitary vision
EDUCATION AND THE HUMANIST REVOLUTION

provided by modern science and learning.
Sample text-books should be prepared, and consideration given to teaching aids and to learning
through projects. Such a curriculum would bypass the split between Sir Charles Snow’s Two
Cultures; its very unity would give it a new
dynamism, with sciences and humanities reinforcing each other instead of being driven into
mutual hostility. Critics like Dr. Yudkin claim
that this is impossible and would involve “the
falsely optimistic idea of an age of Leonardos”’.
On the contrary, I believe that it is perfectly
possible to give every normal boy or girl a
general understanding of what science and history and literature and industry are about: this
could be achieved by the age of fifteen or sixteen
though it would be much easier if secondary education were extended to seventeen or eighteen.
And the first year or so of college or university
life should supplement necessary specialization
with some reasonably advanced study of complementary fields. Throughout, there would be emphasis on the role of concepts and techniques of
thought and expression as mental tools and
machinery enabling one to comprehend external
reality more readily and more satisfactorily; on
projects as well as on customary instruction; and
on making the process of learning and understanding enjoyable.

In relation with this major theme, one subgroup might study examination systems, with
particular reference to devising methods of test
* Some years ago when I visited the Great Mosque of
Kairouan, the oldest university in the Western world, I
saw not only the traditional method of instruction, groups.
of students listening to a learned man by a pillar in the
mosque itself, but was also shown with pride the modern
improvements, in the shape of little classrooms round the
great courtyard, each equipped with a blackboard. I had
never before realized the revolutionary impact that this
teaching aid must have had on the educational process.
I suspect that the impact of our modern teaching aids—
films, closed-circuit TV, radio relays, and teaching
machines will be even more revolutionary.

+ For an imaginative treatment of this subject, see
Aldous Huxley’s Utopia, Island; and for an interesting
experiment in art appreciation and art education, in which
pupils learn to grasp the “perceptual unity”’ of a painting
or a situation when illuminated for a tenth of a second,
see Hoyt Sherman’s Drawing by Seeing.

t As a recent exhibition at the U.S. Embassy in London
demonstrated, the study, appreciation and practice of art
are now becoming an integral part of American programmes of higher education.

ing understanding as well as knowledge, and of
assessing creativity and general capacity as well
as academic performance; another might look
into ways of preventing the growth of antirational ideas and superstitions; another would
deal with the question of teaching aids;* and yet
another with the problem of ensuring an adequate supply of top-level minds for the nation’s
business, administration and culture.

The second major study would be concerned
with inner development—how the educational
system could encourage the growth of integrated
personalities, at war neither with themselves nor
with society. Such a system would bypass the
split between intellectual and moral education.
In order to achieve this, the educational process
must help in the resolution of inevitable conflicts.
It must provide opportunities not only for enjoyment, but for fulfilment of many kinds, especially
for consolidating the boy’s or girl’s identity and
for achieving a sense of significance. Such a study
will be difficult. It will involve calling for help
from a whole range of ologies—anthropology,
ethology, psychiatry, child psychology, physiology. It will involve facing the problem of evil
and what theologians call original sin, and reconciling some violently opposed points of view.
But if it is successful it could lead to new conceptions of the functions of education and a
revolutionary overhaul of its methods. It could
also enable education to affirm its importance as
a transformer of society as well as a transmitter
of culture; for the products of such a personally
fulfilling education would undoubtedly press for
the establishment of a real-life Fulfilment Society.

Then there is the exciting territory of nonverbal and non-intellectual education to be explored and exploited.t There is the problem of
education’s link with the arts.{ Our educational
system is now being called on to supply the
nation with large numbers of scientists and technicians; should it not be required to furnish a
similar quota of artists, architects, sculptors,
decorators and designers ? Thereis the question of
giving schoolmasters (and, of course, schoolmistresses) opportunities for research and creative work. There is the tricky problem of tests—
intelligence tests, open-ended tests, aptitude tests,
personality tests. There is the problem of how far
the practice of meditation can replace or supple
95
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment formal religious services, prayer periods
and scripture lessons.

And there is the world problem. The world has
become one de facto. It must achieve some unification of thought if it is to avoid disaster (let
alone proceed to political unification), and this
can only come about with the aid of education.
We must remember that two-fifths of the world’s
adult population—700 million grown men and
women—are still illiterate, that the world’s provision for education at all levels is lamentably
inadequate, and that the underdeveloped countries are all clamorously demanding more and
better education.* Britain, as an ex-colonialist
country and the senior partner in the Commonwealth, has a special responsibility for meeting
these demands. Unesco 1s also doing a great deal
in this urgent matter.

Beyond all these and many other particular
problems there is the great question-mark of socalled Adult Education. With the combination
of more automation, compulsory leisure, and
greater spending power, we shall soon be faced
with the task of extending our educational system to meet the needs of the entire adult population. Education in the ordinary limited sense
seems destined to become only a part of a comprehensive and continuing process. Perhaps we
should look forward to the establishment of a
National Education Service. In any case, the
prospect opens up all manner of exciting possibilities, which it is the duty and the privilege of
the educational profession to explore.

Obviously, university Departments of Education will be required to enlarge their functions,
and they will become the academic agencies of
the country’s educational system. By fully establishing the claims of education to equal rank with
other subjects in the university curriculum, both
as a field for research and a course of study as
well as a training for a job or a career, they could
do much to improve its public image.

But these are matters of detail. For, make no
mistake, the basic task before the educational
profession to-day is to study and understand the

 

* There is some danger of regarding education as a
panacea for emergent nations. The cost of the immediate
educational facilities demanded is often too high. Attention should also be given to schemes for economic development, which will enable an adequate educational
system to be set up eventually.

96

evolutionary-humanist revolution in all its ramifications, to follow up its educational implications, and to enable as many as possible of the
world’s growing minds to be illuminated by its
new vision of human destiny.

It is a strange and rather disturbing fact that
in the one-volume abridgement of Toynbee’s
monumental Study of History“ there is only one
short section on education, dealing merely with
the impact of modern democratic theories on the
subject. If the educational profession rises boldly
and successfully to meet the challenge of the new
knowledge and the new vision which it reveals,
new histories of mankind will not only devote
much more attention to education as a major
function of man in society, but will single out our
age as the historical moment when education was
reorganized as an integral part of the psychosocial process, and became pre-eminent among
all the agencies concerned with human destiny.

REFERENCES

1. American Institute of Biological Science, 1962. Biological Science Curricular Study.

2. Bowlby, John, 1957. An Ethological Approach to
Research in Child Development. Brit. J. Med.
Psychol., 30, 230. 1958, The Nature of the Child’s
Tie to His Mother. Int. J. Psychoanalysis, 39, 1.

3. Dobzhansky, Th., 1962. Mankind Evolving. Yale
Univ. Press.

4. Elvin, Lionel, 1961. ‘‘An Education for Humanity’’,
in The Humanist Frame, ed. J. S. Huxley. Allen and
Unwin; Harpers.

5. Hurd, P. Dett. 1961. Biological Education in American Secondary Schools 1890-1960. Amer. Inst. Biol. Sci.

6. Huxley, Julian, 1950. Ideology and Scientific Knowledge, (Huxley Lecture), in New Bottles for New
foe Chatto and Windus; Harpers, New York,

7. Huxley, Julian, 1960. Evolution in the High-school
Curriculum. School Review, 68, 164. Univ. of Chicago

8. Huxley, Julian, 1962. Eugenics in Evolutionary Perspective. Eugen. Rev., 54, 123.

9. Huxley, Thomas Henry, 1868. A Liberal Education
and Where to Find It, in Science and Education,
Essays, Vol. 3, 1893. Macmillan.

10. Lorenz, Konrad, 1952. King
Methuen. .

11. Muller, H. J., 1959. One Hundred Years without
Darwinism are Enough. School Sci. and Math.,
April, 1959.

12. Tanner, J. M., 1961. Education and Physical Growth.
Univ. of London Press.

13. Tinbergen, N., 1950. The Study of Instinct. Clarendon Press.

14. Toynbee, Arnold, 1947. A Study of History (onevolume abridgement). Oxford Univ. Press.

15. Waddington, C. H., 1957. The Strategy of the Genes.
Allen and Unwin. .

16. Williams, R. J., 1953. Free and Unequal. Univ. of
Texas Press.

Solomon’s Ring.
