THE EUGENICS REVIEW

somewhat discursive and diffuse, but on the
other hand it does not suffer from the split
between the two cultures and does not—as do
some of our own popularizations—produce a
detailed and elegant picture of a limited speciality—only to leave the reader to draw his own
wrong-headed conclusions.

Covering a vast field of knowledge and a
great span of time, and not working at a
university, the author mostly had to draw on
secondary sources. However, by submitting the
manuscript to expert friends, he has avoided
any glaring mistakes although there occur some
errors and misconceptions. To the reviewer the
most interesting parts of the book are those
dealing with the contemporary efforts of
racialists and with the speculations concerning
the future of our species.

H. KALMUS

FINGER PRINTS

Galton, Francis. Finger Prints. Unabridged
republication of the 1892 edition. New preface
by Harold Cummins. New York, 1965. Da Capo
Press. Pp. XXIII-+xvi+216. Price $6.95.

IT IS, OF course, an accepted fact of life that
identity of finger prints establishes without
doubt the identity of their makers. One wonders
how many people realize that Galton, among his
many contributions to knowledge, enunciated
and ratified in this book, first published in 1892,
the principle: “‘complete or nearly complete
accordance between two prints of a single
finger .. . affords evidence requiring no corroboration, that the persons from whom they are
made are the same’’. If for no other reason
than that it is a major pioneer work in criminology this late nineteenth-century book, now
re-edited so beautifully, is well worth reading.
But there are other reasons.

This reviewer had on a former occasion been
delighted by the vivid precision of Galton’s
writing in his slightly earlier book, Inquiry into
Human Faculty. This book shows equally well
Galton’s superb yet simple command of language,
his aptness of simile and his ingenuity and
persuasiveness of illustration. He is a master of
clear expression. Would that there were more of
them nowadays.

162

It is most fitting that this new edition of
Galton’s book should have been produced at
this time under the guidance of Professor
Cummins of Tulane University. Whereas in the
past dermal ridge patterns have chiefly concerned the criminal detective, within the last
few years they have become of great interest to
those who study human disease, especially the

chromosome disorders. In these disorders the

dermal ridge patterns depart from normal to
the extent that they can be used for clinical
diagnosis. The first recognition of this fact was
made by Professor Cummins thirty years ago.

In scientific work much is ephemeral. Methods
are developed, are used for a time and are
discarded. This book shows how good work may
stand the test of time. The arch, loop, whorl
system of classification and the recognition of
triradii set forth by Galton are the foundations
on which the new science of clinical dermatoglyphics rests.

The type in which this book is set and the
paper used are most pleasing. It is a fascinating
little book.

G. H. VALENTINE

ZOOLOGY

Morris, Ramona and Desmond. Men and Apes.
London, 1966. Hutchinson. Pp. vili+271.
Price 50s.

THIS Is A delightful book, a classic of its kind,
which is calculated to appeal both to the
professional zoologist and to the general reader.
It concerns what may be termed the ideology
of man in relation to the apes, apes here being
read as including monkeys as well as man-like
apes. This is the effort of a happy man and wife
combination. Dr. Morris is a zoologist, specializing in animal behaviour research, who 1s also
a painter and his wife Ramona is a historian
who has spent a number of years scripting and
researching on animal programmes for television.
Here is displayed great erudition, combined with
qualities of readability and liveliness, which passes
in review man’s ideas, more often illusions,
about the nature of his nearer relatives in the
animal world from the earliest times down to
the present. The mythology of the apes is highly
entertaining and often bizarre and it is salutary
