REPORT ON SCIENCE TEACHING IN
SECONDARY SCHOOLS.

Pp. 85, price 1s. Brit. Assoc. for Advancement of Science, 1907.

THE report of the committee appointed by the British Association to investigate the teaching of science which is being
given in our secondary schools is a most interesting document.
It contains a sketch of the history of the growth of this teaching,
followed by a carefully considered essay on the principles
which should govern the teaching of science to the young.
Perhaps, however, the most valuable part of the pamphlet is
the appendix, in which are embodied specimens of the curricula
in science actually employed in a number of schools of different
types. |

There is no doubt that at the present time there is a feeling
that in some way science has been neglected in our scheme
of education, and that in this respect the German education
is superior to our own, and strong protests have been made
against the preponderance given to classical teaching. Indeed,
in some cases the protests have gone the length of the desire
to expel classical teaching entirely from the curriculum.

This vague, indefinite feeling of dissatisfaction demands
investigation, so that the grounds on which it rests may be
Clearly realised. It cannot*be maintained that German men
of science receive a better training than English men of
science, for the progress of the war has shown the marked
superiority of English science over German. Our gas is more
deadly than theirs; our artillery better than theirs; our naval
apparatus incomparably superior.

The state of affairs which has caused the feeling of disSatisfaction may be illustrated by a story which was told to
the author by a certain gas officer on the British front. He
said that before the battle of Loos he represented to the British
Staff that if they desired to use gas effectively it was necessary to have a meteorological observer stationed at each
interval of half a mile along the front. The staff officers scoffed
320 EUGENICS REVIEW.

at the demand and said that the meteorological station at
Kew was stfficient for their purposes. Then during the battle
of Loos the German central gas station was captured, and in
it was found a book containing copies of orders issued to a
large number of observation posts situated close to one another
alongthefront. One of these orders ran thus: ‘‘There are indications that the wind is about to change. Reports are to be given
every half-hour from every station as to the direction and force
of the wind.’ The discovery of this book effected what the
arguments of the British scientific expert had been powerless
to do; it convinced the general staff. What we have to complain of, therefore, is not the lack of adequate provision for
the training of those who wish to devote themselves to science,
but ignorance of scientific principles on the part of our rulers
and officials, and the remedy for this must be a greater weight
given to science in what may be termed a general liberal
education.

Now to impart this general acquaintance with science and
to inculcate respect for scientific principles are very different
problems from that of training a boy or girl to become a
scientific observer. The British Association report clearly
shows that in the past there has been some uncertainty and
vacillation amongst the friends of science as to the best means
to be adopted in order to attain these ends, and before a sound
conclusion can be arrived at we must analyse what is meant and
aimed at by education in general. _

In education there are at least three distinct objects which
the teacher seeks to achieve, viz.: (1) the development by exercise of the mental powers; (2) the formation of a good moral
character; (3) the furnishing of the student with an equipment
of useful knowledge which will be of service to him in the
struggle for existence. Of these three ends obviously (1) and (2)
are the more difficult to accomplish, and should be worked
at intensely in the earlier school years, whilst (3) will be more
readily attained after a good start has been made with (1)
and (2). This three-fold object is clearly recognised in the
report. It is pointed out that it is of little use attempting to
indoctrinate young children with the general laws of any
REPORT ON SCIENCE TEACHING IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS. 325

physical science; such general statements only weary them,
and if learned at all could only be learned by rote. The feeling
of wonder or curiosity is the first to develop in the child’s
mind. This is followed about the age of twelve by a deep
interest in the practical applications of science—the telephone,
telegraph, motor-car, etc., and not until the age of sixteen or
seventeen does the desire to grasp the underlying laws manifest
itself.

This gradual development of the powers of the human mind
has an important bearing on the general question of classical
versus scientific education. The supporters of Classics claim
that their subject affords an unrivalled means of exercising
mental power by the infinite gradation and variety of the
problems presented by translation and composition which the
boy must work out for himself. Of course, the subject of
mathematics also presents an infinite range of problems, but
the substance of classical teaching is full of human interest,
and precisely of that kind of interest which appeals most
strongly to the young, viz., the heroic and adventurous. Now it
must be freely admitted by the friends of science that scientific
teaching does not lend itself to this kind of treatment. We
cannot set young boys of eleven and twelve years of age to
work at scientific problems and grade them by their ability
to solve these, and therefore scientific teaching at this age must
partake of the nature of interesting lectures and be devoid of
the strenuous features of classical and mathematical teaching.
Indeed the report before us calls special attention to this side
of teaching. It points out that there has been a tendency in
schools to overweight the laboratory work, and states with
justice that the range of science which can be covered by
laboratory instruction under school conditions is very limited.
Our own view is that this statement might be still more strongly
emphasised ; that indeed the sole use of laboratory training in
school is to give samples of the kind of fact which is taught in
the descriptive lectures; except in so far as we attempt to train
scientific specialists. Of course, training of this latter kind will
naturally be given in those special classes which prepare boys
for science scholarships in the Universities.
322 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The report emphasises the miserably small allowance of
time reserved for science in the curricula of many secondary
schools, and says with justice that no subject could be expected
to command much respect in the eyes of boys or parents to
which only two hours a week are assigned in the curriculum.
If the position which we have assumed as to the claims of
scientific teaching is sound, it would seem to follow that ihe
education in the earlier years should be based on mathematics
and the humanities, but that in the later years a progressively
larger portion of the school time should be devoted to scientific
instruction which should be compulsory on all, whether they
are looking forward to a literary or to a scientific course of
study in the Universities, or whether they are about to enter
on a commercial career.

One great injury which the preponderant attention given
to Classics has inflicted on education is to induce both parents
and boys to refuse to take the substance of what is taught in
school seriously. A classical master from one of our great
public schools once said to the present author bitterly: ‘‘ The
average English parent cares far more whether his son is
included in the Cricket Eleven than whether he takes a high
place in his class.’? The subjects taught seem so remote from
the interests of modern life, and those who attain high places
in them seem so ignorant on the really important matters of
the day. Even if—as we are perfectly ready to admit—a preliminary training in Classics forms a good foundation for a
scientific education just as the learning of scales does in the
teaching of music, yet just as we should think poorly of a
musical student who at the end of his career could only play
scales, so when classical training which should be a means
becomes an end we feel that this is a perversion of the natural
order of things.

How is this state of things to be remedied? We think that
Sir Ray Lankester has hit upon the proper answer. Science
teaching began in the Universities and was introduced into
the schools because the Universities offered scholarships in the
subject. Classical study has retained its enormous advantage
because in the first place the great majority of scholarships are
REPORT ON SCIENCE TEACHING IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS. 323

awarded for this subject, and secondly because of the great
weight given to it in all examinations for posts in the Government service. If the preponderant weight were transferred to
scientific knowledge, the scientific side of the University would
soon be preferred to the classical, and then the schools would
also alter their curricula in order to meet the new demand.
In time we should acquire a set of rulers who understood and
sympathised with science, and to be without some modicum
of scientific knowledge would be regarded as unfashionable,
and in this way the great reproach of English public men would
be removed.

The report calls attention to the miserable salaries paid
to teachers of science. Of course, the teaching profession as
a whole is shockingly underpaid, but the science teacher is the
worst paid of all, and it is simply hopeless to attempt to attract
ability to the teaching of science unless the remuneration is
largely increased. But again, if the error is set right at its
source this is a state of things which will right itself. If
science carried great weight at Government examinations, and
if more scholarships were given to science at the Universities,
it would begin to pay to procure more able men to teach science
in schools, and better salaries would come. Even some of the
plums of the profession—the head masterships—might then be
bestowed on science teachers.

A word or two on the curricula appended to the report may
be now added. They are most of them excellent, athough
we think that Prof. Percy Nunn’s three-year course would leave
little over to be done when the student reached the University.
We think that there is want of economy in trying to teach all
branches of science at once. Experience has shown that if a
student receive a good grounding in physics and chemistry
a knowledge of biology can be quickly acquired after he has
entered college; in fact, most University teachers in this subject
would prefer to lay the foundation themselves rather than to
have it laid for them. But, of course, the case of the school-boy
who leaves school for business has to be considered, and it is
certainly desirable that he should know something of biology,
especially as the study of elementary biology is the best possible
324 EUGENICS REVIEW.

way of imparting that knowledge of the ‘‘ facts of life,’’ or
in plain language, that acquaintance with the phenomena of
sex and reproduction which in the opinion of all eugenists it
is so desirable that the young should possess. For in this
subject the idea of sex is introduced divested of all emotional
trappings as the simple union of two germ-cells; and as the
student proceeds the accessories are added one by one as he
ascends the scale of life, each seeming natural and necessary
at the point where it is introduced. It follows that in our
opinion biological teaching in school should concern itself
mainly with such elementary teaching as is needed to give
instruction on sex and in addition with the general natural
history of the common animals and plants that are usually
encountered in ordinary life. Detailed comparative anatomy
and anything of the nature of advanced physiology may safely
be postponed until the college course.

In conclusion, we would urge on all interested in education to procure and study the report, for by doing so they will
get a clear idea of what is being done to teach science at present

and what remains to be done.
E. W. MacBrIDE.
