THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

Galton Centenary Addresses.

Sir Francis YounGcHuusspann, K.C.I.E., K.C.S.1., President of the
Royal Geographical Society, gave the first of the three addresses,
at the Francis Galton Centenary Celebration held by the Society
on Thursday, February, 16th, 1922. He was followed by Sir
Henry Rew, K.C.B., President of the Royal Statistical Society.
Major Leonard Darwin, D.Sc., President of the Society and
President of the International Eugenics Commission, gave the
third address.

I feel it peculiarly fitting to be the first to introduce in retrospect
the reminiscences of Sir Francis Galton’s life, as it naturally falls to
me to speak of him as a traveller, and his explorations will be seen in
his case to have made the beginning of bis scientific work in other
directions; and indeed the stimulus which first prompted those studies
which later led him far into other fields: so that, beginning as a geographical explorer, he became an explorer in the mathematical method
of statistics and in the virgin soil of what is becoming a ‘Science’—
Eugenics.

To the Royal Geographical Society falls the honour of setting him
in the way of his first enterprise, for when as a young man, Francis
Galton desired to travel, it was to the Royal Geographical Society that
he came for advice, and it was under its auspices that he made that
-first journey for which he was awarded the Gold Medal cf the Society.

His geographical activities were not confined to exploration. He
gave much thought to the theory of travel, and he is probably best
‘known to geographers for his little book, ‘The Art of Travel,’’ which
went through several editions, and which has helped and influenced
many hundreds of travellers. |

This book gives so many details of what a traveller ought to know,
that many have been frightened at the bare thought of undertaking a
journey, if so much knowledge was required beforehand. I felt truly
alarmed at the many regions of which he demanded some knowledge—
information enough indeed to secure the collection of accurate data and
to insure sound and exact observation—points on which he perseveringly insisted. .

-And yet in this book the true secret of travel is never mentioned,
and in my own case, I had to discover it for myself. When going
across the great desert of Gobi I began to find an almost intolerable
3 EUGENICS REVIEW.

strain in the daily supervision and urging forward of my carriers: I
lit on the plan of ‘putting myself in their hands and making them take
me. Instead of daily rising at dawn, and going the camp round to set
all in motion for the day’s march, I called up my interpreters and leading men, and agreed with them for a definite reward if we got to my
goal at a certain date, with an agreed increase of amount for every
day in advance of said date should we arrive earlier, and a similar fine
for every day’s delay. From that moment I had done with all trouble.
The camp was astir long before me, and I was aroused by my men and
urged forward, while the nightly halt was cheerfully pushed to the
farthest practicable point.

Most people will understand that a traveller must carry the people
of the country along with him. But the true secret. of travel is to make
the people of the country carry him—to make them feel responsible for
him-—-to make the success of the expedition their business. This.
knack Galton had. No mention is made of it in the book above referred to, and it was only in reading his other book describing his own
journey, and there only in reading that unwritten part that runs
between the lines, that I saw he knew the secret.

He started on his journey in Damaraland in South Africa when he
was only twenty-eight. But he managed to attach good men to him.
He got them to work whole-heartedly with him for the success of the
expedition, with the result that he was able to carry out a piece of
original exploration of great value, in spite of having to travel through
very difficult country and ina territory inhabited by natives who were
decidedly unfriendly.

He never made any other exploration. But this was only the
beginning of his long association with the Royal Geographical Society,
and his influepce in the discoveries of this century was far-reaching.
He served for many years on the Council of the Society. And it was
this period which was the greatest period of African travel—the time
of the great journeys of Livingstone, Stanley, Burton, Speke and
Grant: and here he interested himself wholeheartedly in promoting
these adventures. The weight of his influence was felt not only in
the encouragement of great undertakings and in wise counsel as to their
direction, but in his unfailing insistence on exact study. He constantly laid stress on the necessity for exactness of measurement in collection |
of data and the value of observation with precision. His own inveterate habit of statistical activity is happily coupled with reminiscences.
of the Society’s Council Chamber in the following passage of his
autobiography :

‘“‘Many mental processes admit of being roughly measured. For
instance, the degree to which people are bored, by counting the number
of their Fidgets. I not infrequently tried this method at the meetings
of the Royal Geographicai Society, for even there dull memoirs are
occasionally read. A gallery in the meeting is supported by iron
columns. The portion of the audience as seen from the platform who
are bounded by two of these columns, and who sit on two or three of the
benches, are a convenient sample to deal with. They can be watched
simultaneously. The number of movements in the group per minute
can be easily counted, and the average number per man calculated. I
GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS. | 8

have often amused myself with noticing the increase in the number as
the audience becomes tired. The use of a watch attracts attention, so
I reckon time by the number of my breathings, of which there are
fifteen in a minute: they are not counted mentally, but are punctuated
by pressing with fifteen fingers successively. The counting is reserved
for the fidgets. These observations should be confined to persons of
middle age. Children are rarely still while elderly philosophers will
sometimes remain rigid for minutes together.’’ (Page278.)

The width and depth of his interests show him to have been a man
cast ina big mould. He is one of those who did most for Geography
in this country.

By Str Henry Rew, K.C.B.

We meet to honour the memory of an eminent Victorian. It is
true that Francis Galton outlived the Victorian era; it is true also that
his alert mind was unfettered by environment and reached ever forward
to new activities. But he possessed ina high degree one of the qualities
which we associate with the memory of great Victorians, that of manysidecdness. In these specialist days versatility , especially in the pursuit
of science, is rare, and with that characteristic Francis Galton was
extraordinarily endowed. Explorer, Geographer, Meteorologist,
Anthropologist, Biologist, Psychologist, Statistician, Eugenist—-to
all these titles he established an unquestionable right. He touched no
subject which he did not illuminc, and those who are concerned in any
one of the branches of human activity denoted by these titles may
regard him as their colleague.

To me it falls to claim him as a Statistician.

Francis Galton’s genius for statistics was a natural inheritance.

His grandfather, Samuel John Galton, was ‘‘a scientific and statistical man of business’’ who had a decidedly statistical bent and loved
to arrange all kinds of data in parallel lines of corresponding lengths,
frequently using colour for distinction. His father, Samuel Tertius
Galton, was ‘‘eminently statistical by disposition’? and made a
sliding rule his constant companion. He published a chart, with
explanatory observations, showing the relation between the Bank of
England notes in circulation, the rate of foreign exchanges and the
price of gold and silver and of wheat. If confirmation were needed
of his statistical aptitude I might find it in his sense of humour, a
quality which, contrary to popular belief, is frequently associated with
a bent for statistics. When his ancestral! home last its charm of isolation and became unattractive as a residence he leased it to the proprietor of a lunatic asvlum, explaining that no onc in his senses would live
in it.

Francis Galton was elected a Fellow of the Royal Statistical
Society in 1860 on the proposal of Colonel EF. H. Sykes, seconded by
Mr. James Heywood. He served on the Council] from 1869 to 1879,
and as a Vice-President in 1875. In 1886 he was elected an honorary
member of the International Statistical Institute, which had been
formed in London in the previous year. Those on whom this distinction was conferred were—to quote the rules—‘‘persons who have
4. EUGENICS REVIEW.

distinguished themselves in the domain of statistics,’’ and the number’
was strictly limited. The fact that Galton was one of the first to receive
it is evidence of the reputation as a Statistician he had established,
not only at home, but also abraod. His first contribution to the proceedings of the Statistical Society was in 1873 (Vol. XXXVI). Its
title was ‘“The relative supplies from town and country families to the
population of fututre generations.’’ He described it as an enquiry.
into the relative fertility of the labouring classes of urban and rural
popuiations, not as regards the number of children brought into the
world , but as regards that portion of them who are destined to become
the parents of the next generation. By the help of Dr. Farr, then
President of the Society, he obtained extracts from the census returns
relating to 1000 families of factory hands in Coventry and 1000 families
of agricultural labourers in rural parishes of Warwickshire. The
results of his examination and analysis, set forth with great lucidity
and terseness, led to the conclusion that ‘‘ the rate of supply in towns
to the next adult generation is only 77 per cent. of that in the country.
In two generations the proportion falls to 59 per cent., that is the adult
grand-children of artizan townsfolk are little more than half as numerous as those of the labouring people who live in healthy country districts.’

In 1885 the Statistical Society celebrated the completion of fifty
years’ work, and marked the occasion by the preparation of a special
Jubilee volume of its Journal. Among the contributions to this
volume were two short papers by Francis Galton. One called attention to a common method of calculating mean values in certain classes
of observation—those referring to the stature of a population being
cited as an illustration—in which a difference in the degrees of minuteness to which measurements are recorded led to error, and the other
described a graphic method of dealing statistically with values which
vary in one dimension.

In April, 1896, a paper was read before the Statistical Society by
Mr. Udny Yule on the ‘‘History of Pauperism in England and Wales
from 1850, treated by the method of frequency curves.’’ The paper
included a detailed explanation of the methods used. Galton took
part in the discussion, and in response to a request made tc him during
the meeting, amplified his views in a written memorandum, which was
published in the Journal. It dealt with the application of the method
of percentiles, the principles cf which he had explained in his work on
‘‘Natural Inheritance’’ (1889).

In the coining of words Galton has acquired fame by his invention
of the terms ‘‘anticyclone’’ and ‘‘eugenics,’’ but he exercised his
verbal ingenuity in many other cases. In statistics he introduced the
terms “‘percentiles,’’ ‘‘quartile,’’ ‘“decile,’’ and some others. But
he did much more than this, for he may be truly described as the parent
of modern statistical methods.

In his statistical work Galton may be said to have inherited the
mantle of Quetelet, though his attention was first drawn to the normal
law of error by its use by William Spottiswoode in a geographical
memoir. “From references in ‘‘Hereditary Genius’’ (1869) it appears
that he derived his knowledge of the properties of the curve from
GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS. 5

Quetelet’s ‘‘Letters.’’ His first contribution to the methods of statistics, foreshadowed in ‘‘Hereditary Genius,’’ was the method of grades,
or percentiles. in a memoir published in 1875 entitled ‘‘Statistics by
inter-comparison with remarks ‘on the law of frequency cof error.’’
In this he emphasised principally, indeed almost wholly, the application of the method to unmeasured characters. His object was to
describe a method which was ‘‘applicable to a multitude of objects
lying outside the present limits of statistical enquiry’’; the objects need
only be ranked in order as regards the character considered : the middlemost (median) then indicates the average, those one-quarter distant
from either end (quartiles) the divergency of the series. These particuJar objects need not. perhaps cannot , be measured as regards the character concerned, but if they can be pictured or described we obtain a
summary picture or description of the series. The method was freely
used in ‘‘Natural Inheritance’’ and the memoirs that preceded that
work, and Galton’s continued interest in it is shown in many papers
subsequently published by him. Among these, in addition to the
contribution to the Statistical Society’s proceedings already attended
to, mention may be made of notes on ‘‘the median estimate’’ in the
British Association Report for 1899, on a geometrical method of
determining the median of a normal distribution from two centiles in
*“Nature,’’ 1900, on the application of the median in voting, e.g. for
damages to be awarded by a jury or in guessing, in ‘‘Nature,’’ 1907,
and of the explanatory intreduction to a table of Grades and Deviates
of the Norma] Curve calculated by Mr. Sheppard in Biometrika 1907.
A memoir ‘on the most suitable proportion between the values of first
and second prizes’’ published by Biometrika 1902 is related to the
same train of ideas. It may be noted that the conclusion arrived at
was that if in a competition only two prizes are given, the first prize,
in round numbers, should be three times the value of the second, whatever be the character of the competition and whatever the number of
competitors.

In the Dictionary of National Biography I venture to think that
something less than justice is done to Galton as a statistician. After
reference to his statistical investigations, extending over 40 years,
to prove the hereditability of genius it is remarked :—

‘Such investigations necessarily brought him to face the
fundamental principles of statistics and although his mathematical
equipment was inadequate he obtained a remarkably clear insight
into the subject.”’

T submit that his position in regard to statistics is more adequately
stated by Mr. Udny Yule, a Vice-President of the Roya] Statistical
Society, in the following passage from the obituary notice of Francis
Galton which appeared in the Society’s Journal :-—

*“The method of percentiles, while in many respects novel,
may be regarded as a new application of a much older idea—the
idea at the root of the determination of the median and of the
*‘probable error.’’ By his invention of the method of correlation Galton opened an entirely fresh field of work... Certain
memoirs by earlier writers deal with problems which present some
6 EUGENICS REVIEW.

mathematical similarity to those with which he was concerned—
the distribution of shots on a target or of stars in space—but to no
one had it occurred to apply such methods to the serious study
of statistical relations, nor to employ a single co-efficient as a
measure of the closeness of the relation between two varying
quantities. Just as the method of percentiles arose from Galton’s
work on the inheritance of genius, the method of correlation arose
from his studies on the inheritance of stature and in anthropometry .’’

Tt may be true that among the many objects of Galton’s attention
and regard the coy maiden Statistics was not his first love, and still less
his only joy, but at least it may be said that she was his valued companion and oftentimes his guide in his many enterprises.

He was an indefatigable collector of statistical data. It has
sometimes been suggested that a true statistician is one who collects
statistics without any object, or at any rate without regard for any
result which may be obtained from them. Indeed, in the early days of
the Statistica! Society this was the orthodox faith, and the wheatsheaf,
which is the Society’s badge, was encircled by a band on which was
inscribed the proud motto alizs erterendum. The Society has long
ago yielded to the modernists, and for many years has done its own
threshing. Galton certainly was never one of those who leave the
threshing to others. He set out upon his investigations with definite
objects in view. He describes in his ‘‘Memories’’ one of his methods
of investigation. ‘‘Whenever,’’ he writes, ‘‘I have occasion to classify the persons I meet into three classes, ‘‘good, medium, bad,’’ I use
a needle mounted as a pricker wherewith to prick holes, unseen, in a
piece of paper torn rudely into a cross with a long leg. I use its upper
end for ‘good,’ the cross-arm for ‘medium,’ the lower end for ‘bad.’
The prick holes keep distinct and are easily read off at leisure. The
object, place and date are written on the paper. _I used this plan for
my beauty data, classifying the girls I passed in the streets or elsewhere as attractive, indifferent, repellant.’’ .

The object in this case was to obtain materials for a ‘‘Beauty
map’’ of the British Isles, but the operation might properly be termed
the collection of statistical data.

.But indeed, aptitude and affection for statistics were ingrained in
him and formed a large, if not a predominant, factor in his mental
equipment. He acknowledges his debt to his progentiors for a considerable taste for science, statistics and poetry. The medical studies
which occupied his earlier youth led him to reflect on the deficiencies
of medical! statistics at that time. ‘‘Medical statistics’’ he observed,
“*are the least suitable I know for refined comparisons, because the
conditions that cannot be, or at all events are not, taken into account,
are local, very influential and apt to differ greatly. It is, however,
humiliating to find how much has failed to attract attention for want
of even the rudest statistics.’’ .

I cannot refrain, in bringing to a close an allocution which is all
too unworthy of its theme. from quoting trom the ‘‘Memories’’ Galton’s
just explanation and vindication of the function of Statistics :—
GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS. 7

**Confusion is often made between statistical and individual
results. It sometimes seems to be held seriously that if the
effect of a particular union cannot he accurately foretold, the
application of the rules of Eugenics is vain. This is not the case.
Statistics give us assurance concerning the fate of such or such a
percentage of a large number of people which, when translated into
other terms is the probability of each of them being affected by it.
From the statesman’s point of view, where lives are pawns in the
game and personal favour is excluded, this information is sufficient. It tells how large a number of undesirables or desirables
can be introduced or not into a population by such and such
measures. Whether their names be A, B, or C, or else X, Y, or
Z, is of no importance to the ‘statistician’—a term that is more
or less equivalent to that of ‘Statesman’.’’

In remembering Francis Galton asa Statistician we render homage
to his many-sidedness, and we glorify his name as a pioneer in the
path of human progress. If the proper study of mankind is man his
renown as the prince of students can never fade. Inany case, on behalf
of the Royal Statistical Society and of all the human interests which it
represents. T esteem it a high honour to be permitted to contribute a
leaf of laure] to the crown of remembrance with which to-day we commemorate the work of Francis Galton.

By Masor LEONARD Darwin.

When walking in the streets of London we often see oval tablets
over the porch or beside the doors of private houses. At the top of
these tablets, and presumably giving the most important item of
information which they contain, the letters L.C.C. may freyuently be
noted, thus informing us that they were erected by the London County
Council. Lower down on the tablet we are informed, if it is, for
example, St. James’s Square through which we happen to be walking
that the house we are passing was at one time inhabited by William
Pitt or Mr. Gladstone. Now many others besides myself may in the
past have wondered why no such memorial had been placed on 42,
Rutland Gate, the house so long inhabited hy Sir Francis Galton.
On making enquiries from the London County Council, I was informed
that that body make it a rule or practice not to erect a tablet on any
house until twenty vears after the death of the distinguished individual
who had lived therein; this being to avoid hasty action difficult to
prevent at a time when to hint that his merits had been grossly overestimated by the public would be an unpleasant duty. This seems to
me to be an excellent self-denying ordinance; but it has, however, the
unfortunate result that no such memorial can be erected at public
expense at or before the date of the centenary of the birth of anyone who,
like Sir Francis Galton, lived to be over 80 years of age. But asa
fact, such a memorial is now to be seen over the porch at 42, Rutland
Gate, informing all passers-by that Sir Francis Galton, Explorer,
Statistician. and the founder of Eugenics, lived there for fifty years.
Although not erected by the municipality, I should like to say a word
or two as to how that tablet came to be placed where it is now to be
8 -EKUGENICS REVIEW.

-seen;.not because, like the London County Council, I-think that the
matter is in itself of any importance whatever, but merely. because in
this instance it does throw a side light on the character of the man to
whose memory we are to-day doing honour. .
Those here present who like: myself were constant visitors at
- Rutland Gate—I see at least two—will all remember the little man,
short in stature, with a strong foreign accent, who let one in at the door
with a broad smile on his face. This was Giffi, Sir Francis’s faithful
Swiss Servant, who lived with him for 35 years, and to whom he felt,
I believe, more like a friend than a master. Last year I received a
letter from the late Mr. O Plant-Carcasson ,* telling me that he was the
owner of 42, Rutland Gate, and that Giffi, who on the death of Sir
Francis Galton had passed on into his Service, had died recently.
He added that Giffi had on several occasions requested him to write
to me about the erection of a tablet in Rutland Gate. and concluded by
stating that ‘‘I think I owe it to the dear old man’’—that is, Gifi—
-**to mention to you that I am quite agreeable to permit’’ its erection
by the Eugenics Education Society. This letter set me in motion,
and with the generous aid of Mr. Plant-Carcasson, who had the
inscription cut in marble in Italy, the tablet was erected by our
Society last summer. You will notice when you see it that it has
not got the letters E.E.S. at the top to let the public know that it was
erected by the Eugenics Education Scoiety ; but if in any brief way it
could have been indicated it would not now have been put up but for
the wishes of Galton’s faithful friend and servant Giffi, I for one should
have been delighted to have seen that fact placed on record. Here
we have a proof of the falsity of the old saying that no man is a hero
to his own valet. It is far more true to say that the real worth of a
good man is best known to those who serve him most constantly, and
it is with this thought in my mind that I rejoice to be able to place on
record this proof of the respect and affection which Sir Francis Galton
inspired in his own househeld.

_ When looking at this tablet we are naturally led to speculate as to
what will be the sentiments of the passers-by say two or three centuries
hence when they read the name inscribed thereon. Those learned in
the history of either geographical exploration or statistical research
will doubtless be reminded of some of the facts which have been recalled to our minds to-night in such an interesting manner by the
Presidents of the Royal Geographical and Statistical Societies. Such
persons will, however, I fear, be comparatively few in number, unless
indeed the mental condition of the public will have by that time
undergone a marvellous transformation! But what I should like now
to know is whether the name of Galton will at that distant date arouse
any thoughts whatever in the mind of the intelligent man in the street,
that is of the educated public. This wil] depend on the way in which
the history of the coming centuries unfolds itself in certain matters.
The Eugenics Education Society is now striving to make the public
pay serious attention to all problems connected with racial progress
and racial decline; and if we, its members, hold erroneous views, it is
to be hoped that our errors will soon be exposed, that our Society will

Mr. Plant-Carcasson, I much regret to say, died this winter.
GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS. >

quickly sink into a well merited oblivion, and that many others besides
myself will be spared a great deal of tedious and thankless labour!
But if we are right, what then? If Galton’s teachings remain unrefuted, and if his name will be unknown to the public centuries hence,
that will mean, so I feel sure, that no steps will have been taken to
prevent the racial deterioration which we now fear is in progress, and
that the degradation of our national characteristics will have become
well marked. Europe will for a second time have entered the dark
ages, after a second decline and fall of a civilization in some ways
comparable to that of ancient Rome. But if, on the centenary of
Galton’s birth we are in any way to follow Galton’s example, we ought
to-night at all events to take a determinately optimistic view of the
future of eugenic reform ; and, taking that view, and assuming a steady
progress in all measures tending to promote racial progress, then few
passers-by at that distant date will not know that to Francis Galton
ought to be attributed in no small measure the improvement in the
morals, intellect and health of the nation which will then have become
indisputable. His will have become one of the great names in history.

But how will this eugenic victory have been won? The most
important step in advance will be taken when Eugenics becomes a
factor in religion, as Galton clearly saw would have to be the case.
Scientific truths are always very slowly but very surely incorporated
into all powerful religious systems, and this in spite of no small
opposition. To maintain that the earth went round the sun was at
one time held by devout Christians to be an offence worthy of death;
whilst at present a belief in organic evolution ts widely held in religious
circles and from not a few pulpits the animal origin of man, is openly
declared to be in no way antagonistic to religious thought. This indicates a great advance; but there is not the slightest chance of a halt
being called at the point which we happen now to have reached.
With an increased and more widespread knowledge of the laws of natural
inheritance, further changes of opinion are inevitable. For examples
the moral responsibility of parents in regard to their children is recognized by-all religious teachers; but this sense of responsibility will in
future be so extended as to be held to cover, not only the care of all
children already born, but also the question whether in each case it
was right that any child at all should have been born. When this
broader sense of parental responsibility is generally accepted and widely
inculeated as a religious duty, the eugenic victory will have been
nearly won; for then it will become impossible to deny the moral
necessity of utilizing and inducing others to utilize our knowledge of
the laws of natural inheritance for the benefit of posterity. Changes
in our ideas and social customs will come and cught to come; but our
desire for progress, especially in regard to al] sexual questions, ought
always to be tempered by a sane conservatism. It is in order to secure
wise and steady progress in the future, and to prevent the EFugenic
movement from ever being led into harmful ways, that I am intensely
anxious to secure a widespread interest in these racial problems. To
weigh well every step before it is taken, whilst never standing quite
still out of timidity, that is the policy I am confident that Francis
Galton would have approved '
10 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Mora! ideals often need to be encouraged or enforced by law in
order to bear their full fruit ; and here it is that the statesman has to play
his part. Now in my vision of the future I think I see the popularlyelected politician listening deferentially to the views confidently
expressed by the biological expert, and then, utterly regardless of the
votes of his constitutents, throwing all his energies into the promotion
of sane and slow working measures designed to benefit his nation in
the distant future. Perhaps I need not remind you that Iam speaking
with premeditated optimism to-night! When this happy state of
things has arrived, many politicians are likely to have the following
quotation from Galton’s writings inscribed in “letters of gold where it
will be constantly visible, and where it will by auto-suggestion so
influence their sub-conscious selves they will be continually and unconsciously led to advocate a policy of Eugenic reform! ‘‘A democracy
cannot endure unless it be conposed of able citizens; therefore it must
in self-defence withstand the free introduction of degenerate stock .’’*
No doubt the prevention of the influx of inferior types by immigration
from abroad will have been lessened or prevented long before my
imaginary perfect politician makes his appearance on earth. And no
doubt when he does appear he will recognise that what Galton meant
by the ‘‘introduction of degenerate stock’? was rather the results which
must inevitably flow from “that liberty of propagating children which
is now allowed to the undesirable classes.’’{ To prevent racial detereoratiun from this cause, and to give as much liberty as possible to
the individual, will be the aims of our ideal statesman, aims which will
not infrequently have to be adjusted to each other by a wise spirit of
compromise.

I have spoken of the necessity of taking an optimistic view of the
future of the eugenic movement well knowing that in this respect
Ihave beena frequent sinner. Iam glad, therefore, of this opportunity
of reminding myself, and others at the same time, that in being hopeful
we are certainly following the lead given to us by Galton; for without
hope he could never have persevered for so many years in his advocacy
of Eugenic principles, seeing how little support he received. And
amongst our hopes we must, “therefore, include the hope that Galton
was well endowed with the faculty of rightly foretelling the future; a
faculty which he would certainly have held to be hereditary, like all
other mental qualities. As to that scientific bent of mind, possessed
by himseJf and by his cousin, Charles Darwin, he traced it back to their
common grandfather, Erasmus Darwin; and here we are tempted to
enquire whether we can claim for Galton any natural prescience as
springing from the same source. Erasmus Darwin was mainly known
for his ‘‘turgid poetry that had become a temporary craze in’? his
day,{ a craze which fills with astonishment all. those who now
attempt to read his poetry. Almost the only quotation from his
works which is ever inserted in modern anthologies seems to be included
merely because of the remarkable prophecy which it contains. Before

*Memoirs of my Life. F. Galton, page 311.
fIbid, page 311.
tIbid, page 85.
GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS. 1

reading it, which I shall do without any family pride as to its poetic.
_stvle. may I remind you that it was written in the last decade of the
Eighteenth Century, when Watt was making his first experiment. with
the object of obtaining rotary motion from a steam engine, and when
Stevenson, the pioneer of railway traffic, was yet a little boy. The
lines run as follows :—
*Soon shal] thy arm, unconquered steam! afar

Drag the slow barge, or drive the rapid car;

Or on wide waving wings expanded hear

The flying chariot through the field of air.

His forecast of the methods of propulsion now adopted by aeroplane
designers was certainly incorrect; but all the same this quotation
indicates a remarkable power of looking into the future, a power which
we eugenists confidently maintain descended in full measure to the
poet’s grandson, Francis Galton.

In my Utopia of two or three centuries hence, I have assumed the
existence of a widespread and indisputable knowledge of the laws of
natural inheritance. When these happy days arrive, the year 1822
will ever after be regarded as one of the most memorable dates in the
history of science; for in that year were born both Francis Galton and
Gregor Mendel. Mendel’s great work lies outside the scope of our
considerations to-night ; though I cannot help expressing in passing the
keenest regret that my father never even heard his name, and that a
knowledge of his discoveries came too late to Galton to enable him to
utilize them with any great effect. The line of thought encouraged by
Mendel’s discoveries led to the formation of many institutions at

universities and elsewhere, where genetic research has been pursued
mainly by means of direct experimentation on animals and plants.
And in this connection I may perhaps express the great satisfaction we
eugenists feel at the hearty co-operation and support which the American geneticists attached to such institutions gave last year to the
International Congress of Eugenics at New York; an encouraging sign
which I hope will be noted by English geneticists. Galton’s work has
developed on somewhat different lines, in so far as the growths from the
seed sown by these two great men can still be distinguished ; for, as we
havé already heard , many of Galton’s notable advances were connected
with statistical enquiries. He founded the professorship of Eugenics
at the University of London, thus enabling his friend Prof. Pearson
with great ability to lay mathematical foundations on which much
work is destined to be built in future. With the aid of all these institutions, our knowledge of the Jaws of natural inheritance had made
enormous progress during this century.

There was, however, in my opinion, another marked characteristic
of Galton’s work to which I should especially like to call attention;
namely that he always had before him some benefit to mankind as the

*See Botanic Garden, Vol. 1. Canto6. Mr. Wheler-Galton points out to me
tbat the next four lines are equally prophetic. They run as follow:
Fair crews triumphant leaning from above
Shall wave their fluttering kerchiefs as they move,
Or Warrior -bands alarm the gaping crowd
And armies shrink beneath the shadowy cloud.
12 EUGENICS REVIEW.

‘final goal of his endeavours. -He. knew as well as anyone that in.order
to build any scientific structure we should begin to work at the very
‘foundations; but the human superstructure which these foundations
-might carry was never absent from his mind. He saw clearly that to
win in the eugenic campaign, a definite propaganda must be started.and
unremittingly pursued ; and it was doubtless with this thought in his
mind that he became the Honorary President of our Society. In my
Utopia well supported Eugenic Societies will have arisen in every
populous centre, where a wise and temperate eugenic policy will be
steadily advocated ; and it is probably only a President of an existing
Eugenic Society who knows to the full how lamentably we now fall
short of that idea. Our Society struggled on somehow through the
war and since the war; but it was often very uphill work, and it is no
use pretending that we should not greatly appreciate further encouragement and further support. We want more men and especially more
scientific men to follow Galton’s example and to ‘‘take Eugenics very
seriously, feeling that its principles ought to become one of the dominant motives in a civilized nation, much as if it were one of its religious
tenets.’ Then again we must have a perfectly clear idea of what
we are striving for; and in this connection the words with which Galton’s
autobiography closes may well be quoted. ‘‘Natural selection rests
upon excessive production and wholesale destruction; Eugenics on
bringing no more individuals into the world than can be properly cared
for,.and these only of the best stock.’’ Here is the Eugenic programme
in a nutshell; and to win in the long fight before us, we must press
forward with the hope of benefiting posterity as our only reward, a
posterity whose gratitude we may possibly win but whose voices we
shall never hear. If that hope was reward enough for Galton, it
should be reward enough for us also.
