 

“T8 folowing isan English translation

. of the full: text. of the Danish law on

| abortion which came into force on
Ist. | .

w No. 163; 937, concerning Measures
ning Pregnancy, ‘etc., Amalienborg,

18th, 1937, |

e Christian X' by he grace of God King

enmark and Iceland, of the Wends and

is, Duke of Schleswig, Holstein, Stor
n, Ditsmarsken, Lauenburg, and Olden
, proclaim : :Parliamient has passed and

lave ratified the following law :

: | § 1

ct. 1.. A pregnant woman may have her

nancy terminated in the following cases :

‘If the termination of pregnancy is

  
 
  
   

ssary in order to avert serious danger |

1e life and health of the woman.

‘If the woman has become pregnant
sr such circumstances as dealt with in
Civic Penal Code of April 15th, 1930,
O or § 210 combined with § 212, or if
mancy be due to Violation of her sexual
‘ty under such circumstances as dealt
_ in §§ 216-223 or these paragraphs comd with § 224 of the Penal Code.*

' If there is obvious danger that the child,
g to hereditary disposition, will suffer
insanity, mental deficiency, other grave
fal disorders, epilepsy or serious and
ble physical disease.

t. 2. Termination of pregnancy may
ally not take place after the end of the
/ month of pregnancy if there is no
1s risk to the woman’s life and health.

t. 3. If pregnancy is caused by violaof the woman’s sexual liberty under
circumstances as dealt with in §§ 216,
ect. 2 § 218 and § 221, or these paracombined with § 224, pregnancy may
terminated unless the crime has been
led to the police and the notice, after
© investigation, has-not been proved

 
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 

ae: boS Bea s ue : oe Na se :
: “ot Lo a Bag er eee ~
7 ‘ 4 gy 38 . . ea F : ‘ae . Boe .
t eo. .

§2
_If the danger to the life and well-being of
the woman is not due to sickness the termination of the pregnancy in accordance
with the provisions under § 1, sect. 1, subsect. 2, may not take place unless the
following conditions be carefully fulfilled :

I. There must be a testimonial from one
of the clinics mentioned in §9 that the
woman and possibly also the bearer of
parental responsibility or the guardian have
received complete information as to the
dangers and the possible consequences of a
termination of pregnancy on the one hand,
and, on the other, as to the assistance and
help of economic and legal character which
are at her disposal for herself or for the
expected child if she go through with the
pregnancy.

2. If the woman be under 18 years of age
or has been declared incapable of managing
her own affairs the consent of the bearer of
parental responsibility or, respectively, of
the guardian, to the termination of the
pregnancy must be obtained.

3. If the woman is over 18 but under 21
years of age her guardian should give his or
her consent to the termination of pregnancy.
Should she not wish to obtain help from her
guardian and should she not have been
declared irresponsible, consent may be given
by a guardian specially appointed by
nomination by the Social Committee.

4. If the woman, owing to insanity, mental
deficiency or other causes, is incapable of
understanding the significance of the operation a demand for it may be made by a
guardian specially appointed by the Social
Committee, or, should she be the ward of a
state-owned institution or an. institution
recognized according to § 67 of the Public
Welfare Law No. 181 of May 2oth, 1933,
by the head of the institution. If such a
demand be made the operation may be
performed without the testimonial of the
clinic in §9 and §x. |
_ §. Ifthe woman.is ‘married. and. lives. with
44

her husband he shall be given opportunity
to express his views unless special circumstances are against it.

§3

Sect. 1. Termination of pregnancy may
only be undertaken by a qualified doctor
after consultation with another qualified
practitioner, usually the woman’s family
doctor.

Sect. z. Termination of pregnancy may
only be undertaken in one of the national or
communal hospitals, or in a private hospital
receiving public subsidies or one receiving
patients at public expense.

§ 4

The doctors mentioned in § 3 as well as the
staff of the hospitals mentioned in § 3 and
of the clinics mentioned in § 9 are bound
under §267 and § 275 of the Civic Penal
Code to keep secret such conditions of
private life as may come to their knowledge
in connection with the subject of abortion
or which they may suspect, unless they are
bound by the law to speak, or unless they
are acting in accordance with the safeguarding of public interests or with their
own or other people’s interests.

$5

Anyone giving evidence that will be used
in deciding whether conditions for the termination of pregnancy exist, and gives this
evidence without real knowledge of the
facts, or who wilfully gives wrong information, is liable to punishment according to the
regulations of § 162 of the Civic Penal Code.

§ 6

Sect. 1. A woman who terminates her
pregnancy herself or who allows it to be
terminated by a person who is not a qualified
doctor, will be punished, even if the conditions for legal abortion as defined in §1
are present, by up to 3 months imprisonment. If she terminates it or allows it to be
terminated in the knowledge that the conditions for a legal abortion are not present,

_ THE EUGENICS REVIEW"

   

pen impri: cs ‘op to > 3 mont i
No prosecution . is pos

 

: ble if 2 years hay
elapsed since the termination of pregnang
Attempts with ineffective: means .are ny
punishable. ‘Under particularly extenuatin,
circumstances the punishment may be car
celled.

Sect. 2. If, during a trial for illegal. tel
mination of pregnancy or attempt therey
of a woman who has become pregnai
outside wedlock or of the person assistiy
her, information becomes available that m:
be considered to prove who has rendered h
pregnant, the man will be liable to imprison
ment up to I year in so far as it be proved
that he has not given the woman reasonah
aid and assistance despite her applicati
to him for economic and personal suppq
and that this omission has been of decisin
importance to her taking the decision 1
terminate the pregnancy. |

Sect. 3. A qualified doctor who terminats
a pregnancy or renders assistance thereto |
the knowledge that the conditions for legi
abortion as defined in §1 are not preser
will be liable to imprisonment up to 2 year
Under aggravating circumstances, in par

 
   
   
   
  

. ticular if the operation has been performe

for the sake of profit, or if it has caused th
death of the woman or considerable injury {
body or health, the penalty is imprisonmer
up to 4 years. If a legal abortion as state
under § 1 is performed without observation
of the regulations contained in §2 and §
the penalty is imprisonment up to 6 month
or, under extenuating circumstances, a fine
If the pregnancy be terminated without th
woman’s consent the penalty is impriss
ment from 2 to 12 years.

Sect. 4. A person who, not being a qual
fied doctor, terminates or gives assistand
in terminating a pregnancy is liable ti
imprisonment up to 4 years. Under ager
vating circumstances, in particular if th
action has been motivated by profit or if
has caused the woman’s death or consider
able injury to body and health, the penalty
is imprisonment up to 8 years. For a Seco
offence, or in so far as the perpetrator ha
acted without the woman's consent, th
penalty is imprisonment from z to 12. yean

 
    
  
   
  
 
  
   
      
   
    
 
    

A person who by means of illegal coercion
hording to § 260 of the Civil Penal Code
‘by means.of:threats of economic loss or of
a to personal, familial or social standing
‘by means of promises of reward induces a
bman who desires to bear her child to have
> pregnancy terminated, will be punishle, even if the termination is induced
der the prescribed conditions, by imprisonnt up to 2 years; the penalty will, hower, be up to 4 years if the abortion is
ormed by someone who is not a qualified

    
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
    
    
   
 
  
   
  
 

   

i

| ss

he expenses incurred by a términation
pregnancy will be borne by the party conmed. If she has insufficient means the
penses will be borne by the State, or in so
r as she is in the ward of one of the institubns referred to in §66 of Law No. 181
May 2oth, 1933, by that institution.

§9
Sect. 1. Clinics shall be established by
iblic initiative where persons of both sexes
all have access to correct and warrantable
struction in sexual hygiene in which
mnection pregnant women shall receive
vice and guidance concerning their state,
cluding information as to the aid and
sistance of legal and economic character
hich, during pregnancy and after birth, are
their disposal for themselves or for the
jaintenance of the expected child. :
Sect. 2. If a pregnant woman who desires
» have her pregnancy terminated of her
fn accord, or at the suggestion of the
pcial Committee or of others, applies to
ach a clinic, it is the duty of the clinic to
ase its discussions with her on the informaon which it, possibly after consulting the
ocial Committee, may deem necessary to
btain for each particular case. During its
ealing with her the clinic shall endeavour
D prevent her from taking hasty action as
rell as give her information as to the aid and
ssistance that are at her disposal if she
hoose to bear:her child, together with comete information as to the dangers and risks

DANISH LAW ON ABORTION

5

connected with, and the possible consequences of, a termination of pregnancy, and,
possibly, the penalties provided by the law
in connection therewith.

Sect. 3. In those cases in accordance with
the regulations of § 2 it is necessary that a
certificate stating that a discussion has taken
place with the woman in order that pregnancy interruption can take place, it is the
obligation of the clinic at the conclusion of
such discussion to give such certificate.

Sect. 4. It is incumbent on the Social
Committees to give information requested
by the clinics about women who have
addressed themselves to these clinics concerning the termination of their pregnancy.

§ 10

Sect. 1. It is incumbent on the Counties
to see to it that the clinics mentioned in
§9 be set up in required numbers before
April 1st, 1938, in connection with the public
hospitals according to §3, sect. 2. In
Copenhagen this duty rests on the munici
ali

Sect. 2. If the Minister of Justice consider
that there is need for the establishment of
such a clinic in a commune he may enjoin
the county authorities—in Copenhagen the
municipality—to remedy the deficiency.

§ Ir | |
The advisory functions of the clinics as

mentioned in §9 shall be performed by
qualified doctors assisted by trained nurses.

§ 12

The expenses incurred by the establishment and maintenance of the clinics shall,
at the end of each fiscal year and subsequent
to the approval of the chief administrative
officer of the County, be apportioned to the
County Boroughs, towns and townships
according to the number of their inhabitants. On Bornholm the expenses for the
towns and the rural districts of the island
shall be borne by the joint distributive fund;
and in Copenhagen by the municipality.
The treasury will repay the communes onehalf of the expenses incurred. 46 THE eee ee ance

§ 13 | ae
Sect. 1. The Minister of Justice shall lay § This law comes ‘into force ¢ on. a Apri 3
down further regulations for the carrying 1938.

out of the law. Compliance therewith is ‘enjoined on ;
Sect. 2, Infringement of these rules made concerned. __

for the maintenance of the regulations in Amalienborg, the 18th of May; 1937.

§ x to 4 is punishable by fine or by imprison- Under Our Royal Hand and Seal. &

ment up to 3 months. ‘(CHRISTIAN R.

heen,

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY __ |

A record of international research on the physiology of embryonic and reconstitutional |
development, environmental relationships, the cell and protoplasm, the nervous
system and behaviour, as well as research on hormones and other features of chemical |

correlation, sex in its physiological aspects, and the physiological phases of genetics
and cytology. | |

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues:
DIFFERENTIAL GRADIENT FUNCTIONS IN THE FEATHER GERM. By: Ricwarp M. |
Fraps, Whitman Laboratory of Experimental Zodlogy, University of Chicago.

STUDIES ON EETEROPLASTIC TRANSPLANTATION IN TRICLADS. I. CEPHALIC
GRAFTS BETWEEN EUPLANARIA DOROTOCEPHALA AND E. TIGRINA. _ By
J. A. Miter, University of Chicago and Marine Biological Laboratory. :

SINGLE AND COMBINED EFFECTS OF CYANIDE AND METHYLENE BLUE ON RECONSTRUCTION IN EUPLANARIA DOROTOCEPHALA. By Ox Ruton, University of Chicago and Wayne University.

THE FRAGMENTATION OF NAIS PARAGUYENSIS. By Luszr H. Hyuan, Laboratory of,
. Experimental Biology, American Museum of Natural History.

Edited by W. GC. Artez, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago.
Published Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.
Subscription: 35s. 2d. per year. |

English Agents:
CAMBRIDGE. UNIVERSITY PRESS.

Sugenios Review, VoL XXX, Wo ]
