Pauperism and Heredity.” |
A FurtHer Report.

By E. J. LIDBETTER.

It will be remembered that early in 1910 a Committee of this
Society was formed to consider the Eugenic bearing of the Reports of
the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws which had just been published. Those reports dealt at very great Jength with the numerous
aspects of the Poor Law problem, but they dealt almost exclusively
with administrative matters or with the subject from the point of view
of possible legislation .

In neither of the reports was any attempt made to analyse or define
the personality of the Pauper, his character, antecedents or capacity.

To this latter work the Committee appointed by this Society
devoted their energies with the object of discovering whether and to
what extent pauperism could be attributed to bad heredity, either by
the transmission of actual defect or the perpetuation of low-grade
types. .

*P Those concerned in the administration of the Poor Law had long
been struck by the tendency of particular families to apply to the
Relieving Officer in almost every domestic contingency and indeed for
whole familes to spend their lives in intermittent chargeability, but
until the investigation undertaken by this Society the problems of the
Poor Law do not appear to have been considered from this point of view.
The Annual Reports of the Local Government Board were based upon a
mass of statistical] data in which the several qualities of pauperism were
classified—sick, able-bodied, temporarily sick, children, etc.,—
but offspring were never considered in relation to parentage except as
dependent children, or legally liable relatives ; and this is still the case.

In this connection it will be remembered that the statistical
formula of the L.G.B. was established long before the significance of
Galton’s work was recognised—in fact in early Victorian times and on
the social and political views of that period—and as the whole value of
statistical data lies in its comparability ,changes in the Annual! formula
would only be made with great reluctance—even if a case for such
change haa been made out. | ne

It might be argued at the present time that no such case has heen
made out and in that event it must increasingly be the business of this
Society and those who think with us to accumulate the evidence upon
which alone the change can be made, or, if that be too big a task, to
indicate the method of investigation to that end. Unfortunately some
of the greatest difficulties that beset the enquirer at present are such as
can only be removed by those in high authority, as for instance the
limitations of parochial boundaries, or access to material records in
particular cases. To take the first point, there are 28 separate Poor

* A paper read before the Eugenics Education Society in 1920—re-written .

 
PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY: 153

Law areas in the County of London alone, and the population to be
dealt with isa mobile one. The chargeability of a particular case may
be distributed over several of these areas (or elsewhere outside the
County) so that just as the various Poor Law authorities have now no
knowledge as to relief afforded beyond their houndaries, so, and for
the same reason, the investigator cannot ascertain all the facts.

_ Indeed the problem is one that can only be properly undertaken by
an authority larger than the one which our Poor Law system at present
provides and endowed with fuller powers.

A preliminary report of the Committee appointed appeared in the
ReEvIEW in November, 1910, from which I make the following ex:
tracts :—

*“That element in pauperism which represents and transmits
original defect, almost completely neglected in the investigation
and wholly neglected in the recommendations of the Commission,
is the one we wish to take into consideration.

| The determination of this element is not a matter of opinion
but of the application of methods of careful investigation. It is
impossible to disregard the fact that the typical dependent in the
minds of the commissioners is not the typical dependent who
habitually receives relief. Yet it is precisely the latter who is
primarily the subject of Poor Law relief, and who affords the chief
burden on the public purse. a '

He is not the man who responds to a call on manly independence or stands ready to take a place made available through the
Labour Exchange. He was born without manly independence and
is unable to do a normal day’s work however frequently it is

_ offered to him.

' In a general sense, and of course with many exceptions, the

unemployed represent relatively weaker stocks. With a diminu
tion of work elimination falls on the less qualified. This is complicated by the factor of age; elimination at 40 years of age is
possibly as,ociated with elements of origine] weakness.

If a man can do only half the work required in these days of
standardised wages, it is rather futile to attempt to introduce him
into the industrial system.’’

‘*It is to be noted finally that degenerate tendencies do not
manifest in transmission a single set of characteristics but take on_
. a great multiplicity of forms. A single family stock produces
paupers, fecble-rminded, alcoholics and certain types of criminals.
If an investigation could be carried out on a sufficiently large
scale we believe that the greater proportion of undesirables would
be found connected by a network. of relationship, a few thousand
family stocks probably provide this burden which the community
has to bear.’’ |

-It was intended by the Committee presenting this report that it
should be regarded asa preliminary statement on a subject to be much
more exhaustively dealt with later. None knew more clearly than

+. ‘‘ Eugenics Review,’’ Vol. 2, No. 8 (November, 1910).
154 EUGENI CS REVIEW.

the committee concerned the fragmentary character of the evidence
which in the limited time at their disposal they had been able to produce. As time went on and the discussion became more general,
and as the diagrams produced came to be used for lecturing and other
purposes a very healthy criticism was. developed. M uch of this
critisicm was unsound and we need not be troubled with it now; but.
much of it was quite sound and called for further investigation.

_ Among other points made was that the results were selective.
and that so far as the causes of pauperism might be regarded as hereditary they gave no indication as to what proportion they bore to the
sum total of pauperism. This was a perfectly legitimate criticism
and one that had to be met. No considerable argument could be
advanced or supported as to the hereditary aspect behind pauperism
until this question had been dealt with. In short it was necessary to
examine a particular pauper community and ascertain what proportion
of chargeability current on a given date could be connected with simiJar or earlier chargeability. This was the task attempted in an investigation that was carried on. for two years until War conditions
made it impossible to carry it on any longer.

_ The place selected for this investigation was a small Poor Law
Area in London with a populatien of about 140,000 and, at the time
the investigation was commenced, a pauper community in all classes
of about 2,950 and including 800 Imbeciles and Insane.

These figures give some idea of the extent of the work attempted.
The scope of the work may be gathered from the obiects sought, as
follows :—

1. To ascertain the measure of family chargeability and as far as
possible reduce the results to pedigree form.

2. To ascertain the age of onset and the incidence of repetition
in chronic cases.

3. To measure the periods of chargeability against the periods
of independent support.

4. To secure records of fertility and survival in the several classes.

5. Generally, to compare the ascertained family chargeability
with individual chargeability .

As has been already suggested the work was never brought to a
successful conclusion. There weré two reasons for this. The first is
that the work was too much for an individual] enquirer to undertake.
It is a mistake to think that such an investigation is a straight-forward operation which may be undertaken and by diligence carried to
a final conclusion. My experience is that the work is never finished.
It grows as it proceeds. In whatever stage the investigation may be,
there is always more to do than has been done. This is peculiarly the
case with investigations as to heredity. The investigator never finishes
a case—he leaves it for a time, and then returns to it—+to find a variety
of new material awaiting inclusion.

From al] this we may gather the progressive character of the work.
After the investigation had been going on for about 12 months. the
accumulation of material was overwhelming. ‘

The second and fatal difficulty was, however, the War. With- PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY: 155

in a few days of the outbreak of War all ordinary activities were set
aside in favour of special services. This continued with increasing
intensity to the exclusion of all other matters. Meanwhile there
was going on a steady dissipation of the special community which
formed the subject of this enquiry. The older people died, the younger
were absorbed into military or other War service, whilst the lowering of the standard of employable labour drew all the middle-aged
into employment. The following figures shew how far the process
went :—
Numbers in the two main Institutions :—

At date investigation commenced v Ju ly, 1918) 1,490.
Ast January, 1914 2

a

v5 1915... “ ss -. 1,587.
9 1916... .. .. -. 1,110.
43 1917S os .. .. 1,096.
83 1918... ws 6a m8 990.
¥9 1919 . es 792.

It must also be borne in mind that as the people disappeared
so also did the material witnesses, not chargeable, whose evidence was
necessary for the investigation.

In this way the investigation was brought to an end after nearly
wo years of work, in which only the foundation of the enquiry was
laid. —

_ These facts are material in considering the results achieved—
especially the fact that much work was irretrievably lost and that only
such matter can be shewn as lends itself to disconnected review.

One of the most important problems in pauperism has been that of
intermittent chargeability—what is known in Poor Law circles as
‘“the ins and outs.’’ In the course of this enquiry it was possible to
arrive at certain figures hearing on the question. The following figures
shew the number of persons present on a given day in 1918 in the two
institutions referred to above (both in the same Poor Law area) and
the number of times which the several persons had been previously
inmates. For this purpose the two institutions were taken together
and treated as one :—
r Number in Number in
‘Number of times admitted. Workhouse. Infirmary. Total.

- Ist Admission a . 445 240 685
- >. Ind > a .e 197 74 271
8rd - ee 106 4d 147
oo ath ,, Leas 62 25 87
oo. Bho, Lek 30 18 57
vl , 6th 99 ee ee 29 9 38
th ,, ooo OGD 7 18 |
8th vs es .. 18 7 25 —
“Oth > oe oe 1] 3 14
- 10th Il 2 13:
More than 10 and under 20 26 13 89
: More than 20 and under 80 © 16 5 21
More than 80 and under 50 11 1 12
156 . EUGENICS REVIEW.

Among Workhouse cases, 1 each of 52nd, 68rd, 77th, 96th, 110th,
118th, 130th, 152nd and 184th time of admission.

Among Infirmary cases, 1 each of 55th and 115th time of admission ‘

These latter would, of course, be extraordinary cases. Mainly men.
allowed out from day to day to look for work—-who seldom found it.

These numbers are of course the minimum. They include only
the chargeability that had occurred in the area under review and. as.
many of the persons concerned were tramps, freyuenters. of Common.
Lodging Houses and otherwise homeless there would be much chargeability elsewhere which could not be included.

The significance of these figures will perhaps be better understood
if I pass from the general to the particular. In Diagram No. 1. in the
8rd generation, numbers, 8, 9, 10 and 11 four brothers :—

No. 8. Entered House at 60 years of age, was out for two short
periods, average 35 days each, and had on the appointed day been
in continuously 6 years, 4 months and 15 days. Total chargeability 7 years and 11 months.

No.9. Entered at 48 years of age and has never been out since. Period
chargeable 20 years. Has a club foot.

No.10. Entered at age of 34 years. Total period chargeable 15 years,
7 months, 21 days. Last unbroken period 7 years, 6 months, 20:
days. Has been out 32 times, average stay out 7 months and 1
day; total period out since he first came in, 13 years, 2 months,

13 days.

No. 11. Entered at 26 vears of age. Total period chargeable at the
appointed day 20 years, 9 months, 17 days. Last unbroken
period 4 years. Has been out in all 60 times, average 2 months,
18 days, aggregate since he first came in 12 years, 3 months,
12 days.

Of these three brothers two were unmarried and the others had
wives and chiluren. The wives carried on the homes when the men
entered the House.

No. 16. Entered at the age of 62. Has been in 8 years, 10 months,
28 days. Has been out twice: four days in all.

Some attempt was made to prepare a table of relationship frequency, but the variety of relationship disclosed amongst those
chargeable was so great, the complications so diverse, that this had
to be abandoned. Probably 50%, of those chargeable on a given day
had either on that date or upon some previous date, not too remote,
some one or more relatives chargeable. This part of the subject is so.
complicated that it cannot be properly dea!t with in this paper or upon
the data available. The pedigrees alone give some indication of its
importance and complexity. ‘These pedigrees are set out in diagrams
numbered 1, 2 and 3, and shew a remarkable volume of family and
inter- related chargeability.
No. 1.

WY
@
©
(
Q
5
D~
eb
*
@

W@ Co?” QeaacwVW@sveqgdea e@

I >a 662868800800 ODS 6 2600 OFC mw YaPrerrvraegn O° Gaa@

 

IV 5Foa og ne aes YTeegro é@ AAPA CSQAQ SCQBO QO @ O

Born before Born in Born in
Ie an father became first lucid second lucid
eB AQ ® insane. interval. interval.
Diagram No. 1. Pedigree of a group of chronic and occasional paupers, closely inter-married, in six generations. From an East London district.
Period 1801—1914. On the left, mildly incompetent able-bodied, centre, tuberculosis and insanity and on the right intermittent sickness.
O on (@) 7
No. 2. — OB 1D @©
e
AV oQaaeg a e ®@ egZ@a Pre Qg F @ Seed ge Ae @&aoweaes
P f . : =e ty

5 AAG CS HFOA GT TFTHTIINQS SWHA | TE” Sw GaguaadaS 6 Foo
¢

 

Qcecvgaaastvreagr Pa Se q ®eGgaqd 4200 &

Diagram No. 2. Pedigree of a group of Non-moral able-bodied paupers. Period 1810 to 1914. Four generations. North-East London district.

No. 3.

 

eee {Fa oe @QAA*0°RkQE THES
TB B

Diagram No. 3. Insanity and destructive eyc disease. Inter-married with pauper groups on either side. Five generations.
Period 1812—1915. East London district.

 
PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY: 157

Key to the symbols used in the diagrams:

O Normal. | * Insane pauper.

@ Not known. © Reared in Poor Law ole

@ Occasional pauper. Z) Died under one year.

© Chronic pauper. ©) Mentally defectives.
-B=Blind. T=Tuberculous. E=Epileptic.
C=Criminal. S=Suicide. D=Deaf & Dumb,

Notre .—The dotted lines (thus......) indicate irregular unmarried) relationship and illegitimacy.

DracraM No. 1.

A group of mildly incompetent persons in six generations. Very
little sickness shewn.

Paupers :— Non-paupers :—Chronic us .. 18 Known non-paupers 55
Occasional .. .. 64 Not known .. 81
Insane .. ws . 6 Diedininfaney .. 21
Reared in Poor Law
Schools ss ss OG
90 107

Tuberculous 10: Epileptics 8: Blind 1.

DracraM No. 2.

Paupers :— Non-paupers :--Occasional .. .. AO Norma! bd .. 85
Chronic a .. 16 Not known .. e 9
Insane... ss . 8 Died ininfancy .. 18
Reared in Poor Law Tuberculous o. 8

Schools a .. 24

DracraM No. 8.
A case of Insanity and destructive eye disease.

Paupers :— Non-paupers :-—
Occasional .. .. 46 Not known .. .. 81
Chronic 7 . S§ Infant mortality .. 20
Chronic Blind. . .. 7 Norma] e .. 29
Insane .. i’ . il Tuberculous oe |
Insane Blind .. .. 5
Epileptic os . 1

These three pedigrees have been selected for this paper because
they shew in such a clear way the distinctive character in each group,
No. 1 what Mr. Wells calls ‘‘the mildly incompetent, spiritless and
dull.’’ No.2 the non-moral or immoral type and No. 8 Destructive
disease and insanity. Professional men and others interested in
Diagram No. 8 will find it set out in greater detail, but without more
158 . EUGENICS REVIEW.

recent additions, in ‘‘Brain,’’ Volume 25, Part 8 (1918) with memorandum on the eye disease by the late Dr. Nettleship.

Generally speaking these classes are found in combination all in
the same group, but here they are found clearly defined and are so
presented. From this point of view it is particularly interesting to
notice their combination in marriage and in reproduction, for not only
do they reproduce as the biological student would expect, but like
attracts like in marriage to a remarkable degree.

In the course of this investigation the data were collected for upwards of 200 pedigrees. Few of these however contain as many units
as those produced (numbered 1, 2 & 3,) and some are too small for
practical use at present. Many of the smaller ones are however of
special interest, particularly to mendelian students. Of these latter
four are here produced (numbered 4 to 7) shewing the transmission of

a particular defect through the apparently normal member of the stock .

a Q 4

oO C0 0 @

Tr Qeaaed

No. 4.

C@@@2824 @

     

ZG@Qgecoceeoeg2g ogEgoa
No. 5.
PAUPERISM AND HEREDITYs

‘159

QHQAaQON Ff QEAeCQ

 

C
®)
«

OB@B@e
No. 6.

WN
160 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It should be understood that the completion of these data is going
on, but very slowly—mainly hampered for want of the necessary funds.

It is necessary to define more clearly the attitude of Eugenics to
pauperism. In so fur as the receipt of public assistance is of a temporary character—as for instance in non-recurrent temporary sickness,
or relief for the family of a man bona fide unemployed or in the case of
orphans maintained in Poor Law schools whose parents were not suffering from sickness known to be hereditary—we are concerned in the
matter only to the extent that eugenics requires the best environment
for the biologically desirable. This is however a sort of side issue of
eugenics proper and many no doubt will deny that it has any relation
to eugenics. Weare mainly concerned with the Poor Law in so far as
pauperism is in relation to hereditary defect and its reproduction.
Two questions are cardinal to this issue. Can it be shewn that there
is in existence a definite type of pauper family? Secondly, and if so,
is the pauperism in such families associated with a definitely transmissible characteristic standing in relation to the pauperism as cause
and effect?

I think there can be no doubt that the figures and the diagrams I
have produced abundantly answer the first of these questions in the
affirmative. With regard to the second question the diagrams have
been specially selected because they shew in each case transmissible
characteristics not only associated with the public dependence, but
also standing in relation to it as cause and effect. Not only is the
distinguishing characteristic to be observed in each generation, but
the inter-marriages are with the same type.

In the discussion which followed the issue of our first report it
was repeatedly declared that destitution leading to public assistance
is the consequence of adverse environment. The main part of the
discussion has been round that point. But if the enquiry is pressed
forward and found to lead to a clear biological classification the effect
must be to greatly increase the difficulties of those who argue environmental causation.

The fact is also very important from the point of view of classification within the Poor Law. Nothing is talked of more freely, nor on
the whole more loosely, than this business of classification. When it
is more generally recognised that the physical structure, as well as the
mental qualities of man are the result of long generations of adaptation
and that the only force making for practical efficiency in this process
has been elimination by death, and further that the Poor Law population represents a type of borderline individuals who could not survive
but for the protection the Poor Law affords—when these facts are recognised and form part of our mental outlook on these questions, we shall
hear less of classification which merely follows traditional sociology,
and make some attempt to arrive at classification on a more scientific
basis. |

Obviously this is a problem that can only be dealt with by a considerable enlargement of Poor Law areas, and the distribution of Poor
Law charges on a much broader basis than at present. The distinctly
parochial element would then disappear, the purely local inducement
to get rid of chargeability would no longer operate; it would be possible
PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY: 161

to provide separate institutions for particular classes of case (because
there would be in the enlarged areas sufficient numbers chargeable in
each class to make it worth while to equip a special institution for that
class) , the general mixed workhouse would disappear , except as a receiving house, and the way would be cleared for a more thorough and more
enlightened classification and the elucidation of special problems in
relation to the several] classes.

It might then be found that a certain proportion of the habitués
of our Workhouses—not a large proportion but still a considerable
number—-present in themselves a special sort of problem which could
only be dealt with by prolonged or permanent treatment. Many of
these, as the data shews, are mere parasites upon society, spending
their lives between the workhouse, and prison, or on the road. In any
case they render to society no adequate return for their maintenance,
they exist by begging, by petty theft, by the exploitation of publie
and private charities and by occasional incursions into the land of
work, often with immediate and disastrous results to those whose
labour they undersell.

The enlargement of Poor Law areas would make possible, and the
need to place such individuals somewhere in a scientific classification
would compel, thet larger and more comprehensive enquiry that is so
necessary in these matters. Out of that would grow a practical application of the science of heredity, increasing as our knowledge grew.
Every interest would converge to add to our knowledge in these matters
and to emphasise the advantage of the use of that knowledge in the
practical affairs of every-day life.

Another point of the utmost importance to Eugenics is the decline
in pauperism. The decline which I have already indicated is made up
of two parts. The first is a real decline mm the number of persons
dependent on the State. The second is only a statistical] decline due
to the gradual bringing into operation of the scheme for the break up
of the Poor Law. This is of course wholly artificial, consisting as it
does of a large number of persons transferred from one public fund to
another.

The former movement is a bye-product of the war due to the lowered
standard of employable labour and to the attraction of high wages.
In the main the persons «affected have been men and women beyond the
former age of employed labour and to this extent is highly satisfactory .
But it has also included a certain proportion of younger people—the
feeble-minded not so bad as to be permanently detained, the mild
epileptic, the spiritless and dull people and the mildly incompetent
who form the apparently normal unit in these pedigrees. Whilst a
lower rate of pauperism is a desirable condition in the State, we must
recognise that there are limits beyond which a reduction is undesirable.
The policy of getting rid of chargeability at all cost has its value in
Poor Law economy as at present arranged, and it serves the purpose of
the statistical economist ; but it looses sight of the fact that biological
forces operate in man as in other animals, ana that in the intervals of
chargeability not only is the apparent saving not affected, but unless
we or the forces within the child distinguish it from its parents, the
condition of intermittent pauperism is established for at least another
162 EUGENICS REVIEW. —

generation. This is not a demand for the wholesale extention of pauperism, but rather a plea for the recognition of the fact that society as
at present organised must produce a fair proportion of individuals
inherently incapahle of keeping pace with the normal population, and
that these individuals tend to transmit their incapacity.

And a larger aspect of this same problem arises in the scheme for
the break up of the Poor Law. Whatever may be said of the system
that is passing away it did hold this intensive community together.
There seems to be a danger that under the new system this community
may be dispersed not only in the administrative sense, but actually
distributed so that the family may cease to be the unit for administrative purposes. This affects eugenics in many ways. As I have indicated, the study of this problem—which I hold to be essential—-can be
carried on effectually only if the administration is vested in one authority. Again the Eugenic ideal is inseparable from the idea of family
unity. Already both parental and filial responsibility have been very
much weakened by the changes affected and in progress.

The attempt to separate the temporarily sick but otherwise selfsupporting individual from the persons who are paupers first and sick
afterwards is all to the good. Again the proposal to transfer the Poor
Law Schools to the Educational Authority will give facilities for a
higher standard of educational opportunity for the children reared in
these schools—perhaps not free from the taint of pauperism, but in any
case free from the hampering effects of parochial control and the limitations of parochial outlook.

But in both these cases some effort should be made to give the
benefits of the better system to those of civic or Eugenie worth.

It is at this point that the possible effects of the new system are
apparent. Any scheme which can in effect distinguish the case of
temporary and bona fide distress so as to break that class away from
the biological community of paupers must be regarded as a desirable
scheme. The wider that class of case can be distributed in the general
community the better must be the result because the more quickly will
it be absorbed.

Such a scheme might become a sort of social rescue scheme part
of which already exists in the scheme for insurance against unemployment. It needs to be supplemented by the provision of national homes
for orphan children apart from the gencral body of Poor Law children
and selected on a biological basis.

Certain other proposals might be made having for their object the
double purpose of restoring desirable elements to the normal community
and on the other hand isolating this community of perpetual paupers.
No scheme of Poor Law reform can be held to he satisfactory which
does not start at this point, that is at the effort to distinguish and isolate this group. It must be the very foundation of all reform. The
method should be educational in the broadest possible sense, and the
end restorative on the one hand and isolation on the other. There is
no other way. On no known biological principle can you hope to raise
these groups and on no economic principle can you make them selfsupporting. It is better therefore for all concerned that they should
be in the descendant phase.
PAUPERISM AND HEREDITY: 168

It is upon the urgent need for further research that I would lay
final emphasis in concluding this paper. Upon the necessity that is for
an altogether more energetic and concerted effort to get together, and
make available, that mass of reliable data which is so necessary before
a practical application of the idea of Eugenics can be at all possible.
Few, if any, of the suggestions put forward as ‘‘constructive eugenics’’
can be supported without question or qualification, and none of those
put forward as ‘‘restrictive eugenics’’ carry that measure of certainty
that alone would justify collective action.

In fact we have no applicable science yet, and no promise of that
without a far greater and much more comprehensiv e research than has
yet heen undertaken.
