VERA HOUGHTON

~ International Planned Parenthood

Federation (I.P.P.F.)

ITS HISTORY AND INFLUENCE

Introduction
HE INTERNATIONAL PLANNED Parenthood Federation, founded at Bombay
in 1952, was preceded by a long series of
international conferences, organizations and
committees dating back to the neo-malthusian
movement of the nineteenth century. The
first of this series was the International NeoMalthusian Conference, held in Paris in 1900
under the presidency of Dr. C. R. Drysdale;
this led to the formation of the Fédération
Universelle pour la Régéneration Humaine.

Between 1900 and 1911 three further conferences were held, at Liége (1905), the Hague
(1910) and Dresden (1911). By 1912 the
Fédération Universelle comprised constituent
bodies in fifteen countries (eleven in Europe;
one each in North, Central and South America
and one in Africa). Before the next, the
Fifth, International Malthusian Conference
could be held the 1914-18 War had begun and
there was a gap of ten years during which new
pioneers, Mrs. Margaret Sanger in the United
States and Dr. Marie Stopes in England, came
on the scene and a new “birth control’ movement began to take shape.

The term “birth control,’’ coined by Mrs.
Sanger, soon became popular in England as
expressing better the aims of the movement than
the older more clumsy term ‘“‘neo-malthusianism.” In time “birth control” itself became
outmoded and we now have “planned parenthood” or “family planning.”

PART I: 1912-1945

Mrs. Margaret Sanger
As a public health nurse in New York Margaret

Sanger began in 1912 her lifelong fight to free
women from unwanted pregnancies. In the
beginning Mrs. Sanger saw birth control solely
in relation to the health and happiness of the
family. It was later, in 1917, while writing her
book Woman and the New Race (published in
1920) that she began to realize the contribution
that birth control could make to a nation’s
survival. Her visit to Germany in 1920 in search
of more scientific methods of birth control
crystallized this belief. She was appalled by
conditions there: the degrading poverty, an
aftermath of war; the subjugation of the women
and the attempts being made to build up the
birth rate seemed to her to hold a fresh threat
to peace. Mrs. Sanger returned to New York
with the contraceptive jelly but also with a
new message—‘birth control must save the
world from another and more devastating
holocaust.” The direct connection between
overpopulation and war became the recurrent
theme of her speeches. Shortly after her return
she sounded a second warning that Japan’s
population would one day explode beyond its
borders unless birth control was adopted
immediately. But it took twenty-eight years,
during which time Japan’s population increased
from 56 to 80 million, and the chaos of World
War II to persuade the Japanese Government
to adopt a policy of population control. In 1954,
on her fourth visit to Japan, Mrs. Sanger was
invited to address a committee of the Japanese
Parliament: she spoke at a session of the Upper
House Welfare Committee on the subject of
*“World Population and Birth Control.”

On Mrs. Sanger’s second visit to London, in
1915, she met Mrs. Edith How-Martyn, then

149

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 3.
ER—D
THB EUGENICS REVIEW

active in the suffragette movement, who made
the arrangements for and took the chair at Mrs.
Sanger’s first public meeting here. Present in the
audience at that meeting was Dr. Marie Stopes
whose well-known book Married Love was to be
published in 1918, followed by Wise Parenthood.
In the years ahead the paths of these three
women converged many times: for Margaret
Sanger and Edith How-Martyn it was the
beginning of a long and close association; together they organized international conferences,
established an international information centre
in London and travelled extensively for birth
control. Theirs was a revolution of thought
which spread throughout the world.

In order to test the so-called Comstock law
in the United States Mrs. Sanger opened the
first birth control clinic in 1916, following
which she was imprisoned for thirty days for
creating a public nuisance. In 1918 she won her
first great legal victory, establishing that a
physician who in good faith gives birth control
help or advice to a married person to cure or
prevent disease is not contravening the law.

Dr. Marie Stopes and her Clinic’

In 1921, Dr. Marie Stopes opened at Holloway
in London the first birth control clinic in
England and founded the Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress.
In the same year, a second clinic, ostensibly a
maternity and child welfare centre, was opened
at Walworth by the Malthusian League. The
Walworth Centre was later taken over by the
Society for the Provision of Birth Control
Clinics which in 1930 joined with several other
groups to form the National Birth Control
Association (now the Family Planning Association) with which at first Dr. Stopes cooperated.

Of the early pioneers only the Malthusian
League in England and the Society for Constructive Birth Control kept their separate
entities to the end. The Society ceased in
October 1958 with the death of Dr. Stopes.
The Whitfield Street clinic which she left to the
Eugenics Society continues as the Marie Stopes
Memorial Clinic. The last of the “malthusian”’
Drysdales, Dr. C. V. Drysdale, died in February 1961 and with him ended an historic

150

organization which was formed eighty-four
years ago (1877) “to agitate for the abolition
of all penalties on the public discussion of the
population question” and “‘to spread among the
people by all practicable means a knowledge of
the law of population, of its consequences and
of its bearing upon human conduct and morals.”

Birth Control in Asia

The year 1922 marked the beginning of the
modern birth control movement in Asia:
Margaret Sanger on her first world tour spoke
to packed audiences in Japan and China and
news of her work spread to India. As a result of
meeting Mrs. Sanger, a young Japanese woman,
Baroness Shidzue Ishimoto (now Senator Mrs.
Kato) devoted herself to the emancipation of
Japanese women: in 1935 she started a birth
control clinic in Tokyo which was closed down
two years later by the Japanese militarists
when she was arrested along with many other
liberal thinkers. Since 1946 Mrs. Kato has been
an elected representative of the Japanese Upper
House and a vigorous supporter of the new
family planning movement; she was a VicePresident of the I.P.P.F. from 1953 to 1959 and
took a leading part in the organization of the
Fifth International Conference on Planned
Parenthood at Tokyo in 1955.

In China Mrs. Sanger quickly gained the
support of the medical profession: in 1930 a
group of university professors, physicians and
social workers formed the Peiping Committee
on Maternal Health, a pioneer organization for
the promotion of scientific contraception, and
in 1935 the Chinese Medical Association passed
a resolution “‘that the Chinese medical profession
should officially recognize that contraception
is a part of the activities of public health,
especially in the field of maternity and child
welfare.”

Demographic Conferences

Following the Fifth International Malthusian
Conference in London in 1922, Mrs. Sanger
persuaded the American Birth Control League to
invite the next, the Sixth, to New York in 1925.
One result of the New York Conference was the
promotion of the second in the series of international organizations, the International FedINTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (1.P.P.F.)

eration of Birth Control Leagues, the active
work of which was, in 1930, undertaken by the
Birth Control International Information Centre
in London.

The next big step was the convening in 1927
of the first World Population Conference:
not another comparable conference was held
until the United Nations World Population
Conference met at Rome in 1954. Margaret
Sanger brought together at Geneva leading
demographers, scientists, sociologists and physicians to discuss the subject of world population
in the hope that a policy would be formulated
to put an end to its uncontrolled growth. That
hope was not fulfilled. In the weeks immediately
before the conference a number of associations
opposed to birth control began to put pressure
on the President, Sir Bernard Mallet; to save
the conference from disruption the sponsoring
committee took a last-minute decision to rule
out of order all mention of birth control or
malthusianism. That incident was referred to
twenty-seven years later in the President’s
opening remarks at the United Nations World
Population Conference (Rome, 1954). Again,
the warning was given: there was to be no
so-called propaganda; the object of the Rome
Conference was not to discuss policies or to
make recommendations but to seek information
on population trends and relevant matters.
But whereas in 1927 all mention of birth control
was excluded from the proceedings of the
Geneva Conference, at the Rome Conference
in 1954 papers were accepted on such subjects
as “The Present Situation of Family Planning
among Farmers and Coal Mine Workers in
Japan” by Dr. Yoshio Koya; “The Pattern of
Birth Control in Puerto Rico” by Dr. Joseph M.
Stycos, and two by Dr. Abraham Stone: “Biological Factors influencing Human Fertility”
and “‘Present Day Family Planning Techniques.”

The immediate outcome of the Geneva
Conference was the formation of two scientific
organizations, one of which—the International
Union for the Scientific Study of Population—
exists to-day and collaborated in the organization of the Rome Conference. The other, the
International Medical Group for the Investigation of Contraception, has been replaced by
national committees and by the I.P.P.F. Medical

Committee and its International Evaluation
Sub-Committee. :

Dissemination of Information

During the years 1929 to 1934 five reports
were issued by the International Medical Group
and published in England under the auspices
of the Birth Control Investigation Committee.
Edited by Dr. C. P. Blacker, who was both
Chairman of the International Group and
Honorary Medical Secretary of the Birth Control
Investigation Committee, these reports summarized statistical and medical information
about contraception as it became available in
different countries. Their publication was facilitated by grants-in-aid from the Eugenics
Society. Later reports appeared in the Journal of
Contraception edited by Dr. Abraham Stone and
published in the United States. The Journal
subsequently renamed Human Fertility, ceased
publication with Volume 13 in 1948.

In connection with the General Election of
1929 several women’s organizations formed a
joint committee under Mrs. Eva Hubback for the
purpose of questioning parliamentary candidates
about their views on birth control and an information office was opened in Westminster by
Mrs. How-Martyn. After the election this office
became a permanent Birth Control Information
Centre and in 1930, following the Seventh
International Birth Control Conference at
Zurich, it was renamed the Birth Control
International Information Centre; Mrs. Sanger
became its President and Mrs. How-Martyn
the Honorary Director. In 1936 they were succeeded by Lord Horder and Dr. Maurice Newfield respectively.

At the Zurich Conference, physicians,
clinicians and lay workers from twelve countries
met to discuss the work and procedures of
existing birth control clinics, contraceptive
techniques and the need for research. Biological
methods of conception control were here discussed for the first time and reports received on
sterilization procedures; the psychological
aspects of birth control were also considered.

The main recommendations of the Zurich
Conference may be summarized as follows:
that birth control must be regarded as an
essential part of public health programmes and

ICI
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of preventive medicine in all countries; that the
spread of contraceptive knowledge is the best
means of reducing the incidence of abortion;
that instruction in contraceptive techniques
should be introduced into all medical curricula;
that facilities for therapeutic and eugenic
sterilization should be available to persons
for whom existing contraceptive methods are
impracticable, and that no chemical contraceptive for which the formula is not available
should be prescribed by doctors. Here was the
blue-print of the future and its sponsors were
the nucleus of the present-day International
Planned Parenthood Federation: Mrs. Margaret
Sanger, Founder and President Emeritus; Mrs.
Elise Ottesen-Jensen, President; Dr. Abraham
Stone, a Vice-President until his death in July
1959; Dr. C. P. Blacker, Administrative Chairman (1959-1960); Dr. Helena Wright, Chairman, Medical Committee; Governing Body
members Dr. Anne-Marie Durand-Wever (19531960) and Professor Hans Harmsen, both of
Germany.

Personalities and Progress

The year 1930 marked the turning point of the
birth control movement in the west; in the east
it was notable for the establishment of the first
Government birth control clinics in the world,
by the Mysore Government in India. In England
the Ministry of Health issued in July 1930 its
Memorandum 153 MCW informing public
health authorities that contraceptive advice
could be given in cases where further pregnancy
would be detrimental to health; while in the
United States the National Committee on
Federal Legislation for Birth Control, organized
in 1929 by Mrs. Sanger, was gaining support
for a “Doctor’s Bill” to modify the Federal
Postal Law so as to allow contraceptive information and appliances to be sent through the
mails by doctors, hospitals, dispensaries and
druggists. Secretary of that committee was Mrs.
Dorothy Brush who in 1937 accompanied Mrs.
Sanger on a third world tour; at the Stockholm
Conference (1946) Mrs. Brush was appointed
secretary of an international liaison committee;
later she became in turn editor of the I.P.P.F.
bulletin Around the World News of Population
and Birth Control (1952-57) and Honorary

152

Adviser for Field Work Services (1957-1961).
The six years 1930 to 1936 were for the Birth
Control International Information Centre a
period of much activity and influence. Official
correspondents were appointed in twenty-five
countries and personal visits were made to
twenty-one countries either by the President,
Mrs. Sanger, the Honorary Director, Mrs.
How-Martyn or other members of the Centre,
among them Janet Chance, Gerda Guy and
Frida Laski. The London Centre attracted
many visitors from abroad some of whom later
held political power in their own countries;
others became well known for their work in the
scientific, medical and social welfare fields.

Recalling the events of this period Mrs.
Laski writes “I well remember the time
Jawaharlal Nehru came to one of our weekly
lunches, and how sympathetic he was towards
our work, and during the Round Table Conference of 1930 all the Indian wives of the
delegates were invited to a meeting.”’*

At that time the All India Women’s Conference representative in London was Dhanvanthi
Rama Rau whose husband, Benegal Rama Rau,
was later knighted and served as High Commissioner for India in South Africa and Japan. In
recognition of her many years of work for
women’s social and political movements Lady
Rama Rau was given in 1959 the Indian award
of “Padma Bhushan”: President of the Family
Planning Association of India and a member of
the Indian Government Family Planning Board,
Lady Rama Rau was Joint President (with
Margaret Sanger) of the I.P.P.F. in 1952-53
and at present holds the office of Chairman of
Council.

Asian Problems

In November 1933 a conference on Birth Control
in Asia, organized by the Centre, was held in
London. Its purpose was to study the population
problems of India, China and Japan, to determine the obstacles to the practice of birth
control in these countries and to discuss ways
of overcoming them. The findings of the conference were summed up in the British Medical
Journal (December 2nd, 1933) as follows:

* THE EUGENICS Review, April 1954, 46, 16.
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

Even if birth control alone would not serve as a
complete remedy for the economic problems of
Asia, granted even that the difficulties in the way of
its dissemination were created by the very miseries
it aimed at relieving, it yet offered, all speakers were
agreed, a contribution to the solution of these
problems; and they differed only in their estimates
of how important (in relation to other measures)
this contribution might be

Many years later as Prime Minister of India,
Pandit Nehru, in a speech inaugurating the
Sixth International Conference on Planned
Parenthood (Delhi, 1959) said: “‘Some of us
really have arrived at the stage of advocating
family planning because ...in our thinking of
national planning it has become inevitable...
as part of the larger movement for raising the
standard of living.” He continued, “we have
found that we can never plan at all for the nation
and our Five-Year Plans have no meaning if the
‘population grows at this rate” (2 per cent per
annum).

As a result of the Birth Control in Asia
Conference the All India Women’s Conference
invited the Centre to send a representative to
‘India to put the case for birth control before
the delegates. In response to this invitation
Mrs. How-Martyn went to India in 1934: her
visit helped to prepare the way for the more
extensive tour of 1935-36 when the A.I.W.C.
invited Mrs. Sanger to be its guest speaker at
Travancore.

The stated objectives of the 1935-36 tour were
to arouse public interest in the establishment of
birth control centres, to focus attention on the
relation of population control to national
welfare and international peace, and to
encourage public health agencies and officials
to include contraceptive instruction in all health
programmes. The countries visited were India
(where Mrs. Sanger met Mahatma Gandhi),
Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, China, the Philippines,

Japan, Hawaii, Canada and the western coast
of the United States. |

Two further visits to India were made by Mrs.
How-Martyn, in 1936-37 and 1937-38. In 1938
the work of the Birth Control International
Information Centre was transferred to the
National Birth Control Association for which
purpose an international sub-committee was set
up under the chairmanship of Mr. J. H. Guy.
This committee decided to concentrate effort
and funds on developing the work in India and
appointed Mrs. Rena Datta, the Scottish wife of
the Indian Principal of the Forman Christian
College, Lucknow, as N.B.C.A. Organizer in
India. After six years of valuable work there she
returned to England in 1945. |

A Tribute to the Pioneers
After the outbreak of war Mrs. How-Martyn
went to Australia in 1940; she died there, in
1954, in her eightieth year. Mrs. Laski concludes: “There is little that would have given
Edith How-Martyn more happiness during these
last few months of ill health than the knowledge
that the movement to which she had devoted
her last years had blossomed out into the
International Planned Parenthood Federation.”
The devotion of the pioneers of the period
from 1912 to 1945 is unexampled in the history
of the I.P.P.F.; their influence incalculable. In
addition to carrying out an exhausting programme of work they had also to organize
fund-raising campaigns to finance it: one of the
more successful was the Malthusian Ball held
under the patronage of H.R.H. Princess Alice,
Countess of Athlone, at the Dorchester Hotel,
London, in 1933. Some, like Clinton and Janet
Chance and Harry and Gerda Guy, gave not
only the greater part of their time but a good
deal of their money to the movement.

Part 2 will appear in a future issue of the REVIEW.—EDITOR.

1$3
