HEALTH AND PROSPERITY
In England in the Early Nineteenth Century
By M. C. BUER, D.Sc.

little direct bearing upon eugenic

problems, but it has some indirect
relation to them and, further, the sources
indicated almost certainly contain material
for the investigator upon more direct lines.
I suppose that I interpret the eugenic position correctly in stating that it attaches more
importance to the heredity of the individual
than to his environment, and holds that the
chief importance of environment lies in its
selective effect upon breeding. The antieugenic position, on the other hand, is that
the environment of the individual is of paramount importance. No one but a fanatic
denies that both heredity and environment
count in the well-being of the individual.
The question is which is the more important
for the individual and the race. The controversy is complicated by the fact that very
often a bad environment accompanies a bad
heredity, and vice versa. Another difficulty
is that it is not possible in the case of human
beings to make observations extending over
many generations.

Further, the environment of civilized man
is very complicated. It consists not only of
the natural environment of climate and so
on, but also of food, clothing, housing, sanitation, medical and nursing attention, and
specialized occupation, not to mention social
environment such as charity and Poor Law.

The material and social environment of
the peoples of this island and of Western
Europe was changed, to an extent which it
is almost impossible to exaggerate, by the
Industrial Revolution. This term has been
much criticized in recent years, as having
a too catastrophic implication. If by revolution we mean a change which is complete
in a few weeks or months or even in one or
two decades, then indeed the term is hopelessly misleading. But if we view the long

| ‘ HE subject of this paper has perhaps

history of mankind in proper perspective,
and realize how economic and social arrangements which had existed for hundreds and,
in some cases, thousands of years were
superseded in the course of two or three
generations, then the term seems not only
striking but correct.

In the middle of the eighteenth century
the majority of the population of England
were rural workers. In the towns the death
rate exceeded the birth rate, and the
majority of town dwellers were either
country-born or the children of country-born
parents. In the nineteenth century the
urban dwellers rapidly became the majority
of the population and, even more significant,
a large proportion of the population was
town-born. This population lived in different kinds of dwellings from its rural ancestors, ate different food, did different work
amid totally different surroundings both
material and moral. It is extremely difficult
to say, however, what has been the result of
these changes upon human physique. Very
extreme statements are often made, based
upon little more than preconceived opinions.
The only thing that can be stated with certainty is that the changes are relatively
small compared with the magnitude of the
changes in environment. We have to remember, however, that the new environment
has existed for only a very short time, and
small changes may be very significant for
the future.

The period of environmental change may
be divided into three. (The actual dates
are, of course, somewhat arbitrary.)

1760-1820.—Broadly, a period of falling
death rate, and a stationary or slightly
rising birth rate. Economically, a period of
experiment and change, of the re-organization of agriculture. Politically and socially,
a period of war and unrest.

189
190

The second period, 1820-1870, is marked
by a stationary death rate and (possibly) a
slightly fluctuating birth rate, the two rates
being such that a large natural increase of
population took place throughout the period.
The period was one of most rapid change in
industry ; it saw the coming of the railway
age, and in it took place a very rapid growth
of towns and the mechanization of a large
part of industry. Politically the period was
one of consolidation and reform.

The last period, 1870 to 1914, is marked
by continued industrialization, a growing
dependence upon food and raw materials
produced overseas, and by effective improvements in social administration. During this
period both the death and birth rates were
falling, and the natural increase of population remained large.

The first period has already been worked
upon to a considerable extent both by the
writer of this article and by others. The
last period belongs rather to the statistician
and the medical writer than to the historian,
and, indeed, the ground has been largely
covered by Sir Arthur Newsholme and
others. The middle period was one of most
rapid change in industry, and yet it was
one of stability in birth and death rates. It
is the problem of that stability which is
engaging my attention at present. This
paper is concerned with that part of environmental change which was due to the changing occupations and the effect of that change
upon health and upon birth and death rates.

It had, of course, long been known that
certain diseases were associated with certain
specialized occupations, but interesting as
the facts were to medical science and important as they were to individuals, occupational
disease was of little national importance
since the majority of the people were nonspecialized rural workers. With the coming
of modern industry, however, large numbers
became specialized workers and, since some
of the industries were highly localized, occupation tended to become hereditary. ‘The
question of occupation and disease is, of
course, a wider one than that of unhealthy
processes. It includes occupational environment—e.g., factory as opposed to home

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

work, home environment associated with
work, e.g., the necessity of living in a large
town, and finally the standard of living
which the occupational wage makes possible.
All these subjects were canvassed during
the mid-nineteenth-century controversy over
the Factory Acts. (Factories at this period
meant textile factories in general, and cotton
factories in particular.) During this controversy one school of thought represented
the factories as pest houses, and the other
extreme as health resorts. These protagonists are too biased for their opinions to be
of any value, but from the reports of the
early factory inspectors much valuable
material may be drawn. One thing is clear
from these, that it was impossible to generalize about factory work. There were some
unhealthy processes, but these processes had
often been equally or more unhealthy when
carried on in the worker’s home (by hand).
Factories themselves could be divided into
town and country, and into large and small.

The conditions were totally different in
these different classes. There is a considerable amount of evidence that the
workers in well-managed rural factories
enjoyed good health. The inspectors always
vigorously defended the factory owners and
the industry against the wholesale charges
brought against them, and contended that
the conditions were better rather than worse
in factory as compared with home industry.
Even the evil of long hours was found to the
same or greater extent in employments such
as tailoring, printing, boot and _ shoe
making, and shop keeping. As to the
standard of life of the workers, here again
the evidence is very conflicting. Since the
textile industries gave work to men, women,
and children, earnings were on a family
basis, and wage statistics tell us little of the
well-being of families. In families with
several earners, the standard must have been
fairly high. Another difficulty is that the
cotton trade then, as now, was subject to
alternating periods of boom and depression,
and since the industry was highly localized
whole families suffered together in bad
times. There is also evidence that the
country workers were a better type than the
HEALTH AND PROSPERITY

town workers. The cotton towns, especially
Manchester, were flooded with low-grade,
slum-dwelling Irish labour in the forties.

THE IRISH IMMIGRATION

Contemporary writers on social subjects
were agreed that the Irish immigrants were
less healthy than the English poor. They
invariably lived in conditions of greater
overcrowding and dirt, and were subject to
constant re-infection from new immigrants
with the fever that was rampant in the home
country. Generally they entered unskilled
employments, and often struggled to send
money to members of the family in Ireland,
and so were less well fed than the English
workers. It was generally believed that
their constitutions were less resistant to
disease, but whether this was an inborn
characteristic or was due to bad environment it is difficult to say. The large Irish
immigration into the north of England
manufacturing towns was a factor of very
great social and racial significance. Mr.
Redford, in his book Labour Migration in
England 1800-1850, deals with the facts
very fully; but this migration has never
been given due weight in any general history
of the time.

Of course, one of the chief difficulties in
attempting to gauge the effects of industrialism on physique is that of measurement.
At the present time we have available the
criteria of height, weight, and so on, but it
is not safe to measure the effects of industrialism by comparing the existing rural
population with the existing town population. The existing rural population has
been subjected to the effects of heavy migrational losses, and industrialism has affected
its environment to a considerable extent,
particularly in the matter of food. We have
also to distinguish between the effects of the
early industrialism and of the very different
industrialism of the present time. For the
former we must rely on contemporary information. ‘To some extent the death rate
is a guide, and the fact that the death rate
remained stationary during the period of
most rapid industrial change, at any rate

19!

disproves some of the wilder statements as
to the bad effect of industrialism upon
health. But while I believe it to be true that
big changes in mortality will generally be
accompanied by changes in morbidity in the
same direction (not by any means necessarily of the same magnitude), it is not
always true of small changes: still less will
a stationary death rate necessarily mean
stationary health conditions. It is, however, an indication in that direction,
especially when we remember that the death
rate fell considerably in the succeeding
period. ‘There are certain other lines of
inquiry which the writer is pursuing, but is
not yet in a position to say with what result.

We have, of course, the opinions of contemporaries. Most of these are of little
scientific value, being in conformity with
the general views of the observer as to the
good or evil of the industrial system. But
in 1831 Thackrah published his well-known
book upon the Effects of the Arts, Trades,
and Professions upon Health, the first English work to attempt to deal fully with the
subject of industrial disease. He dealt with
over 120 occupations, most of them of the
handicraft type. His treatment over such
a large field was necessarily somewhat cursory and second-hand, but, nevertheless, the
book shows evidence of much keen, sensible,
and first-hand observation. Thackrah’s
book attracted considerable attention—it
went into a second edition almost immediately—and it was undoubtedly a great
stimulus to the scientific study of the relationship of health and occupation.

Various writers published studies of particular occupations or of the incidence of
particular diseases in different occupations.
Some of these writers tended to attach too
much importance to casual appearance—for
instance, the pallid complexion of the town
worker—or to statements of the worker himself ‘‘ that he enjoyed pretty good health.”’
In some cases such statements may have
been made under the influence of the fear
of dismissal if ill-health were owned to.
Another measuring rod used was that of the
age composition of the workers in an employment, a large number of old or elderly
192

workers being held to indicate that the employment was healthy. The investigators
sometimes failed to realize that many new
occupations would have been unlikely to
recruit elderly workers, and that ageing
workers would leave the heavy trades, not
necessarily to die. Also, age composition is
partly a function of the degree of division
of labour. In agriculture, where there was
little division of labour, there were plenty
of jobs suitable to elderly workers, while in
many more specialized employments there
would be none. But while we criticize some
of their methods, we must remember that
these early inquirers were breaking new
ground ; and if their statistics are often of
doubtful value, the importance of their
general impressions remains. A good number of the results of these special studies will
be found in the early numbers of the Journal
of Statistics.

The fundamental difficulty in dealing
with questions of health is, of course,
that there is no sharp line between good
and bad health. We have to accept the
rough-and-ready criterion as to whether the
worker is ill enough to be away from work,
and obviously the outlook of both the employer and the worker will affect this
criterion. But if the worker is entitled to
any form of sick benefit a rather more uniform gauge is introduced. It is, of course,
by no means a perfect one, but it remains
extremely important. By 1850 the Friendly
Society movement had attained considerable
importance in this country. The movement,
however, was much hampered by the constant failure of societies, due mainly to loose
actuarial calculation or, in many cases, to
the absence of any such calculation at all.
It was to aid in remedying this defect that
in 1850 the Registrar-General of Friendly
Societies, by the direction of the Home
Secretary, called for returns from the
societies for the preceding five years. The
results filled forty folio volumes, 6-7 inches
thick. After some discussion as to what
was to be done with this mass of material,
it was handed to Finlaison, the Actuary to
the National Debt Office. After excluding
300,000 doubtful cases, over three and a half

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

million entries remained to be dealt with.
Finlaison adopted a card system. The cards
were cut into slips and were assembled and
re-assembled in special frames according to
the observation to be made. The published
results showed the different incidence of
sickness among Friendly Society members
according to residence in small or large
towns or the country, according to light
occupations or heavy. Some of the more
important occupations were also given
separately. In all cases figures were given
for different age groups.

THE RATE OF SICKNESS

The final calculation showed an average
amount of sickness for the whole country of
ten days per member per annum, while the
average duration of sickness per case was
40.5 days. The mortality was 12 per
thousand members. To the surprise of the
investigators, the rural districts showed a
higher number of sick cases in proportion
to membership than the towns, but the sickness was of shorter duration. The returns
showed a correlation between length of sickness and mortality, but not between sickness
per member and mortality. German figures
for about the same period show a similar
result.

The theory that death-dealing illness
kills off a number of people quickly, leaving
healthy survivors, is not borne out by these
figures. In some cases death comes slowly ;
in others, where the victims are killed
quickly, the recovery of the survivors is
slow. It is also true that the conditions
which lead to high death rates are also likely
to lead to a large amount of serious sickness.
In regard to the inverse proportion of shortduration sickness, the explanation is probably that societies with a low incidence of
serious sickness would be likely to be more
generous in respect of claims for slight
sickness. In regard to the particular case
of high incidence of short-duration sickness
in the agricultural Friendly Societies, it was
pointed out that there was less difference
between sick pay and earnings in rural districts than there was in towns. Supervision
also is more difficult in rural districts than
HEALTH AND PROSPERITY

in towns; and there is evidence that the
rural societies were often under the patronage of the parson and the squire, and there
may have been a tendency to save poor
relief in periods of slack work at the expense
of the societies.

The average duration of sickness was
longer in the small towns than in the large,
possibly due to less good medical attention.
The returns also showed a heavy incidence
of sickness in the heavy trades, especially in
mining. ‘This was probably due to the inclusion of illness following accidents. There
was the same heavy incidence in the special
societies catering for railway workers and
for the Metropolitan Police. In the former
case the explanation as to accidents may
apply; the latter is somewhat mysterious,
but one reason would doubtless be that the
standard of health for active police duty
would he very high.

At the time of publication much attention
was attracted to the fact that the mortality
figures of the Friendly Societies were better
than those shown by the Life Insurance
Companies which catered for the upper and
middle classes. This result appeared to be
in direct opposition to some figures published by Chadwick, which showed a very
much lower average age at death in poor
districts of London than in the well-to-do
ones. From this Chadwick argued that the
death rate among the poor was very much
higher than among the rich. He had, however, failed to allow for the differing age
composition of the rich and poor districts,
which to a great extent, though by no means
entirely, accounted for the difference in age
at death. But neither was the comparison
between the Friendly Societies and the Life
Insurance Companies convincing. ‘The Insurance Companies figures were for policies
and not for lives, and it was very common
to effect more than one insurance upon the
same life—as many as twenty are recorded ;
the reason for this being that a life insurance policy was a common security for loans.

In regard to the Friendly Society figures,
the membership was so transitory that
mortality figures were not very reliable for
comparison with the rest of the community.

193

Further, members of Friendly Societies,
particularly in towns, were somewhat picked
members of their class, the more thrifty and
the more temperate. Again, there seems
reason to believe that a good part of the excessive mortality of the poor occurred in
infancy and early childhood ; and infant and
child mortality would not, of course, affect
the Friendly Society figures, nor, normally,
the life insurance ones.

DIFFERENTIAL RATES OF INCREASE

The question of the differential infant
mortality rate is closely related to that of
the differential rate of increase among
different classes. It was generally believed
in mid-nineteenth-century England that the
birth rate among the well-to-do was considerably lower than among the poor. Certainly, the proportion of children was relatively low in the residential districts of
London, but those districts have never been
typical: the large proportion of resident
servants accounts for a considerable number
of the excess of adults. ‘The belief at the
time was that town life increased fertility
and that the growing urbanization was
necessarily leading to a higher birth rate
among the working classes. This belief,
which was held by Chadwick, was mainly
due to a failure to allow for the age composition of the mid-nineteenth-century towns
which were growing rapidly by the immigration of young adults of both sexes. As
a matter of fact, the Report of the RegistrarGeneral for 1840 shows that the greatest
proportionate number of marriages of minors
was in the purely agricultural counties and
the least proportionate number in the Metropolis and the manufacturing districts.

The growing localization of industry
must have been some check on marriage.
The mining and metal industry districts
showed a large excess of males, while the
residential and textile districts attracted
women and children. The much-discussed
cotton industry was the subject of controversy in this, as in every conceivable matter.
Some writers held that factory work tended
to early marriage, and fecundity and/or im194

morality. “Other writers said that the factory worker had fewer children than the
wife of the agricultural labourer. Some
writers defended the factory worker by
pointing to the relatively small number of
bastardy orders in manufacturing districts.
The detractors of the system replied that
this was no proof of morality, since the factory worker either resorted to abortion or
supported her illegitimate child from her
own earnings without help from the Poor
Law.

It is very difficult to extract anything
from this welter of conflicting opinion. My
own belief, for what it is worth, is that the
line between respectability and the reverse
tends to be drawn more sharply in towns.
It seems likely that in a well-managed factory, for obvious reasons of discipline,
women with loose moral records would not
have been employed ; but this was not necessarily true of all factories. The immoral
would tend to be segregated and so to fall
to lower depths and to attract attention from
the charitable and from reformers. Rescue
societies, however, reported that very few of
those with whom they had to deal came from
the ranks of the factory operatives. Domestic service held the unenviable distinction of
supplying the greatest number of the unhappy inmates of rescue homes.

With regard to legitimate birth rates,
again we are mainly dealing with mere
opinion, not necessarily well-informed. A
return as to the vital statistics of a group of
spinners and piecers was, however, made
for presentation to the Factory Commission
of 1832. It was not ready in time for the
Commission, and was finally published in
the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
in 1842. This return was based upon statements made by the operatives and was, of
course, subject to a wide margin of error.
At the time of the inquiry the average duration of the married life of the married operatives was eleven years, and the average age
of the wives at marriage was 21. They had
had an average of 4.5 children per marriage,
and 4o per cent. of these children were dead.
Farr had calculated the fertility of marriage
for England and Wales as 4.2 for the ten

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

years ending 1830, but this was very likely
an under-estimate.

On the other hand, the marriages of the
spinners and piecers were not all completed ;
there is the possibility therefore of a fertility
higher, though not markedly higher, than
that for the whole country. This, however,
need not be ascribed to increased fecundity
due to the conditions of work, but to the
simple fact that the opportunities for child
employment tended to attract migrants with
large or growing families to the textile districts. There is direct evidence that widows
with young children migrated to the textile
districts to find work for themselves and
their offspring. It is possible that some of
the children enumerated in the above inquiry may have been step-children. ‘The
high mortality among the children will be
noted. There is not very likely to have been
over-statement here, nor is the figure out of
harmony with the known statistics of the
time. If the working-class birth rate at this
time was slightly higher than that of the
upper and middle classes, its effect was
probably more than balanced by the high
infant and child mortality rates among the
children of the workers. I should feel inclined to hazard the opinion that the natural
increase of the better-off was at a higher rate
at this time than that of the manual
workers. Further research may enable me
to confirm this opinion or the reverse.

INDICATIONS OF HEALTH

Returning to the question of the effect of
industrialism upon health, there is a con
‘siderable amount of evidence, which there is

not the space to quote here, that factory
work was not in itself more unhealthy than
other indoor urban occupations. Industrialism, however, led to a rapid urbanization
which common sense would lead us to believe
must have been an unfavourable factor in
national health, especially in view of the
then conditions in towns. There must have
been some favourable factor which led to the
stationary death rate in spite of urbanization and the depressed state of the agricul
[Continued on page 196.]
196

tural labourer. This factor was probably
the increased earning power which the new
technique brought to many workers, and the
consequent better feeding. At any rate, the
output of the workers of industrialized England was generally held to be superior to
those of the far less industrialized continent.
It is well known that Brassey held the English navvy to be well worth the high wages
which he could command. ‘The pessimistic
Report on the Sanitary Condition of the
Working Classes, published in 1842, quotes
the fact that English navvys employed on
railway construction at Hamburg earned
double the wages of the Germans and were
worth more to the contractors at double
wages. Employers of labour are quoted as
saying that it was strength of body com
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bined with strength of will which gave
steadiness and value to the artisan and common labourer of England. The majority of
these may have been country bred, but an
English cotton manufacturer also spoke of
English labour being twice as effective as
French, and spoke of the ‘‘ superior persevering energy of the English workman,
whose enduring, untiring, savage industry
surpasses that of every other manufacturing
country I have visited, Belgium, Germany,
and Switzerland not excepted.’’ The terms
of this tribute may be exaggerated in expression, but the general superiority of the
English workman at this period is well
attested, and hardly bears out the contention
that the race was suffering rapid deterioration.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.
