C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.

Voluntary Sterilization:

Its Role

in Human Betterment:

and a half, I am one of six speakers. If the

available time is equally partitioned, I have
fifteen minutes. I hold it to be a grave discourtesy
to other speakers, as well as an embarrassment
to the organizers, if one exceeds one’s time limit.

What is the role of voluntary sterilization
in human betterment? It will certainly be contended at this conference that sterilization has
many roles in human betterment; but it could be
argued, and has by some been argued, that
sterilization is more likely to cause human
degradation than betterment. The issue turns on
what we mean by betterment. I will arbitrarily
distinguish four possible meanings of this
controversial word.

[= THIS OPENING session lasting an hour

1. Genetic or Eugenic Betterment
First we might mean genetic, eugenic or racial
betterment. It was in this sense, I think, that the
term was mainly understood in the first two
decades of the century. Attention was then given
to certain families—or rather widely ramifying
connections—in which fertility was abnormally
high and in which pauperism, disease, defect and
crime were widespread. Massive genealogies
were compiled and the financial cost to the
community of these connections was estimated.
These retrospects were sometimes rounded off
with a plausible guess at what the community
would have been saved in cash and stress if,
aided by sterilization or by other means, the
original founder of the ill-fated dynasty had
been childless.

These genealogical connections were some
* Keynote address delivered at The First International
Conference on Voluntary Sterilization (convened by
the Human Betterment Association for Voluntary
Sterilization), April 16th, 1964, in New York City.

times contrasted with others which had produced a rich crop of able and distinguished
people to whom the community and the nation
owed much. It was obvious that humanity could
be bettered by the discriminating use on the one
hand of the brake or pruning hook, and on the
other of the accelerator or fertilizer. There were
similar genealogical researches in Britain. We
called the two groups problem families and
promising families. The former contained people
who presented multiple and burdensome social
problems. In both our countries compulsion
was once held to be necessary as a restraining
measure; and at meetings of the London
Eugenics Society forty years ago I recall the
contention that the use of compulsion was
justified by its acceptance in other spheres of
life. Education is compulsory. We are all compulsorily—and many think excessively—taxed.
We are compulsorily fined for minor offences
such as exceeding the speed limit or parking our
cars in the wrong places. We are compulsorily
conscripted in war time, and even in peace time.
We are compulsorily certified and segregated if
mental disorders make us dangerous to ourselves
or to others. If we commit crimes we may be
compulsorily imprisoned or even compulsorily
executed. And I might add that if these discussions about the permissible uses of compulsion had been held in Britain after 1948, when
the Children Act was passed, it might further
have been pointed out that children could be
compulsorily removed by the local authority
from the care of parents who were deemed
unfit to look after them.

This exercise of compulsion within the sphere
of the family is nearer to our topic: for if
compulsion is justified in removing children
from the care of “‘unfit”’ parents (as such parents

77

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56, 2.
ER-~—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are called in the Children Act), compulsion
might also be beneficently used to prevent
“unfit” parents from having more children on
behalf of whom similar drastic measures would
probably have to be taken at a later date.

Thus, it used to be contended, the principle of
compulsion is already widely accepted. What
was needed was the recognition of its applicability to people who, by merely reproducing
themselves, imposed grave burdens and evils on
themselves, their children and the community.

This idea of betterment is, I take it, losing
ground everywhere to-day. Yet it presumably
underlies the compulsory sterilization laws
which, in diminishing force, are applied to
sufferers from mental illness and defect in most
of your State Institutions.

It may be noted at this point that the ideal of
eugenic or genetic betterment is applied in a
converse sense by a minority who, sharing
Professor H. J. Muller’s views, see in the
judicious use of artificial insemination a means
of human betterment.

2. Betterment of Health

The idea that humanity can be bettered by
improvement in health has always been accepted,
and I suppose that this is the way that most
members of your association think of betterment. That the health of an overtaxed mother
can be preserved by sterilization is proved by the
numerous letters expressing thanks and gratitude
which most of us have received. Their thanks
can be taken to include vicariously the thanks of
their already born children who will be spared
the deprivations imposed on poor families by a
very high fertility.

3. Socio-economic Betterment

This kind of betterment seems to me to be new.
It is in the minds of the leaders of developing
countries where accelerating population growth
is stultifying carefully laid plans to raise levels of
living. It is the quantitative emphasis which is
novel. The benefits and betterments resulting
from a well-geared adjustment of population
growth to the growth of resources are diverse.
They certainly include considerations of health
and nutrition. Indeed, these benefits may be
regarded as primary. As we all know, voluntary

78

sterilization is now being encouraged in India
and elsewhere in a socio-economic perspective
which, so to speak, transcends the family. I am
thinking particularly of the arguments of Mr.
Gopalaswami of which I hope that we shall hear
more during this conference. Together with
other “targets” aimed at in India’s third fiveyear plan, we hear of a sterilization target the
attainment of which would bring betterment.

4. Moral Betterment

Here we are on controversial ground. It could be
argued on the one hand that any measure which
preserves and consolidates the family is morally
praiseworthy. But on the other hand it can be
argued, and is argued by some, that sterilization
is intrinsically wrong or morally reprehensible
and, in this assessment, it is bracketed with the
use of appliance methods of birth control and
with abortion. This is an issue about which
argument is usually unprofitable. But to those
who apply a moral veto, it is, I think, fair to puta
question. At what cost is the veto to be applied?
If it is recognized that an exceedingly rapid
growth of population brings deprivations and
hardships in its train, and if it is further acknowledged that the morally permissible methods of
restraining fertility—such as continence and the
rhythm method—are likely to be impracticable
in developing countries for some time to come,
what is the price which opponents, by setting
their moral sights so high, would be prepared to
see paid (principally by women and children)
for the moral frailty of men? The extremist
would doubtless answer “‘any price. You must
never pursue good ends by bad means; never
compromise with evil.” I may say that I understand this view though I don’t share it; and I
feel sorry for those who are genuinely
“‘agonized” by the predicament. I may mention
that in 1954 Pope Pius XII, addressing the
participants in a world population conference
held in Rome, referred to the world’s population
problems as “agonizing” or “‘anguishing”: he
spoke in French and used the word
“‘angouassant’’.

Yet a seemingly simple solution of this moral
dilemma has been advanced. Addressing in 1952
the inaugural meeting of the third international
conference of the IPPF in Bombay, Dr. S.
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: ITS ROLE IN HUMAN BETTERMENT

Radhakrishnan, then Vice-President of India,
told us that Gandhi “‘made a distinction between
what may be regarded as ideal and what is to be
regarded as permissible.” The sights were
unfixed, so to speak, and treated as adjustable.
Harshness could be tempered and tolerance
inculcated if, in relation to the ideal, spheres
could be delineated comprising the generally
permissible or second best, the occasionally
permissible in special circumstances, and the
never permissible. Thus, by admitting some
flexibility, the agonizing predicament caused by
the widespread inability, heavy with prospects of
social disaster, to conform with a respected but
uncompromisingly formulated ideal, could be
relieved.

Possible Scope of Sterilization
What conclusions can I draw from my review of
these four meanings of the word “‘betterment’’?

In my first sense of eugenic betterment,
definite conclusions are difficult to draw, for we
don’t know what stresses the women concerned
(for example those sterilized in your State
Institutions) were spared by not having more
children; nor do we know what sort of children
they would have had, nor what sort of lives these
children would have led. We are likewise ignorant of whether the community would have
suffered or benefitted from their births. A little
light might be thrown on these uncertainties by
a study of the children already born to the
inmates of your state institutions before they
were sterilized. But I do not know of any such
studies. Privately, I have little doubt that the
women themselves benefitted from being spared
further pregnancies, and that the community
was spared social problems and burdens. Could
not your Association promote an investigation
of the already born children of a sample of your
institutionally-sterilized women and of the later
reactions of the women themselves to the
operation ?

In my second sense of betterment in health,
there is I think, little doubt. The question can
largely be answered by simple statistics. I
recently reviewed the results of nine follow-up
inquiries and this was my conclusion: there is a
general similarity of results of reported follow-up
inquiries of voluntarily sterilized people. A

substantial majority of from 75 per cent upwards report themselves as entirely satisfied; a
minority of from 10 to 15 per cent report
dissatisfaction not amounting to permanent
regret; and a smaller minority, usually under 10
per cent and sometimes much less, express
definite regret. The larger the proportion of
psychiatric cases in the sample, especially of
neurotics and sufferers from hypochondriacal
anxiety, the larger are these last two minorities.

In my third sense of socio-economic benefit, it
is too soon to venture an answer. The organized
practice of sterilization in India, where it is
hoped that sterilization may in due course help
to curb an excessive fertility, is in a transitional
stage. In another ten years Indian demographers
and those of other Asian countries who may
follow India’s example should be able to provide
an answer. Hitherto the effect on the birth rate
must be negligible. But Colonel Raina will tell
us more later. The Jeast that can be said is that
if a majority of the sterilized people are happy,
more good than harm will have been done.

Of betterment in my fourth category, of moral
betterment, our view will depend on standpoint.
Those who think that it is morally praiseworthy
to promote the well-being of the family will take
a favourable view if it can be shown that
sterilization as now practised in the world
consolidates rather than weakens family ties.
Those who think that, in the absence of strong
medical indications (such, for example, as those
which call for prostatectomy in the male and
hysterectomy in the female), sterilization is
intrinsically evil, will take an opposite view.

I conclude with two remarks. First, may I say
that I well know that in many western countries
sterilization is widely sought as a convenience.
An often well-to-do couple have had as many
children as they want; and they wish to be
spared the bother—and the slight risk—of using
contraception. I have not considered this
sizeable group in my paper because I don’t
really think that its experiences have much
bearing on human betterment which is the theme
which Mrs. Proskauer Smith assigned to me.
The issue is one of convenience rather than of
betterment.

Secondly, I am inclined to think that sterilization as we practise it to-day may, from the

79
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

standpoint of the historian of the future, appear
as an interim measure. If, as I regard as almost
certain, oral methods of birth control are
perfected—that is to say when they are cheap
(as they are not to-day), reliable (as they seemingly are to-day) harmless (as they apparently
are to-day) and devoid of occasionally unpleasant side-effects (as they are not to-day)—then I
think that the demand for sterilization will
dwindle. But no one knows how long we will

have to wait before oral methods of contraception are thus perfected. Intra-uterine devices for
preventing conception—if they fulfill current

‘expectations—may likewise diminish the need

for sterilization. Until these new methods are
perfected my guess is that there will be an
increasing demand for voluntary sterilization
which must be discriminatingly met. And my
belief is that on balance the results will conduce
to human betterment.

THE AMERICAN JOURNAL

HUMAN GENETICS

A quarterly record of research, review and bibliographic material relating to heredity in man.
Official Journal of THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HUMAN GENETICS

Editor: H. ELDON SUTTON
Department of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712

The editor and his staff of associates will be glad to consider manuscripts pertaining to human genetics.

Subscription to THe AMERICAN JOURNAL OF HUMAN GENETICS or information pertaining to subscription
should be addressed to Grune & Stratton, Inc., 381 Park Avenue South, New York 16, New York. The
subscription price per volume is $10.00. A volume consists of 4 numbers. Single numbers cost $3.00.
The first volume was published in 1949. One volume has been published each year since then.

Correspondence pertaining to membership in THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HUMAN GENETICS or to general
society affairs should be addressed to the Secretary of the Society, Dr. S. H. Boyer, Department of
Medicine, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore 5, Maryland.

 
