DIVORCE AND EUGENICS WA
Some Notes on their Relationship

By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN

GOOD deal of confusion is often

displayed when divorce is considered

solely with reference to its racial
effects, and I feel that I may have erred
in this respect by not clearly realizing that
there are in this connection two quite
distinct questions to be held in view. They
are as follows:

1. What would be the effect of legislation facilitating divorce on the birth rate?
More especially, would it affect one section
of the population more than another ?

2. What would be the effect of divorce
on the individuals divorced in regard to
their probable fertility?

Divorce only enters on the field of
eugenics when it affects procreation differentially, and this is for our Society a
fundamental scientific truth which, however, seems usually to be ignored when
divorce is being discussed under its
auspices, a truth which I wish here
especially to emphasize.

In a message which I sent to the International Congress at New York last year,
I dealt with the first of these two questions
very briefly, and I then stated my belief,
though not without doubts, that free or
unfettered divorce would lower the birth
rate generally by the further promotion
of birth control, the greatest effects being
thus produced amongst the superior types,
this being an obviously dysgenic consequence.

The reasons which I gave for this belief
were as follows: The more easily could
divorce be obtained, the more probable
would a dissolution of the marriage tie
appear to be in all circumstances. In
consequence, family limitation would be
more practised, because both before
marriage and after it the thought would

15

more often arise that when living apart
children would be likely to become a
serious encumbrance. And if the birth
rate were thus lowered, it would be lowered
most amongst the foreseeing and the
prudent and least amongst the stupid and
the reckless. Free divorce would, therefore, thus tend to increase those differences
in the birth rate which now constitute the
greatest danger to our race.*

In my book on Eugenic Reform I had
previously argued that the effect of divorce
on the individuals thus separated is to
increase their fertility, and here are, therefore, two conclusions which I have come
to at different times, and which appear at
first sight to contradict each other.+ There
is, however, not necessarily any antagonism between these two opinions. Legislation facilitating divorce might lower the
birth rate generally, whilst lowering. it
least, not only amongst many inferior
types, but also amongst those who have
actually been divorced. And this is what
I have suggested would actually occur.

It is true that I am now less sure than
I was that divorce does increase the
probability of parenthood amongst those
actually divorced. To illustrate why such
an increase seems probable, the case of a
man whose ill-temper was the ultimate
cause of his divorce may be cited. His
divorced wife may have had as many
children as she wanted; she may have
become familiar with contraceptive
methods; and she may from experience
have acquired a dread of marriage. None
of these things may be true of the woman

*** Although few statistics are available, what
there are agree with ordinary observation in indicating that divorce lowers the birth rate.’ Builders
of America. Huntington and Whitney. p. 123.

+ Eugenics Reform, p. 465. Several points are
there discussed for which there is no space here.
16

whom the divorced man wishes to marry,
and the number of his children may, therefore, be actually increased by his divorce.
It seems at all events to be evident that
in some cases divorce would actually
increase the fertility of the individuals
divorced; and, with such a possibility in
view, divorce is a futile racial safeguard
in regard to the hereditary transmission
of any defect. Eugenic reformers should
devote their main efforts towards facilitating voluntary sterilization in the case of
those divorced on account of any sufhciently serious hereditary defect, this
being the most efficient safeguard.

It should, moreover, be remembered that
the easier it is to obtain a divorce, the less
often will those couples, who fail to agree,
be separated one from the other without
being divorced. Such a state of things, of
course, does not prevent illegitimate
parenthood, but it can hardly be doubted
that it does to some extent diminish the
fertility of those thus separated. From
this it follows that the easier it became to
obtain a divorce, the greater would become
the fertility of those divorced and the
greater would be such dysgenic effects as
might be produced.

The types most frequently divorced
include those difficult to live with, the
quarrelsome, the discontented, the neurotic,
the drunkard, the insane, and the criminal.
Moreover, as mating appears to be to some
extent assortive, we may assume that
even when the fault appears to be on one
side only, the other spouse is probably also
below the average in racial value. All
those divorced may, therefore, be held to
be on the average below the median of the
nation as a whole; and, if greater facilities
for divorce would in truth increase the
fertility of both parties, we are thus confirmed in our belief that dysgenic effects
would be produced by facilitating divorce.

In the case of any divorced person, however, who is endowed with failings sufficiently apparent to make a second marriage
very improbable, the foregoing conclusion
that divorce tends to increase his or her
fertility obviously no longer holds good.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In such cases divorce is in fact eugenic;
for it prevents further procreation on the
part of the couple thus separated, and this
without any corresponding disadvantages ;
that is if we may leave the doubtful effects
of assortive mating out of account. But
the desire to be separated from such a
markedly defective partner would generally be strong, and as long as divorce is
possible in such cases, there is little need
that it should be very easily obtainable.
There are, moreover, reasons for believing that where divorce is impossible,
illegitimacy is promoted and marriage
comes to be regarded as a less necessary
prelude to parenthood. Such a state of
things produces dysgenic results by
encouraging carelessness in mating, and
we thus again come to the conclusion that
if looking to eugenic considerations only,
divorces should not be too difficult to
obtain. The above-mentioned conflicting
claims will be best met, in my opinion, as
I have suggested elsewhere, by making
living apart for a given period—I now
suggest four years—as the one and only
ground for divorce And here let it be
noted that if any such proposal were
adopted, then there would be no advantage
in making insanity and certain other grave
defects a sufficient ground for divorce. No
one has or will suggest that the mere
certification of a person as being insane
should be all that is needed in this respect ;
because, amongst other reasons, the doctor
when deciding on such an _ important
question ought to be able to concentrate his
attention on the welfare of his patient and
on the safety of the public without being
disturbed by thoughts concerning divorce.
Continuous detention in an asylum for a
certain number of years has no doubt been
suggested as being an adequate ground for
divorce; but such a proposal is also open
to some extent to the above-mentioned
objections on medical grounds. It would’
at all events be interesting if a considered
opinion of the Board of Control on the
subject could be obtained. What I wish
now to urge is, however, that if living apart
for a given period were legalized as a
DIVORCE AND EUGENICS

ground for divorce, then all that is needed
in this respect in regard to insanity and
certain other grave evils would thus be
automatically dealt with as far as it is
possible to do so.

A not uncommon misconception in regard
to the racial effects of divorce is that, when
all obligations in respect to an unworthy
partner are cancelled, such a breaking of
the marriage tie must produce beneficial
effects by permitting parenthood with a
worthy spouse. But it must be remembered that, if we may put assortive
mating out of the question, divorce is in
this way exactly as likely to promote the
fertility of those below the average in what
Galton called civic worth as of those above
it. We shall all admit that merely to
increase the numbers of a herd of cattle
does nothing towards improving its breed,
and we should never forget that in the same
way to encourage parenthood without
reference to quality is useless from the
racial point of view.

Merely to avoid giving a false impression, I wish here to state clearly that
I am definitely opposed to making it either
very easy or very difficult to obtain a
divorce; but as my main reasons have no
connection with differential fertility and
therefore none with eugenics, it would be
out of place to discuss them here. Perhaps
I may, however, go so far as to state that
my chief objections to free divorce arise
from my belief in the extreme importance
of keeping the family together, the
advantages being obvious, including the
bringing tp of as many children as possible
with the care of both a mother and a
father; an argument against facilitating
divorce which only holds good up to a
certain point. It is true that some authorities, for whom I have great respect, believe

17

that the existing rigidity of the marriage
tie causes a reaction and increases the
desire for divorce. This is, I hold, a
psychological error ; for such opinions seem
to arise from a wish on the part of those
aiming at greater sexual freedom to
rationalize their desires. I may here also
add that if living apart for a given period
were made a ground for divorce, there
would be no need to place, as at present, a
most objectionable premium on adultery in
this respect.

THE EUGENIC ATTITUDE

The foregoing arguments indicate that
when the matter is considered in regard to
racial consequences only, there are reasons
of no great weight or cogency for not making
divorce obtainable with either great ease
or great difficulty. This is, as I have
indicated, also the conclusion at which I
myself arrive when the more immediate
consequences only are taken into account.
Indeed, these social effects seem to me to
be of so much greater importance that I
hold it would be wise when considering
divorce to leave racial consequence out of
consideration altogether. The moral questions connected with these problems give
rise to acute difference of opinion on points
having no racial bearings; and divorce has,
therefore, not been included in our Outline
of a Practical Eugenic Policy, and I hope
it never will be. Provided that they pull
together in a common determination to do
what is possible to improve the inborn
qualities of future generations, the members of the Eugenics Society should not be
hindered by their membership from holding
any opinion whatever in regard to divorce
law reform, these controversies being, however, carried on in some other arena.

_ ne

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 1.
