THE TREATMENT OF THE
CONGENITALLY UNFIT AND OF
CONVICTS BY STERILIZATION.

By R. A. GissBons, M.D., F.R.C.S.E.,

(Gynaccologist to the Grosvenor Hospital for Women.)

From A Paper READ BEFORE THE HUNTERIAN SOCIETY
ON Monpay, Marcu 22np, 1926.

It is certain that the subject of Sterilization of the unfit is becoming
of increasing interest. The fact that it has been for iong in use in
America and that it is now being considered by other countries, shews
how much more seriously it is thought of as a means of permanently
diminishing propagation. As evidence of this interest in London, I
may mention that recently a Board of Guardians sent out a memorandum to all Guardians of England and Wales, asking their support
to a resolution urging Parliament to consider seriously the urgent
question of sterilization of the mentally unfit. In addition, there
have been somewhat similar resolutions from public bodies.

In the first place, I should like to say that the word ‘‘unfit,’’
when read in medical literature, is generally meant to convey that the
individual is unsuitable as to behaviour and conduct for the every day
duties of life, and carries with it the impression of mental deficiency.
In this paper, I use the word as implying an individual who does not
conform to the ordinary convenances of society, whether the acts be
due to genuine mental weakness or to moral delinquency.

According to the last Annual Reports of the Board of Control for
England and Wales,‘ and the General Board of Control for Scotland,
there were 201,179 individuals mentallv affected, and of these, 51,230
were mental defectives. ©)

During the four years 1921 to 1924, there were 143,326 males,
and 41,219 female prisoners, some of these having been convicted from
1 to 5 times, from 6 to 10 times, from 11 to 20 times, and others actually over 20 times, as the accompanying table will shew. )

Abstract from Report of Commissioners of Prisons and Director of
Convict Prisons for years ending 31st March, 1921, 1922, 1923, and
1924.
 

THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 101

PARTICULARS. 1921 1922 1923 1924 Totals for 4
years.

Total number of male

 

 

 

 

 

 

prisoners om Bs 82, 869 35,787 37,336 37,334 143, 326
Total number Female 11,043 11,340 10,035 8,801 40,419
43,912 47,127 47,371 46,135 183, 745

Previous Convictions
Convicted 1 to 5 times:

 

 

Males. . i bd 11,681 13,292 14,550 14, 508 d4,031
Females .. wa 3, 361 3, 666 3, 004 2,391 12,422
66.45¢
Convicted 6 to 10 times:
Males. . sm i 2,465 2,873 3, 13+ 3.6945 12,166
Females .. .. 970 1,129 1,120 948 A, 167
16,333
Convicted 11 to 20 times:
Males. . as as 1, 948 2,101 2,852 2,608 9, 004
Females .. .. 1,121 1,416 1,186 1,033 4,756
13, 760°
Convicted over 20 times:
MAles.. ay a 1, 802 2,140 2,082 2,224 8,258
Females a: a 2,648 2,860 3,127 2,886 11,521
19,779
Average annual charge
per inmate .. .. | £121 71011138 7 2/85 19 0] 85 12 8
Total cost of prisoners per annum for 1921— £5,828, 847
do. 1922— £5, 339,881 16 4
do. 1923— £4,071,537 9 O

 

 

do. 1924— £3, 947,732 13 9
Total for 4 vears . £18,687,998 19 1

From the tables of mental deficiency it is evident that it is increasing. The number of mentally deficient under statutory supervision
on the Ist January 1925 was 18,547,—an increase of 2,722. In addition, there was a large increase in the number under voluntary supervision, the figure being 14,156, as compared with 6,744 in the previous
vear. (4)

From the reports of the Commissioners of Prisons, the number of
prisoners, both male and female, averages 46,136 annually.

HEREDITY.

In this paper, I suggest a method of diminishing in the future, not
only the mentally deficient, but the number of individuals in our
prisons. It is therefore only right I should adduce such statistics as
will prove it to be logically sound that such means of treatment ought
to be adopted in the best interests of the State. It can be shewn that
the main cause of this increasing number of the mentally affected is
heredity, and that this also accounts for the large number of confirmed
criminals.

 
102 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In an interesting paper on the work of the special schools in London
for mentally defective children, Mr. Arthur Hill states that the
training aims at teaching habits of obedience and cleanliness, improving emotional stability, and making children employable; but he
does not consider that ‘‘their final products are of eugenic value to
the race.’’ ©)

Dr. Goddard states that no less than two thirds of our feeblemindedness is due to heredity.“ From personal examination of
more than 5000 prisoners, Dr. Paul Bowers has shewn that the antecedents of 44 per cent. of these convicts were psychopathic individuals
who were either insane, feeble-minded, epileptic, criminal, or suffered
with organic or functional disease of the nervous system. Of
course heredity and environment must be considered together, because,
however excellent may be the hereditary tendencies in a child, the
influence of a pernicious environment may be the cause of criminal
conduct.

In the interesting presidential address of Dr. Ochsner, delivered
before the American Surgical Association, advocating -the sterilization of habitual criminals &c., he states that it has been proved by
statistics collected in the State of Indiana, that 100 families have added
more than one half to the crimes done to native born citizens during
the past generation. The offspring of the respectable members of
society are constantly exposed to the harmful influence of contact with
these degenerate classes and their offspring. He also mentions that a
noted criminal lawyer who has been active constantly in the criminal
court of a great city for many year, states that he has many times
encountered sons of criminals guilty of the identical crimes for which
their fathers were prosecuted many years before. ®)

It is important in criminology to collect and classify the data. It
is true that environment and evil education have a marked effect in
the production of criminals, but a large proportion ofthem have sprung
from unsound parents.) Sichart gives the proportion of pathological inheritance as 36 per cent; Marro makes it 90 per cent. “9
Frequently vicious education and vicious heredity are combined in
producing criminals. Of 104 criminals whose heredity was investigated, 71 shewed some hereditary influences. Marro investigated
deaths by alcoholism, suicide, insanity and cerebral disease, and
found that among 230 parents of criminals, these causes constituted
32-1 per cent., whilst in the case of the parents of normal persons they
are only 16-1 per cent.,—almost exactly half. Sichart studied 3881
subjects in prison in Wurtemberg for theft, rape and fraud. In comparison with the general population he found that anomalies or crimes
existed in the case of the parents of the various classes in the following
proportions :—

Thieves, 32 per cent;
Incendiaries, 36-8 per cent;
Sexual offenders, 38-7 per cent;
Perjurers, 20-5 per cent;
Swindlers, 23-6 per cent.()
THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 103

In Dr. Barr’s individual study of 4050 cases of imbecility, he
found 2651, or 65:45 per cent. caused by malign heredities, and of
these, 1030, or 25-43 per cent. were due to a direct inheritance of
idiocy, and 280, or 6:91 per cent. to insanity. 42)

The course of criminality commences early. In 87 cases out of 100,
the first conviction took place under the age of 20; in many instances
at 15 or 17 years of age, and even earlier.“3) In spite of the excellent
work done for the Borstal lads, about 35 per cent. who have passed
through the Borstal training have again come into conflict with the
law. Dr. Parkes Wilson said that in Pentonville about 100.
persons a year were so far mentally deficient as to be quite unfit for
prison discipline, and that, besides these, no less than 20 per cent.
of the prisoners shew signs of mental inefficiency. Of 100 feebleminded ecnvicts, it is judged that only four might be discharged to
the care of relatives, or unconditionally, with reasonable prospect of
leading an honest life. (5)

Dr. Tredgold, from an exhaustive study of the antecedents of
mental defectives, states that over 80 per cent. of the cases are connected with neuropathic inheritance. Ge)

It is apparently a simple explanation of the foregoing conditions.
to say that there must be some fault in the development of the brain,
but it is extremely difficult to say what is the actual cerebral change
occurring in the mentally deficient child or in the confirmed convict.
Mental deficiency is associated with and proportional to the arrest of
development of the supra granular layer of pyramidal cells of the
cerebral cortex.” Normal development is undoubtedly dependent
upon various parts of the organism being gradually formed in physiologically healthy relation to each other. It may be that the necessary
stimuli for the development of certain parts of the brain may be
inhibited, or that there may be too much stimulation, with the result
that there may be an atrophic condition of the part affected, or the
reverse. It may also be borne in mind in dealing with development,
that the nutritive or atrophic relations existing between the different
parts of the mass undergoing growth, is of the highest importance. It
may be pointed out that environmental changes acting upon the
fertilised ovum, or upon the embryo, may produce an almost infinite
variety of abnormal types, although, so far as is known, these modifications do not become hereditary. If the fertilised egg be placed in a
centrifugal machine, the heavier particles are thrown to one side of
the egg, and the entire substance of the egg becomes stratified into
layers and zones, which may lead to serious changes in development. (18)

ENVIRONMENT.

It is interesting to note that in the 17th and 18th centuries, many
philosophers taught that all men were born equal, and later, became
unequal through unequal opportunities.

There can be no doubt about the influence of environment upon the
young, both for good and for evil, and there are many who regard
environment as the greatest contributory cause of crime, and who
place heredity in a subordinate position. The environmental condi104 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tions act on the mind through the medium of the nervous mechanism,
and we are therefore able to trace innumerable modifications in the
nervous system which may correspond to the growing adaptation to
external relations. But the physical organism must possess certain
fundamental capacities which determine its adaptability from birth. 0

We can see, from what has already been said, that neither heredity
nor environment should be considered alone, but that they must be
combined in bringing up a child, for both are necessary to development, and the latter can often do much when the former is at fault.
According to an interesting memoir on ‘‘The relative value of the
factors which influence infant welfare’’—a study of the data provided
by the Medical Officers of Health of certain towns, leads to the conclusion that purely environmental factors are, as a whole, far less influential upon infant welfare than factors which are presumably inborn. @°

A germ cell would remain the same if it were not for some external
stimulant. Experiments on developing animals shew what may be
relatively important, both as regards environment and heredity, and
the modifications which may be produced by changes in environmental conditions.

From the foregoing, it is quite evident how great is the responsibility of heredity in producing mental defectives and criminals. But
although this is readily accepted in the case of mental defectives, it is
hard to make the vast majority of people grasp the connection between
heredity and criminal offences; and yet we are certain, from the statistics already mentioned, that prisoners convicted more than twice are
likely to be found guilty on future occasions, and that this conduct
may be really due to a neuropathic strain.

It is right however, to point out that all mentally defective children are not the result of hereditary tendencies; they may originate
from three additional sources :—

(a) It may happen that the first born child of parents who may
have an excellent mental and physical history, may have the brain
injured, and become deficient mentally owing to some compression
of the head by a slightly narrow pelvis, or to the use of forceps in
delivery. We know from the post-mortem examination of infants
what may take place in the way of intra-cranial haemorrhage, laceration, depression, and depressed fracture of the cranial bones. Statistics seem to prove however, that a long labour is more prone to interfere with mental development late in life than forceps extraction. (21)

(b) A second source is, strangely enough, the last child delivered
in a large family of otherwise perfectly normal infants. This is
difficult to explain; it may have something to do with the exhaustion
of a woman who has borne many children.

(c) The third source is injury to the head in an infant who up to
the moment of the accident has been perfectly bright and apparently
intelligent. I need only refer to the, mental weakness following
specific fevers, or to an attack of encephalitis lethargica, for at present
we do not know enough about the latter disease to predicate whether
the condition may be permanent or pass off.

I have dwelt thus long upon heredity and environment because
THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 105

the former is the prime factor, in the vast majority of cases, of
mentally deficient children and confirmed criminals.

TREATMENT.

Under this will be considered the best method, having regard to
the future, of dealing with the mentally deficient and criminals. With
reference to the former, this must be divided into the treatment of
those mentally deficient by segregation and by sterilization.

With regard to segregation, it must be at once admitted that if
it could be thoroughly and efficiently carried out, and if it could
include all the mentally deficient, no treatment could be better. But
we know that all mentally deficient individuals are not under control.
There are many girls and boys who are quite well enough to be kept
at home, and who can do a certain amount of housework with advantage to the parents. It is impossible to segregate these. For those
who are bad enough, the best method of treatment is doubtless that
which they receive at schools or colonies.

According to the Board of Control, large institutions are to be
preferred, not only on the ground of economy in initial cost of maintenance, but also of efficient organisation and classification. It is
the high grade mentally deficients who give rise to so much anxiety,
not only on account of the future, but because of the harm they may
do to others. If all could be segregated, it would obviously be a
great advantage. We know that the mentally deficient are well cared
for in the State institutions and certified houses, and there is of course,
less likelihood of promiscuous intercourse, but according to the
Report of 1924, there were many hundreds of urgent cases for which
there were no vacancies in existing institutions. These will have to
remain for long periods without the training, care, and protection they
need. Lack of accommodation means degradation, crime, pauperism,
and disease to individual defectives, with additional expense to the
community. (22) Needless to say it is from the latter that, from the
point of view of propagation, harm is apt to arise.

It is on account of the rapidity with which propagation occurs
that this matter becomes so serious and increasingly urgent. They
propagate from two to six times more rapidly than normal individuals. 3) The higher grades of feeble-minded persons (who are the
most numerous and dangerous) tend to have very large families, as
can be proved from the detailed records of 1000 cases. It is important,
with reference to the above, to point out that after the infinite care and
trouble exercised by the Royal Commission on the Care and Control
of the Feeble-minded, one of the conclusions was that ‘‘In view of the
evidence concerning fertility, the prevention of mentally deficient
persons becoming parents would tend largely to diminish the number
of such persons in the population.’’

According to the Royal Commission, the figures and statements
support the opinion that during the vears of procreation and childbearing, there should be control and supervision in the case of mentally
defective men or women. My contention is that at present, such
control except by segregation, which is out of the question, is impos106 EUGENICS REVIEW.

sible, and that the only method of diminishing propagation is by
sterilization.

The operation of sterilization by modern methods is simple, and
in no way interferes with the metabolism of the individual or with
sexual feeling, so that there can be no shadow of doubt that it ought
to be carried out on all the mentally deficient if we are really in earnest
in endeavouring to lessen their numbers. The mere fact of sterilization
would release large numbers from the necessity of segregation. My own
view is that, should it not be done earlier, the limit of age be set down
at 16, for if by then there be no evidence of such improvement as
would lead to the belief that permanent benefit or cure could take place,
it is in the highest degree improbable that there will be any hopeful
outlook. When a child is mentally deficient and is pronounced by
alienists to be beyond the prospect of recovery or improvement, then
sterilization ought to be performed. Every possible care would be
exercised before a decision is given, and that would only be arrived
at after consultation with an alienist and the Medical Officer in charge
of the patient. For those in institutions, these operations could be
carried out by the Medical Officer in charge, or, if thought advisable,
by a surgeon appointed to the Institution—whatever course would be
the most economical.

Some who have had much experience in dealing with the mentally
deficient, are of the opinion that sterilization would have but little
effect in the prevention of mental deficiency, but, considering that
it has never been tried in this country, and that they acknowledge
the statement that over 80 per cent. of the cases are connected with
neuropathic inheritance, one cannot accept such logic; for, given a
mentally deficient individual, the descendant of a mentally deficient
parent, it is in the highest degree improbable that the offspring will
be anything but a mental defective.

I know it is advanced by some that when once sterilization took
place, it would be an excuse for promiscuous intercourse, and that it
would lead to the increase of venereal disease. I do not believe that
anything of the kind would happen. Sterilization would make no
difference as to promiscuous intercourse, which will always occur, no
matter what is done to prevent it. The ideas of morality will not
act as a deterrent, and if the gonococcus or sphirochaeta pallida should
be present, such conditions cannot be put down to sterilization. In
the event of either, sterilization would certainly prevent the birth of
illegitimate syphilitic chidren, or of those who become blind from the
gonococcus. In rescue work, about 27 per cent. of the cases received
into the Rescue Home were decidedly deficient in moral responsibility and will power, and, to a marked degree, in mental capacity,
and were unfit to be trusted without supervision. Certain points
recorded seem to prove the fact that irresponsibility increases with
age(?4),

° TREATMENT OF CRIMINALS.

I have already mentioned the percentage of neuropathic strain in
the family histories of criminals, and that some of these prisoners have
been convicted over 20 times. My strong opinion, and that of many
THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 107

others, is that such prisoners should be sterilized. I do not suggest
for a moment that such treatment would have the smallest effect as a
deterrent, although in the State of Nevada, the law is punitive. I
believe that sterilization should be purely eugenical, but we should
know that it would be the means of preventing a prisoner becoming
the parent of any future child. This treatment however, wants careful consideration in the case of certain crimina!s, for it is obvious that
it would be useless in confirmed old criminals, or in women past the
child bearing age, who spend most of their time in gaol, for their time
of propagation is over. But in the case of the young or middle aged
criminal who had been convicted more than twice, it should be carried
out.

Although we know that the operation is a simple one, and in no
way interferes with the functions of the body, it, would doubtless in
time be looked upon as an added punishment, and although this might
be an advantage, we know that it would probably have no effect in
the suppression of crime.

In fifteen states of America experiments have been made with
sterilization. Of these, nine are still in force, five have been declared
unconstitutional, and one repealed.@*) In 1922 the law had been
carried out in 3233 cases, of which 2558 had been operated on in the
State of California. Dr. H. C. Sharp, who has applied vasectomy
since 1899, says that he has had under his post-operative observation
236 of these cases, and has seen no unfavourable symptoms in any case.
There has been no atrophy or cystic degeneration, and no disturbed
mental or nervous conditions. (9,

Sterilization might be brought about by X rays, but it is possible
that this may interfere with the functions of the interstitial cells.
Dr. Martindale states that working under definite standard conditions
in women, the dose of intensive X rays should be so accurate that
amennorrhoea for a ccrtain definite time, or permanently, should be
guaranteed, but that with our present knowledge of the possible
idiosyneracies of the patient, this is difficult. Needless to say that if
X ray therapy can be relied upon, it would be an enormous benefit in
the case of women who had to be sterilized permanently. @?

Dr. Irvine, Physician to the Sing Sing prison, considers that
criminal character depends in the first instance on heredity, and that
it would be an economy and a great benefit if all habitual criminals
were deprived of the power to produce offspring, and he would class
crime as one of the preventable diseases. (28)

To ensure sterilization in the male, the operation of vasectomy
is done, and in the female, division of the Fallopian tubes in a manner
to render future imperviousness. It is unnecessary to describe these
operations now, but it certainly is important that it should be generally
known that there is nothing cruel about the operation itself, and under
modern methods of operating, the danger is infinitesimal. Perhaps
with the advance of science, some new method may be discovered
which may be equally effective as vasectomy and salpingectomy.

It is of course obvious that to carry out sterilization in this country, legislation would be required, and therefore it is no part of this
108 EUGENICS REVIEW.

paper to enter into the details now as to how it is to be effected.
Suffice it to say that in the case of the mentally deficient, it would be
done in each individual only after careful investigation. As regards
prisoners, the matter would be simple, for it would follow immediately after the number of convictions, which would be finally decided
upon after legislation had been passed.

COST TO THE STATE.

Now if the statistics I have collected be accepted, then it must
be evident that sterilization would be the means not only of lessening
the numbers of the mentally deficient, but would also in time, have a
most salutary effect upon the number of convicts. This would diminish
enormously the cost to the State, because the care and management
of the mentally deficient, and of the housing and control of prisoners
average together a very large annual sum. Any suggestion which,
if adopted, would lessen this cost to the State would be gratefully
accepted at the present time, when taxation is so excessive. The
total expenditure on the upkeep of County and Borough Mental
Hospitals in England and Wales, and on the maintenance, supervision
and treatment of the patients in them during the financial year ending
31st March 1924, amounted to £6,953,804. In the case of prisoners
for the year 1923 the cost was £4,071,537, so that, for this one year,
the total cost came to £11,0387,690. Surely such figures ought to
stimulate all who take an interest in the welfare of our country to do
everything in their power to lessen such enormous expenditure. By
so doing, they will be helping to increase the standard of health of the
nation by lessening the number of the mentally deficient, and of the
convicts in our prisons. We know that neither can ever be actually
arrested at the source, but by doing our utmost to abolish prejudice
and sentiment, to secure legislation for the elimination of the unsound,
and to mitigate the incidence of both mental deficiency and crime,
we shall be helping to build up a State composed of a people physically
and morally healthy.

1. Eleventh Annual Report of the Board of Control for 1924. Pp. 3 and 62.

2. Eleventh Annual Report of the Board of Control for Scotland.

3. Abstract from Report of Commissioners of Prisons and Directory of Convict
Prisons for 1921, °22, °28 and ’24.

4. Eleventh Annual Report of the Board of Control, Page 68.

5. Eugenics Review, April 1925.

6. International Cliniques, 1920, Page 160.

7. Sterilization. International Cliniques, 1920.

8. Annals of Surgery, September 1925.—Surgical treatment of Habitual Criminals, Inebriates, Perverts, Paupers, Morons, Epileptics and Degenerates. Albert J. Ochsner, M.D., Chicago.

9. Studies in Mental Inefficiency.—Biological Factor in Criminal Conduct.
By W. E. Sullivan M.D., Medical Superintendent of H.M. Criminal
Asylum, Broadmoor. .

10. Crime,—lIts Causes and Remedies. Caesare Lombroso, M.D.1911. Translation by Henry P. Horton, M.A.

11. Caesare Lombroso, Op. Cit. Page 152.

12. Chief Physician for Feeble-minded Children, Pennsylvania.—Elwyn.

13. Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded, Vol. VIII,
Page 394.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

26.
276

28»

THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 109

The Borstal Lads. Timis, August 1925.

Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded, Vol. VIII,
Page 123. ‘

Royal Commission, Vol. VI, Page 181.—Tredgold.

Psychology and Medicine. Sir Frederick Mott, British Medical Journal,
March, 1923.

Heredity and Environment in the Development of Man. By Edwin Grant
Conklin, 1915.

The Borderland. By J. Bulkley Hyslop, M.D., Page 15.

Annals of Eugenics, October, 1925. Miss EK. M. Elderton.

Birth Injuries of the Child. Hugo Ehrenbert, Page 29.

Eleventh Annual Report, Board of Control, Page 63.

Dr. Barr. Sterilization of the Unfit. International Cliniques.

Royal Commission on the care and Control of the Feeble-minded. Vol. 6,
Page 135. Evidence of President of Rescue work.

Eugenical Sterilization in the United States. By Harry H. Laughlin,
Page 6. Introduction by Chief Justice Olson, Chicago.

Annals of Surgery, September, 1925.

Fibro-Myomata of the Uterus. A series of 252 cases, treated either by
Surgical operation or Intensive X ray Therapy. The Journal of Obstericst
and Gynaecology of the British Empire Vol. 832. No.4. By L. Martindale, M.D., B.Sc.

The Congenital Criminal. By Robert Irvine, M.D. Medical Times, April,
1903.
