104 FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS

means, probably the chief means, of discriminating one class from the other.
If idiocy is acquired, there should not be a preponderance of defective
ancestry; if imbecility is a congenital defect, there will be (and there is) a
preponderance.

La NovuveLLe Revue, February, 1912. Jacques Daugny: Contre
la Depopulation. In France, for the first half of t1g11, the deaths
exceeded by 18,000 the number of births, and M. Daugny has used
this fact as the basis of his stirring appeal against the decadence that
threatens his race. Headvocates the admission into France of emigration.
Already, for the few weeks of harvest, there come Belgians, Germans,
Italians and Spaniards, only to return and bring up with French money,
children, who may, one day, be the enemies of France.

‘‘ Would it not be wiser, from all points of view, that the hand of the
foreign labourer, since it is indispensable, should contribute not only to the
culture of the land, but to its defence ? ”’

The author suggests that instead of transitory work, these foreigners
should settle with their families. Already, statistics have shown, that of the
million who colonise North Africa for France, the majority belong to other
peoples, and that their fusion with French blood has resulted in a race
prolific, energetic and mentally capable. There are now, in France, a few
such colonies, and in Normandy, Champagne and Burgogne, more would be
gladly welcomed.

THe Economic JourNnaL, March, 1912. Prof. Gustave Cohn: The
Increase of Population 1n Germany.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ETHICS, January, 1912. Harrold Johnson:
The Problem of an effective Moral Education in Schools.

Tue NatTionaL Review, March, 1912. George Hookham: Professor
Bergson as a critic of Darwin. An excellent article, well worth reading.

POLITICAL SCIENCE QUARTERLY, December, 1911. I. A. Hourwich:
The Economic Aspects of Immigration.

THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS
CONGRESS

WEDNESDAY, JULY 24TH, TO TUESDAY, 30TH, I9I2

THE General Committee have extended a cordial invitation to
attend the Meetings of the First International Eugenics Congress
to—(1) All Societies studying Eugenics, Race-Hygiene and Heredity.
(z) Delegates from public bodies occupied in Administration, Education, Religion, Medicine and Law. (3) All who are interested in the
various aspects of Eugenics and Social Reform. Arrangements have been
made by which the Meetings of the Congress, as well as the Exhibition, will
be held at the University of London, South Kensington. Interpreters
will be in attendance to assist members who are unfamiliar with the English
language.

A full Programme, with complete local arrangements, will be forwarded
to all members at least a month before the Meeting takes place.

__ Membership is acquired by the payment of £1. Members have the
right to vote; they participate in all the functions of the Congress and
receive the publications gratuitously. Persons desiring to attend the
Congress as A ssuciates pay to/-. They are precluded from voting and are not
FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS I05

entitled to receive the publications gratuitously, but they may be present at
all Meetings of the Congress.

Receipts and Railway Vouchers will be forwarded on receipt of the
amount of subscription, which may be paid in cash, by postal money
order, or by cheque payable to the Assistant Treasurer of the Congress,
6, York Buildings, Adelphi.

Travelling Facilities——All the British and some of the Continental
Railways have very kindly granted exceptional facilities to members of the
Congress. In all cases, the Congress Voucher (which will be sent together
with the receipt for members’ subscriptions to each subscriber), must
be presented to the booking clerk at the stationof departure. Great Britain
and Ireland: Special return tickets will be issued to members of the First
International Eugenics Congress from July 23rd to July 31st inclusive, at the
rate of a single fare and a third from all parts of the United Kingdom.

Hotel Arrangements.—Arrangements are being made for the accommodation of the visitors attending the Conference either for the full period, or
per day, for Room and Breakfast, leaving the members to make their
own arrangements for Lunch and Dinner at places suitable to their
convenience. The rates for Room and Breakfast are from 4s. to 7s.
Early application stating exact requirements is necessary.

Intending members are particularly requested to intimate their intention
to attend the Congress, to the Secretary, on the annexed form (page i
adverts.) as soon as possible, in order that their names and addresses may be
registered, and all subsequent communications concerning the Congress sent
to them.

A banquet of welcome is being arranged at the Hotel Cecil for
July 24th, to which the Members of the Foreign Consultative Committees,
the readers of papers, and all the officers of the Congress and some
distinguished public men and women will be the guests of the Committee.
A limited number of Members of the Congress may obtain tickets, 7s. 6d.
each, from Mrs. Alec Tweedie, Hon. Secretary of the Reception Committee,
30, York Terrace, Harley Street. As the capacity of the Banqueting Hall
is limited, it will be advisable for members wishing for tickets to apply
as early as possible.

The Duchess of Marlborough has very kindly promised a reception for
the evening of the 25th, and the Lord Mayor will receive the Members of the
Congress at the Mansion House on the 26th, a number of lunch parties are
being arranged for the 27th, and a farewell Reception will be held at the
University of London on the 2gth.

The arrangements are not yet complete, and further suggestions
as to hospitality can be sent to the Hon. Secretary.

The following have promised either to give papers or participate in the
discussions :—

1. The Bearing upon Lugenics of Biological Research—Papers: Dr.
Raymond Pearl (Director of the Maine Agricultural Station), ‘‘ The Inheritance of Fecundity ”’; Professor R. Punnett (Professor of Biology, Cambridge),
“Eugenics and Genetics”; Dr. David F. Weeks (Superintendent of the
New Jersey State Village for Epileptics), ‘*‘ The Inheritance of Epilepsy ” ;
Professor Guiseppe Sergi (Professor of Anthropology, the University of
Rome), “ Heredity and Mutability in Iluman Races”; Professor E. Morselli
(Professor of Psychiatry, University of Genoa), ‘“‘ Persistence and Variation
of Racial Characters, particularly with regard to Ethnical Psychology ” ;
Professor V. Gruffridi-Ruggeri (Professor of Anthropology, University of
Naples), ‘‘ The so-called Laws of Heredity in Man.” Discussion: Professor
W. Bateson, Professor J. Arthur Thomson, Dr. Archdall Reid.

2. The Bearing upon Eugenics of Sociological and Historical Research.—
Papers: Dr. Corrado Gini (Professor of Statistics, University of Cagliaro),
‘* The Problem of Eugenics from the Democratic Point of View”; Dr. F. A.
Woods (Harvard Medical School), “‘ Some Inter-relations between Eugenics
and Historical Research”; Mrs. C. D. Whetham and W. C. D. Whetham,
106 FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS

F.R.S., “Race as a Factor in History”; Dr. Ignacio Valenti y Vivo
(Professor of Medicine and Toxicology, University of Barcelona), “A
Healthy Sane Family showing Longevity in Catalonia.”

3. The Bearing upon Eugenics of Legislation and Social Customs.
—Papers: Dr. C. B. Davenport (Superintendent American Eugenics
Record Office), ‘“ Marriage Laws and Customs”; Professor J. L.
Kellogg (Professor of Entomology, Stanford University), ‘‘ Eugenics and
Militarism ”; Professor D. Starr Jordan (Professor Leland Stanford University; President American Eugenics Section), “War and National
Welfare”; Professor Alfredo Niceforo (Professor of Statistics, University of
Naples), “ The cause of the Inferiority of Physical and Mental Characters in
the lower social classes’’; Professor A. Loria (Professor of Political
Economy, University of Turin), ‘The Physio- Psychological Aristocracy and
the Social Aristocracy”; Monsieur Lucien March (Superintendent of
the Bureau of the Statistique Générale de la France), ‘‘ The Fertility of
Marriages, according to profession and social class’’; Fraulein Dr. Agnes
Bluhm (Berlin), ‘‘Race Hygiene and Midwifery. Discussions: Sir John
Macdonnell, C.B., LL.D.

4. Consideration of the Practical Applications of Eugenic Principles.—
Papers: Sir William Osler, M.D., F.R.S. (Regius Professor of Medicine,
Oxford), ‘Eugenics and the Medical Profession’; Mr. Bleecher van
Wagenen (Chairman of the Sterilisation Committee American Breeders’
Association), ‘“ Report of Recent Investigations as to the effects and
practicability of Sterilization”; Dr. H. E. Jordan ‘“‘ Professor of Anatomy,
University of Virginia), ‘‘ The Place of Eugenics in the Medical Curriculum”; Dr. F. C. S. Schiller, ‘“ Practicable Applications of Eugenics
to Education”; Dr. A. Ploetz (President of the International Society
for Race Hygiene, Germany), “The Bearing of Neo-Malthusianism on
Eugenics”; Dr. Pinard. Dr. Louis Quinton (Belgium), “The Practical
Organisation of Eugenic Action”’; Dr. J. Mjorn (Norway), ‘‘ Recent Eugenic
Legislation in Norway.” Discussions: Professor Sadler; Dr. Murray Leslie,
Dr. Saleeby.

The Organising Committee reserves toitself the privilege of determining
the order and nature of the proceedings of each day.

The Exhibition in connection with the First International Eugenics
Congress will include—(1) Charts, pedigrees, photographs, and specimens
illustrative of Heredity, especially in man. (2) Relics of Charles Darwin,
Sir Francis Galton and Gregor Mendel. (3) Portraits of Notable Workers.
The Committee desires to make the Exhibition as fully representative
as possible of the present state and past history of the science of Heredity
and Eugenics. It is intended that the Exhibition shall be International, and
it is therefore hoped that contributions will be received from all the
countries taking part in the Congress. The Committee will be glad of
an early intimation of the character of the exhibits and the space likely to be
required by any exhibitor. In every case thts information should be sent and a
reply awaited before the exhibit is despatched. A Catalogue of the Exhibition
will be published. The Exhibition will be held in the Buildings of the
London University, South Kensington, London, S.W. All communications
should be addressed to the Seeretary for the Exhibition, Eugenics
Education Society, 6, York Buildings, Adelphi, London, W.C.
