EDUCATION IN SEX-HYGIENE!

By G. STANLEY HALL

President, Clark University, Worcester, U.S.A.

THE 1,500,000,000 people, more or less, alive on the earth
to-day are but a mere handful compared with the countless
generations who are to proceed from their loins in the future.
All posterity slumbers now in our bodies, as we did in our
ancestors. They demand of us the supreme right and blessing
of being well born, and they will have only curses for us if they
awaken into life handicapped by our errors. Their interests
should dominate all our lives, for that is living for the children,
for our duty of all duties is to transmit the sacred torch of life
undimmed, and if possible a little brightened, to our children’s
children in secula seculorum. This is the chief end of man and
of woman. The welfare of all this cloud of witnesses is committed to our honour and virtue. The basis of the new biological
ethics of to-day and of the future is that everything is right
that makes for the welfare of the yet unborn and all is wrong
that injures them, and to do so is the unpardonable sin—the
only one nature knows. Just as the soma and all the mortal cells
and organs of the body and all their activities throughout our
individual lives are only to serve the deathless germ plasm, so
every human institution, home, school, state, church and all the
rest exist primarily in order to bring children and youth on and
up to their highest possible maturity of body and soul, and the
value not only of all institutions, but of art, science, literature,
culture and civilisation itself are ultimately measured and graded
by how much they contribute to this supreme end. Our religion
began in the promise to and covenant with, Abraham that if he
lived aright his seed should be as the stars of heaven for multi
1 Address at Meeting of American Society of Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis,
New York City, Feb. 13, 1908.
EDUCATION IN SEX-HYGIENE 243

tude, and the essence of Christianity was the effort to fix the
highest of all human sentiments upon the loftiest of all objects
and thus to bring salvation by ennobling love. Hence, both
Testaments are in a sense a continued love story, the romance
of humanity with God. On this view, if we say that God himself when biologically interpreted is simply posterity personified,
he would again be worthy of the supreme reverence, devotion
and service of those who are now prone to neglect and forget
him.

Now the aberrant fallen aspect of man, wherein he differs
from all animals, is rooted in the excessive development of the
sex functions, which is no longer limited to breeding seasons nor
to the desire of the female, nor exercised for procreation only,
but has become an end in itself. Man is prone to mortgage
posterity by consuming in his own self-gratification energies that
belong to the future, or in Herbert Spencer’s phrase, to overmagnify individuation at the cost of genetic powers, for there
is in all a critical point beyond which development of the ego
robs the future. Our life is like a richly laden ship of which we
are simply the steersmen with the sole duty of navigating our
bark from the last safely on to the next generation, but overself-indulgence is breaking into the hold and looting the cargo to
the loss of the consignees, our children. Like fire, sex is a good
servant but a tyrannous master, and how few are they to-day
entirely unscathed either by its conflagrations or its smouldering
inner calentures. Prostitution, abortion, preventives, precocity,
sex diseases, divorces, defective parenthood, race suicide, inability
to nurse, declining birth-rate in every country in Western and
‘Central Europe and still more so in this country for native-born
population—all these are only a few of the more salient outcrops
of the one great fact of growing abnormality of the sex function
which some anthropologists now think marks the same stage of
race senescence as began the decline and fall of the great nations
of old. | :
However this may be, men have learned very much about
sex within the last two decades, so that we can now begin at least
to take a broad comparative view of it from its origin up to the
highest animals, including man. The studies of all its grossest
244 G. S. Hall:

perversities, repulsive as they are, have shed very precious light,
while just now such studies as those of Freud, Jung, Bleuler,
Riklin and others in Germany, and Janet and his group in
France, have shown its profound and often all-conditioning
psychic ramifications and immensely broadened the field of
hysteria, essentially rejustifying its etymology, though finding
its symptoms often well developed in men. We have learned,
too, how sex has permeated all religions, the chief problem of
which some are now boldly saying always has been and must be
to regulate and explain sex in its wider relationships, and thus
including not merely phallic types of worship which once covered
the world, but even the religion of totemic clans by their rules
of exogamy. From all these sources new data are rather suddenly
at hand for a far deeper and broader knowledge of sex than ever
before, and this seems now certain to rescue the subject from the
‘sex-intoxicated mystics and from the tendency of even sane men
to become dogmatic, extravagant, if not absurd upon this subject
as upon no other.

The old prudery and false reticence, too, are giving way all
along the line. Not only are novels, drama and often works of
art entering this field more freely, whether for good or ill, but
staid professors like Ehrenfels of Prague, are developing a radically new sex ethics, while Galton’s eugenic schemes involve the
endowment of wedlock for the fit if found to be so when examined
by a medical commission. The vigorous group of young professors who support the German archive for racial and social
biology are urging legislation to unsex or otherwise eliminate
reproduction by the unfit but extremely fecund Jukes, Sebalds,
Buddenbrucks and other degenerate families, to compel marriage
of all fit by progressive fines designed to make the way of the
capable bachelors hard and their selfishness opprobrious.
Somer and half a dozen others backed by a society are working
out tirelessly very elaborate pedigrees of royal and other families
to draw therefrom lessons for practical human stirpiculture.
European countries, conscious of their dwindling birth-rate and
the increasing rate of infant mortality during the first year, as
well as of the tide of emigration to both Americas, are now
intensely alive to the necessity of having more men for their
EDUCATION IN SEX-HYGIENE 245

armies, their industries and their colonies, and that in the competition between different countries natural supremacy will
ultimately go to that country that is most fecund—hence
they are farther on than we in the study of. these larger problems of sex, and many startling schemes designed to produce
more and better men and women are already being discussed.

In the Mannheim Conference on sex pedagogy in 1905, the
proceedings of which have only just appeared in a stately volume,
not one voice dissented from the proposition that sex should be
taught in the later years of secondary boys’ schools, and the only
grave differences of opinion were as to what should be taught,
how and by whom, and whether certain instruction should not
begin some years earlier and as to whether and how girls should
be taught. In Finland, Switzerland and Hungary such instruction has been for some years authorised by law and it has also
been given in a dozen or more of the largest German cities and
with the best results, although the Prussian cultus minister has not
formally sanctioned it. Of course parents should do it, but very
few will and can, although many courses in Germany are now
offered to educate them in that duty. To believe or to urge, as
is often done, that children now and here come up to the age of
twelve or even ten to-day innocent of all sex knowledge, is simply
ignorance. City life itself makes knowledge more precocious
and school associations suddenly increase it, so that our censuses
indicate that the vast majority of children of eight or ten already
have quite a body of misinformation that is most eagerly sought,
that is gross in form and deplorably misleading in content.
Wherever special studies have been made they indicate, too,
that nearly every boy before the end of the teens has at least
experimented with himself, knows a good stock of indecent words
and stories and a large percentage of them, despite the noble
work of the purity agencies, have soiled their minds with literature that it is a crime to print or circulate, have dangerously false
views about the dangers and gravity of disease, the need of
indulgence, while many are more or less panicky about their
spontaneous nocturnal experiences and a percentage variously
estimated from three to twelve have written to quacks whose
flaunting scare advertisements many newspapers still print; and
246 G. S. Hall

all this while mothers and lady teachers are living on complacently in their fools’ paradise confident that all is well with
their callow adolescent darlings, so secret, subterranean and
spun-over with the web of lies and deceits is sexual life.

Our life fortunately begins with a sexually neuter period
during which no sex consciousness exists, a stage typically illustrated by the four-year-old boy’s question how could one tell
when children were in bathing with their clothes off which were
boys and which were girls? Of course the age of primeval
innocence should be prolonged by every possible means, and the
only sex hygiene is cleanliness to avoid irritation, loose and not
too warm clothing, wholesome food, open bowels, regularity, cool
bedding, active life, and objective interests. Knowledge on this
subject should be given only as interest arises, and to force it
prematurely at this or any other stage is a kind of psychic rape,
and makes directly for precocity, so that eager curiosity should
always be assured before information is given. Self handling at
this age is exceptional and needs medical care.

The second specific interest, which seems usually to nearly
coincide with school age, is where babies come from, when the
myth of the stork, doctor, or the milkman is outgrown. This Is
the stage Helen Keller was in when her teacher exclaimed that
she was tired of hearing of new little cows, cats, dogs, babies,
and when she asked the meaning of the word born, and also of a
group of school-girls of eight to eleven who wrote and signed a
round robin request to the teacher to tell them where men and
women come from. In most cases it is enough at first to
explain that the young grow in the mother’s body and in due
time are brought forth, and that this is true of animals as well as
men. ,
Of course the mother should give this information simply,
briefly, and as something rather mysterious and sacred, though
but few mothers do so, so that the teacher must qualify for this
task. All that is necessary can be told briefly, and it ought to
be personal. Of course, pedagogically, it should come incidentally in the nature study course, but so important is it that of
itself it is a sufficient motive to introduce the subject of rudimentary zoology in the middle grammar grades. The needs of
EDUCATION IN SEX-HYGIENE 247

the sexes, of course, differ here, and it would be advantageous to
segregate them for this instruction. The ideal is a woman
teacher for girls and a man for boys. This would appeai far
more to girls than to boys before puberty. I cannot yet find any
course or text which seems to me quite ideal, although I have
collected many, and Germany has at least one, and perhaps
three, that are in many respects admirable.

The paternal function excites interest much later, and how
to teach it many think a pedagogic crux. If the child really did
repeat the history of the race this would come far later, but with
our precocious sexual éclaircissement which presents this in the
very worst light and long before its time, something has to be
done on the back fire or immunisation principle. The fertilisation of plants and flowers by insects and the wind is a familiar
prelude, and this knowledge when sex begins to bourgeon in the
soul will blossom out with new significance. So fertilisation of
lower animals, of those that lay eggs, of the relations between
sperm cell and ova on up the scale can be brought in an enlightening way without too objective diagrams of human organs or
processes as some advocate, for the child’s mind is very alert to
see and apply all needed lessons from lower forms, so close are
its relations to, and sympathies with, animal life. The normal
should, of course, always precede the abnormal, and animal
courtship, brooding, etc., are normal. This instruction need not
be prolonged or much methodised, and if rightly taught does not
need to be examined on. Here too much illustration, amplification and detail hinders understanding, while sex segregation is
still more desirable, though where it is not practicable this should
not prevent teaching the subject, even to mixed classes just
before puberty.

With the dawn of adolescence, when the sexes naturally
draw more or less apart in the home, games, and socially, and
when in nearly all savage races boys and girls are given instruction apart, often lasting for weeks, and with very impressive
ceremonial initiation into manhood (for instruction in sex and its
irradiation constitutes most of the material of savage education),
the chief need of girls is for hygienic instruction concerning their
monthly regimen at an age when folly and ignorance are most
248 | G. S. Hall:

dangerous. The needs of boys are now several; first, to know
the harmfulness of self-abuse, which is very grave, although it
has been the fashion to exaggerate it. They must also be disabused of their morbid fears of being lost because of the
spontaneous nocturnal experiences which quacks know so well
how to prey upon. Third, they need some plain talk about the
dangers of infection, both by black plague and by gonorrhea, and
the enormous evils of the latter, which are only lately adequately
understood. All this instruction should, to be authoritative, be
given bya physician. Boys are not much impressed by goody talks
about purity such as clergymen, teachers or principals, and the
worst of all, ladies are likely to give, and such as are now quite
the fashion in the great English schools, Eton, Harrow, Rugby,
etc., where such preachments are known in school slang as
“‘smut jaws.” I believe boys of fourteen need to be told, too, of
the marvellous nature of the germ plasm, the most complex and
highest product of the great biologos or spirit of life, and how
the sexual glands in man best take care of their own functions
and are no more prone to atrophy from disuse than are the
lachrymal glands. They should be informed rather fully of the
dangers and also the results of infection. After every general
talk there should be a very carefully devised opportunity and
encouragement for personal conferences that the sexual fears that
often become perfect obsessions be removed, that more instruction be given to individuals who need it, etc. The physical
trainer should weigh, measure and test heart, lungs, muscles,
always incidentally observing sex, and co-operate according to
need with the medical instructor, unless he can give such instruction himself. Stripping periodically before an expert is as
salutary to-day as it was in ancient Sparta, and from it many
most wholesome influences can be evolved. So much I think
the State now owes to every fourteen-year-old boy, and if we
begin with those of eighteen, as we should do without delay, such
instruction would be sure to gravitate downward to the very
beginning of puberty, when its benefits were seen. In Germany
a few have advocated teaching sex perversions, even Sadsm,
Masochism, fetichism, pediastry, and even some _ pornologic
details, and one text including these things has been prepared
EDUCATION IN SEX-HYGIENE 249

there. Curiously, in Germany, it is women teachers. who
advocate most unreserved teaching, but I believe all this is
entirely wrong, unless, of course, individually where perverse
tendencies are already indicated.

For the high school Cohen and Rohleder in Germany and
various investigators in England and France think self-abuse
among boys the rule and perfect chastity the rare exception,
while Blaschko’s careful statistics of German university students
convince him that they show “‘a greater proportion of sex infection than any other class in the community.”’ In this country
reliable and comprehensive statistics are wanting. Certain it is
that sedentary student life with its too common exemption from
hard work, mental or physical, more is the pity, sheltered as it
is from the struggle for existence, predisposes to temptation.
The very causes that make boys leave high school and that fill
college with those who do not expect to make their living by
what they learn there—football, athleticism, liberty—young
barbarians at play have influence here. Collegiate instruction in
this subject is surely imperative, and in this great stress should
be laid upon the sense of honour, chivalry and respect to women ;
on the gross egotism and dishonour of seduction in ways so
almost ideally set forth by the lectures to students of Prof.
Ziegler’ of Strassburg, and in France by Wagner. Students
before college need to be told of the wide range and variation of
organs, both in form, size and functional activity within the
limits of normality, for physical examiners agree in reporting that
many, if not most, young men pass through a stage of anxiety and
sometimes of morbid fears lest they are hopelessly abnormal.

All girls before leaving the secondary schools should be told
of the commonest wiles and arguments used for their betrayal,
and some think as to risks, dangers and degrees of permissible
liberty. Girls’ intuitions, however, are wiser and more reliable,
and they need less instruction upon most of these topics, save
the last, than boys. The preponderance of opinion seems to be
against either instructing girls in advance what to do if unfortunate, etc., or boys concerning the proper course if they become

3 Theobald Ziegler: Dey deutsche Student am onde des 19. Jakvhundevis, 6th ed.
Géschen, Leipzig, 1896.
250 G. S. Hall:

infected, and ts unanimous against information concerning
precautions against either of these calamities.

To me it seems clear that all children should have some
instruction in this subject suitable to their age before they
satisfy the requirements of school attendance, and that this
should be given by qualified instructors of the same sex. Hence
every normal school should train teachers in this field. The
church, too, has a duty in this respect, which it is happily just
beginning to realise in a few places. Extension schoolhouse
lectures should be offered to mothers and also to fathers, as they
should in most young people’s clubs and societies, Christian
Endeavourers, Epworth Leagues, Young Men’s Christian Association and the now very many other associations for the
young, of whatever faith. Such instruction should not be
prolonged or over-systematic, for the pedagogic method here
needed is entirely unique. Every child ought to be in frank
and confidential relation with some wise, older mentor, the
parent of course preferred, to whom it can and will freely turn
during all the ten or more years before maturity. Of the two or
three-score books designed for the young on these topics in my
collection everyone seems to me too large and diffuse, and holds
the mind too long upon the subject, while most were written by
people with more zeal than knowledge and often with more
knowledge than discretion.

But finally, medical knowledge, indispensable as it is, is not
enough, but the prophylactic needed is vastly larger. Nature’s
method is to long-circuit and evolve ever more widely irradiating
secondary sex qualities, plumes, wattles, antlers, organs of
offence and defence, balzing and tumbling and all the varieties
of love antics and the showing-off instinct that are involved in
the function of sexual selection. So many, if not most, of the
best qualities of the human body and mind are built upon the
basis of sex, and from which evolve deportment, manners, dress,
ornament, the spirit of personal loyalty and devotion, the antique
idea of friendship, the sentiment of honour, and above all, the
nobler and purer expressions of love, and even religion itself, so
that itis plain that whatever strengthens these tends to sublimate,
Spiritualise and normalise sex. The ideals of body keeping,
EDUCATION IN SEX-HYGIENE 25I

physical perfection and strength, agility, skill, beauty, the full
development of shoulders, chest, arms, loins, legs, a ruddy
cheek, clear eye, love of exercise, of cold water and cleanliness,
of nature afield, of contest and competition involving victory and
defeat, the legitimate ambition of being a splendid animal with a
strong and flexible voice, defiance of wind and weather, a normal
appetite and sane regular sleeping habits, hearty, free, open
manners, 2 love of the Turner’s ideal—‘frisch, frei, frohlich,
fromm ’’—a laudable passion to excel, a love of rhythmical
movements as exemplified in periods of history when dancing
was most varied and vigorous and did most to cadence the soul
to virtue and preform it for religion ; those who know, feel, do
these things are developing probably the most effective of all
checks and come thus against every kind of sexual aberration.
It is incalculably harder to develop these results than it is to give
a few lectures on sex dangers, but it is as much more effective as
itis harder. It is these things in which the sexually corrupt are
crippled and here those who know too much of Venusberg
cannot enter. If this is so, then every introduction of a motor
element in place of the old sedentary modes of training makes
for chastity.

So the intelligence of youth is normally keen, alert, curious,
sprouting all over with eager spontaneous interests, grasping out
for new facts, fond of trying its new-found powers of reason by
argumentation and dispute, ambitious for the summit like the
hero of Longfellow’s ‘‘ Excelsior,” showing now amazing spells of
concentration, perseverance, though perhaps alternating with
periods of distraction and unrest. So every intellectual interest
is a sedative, or perhaps better, an alternative of the sensuous
side of sex, while merely formal school topics, dull teaching,
listless routine, zestless attention are almost of themselves
temptations to passion, which always presses for entrance into
unoccupied minds and moments and wherever there are unused
functions tends to sap them. The deeds and words of great men
are never so inspiring, and teachers and courses that fail of this
are co-respondents with the lusty blood of youth in the indictment of sexual errors now brought against students. Among
the many reasons for the more practical and even occupational
252 G. S. Hall:

training of boys I count this moral one as one of the chief
because the contact with life it brings rouses a sense of responsibility to both self and the community and makes the call of the
future louder and all this has a sex value perhaps primary and at
least secondary.

Again, puberty is the birthday of the feelings and emotions,
and these are the older and most dominant parts of the soul that
really rule all our lives and have very much to do in determining
sanity and insanity. Young people need to glow, tingle and
crepitate with sentiments, and the appetite for excitement and
sensation is at its height in the teens and here is where the
principle of vicariousness of Aristotelian catharsis comes in and
gives the teacher of higher sexology his chief opportunity and
resource. Excitement, the young must and will have, for the
feelings are now in their very life. If they cannot find it in the
worthy, they are strongly predisposed to seek it in the grosser
forms of pleasure. Hence, every glow of esthetic appreciation
for a great work of art, every thrill aroused by an act of sublime
heroism, every pulse of religious aspiration weakens by just so
much the potential energy of passion because it has found its
kinetic equivalent in a higher form of expression. It is for this
reason that some of our German co-labourers on this theme have
advocated a carefully selected course of love stories chosen so as
to bring out the highest, most chivalric side of the tender passion
at the age when it is most capable of idealisation, and still more
in that country and now lately here have seen the necessity of
encouraging theatre-going to plays palpitating with life, action
and adventure that emotional tension may be discharged not
merely harmlessly but in a way elevating in the middle teens.
Even melodrama, gushy and tawdry though it may seem to
adults, has been sometimes authorised. The statistical studies
lately made of children’s attendance upon and love of the theatre
as well as of their passion for assuming réles of many kinds in
ever so fragmentary a way have come to us pedagogues of late
almost as the revelation of a new power in human nature, the
educational utilisation of which when we learn how to do the
most and best with it, will be comparable to the harnessing of a
new power of nature into the service of man.
EDUCATION IN SEX-HYGIENE 253

To conclude, I am convinced that if religion were known to
be only a myth and a superstition by cultured adults it would
have to be kept and its function modified for the young because
of its prophylactic value for this function, even if it had no other.
Its great themes are life, death, virtue, sin, duty and responsibility, love and service of God and man. These awaken old
phylogenetic echoes in the youthful soul which bring it into
salutary rapport with the past of the race in which, if evolution is
true, the best has survived and the worst perished. Those who
have been most truly religious have most sought purity and
alliance with the power that works righteousness. The chief sin
of the world is in the sphere of sex, and the youthful struggle
with temptation here is the only field where the hackneyed
expressions of being corrupt, polluted, lost, and then rejuvenated,
of being in the hands of a power stronger than human will,
become literally true. Especially if the theme of the religion of
the future be the relation of the individual to the race and to
posterity, and if the world to-day is increasingly in need of anew
dispensation of sexual theory and practice, we shall have to have
a national, industrial, social, political as well as religious revival,
such as the world has seen but once or possibly twice since the
Renaissance. If this ever comes, it can only spring from a sense
of demerit intensified almost to the point of moral despair and
this folk psychology shows us can only arise from a conviction of
impending racial decadence and sterility. This, I believe, we
cannot expect because we have already begun to glimpse the
magnitude and importance of this subject from so many sides
and to work against downward tendencies so that what we must.
look forward to is a reform and progress that will come by
methods of evolution and not those of revolution.
