A. S. PARKES

C.B.E., M.A., Sc.D. Cantab., D.Sc. Lond., Ph.D. Manc., F.R.S.
Mary Marshall Professor of the Physiology of Reproduction, University of Cambridge

Change and Control

in Human Populations

IRST OF ALL, I must emphasize that I

am not a demographer, still less am I a

medical statistician. I am a biologist who
finds that the study of the processes of reproduction leads naturally to an interest in its
consequences. To a biologist, the human race,
whatever else it may be, is biological material,
and I must start with some biological considerations.

The first is that, in nature, the essential task of
a species is to survive, and to this end reproductive capacity is such that any kind of animal,
including men, if able to multiply to the limit
without wastage would in time swamp any part
of the world in which it could live. In practice,
all animal populations are kept in check by
limiting factors, of which the important ones are
food-supply, disease, and enemies. In terms of
the human race these factors are famine, pestilence, and war, the traditional scourges of
mankind.

The second consideration is that the male is
less viable than the female. This rule applies not
only to man, in which mortality of males exceeds
that of females at all stages of the life-cycle, but
also to some farm and laboratory animals. This
curious and interesting phenomenon has excited
much speculation, but it is not even certain
whether it has a chromosomal or an endocrinological basis. The fact, however, remains, and it
plays an important part in the sex composition of
populations.

* The third Darwin Lecture of the Institute of Biology
and the Eugenics Society delivered on December 12th,
1962. It was published in the Lancet on February 16th,
1963 (No. 7277).

The third consideration is that, although man
is biological material, he is specialized material
in that he has developed mental powers much
greater than those of other animals. Unfortunately, he was endowed with emotions, especially
fear, before he developed a capacity for effective
reasoning. As a result, awed by the mysteries of
his environment and his own existence, and as
the outcome of his sexuality and gregarious
habits, he developed an astonishing assortment
of taboos, phobias, fetishes, and superstitions,
many of which, having become enshrined in
religious, social, legal, and ethical systems, have
survived into the days of comparatively rational
thought on at least some other matters. These
three factors—excessive reproductive capacity,
superior female viability, and psycho-social
influences—are responsible for much of the
change, and restrict the possibility of control, in
human populations.

Against this background, I want now to
consider changes in the population of Great
Britain.

Changes in Great Britain

As is well known, the population of Great
Britain—England and Wales, and Scotland—is
now a little over 50 million. This size of population is of comparatively recent growth. At the
beginning of last century, when the ten-yearly
census began, the population was a little over
10 million. Four-fifths of our present population,
therefore, has been acquired during the past
150 years, most of the increase being in the
nineteenth century. At the present time total
population is increasing very slowly and is doing

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1963, 55, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

so mainly as the result of increasing longevity
—the birth rate is still little above replacement
rate. In 1960, births were about seventeen per
1,000 population as compared with thirty-five per
1,000 at the peak between 1860 and 1880, twenty
per 1,000 during the so-called baby boom in 1946
and 1947, and about fifteen per 1,000 in the 1930s
when serious doubts began to arise about the
fertility of the inhabitants of these islands.
Needless to say, these doubts were quite unfounded.

In Britain, therefore, we do not have a population problem in the sense of a rapid increase in
numbers. In recent years the important changes
have been in age and sex composition within the
overall figures, changes caused by reduction in
the death rate and an associated increase in the
expectation of life at birth. So far as the individual is concerned, these developments in medical
science must be regarded as largely beneficent.
Demographically, however, from the point of
view of the community as a whole, medical
science is creating problems of a formidable
nature. With a relatively stable birth rate, decrease of the death rate does three things: it
increases the total population over what would
otherwise be the level; it alters the proportions
of the sexes, especially among young people; and
it profoundly alters the age structure of the
population by increasing the number of old
people. Men over sixty-five years and women
over sixty were 6 per cent of the population in
1901, 12 per cent in 1941, and are likely to
amount to more than 20 per cent in 1971. This
accumulation is becoming a major social problem and one for which medical science, in the
widest sense, is directly responsible.

The work of medical science, however, has
conferred one unmixed benefit: it has adjusted
the proportions of the sexes at marriageable age.
About 105 males are born for every 100 females,
but in time past this excess of males was abolished in early childhood because of high infant
mortality falling differentially on the males.
There was thus a substantial excess of females at
marriageable age. The progressive decrease of
child mortality has progressively increased the
age at which the excess of males disappears, and
at the present time there is still an excess of males
in the age-group twenty-five to twenty-nine

12

years. The young female has thus acquired the
slight scarcity value previously held by the male.
It will be interesting to see what she does with it.

Changes in World Population
I want now to turn to the very different picture
presented by world population.

In 1930, the population of the world was about
2,000 million. By 1954, it was thought that it was
about 2,500 million and that it might rush up to
3,000 million within the lifetime of many of us.
This was one of the many underestimates which
characterize this subject, because world population is already thought to exceed 3,000 million
and it is rushing upwards at a rate which conjures
up visions of staggering numbers of people in the
foreseeable future. Estimates of 10,000 million
by the end of next century, which a few years ago
seemed fantastic, seem conservative in the light
of present trends. To quote from the preface of a
United Nations report on The Future Growth of
World Populations (1958):

... it took 200,000 years for the world’s human
population to reach 2,500 million, it will now take
a mere thirty years to add another 2,000 million.
With the present rate of increase, it can be calculated that in 600 years the number of human
beings on Earth will be such that there will be only
one square yard for each to live on. It goes without
saying that this can never take place, something
will happen to prevent it.

The human race will have to decide whether
that “something” is to be pleasant or unpleasant.

The explosive growth of world population has
not been caused by a sudden increase in human
fertility, and probably owes little in any part of
the world to an increase in birth rate. It has been
caused almost entirely by advances in the medical and ancillary sciences, and the consequent
decrease of the death rate in areas where the
birth rate remains high. Many examples could
be given of the impact on population growth of
even a single discovery in medical science. An
outstanding example is D.D.T., the use of which
must have saved tens of millions of lives.

Two points are of especial interest.

The first is that the impact of medical science
on world population is accelerating. In Great
Britain it took a century for the expectation of
life to increase from forty years to sixty years—
CHANGE AND CONTROL IN HUMAN POPULATIONS

that is, it increased one year every five years. In
India the expectation of life at birth is now about
forty years, and it is said to be increasing by twoand-a-half years every five years. Even if the birth
rate were at no more than replacement level, this
increasing expectation of life would add enormously to the population of India. In fact, of
course, the birth rate is far above that level. In
England, the social background was able to
adjust itself gradually to the increased expectation of life. In India and many other places,
medical progress has been so rapid that the
necessary adjustment of the social background
lags far behind.

The second point is that the growth of world
population is taking place unevenly, and the
differing rates of increase mean a continuous
shift in the balance of world population. I have
already said that the population in Great Britain
is increasing slowly and that mainly by increasing
longevity. We have in fact one of the lowest rates
of natural increase in the world. Great Britain is
being outbred by North America, North America by South America and South America by
some parts of Asia.

Control of World Population
The growth of world population cannot continue
indefinitely at its present rate; something will
happen to stop it. What will that something be?
We should be ill-advised to rely on emigration to
other planets or other solar systems before it is
too late. That “something” will therefore be one
of the three traditional biological checks to
population growth—shortage of food, disease,
and war—or a fourth and essentially human and
humane check—voluntary control. What about
the biological checks? Short of some new and
catastrophic manifestation, the limiting effect of
disease will decrease still further in many parts
of the world. War is likely to be far more effective
in future than in the past in reducing human
numbers, but few would wish to adopt this
remedy for overpopulation. In fact, to those who
believe that pressure of population is a potent
cause of war, the spectacle of defence scientists
slaving away to deal with the effects of the work
of their colleagues, the medical scientists, is
enough to make one despair of human reason.
The third of the biological checks, famine, or

at least malnutrition, has to some extent always
been with us, and in the past has been a potent
limiting factor. Even now, a quarter of the
world’s population is admitted to be undernourished and another quarter malnourished.
One school of thought maintains that this need
no longer be so, that man has muscles as well as a
mouth, and brains as well as a belly. It is argued
that the intensive application of scientific
methods to production and distribution could
increase food supplies and other resources sufficiently to provide not merely subsistence but an
improved standard of living for the world’s
rapidly increasing population. 1 have even heard
it said, quite recently, that the world could support not 3,000 million people as at present, but
45,000 million—half an acre each for all purposes. Unfortunately, this optimistic view takes
no account of the fact that reproductive capacity
allows potentially for geometric increase in
numbers, while resources can only increase more
slowly. The groundnuts fiasco showed clearly, if
demonstration was needed, that agricultural
production cannot be increased merely by pressing a button, especially now that man has largely
robbed the world of its accumulated fertility. In
future, increase in food production will mean
hard work, with all the assistance that science
can give, and there is no possibility of its keeping
pace with the potential reproductivity of the
human race. In any case, the argument based on
an indefinite increase in resources inevitably
breaks down at the vision of standing-room only
on the planet Earth.

Given the need for slowing the rate of population growth, how is this to be effected? One
argument is that, with an improved standard of
living, the birth rate in other parts of the world
will fall spontaneously without fertility control
as it has done in Western Europe during the
present century. This argument begs the question.
For what reason does the birth rate fall with an
improved standard of living? It is easy to say
that people come to prefer motor cars to babies,
but how is this preference implemented? Evidently voluntary control, by whatever means,
must have been a large factor in the decrease in
the birth rate in Europe during the past fifty
years. In any case, to judge from the current state
of affairs in the United States, it seems that what

13
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is known as the demographic cycle works both
ways, and that with a very high standard of
living there are both motor cars and babies.
Arguments based on the idea of a demographic
cycle, therefore, provide little comfort, and
motivation to fertility control and the availability
of simple means are becoming increasingly
urgent.

As to motivation, in the West we have the
sorry spectacle of opposition arising from manmade religious dogma. In the East, among the
people of the underdeveloped nations accustomed to a high birth rate and a high death rate,
motivation to family limitation, for either personal or demographic reasons, does not come
easily. As to means, biological research on
fertility control is making very rapid strides at
the present time. The so-called Pincus pill, which
suppresses ovulation and is effective by mouth,
has a remarkable record of effectiveness when
properly used. The outstanding problem of such
medication is not as to its effectiveness but as to
the general practicability of taking twenty pills a
month according to a set regime, the frequency
of uncomfortable side-effects, and the possible dangers arising from the long-term
inhibition of the anterior pituitary gland. The
last hazard I consider to have been much exaggerated by specious arguments which take full
advantage of the difficulty of proving a longterm negative. In fairness it should be pointed
out that the ovulation-producing activity of the
human pituitary gland is inhibited for a year or
more during pregnancy and lactation; so in this
respect the continued use of the pill may be
likened to a rapid succession of pregnancies.
However undesirable in other ways, a succession
of pregnancies is not usually regarded as
carcinogenic or endocrinologically catastrophic.

Many will be glad to know that the male has
not escaped attention in research on fertility
control. A variety of substances are now known
which inhibit spermatogenesis without suppressing the androgenic activity of the testes, and
attention is being directed to the selection of one
or more free from toxic or other unwanted
effects. .

It is to be hoped that work on the male will be
pushed on rapidly to a successful conclusion.
The obvious answer to the question of hazards

14

from long-term suppression of the activity of the
reproductive organs is that male and female
should be able to take alternate shifts—say,
alternate yearly shifts—in consuming pills. But
we must aim for still better methods. In my
opinion the possession of the means and the
willingness to adapt his fertility to his environment will distinguish man from the animals in a
far more fundamental way than does the
possession of television or atomic bombs.

Control of Quality

So much for control of the quantity of human
beings. What can we do about quality? This is a
serious question for us in this country. So long
as present demographic trends continue, the
inhabitants of the British Isles will constitute an
ever dwindling proportion of the human race. In
these circumstances, how are we to hold even our
present somewhat attenuated position in the
world? Obviously we cannot take part in a
propagation race, and the answer must lie in
quality not quantity. It is often said that a
comparatively slight rise in average intelligence
quotient would give a great advantage to any
country. Can we achieve this? Different people
will naturally have different ideas about how
such an improvement might be effected. Most
would agree that the mentally and physically fit,
heavily aware of their responsibilities, should not
be inhibited from reproducing their kind, as
many are at present, by the economic pressures
of raising a family, or by the chronic uncertainties of our times. Some might suggest a policy of
positive eugenics; but, apart from obvious cases
of mental or physical deficiency, have we the
necessary knowledge? There may be doubts on
this point, but what is certain is that knowledge
is now being gained with great speed. The wide
dissemination of such knowledge as it becomes
available must surely be a main aim of eugenics.
Whether it can be put to use in time to give us
here the relatively increasing quality of population which would compensate for our relatively
decreasing numbers only time will show. As
with fertility control, knowledge may well outstrip motivation; for it is a sad commentary on
the human race that man will accept, for his own
progeny, genetic hazards to which he would
hesitate to expose his domestic animals. But at
CHANGE AND CONTROL IN HUMAN POPULATIONS

least it should be made possible for everyone to
obtain the best genetic advice available in the
light of current knowledge, in the hope that
sooner or later it will become recognized that in
breeding, as in other ways, the human race is
more important than a domestic animal. Then,
and probably only then, will it be possible to take
action against low-grade individuals who are
irresponsibly indifferent to both the quantity and
quality of their offspring.

I can hardly leave this subject without a word
on eutelegenesis—i.e., the artificial insemination
of women from selected and known donors of
outstanding ability, probably with material which
has been preserved at low temperature for many
years. We have recently heard a good deal about
this from Sir Julian Huxley and Dr. Muller. The
idea is, of course, not new—the word was invented more than twenty-five years ago—and it
raises many intriguing questions which are
obvious to everyone and which raise emotional
and other reactions of varying intensity. In this
connection, we should recognize the magnitude
of the revolution in animal breeding initiated by
the possibility of long-term preservation of
spermatozoa. Reproduction in mammals normally involves contemporaneous and contiguous
action on the part of the two sexes. The advent of
artificial insemination abolished this requirement in principle; but, in cattle at any rate, the
practicability of effectively using semen long
stored in the frozen state has enormously extended the scope of the technique. It may be said,
in fact, that in cattle breeding we have abolished
time and space, and gone far in exploiting the
reproductive potential of superior males. With
this example before us, there is little doubt that
the technical problems of telegenesis in man
would soon yield to intensive attack. Human
pregnancies have already been reported following the insemination of frozen and thawed
semen; but, generally speaking, work on the
preservation of human spermatozoa has not been
pursued with the vigour which the interest of the
subject seems to justify. No doubt this dilatoriness is due partly to hesitation about the testing
of frozen and thawed specimens, but mainly it
seems to arise from a lack of enthusiasm for the
idea of abolishing in human reproduction the
need for contemporaneous and contiguous

action on the part of the two sexes. For this
reason, and because of our social conditioning,
motivation in the case of eutelegenesis is obviously going to lag even further behind technical
achievement than it does in the case of fertility
control and genetic improvement.

Choice of Sex?

If at some future time germinal choice in the
sense used by Muller becomes an acceptable
possibility, what about the additional possibility
of choosing the sex of the offspring? According
to present knowledge, this is most likely to be
effected by the separation of X- and Y-spermatozoa in vitro, followed by artificial insemination.
Successful manipulations of this kind have been
claimed in animals, and the in vitro separation
even in man; but there is at present no solid
basis of reproducible experiment. However, such
a procedure would fit in well with eutelegenesis,
and there can be no doubt that this technical
problem, too, will be solved in time, giving the
possibility of eutelegynogenesis and euteleandrogenesis.

A Concluding Question

Some years ago I wrote, “It is the ethic of the
medical man that life must be saved if only for
the gallows, or prolonged if only for months of
suffering. In the same way it is the ethic of
medical science that disease must be conquered
no matter what risk of war and famine may
thereby be incurred.” My question now is
whether in modern times this is a completely
adequate ethic? Medical science is largely
responsible for creating the problems of overpopulation, old people, and survival of the unfit,
and it can reasonably be expected to take a large
share of the responsibility for solving them.
Medical science, after long years of looking
askance at contraception, is gradually coming
to the view that death control must be balanced
by birth control. Can medical science now go
further and reconcile the interests of demography, of eugenics, and of the individual in
other ways also?

In an overcrowded world, it is hardly logical
that time and money should be spent on the
treatment of infertility, on facilitating the propagation of defects, or on prolonging life in cases

1§
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of fatal disease. Further, in so far as medical
science cannot attack everything at once, it
might logically concentrate research on diseases
that disable rather than on those that kill, and on
those common in the less crowded parts of the
world. Again, provision for voluntary euthanasia
would be a welcome relief to many people. A
man and a woman thrust life on a new individual
without his consent and for reasons which are
mainly egoistical. It is one of the anomalies of
the Western world that society then tells the new
individual that he must put up with his life for as
long as may be, however burdensome it may be
to himself or others. Surely this is a gross violation of the liberty of the individual.

Lest these ideas be regarded as the product of
too much biology and too little humanity, I
quote a letter which I received recently from a
lady writing from a private address and unknown
to me:

The recent valuable discoveries in surgery and
medicine have been applied to prolong life without
regard at all for social and economic consequences
in a chaotic world, and unfortunately have fre
quently caused great physical and mental suffering,
which I am sure was not the intention of the

16

medical profession. It is certain that further research should be devoted to diseases that cause
suffering and disability, not to the mortal illnesses,
since we are all condemned to death.

Objectivity of this kind is probably not as rare as
might be expected; but medical science continues
to push on with its task of saving and prolonging
life, with little or no regard for the personal and
demographic problems thereby created. Surely
there is a most urgent need to forget ancient
shibboleths and evolve ethics and policies which
reconcile humanitarianism and medical science
with the limitations of society and of our world?

It is not going to be easy or rapid. It takes
twenty years to make a man, and on the average
longer still to get rid of him. It takes years to
make an inch of top soil and centuries to alter
traditional beliefs. It is going to be very difficult
to harmonize all this with the spectacular and
accelerating technological progress of to-day.
We can now fly round the world in a couple of
days, but we still get only one summer a year—
and not always that. But harmonize such things,
in some way, we must; and the sooner we start
the sooner we shall get results.
