EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND
THE WORLD’S RESOURCES *

By G, C. L. BERTRAM, W.A., PhD.

Introduction

N this paper I propose to cover such a
| wide field of inter-related facts and effects

that you must, please, excuse a certain
abruptness in the description of present
trends. In a paper read to the Royal Geographical Societyf about eighteen months
ago I described population trends relative to
the world’s biological resources. I stressed
that the field was dynamic and that the
answer, measured in terms of human wellbeing, depended on the relative rates of the
trends involved. In concluding I mentioned
that, “eventually active and voluntary
adjustment of populations will be as inevitable as it is already desirable.” This afternoon I want to present briefly that same
dynamic field of numbers relative to resources, and then carry the argument
further, into the special realm which is the
concern of the eugenist.

Biological Resources

Needs, determined by population, are met
over a wide field by biological resources. The
supply of these biological resources is dependent upon a whole host of factors, some
of them favourable, some of them unfavourable. Some of these factors are constant, some of them dynamic in their incidence ; some are under our control and some
are not. Frequently factors on the biological
plane are both accelerative in action and
accumulative in result. I shall deliberately
leave aside the problems set by our economic
system, in which individual and national
need and purchasing power so often seem
almost to be in inverse ratio.

Biological resources derive from the
present growth and reproduction of living
organisms, both vegetable and animal. It is

*A paper read before the Eugenics Society on

November 18th, 1947.
t Geographical Journal, 107, pp. 194-210, 1946.

axiomatic that for all supplies derived from
living organisms there is a particular annual
cropping rate which will give the maximum
harvest on a sustained yield basis. This is the
rational rate of cropping, and departure from
it in either direction results, over a period of
years, in reduced yields. This principle is of
primary importance, whether we are considering fishing, grazing, lumbering, or the
fertility of the soil itself. Area is the most
important single factor in production, and
the total area available obviously has an
upper limit. |

The biological resources with which we are
concerned supply the whole of our food (with
such minor exceptions as salt and saccharine)
and a large part of our industrial raw materials. Usually food and industrial crops are in
competition for the same areas of land. This
competition will continue to be inevitable.
Sometimes the calls of food and industry
compete for the same commodity—for example, fats and vegetable oils. There is now
a moderately well-agreed level of nutrition
which is deemed necessary for the individual.
There is no similarly agreed level of supply
of rubber, timber, fibres, paper, soap, and so
on. Present shortages of food have shocked
us all. But the avoidance of actual starvation is very far from being enough. We have
begun to realize in recent years just how
large is the gap between a diet sufficient to
maintain life and one adequate for full health
and vigour. Here it is worth noting one
respect in which our species seem to differ
from most other animals, certainly most
mammals and birds. On a badly deficient
diet, humans continue to reproduce at a rate
which is only slightly reduced. This is a
point of leading importance in world affairs.

Inadequacy of Supply is Normal
It is evident that a very large proportion
of the 2,000 million people of the world, even

136
EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS

in ‘‘ normal ”’ times, exist on an inadequate
diet. The present near-famine conditions in
large areas of the world are not something
novel but simply an intensification of the
pre-existing lack of adjustment between
supplies and numbers, between availability
and need. There has been and is far from
true world sufficiency of any biologically
produced material, whether for food or
industry, if we hold total need as our criterion. The gap between need and supply is
immense, though largely unmeasured. Occasional temporary gluts have been spurious,
arising from lack of purchasing power and
not from real sufficiency.

The problem of inadequacy is of especial
significance within the British Commonwealth and Empire, a sample of the whole
world which contains abnormally great
inter-territorial goodwill. Here, in the
Mother Country, some forty-five millions of
us import about half our total sustenance.
Highly industrialized, we support a relatively
high standard of living. The vigorous
Dominions overseas, totalling less than
twenty-five millions of European origin, have
an even higher standard of living but are
among the world’s greatest food-exporting
countries. The new Dominions of India and
Pakistan, with their 400 millions, import
only a fraction of their food and have an
extremely low average standard of living.
The Colonies, so diverse in their evolution,
character, people and appearance, are scattered along the path which has India and
Canada at its two extremes. The United
Kingdom imports the largest quantity of
food of any country in the world. India and
Pakistan, with nearly ten times our population and one-fifth of the world’s total,
import relatively little to meet their immense
and swelling need.

Population the Measure of Need

What we need to know, on the world scale,
is whether the land is potentially capable of
producing enough to meet present and future
needs and, if capable, how soon? The
present answer is, ‘‘ We do not know, but we
hope so.”” The reason lies partly in our
inability to view the background to these

AND THE WORLD’S RESOURCES 137

questions as an integrated and dynamic
whole. In presenting the background one
needs to integrate, first, changes of real need
as measured by changes in human numbers
and standards ; secondly, a group of factors
helpful in increasing supplies, for example the
cultivation of new lands, irrigation works,
the use of new crop varieties and cultivation
practices; and, thirdly, a host of factors
tending to diminish supplies, including land
degradation and irrational exploitation.

First, what in our days is happening to the
total population of our species? This is the
central factor which measures our total
needs. The answer is well known to members
of this Society. We live in days of very rapid
increase of population.

Population Changes and Decrease of

Mortality

Outside specialist societies there is a remarkable lack of appreciation of the great
increases which are taking place in the
numbers of our own species, and indeed of
population affairs in general. The usual
assumption is that, because we reproduce so
much more slowly than our domestic animals,
and the length of each generation is so long,
our Own numbers cannot increase rapidly.
To you the falsity of that assumption needs
no stressing. Mankind takes such peculiar
care of its relatively few young that actual
increases in man’s numbers can be rapid. In
these islands we have increased our numbers
approximately eightfold in the dozen generations since the middle of the seventeenth
century. In the four generations of the
nineteenth century we quadrupled our population, and this despite heavy emigration.

Carr-Saunders* points out that this modern
trend towards much increased numbers must
be unprecedented in human history. It
follows that we live in a time when total
human needs, and total human pressure on
the biological resources of the world, are
rising at an unprecedented rate. This pressure is made all the greater because, in the
last few decades, world opinion has begun
to recognize that human needs should be met
by adequacy for full individual develop
* World Population, 1936. Clarendon Press.
138

ment, and not only by sufficiency for survival and reproduction. At the present time
it is doubtful whether we are in a position to
provide, on a world basis, even enough for
the survival of many. It is the relative
rates of increase of population and supply
which are of leading importance.

The present unprecedented increase in
human numbers is, of course, not a process
which is going on equally all over the world.
In general, the fourfold increase of world
population in the last three hundred years
has been the result of decreased mortality—a
decline in the death-rate and not an increase
in reproduction. Because we value the
individual human life and are philanthropic
in sentiment and in action, we must expect
an extension of the process of removing
causes of mortality. Therefore we must
expect, and budget for, substantial further
increases of world population in the coming
decades. That is inevitable, unless the
former causes of mortality are to be allowed
to re-assert themselves or unless we assume,
as we have no right to do, that fertility will
fall rapidly.

In particular it is the English-speaking
peoples, on both sides of the Atlantic and
elsewhere, who now have a replacement rate
which falls below unity. But these groups
with a replacement rate near unity or
below are not typical of the world as a
whole.* We have no good grounds for
expecting that certain other populations
of the world, now quickly increasing in
numbers, will shortly reach the condition of
the English-speaking peoples. Their fall in
replacement rate may come, but it is likely
to take several decades if not generations.
If we are successful in our efforts to promote
the well-being of all peoples, we must expect
that for a while there will be an increased
rapidity of population growth on the world
scale.

A single example is enough. I quote from
a recent pamphlet by Professor A. V. Hill.t

* For example, see Dr. C. P. Blacker’s “‘ Stages in
Population Growth, EuGENnics ReEviEw, 39, 3,”
October 1947.

t India: scientific development or disaster? India
Burma Association, 1944. (The text of an address to
the East India Association on July 4th, 1944.)

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

He remarks that, ‘‘ There are over 400 million in India to-day—more than eight times
the population of Great Britain; and they
are increasing now by fifteen per thousand
annually, about six millions every year. The
mortality is very high; at every age up to
fifty-five it is four to eight times ours....
Only half the people born reach the age of
22, with us, two-thirds reach 60. Of Indian
girl babies born, only 57 per cent reach childbearing age, compared with 88 per cent of
ours ; and although in India only about half
the girls who reach that age survive to the
normal end of the child-bearing period, as
compared with 89 per cent in England, they
nevertheless produce on the average twice
as many babies as English women do. As
public health measures and nutrition improve, the mortality will diminish and the
population will increase still faster.... The
present rapid increase of population is a sign
that conditions have substantially improved
in recent years.... The first of all India’s
requirements, if she is to be happy, efficient,
and prosperous, is better health, and that
implies beyond everything more and better
food. But the immediate consequence of
better health and better food is a lowering of
mortality, which means a further increase of
population....’’ Members of this Soczety
know well the arguments, that industrialisation may lower birth-rates, that education
leads to contraception, and so on. The time
factor is involved. There will be general
agreement here with Hill’s conclusion with
regard to India—a population increase from
400 to over 700 million within a few decades,
and a real requirement of food three times
what it is now. The increased quantities of
food which must be made available are
enormous. As a rough measure it may be'
said that 1 oz. per day extra for everycne in
India involves, at present, a total of roughly
4,000,000 tons per year. Over a million tons
of extra food is needed each year to feed the
present annual increase of between five and
six million people.

India is not however an isolated example
of present trends. A parallel course will
probably be run by China if conditions
improve. She holds another fifth of world
EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS

population, with a mortality rate probably
exceeding that of India. Indeed there is
doubt whether her population has risen at all
in recent decades. The same pressure on the
means of subsistence, the same low standard
of living, the same high mortality at all ages,
is very evident too in such geographically
circumscribed areas as Egypt and the West
Indies, Ceylon, Java, and so on. The rate
of increase of the availability of food seems,
at least in some instances, not to have kept
pace. Exertions in the fields of agriculture,
engineering, and public health continue.

Fortunately, there are in the world a
number of great countries which have huge
exportable surpluses of food and other
biological materials, so that in recent times,
despite the real and unreal problems set by
transport and finance, major famines have
been infrequent.

Migration

Migration is considered by some to offer a
solution to many problems. Successful and
desirable migration involves two processes,
one physical and one largely psychological.
The physical aspect is that of transport and
organization. If it is hoped that India’s
problem may be met by draining off the
annual population increase in planned
migration, that hope is set too high. India’s
net increase daily totals fifteen thousand.
Sufficient shipping could scarcely be provided, quite apart from all other considerations. From the psychological aspect, it is
evident that no acceptor country will want
to receive immigrants at a rate faster than
that at which they can be absorbed culturally and politically.

Future Population and Future Food

We must then, at this stage in our consideration, conclude that if we are successful
in our plans for bettering the lot of the
individual, and probably even if we are not,
the population of the world will increase
substantially in the next few decades and
probably generations. Equally we must conclude that during this period we must increase the availability of food and other
organic materials in much greater propor
AND THE WORLD’S RESOURCES 139

tion. Is this increase in fact possible, are we
capable of achieving it, and are our present
efforts yielding results at the rate required
to meet increasing need ? It has already been
stated that some factors in the environment
are helpful and some the reverse. Here, too,
relative rates of action are of great importance. Let us first consider some of those
factors or trends which appear to help
towards important increases in the production of organic matter for man’s use.

Trends and Factors: Increased Areas of

Cultivation

There are certain areas of the world where
the land is properly cultivable, but in fact is
not cultivated, because there are not enough
people available on the spot to do the job.
The Amazon basin, parts of Burma, New
Guinea, and Sumatra are examples. I
remind you here of the new East African
groundnut scheme. Additional areas may be
brought into agricultural production by
means of new irrigation systems and by the
extension of old ones. The Nile system
affords the most widely known example.
Already for some months each year no Nile
water enters the sea direct. The sea receives

- only the water pumped from the main drains

after passage through the soil of the irrigated
lands. India’s problem in particular has been
stressed, so it should be realized that the
irrigated area of the old India, some 70 million acres, is already more than three times
the irrigated area of the U.S.A. (the second
on the list of countries with irrigation), and
more than the combined total of the ten
countries with most irrigation after India.*
Yet presumably, the greater the dependence
on irrigation, the greater the danger in times
of periodic or abnormal drought.

Another way in which the crop-bearing
lands of the world may be increased is illustrated by the northward push of the wheatbelt in Eurasia and North America during
the last fifty years. This has been made
possible by the use of faster-growing and
earlier-ripening varieties of wheat, and the
process of vernalization of the seed grain.

* The Times, November 27th, 1945, reporting a
Viceregal statement.
140

Improvements in Technique

There is still much to be done all over the
world, in the advancement of agricultural
technique and animal husbandry and pest
control. Great advances have been made,
and can continue to be made, in the actual
productive efficiency of the living organisms
which are our means of subsistence. But the
distribution of these improvements over the
world is extremely uneven. There is far to
go before we can reap the full benefits, even
of the improvements already known to’ us.

Fisheries

Similarly, there are great strides to be
made in the development of fisheries, and
considerable efforts are being made to that
end, both in the fresh waters and in the sea.
Fisheries have the advantage that we can
reap where we have not sown, and we can
reap in the open, little hampered by the
habits and the habitations of men.

Hindering Factors: The Individual Outlook
in Hot Lands

Let us now look on the other side of the
picture, at those factors and trends which
‘are unhelpful.

Stockdale,* speaking in particular of the
West Indies, has pointed out that ‘ Most
people in moist, hot tropical climates do not
want to work very energetically for long
hours: they seem to prefer to be satisfied
with a lower standard of living and more
leisure and they would, it appears, rather
take life easily than add to their material
comforts. This is an outlook which no one
has a right to condemn, but it carries with it
the corollary that the standard of living of
most workers in such areas cannot be expected to rise enough to be comparable with
western standards.” That is a point which
is too often overlooked.

Land Degradation

Processes of land degradation are now
world-wide in their distribution, but vary
greatly in cause and local importance. Local
decreasing fertility and crop yields are often

* Development and Welfare in the West Indies,
Colonial, No. 189, 1945, p. 12, para. 61.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

early symptoms of that disease which may
develop into gross land degradation. Such
degradation and erosion is now recognized as
being ancient in local but recent in widespread incidence. The immediate agencies
of erosion are wind and water, following
removal or damage to the pre-existing plant
cover. The causes of this damage are usually
associated with improper exploitation in
grazing, ploughing, firing, felling, or the
collection of domestic fuel. This improper or
too violent exploitation is itself the result of
pressures, financial, biological, or otherwise.

In the United Kingdom our gentle and
tolerant climate, together with the peculiar
consistency of most of our soils, allows us to
behave in a way which elsewhere in the
world would rapidly lead to extensive erosion. The steepness of slope which can be
safely ploughed is one example. There are
now few countries in the world where land
degradation, in one form or another, is not
of major importance. In aggregate, the
result of land degradation is that great areas
of the world are producing less organic
matter for man’s use each year than those
areas should properly produce. This process
of degradation tends to be both accelerative
in action and accumulative in result. The
necessary counter-measures are usually obvious. But these take time, often at the cost
of still further reduced production, before
their cumulative effect can be seen and felt.
Frequently, the degradation itself is a result
of the rapid growth of the local population,
whose pressing needs retard the necessary
counter-measures.

Irrational Exploitation

Allied to this problem of land degradation
is that of the irrational, over-exploitation of
biological stocks. Each one, whether it be
whales, wood, wheat, or wool, has a rational
cropping rate, determined by the natural
rate of growth and increase, and the local
environment. Exploitation, at a rate which
exceeds the rational, results in reduced yields
later: it is stealing from the future. Yet
over a wide range of biological production,
living stocks, both of plants and animals, are
being over-cropped to our own present and
EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS

future detriment. This process, too, tends to
be accelerative in action and accumulative
in effect.

A large proportion of the forest lands of
the world are still being over-cut, the yearly
fell exceeding the annual increment of
woody substance. Likewise, it is regrettably
true that a large proportion of the most
important fisheries in the world, particularly
the trawl fisheries of north-west Europe,
are being over-fished. Similarly, many areas
of the world are at present being over-grazed.

Tradition

Conservatism and the continued use of
obsolete varieties, techniques, or customs
also account for a less than rational production from many areas of cultivated land.
Unnecessarily low yields are also frequently
to be attributed to unsatisfactory systems of
land tenure. Excessive fragmentation, sharing, frequent redistribution of village lands,
strip cultivation up and down the slope, and
other anachronisms are common examples.
All of them are a particular hindrance to the
planting of trees and any form of conservation cultivation.

Integration of the Trends

These then are the circumstances. Particular areas of the world, and the world as a
whole, have populations which are rapidly
increasing, a process which is likely to go on
for several generations. The people have to
be supplied with organic materials which can
only be obtained by the cropping of living
plants and animals. The amount properly
needed by each individual is much more than,
on the average, has ever been available so
far: the deficiency is measured in misery.
There are certain processes at work which are
favourable to increased availability for the
individual, and there are other processes and
circumstances which are unfavourable.
Many believe that service to others is a
constant duty, and that therefore we should
press forward in our efforts to provide health
and adequacy for every individual. The
question is whether adequacy is possible now
and in the future, and whether we are acting
with vigour enough to attain it.

AND THE WORLD’S RESOURCES 141

The rapid development of biological production involves two chief processes: one
the knowledge of what should be done, the
other the doing of it. At present, in most
areas, knowledge is far ahead of practice.
Practice, consequently production, is very
largely dependent on the actions of a
great diversity of individuals all over the
world who have in common one particular
attribute—conservatism. Education and
largely dependent on the actions of a great
diversity of individuals all over the world
who have in common one particular attribute: conservatism. Education § and
demonstration are the standard and the
desirable methods of overcoming conservatism and so leading on to improved techniques and larger production. Fortunately,
education and its results are accelerative and
accumulative. But it may well be, when
quantitative assessment of the factors has
been carried out, that instances will occur in
which the results of education are demonstrably insufficient. If this is so, it may,
however regrettably, be necessary for a time
to resort to coercion. An unpleasant doctrine, indeed ; yet what is the alternative ?
The quantitative data, relating to numbers,
needs, and the environmental factors involved in production, must be obtained and
action taken in accordance with the results.

There must then, in this matter of population trends relative to the world shortage of
biological resources, be appreciation that the
background is dynamic, that the relative
rates of the factors is of immense importance,
and that eventually active and, let us hope,
voluntary, adjustment of populations will
be as inevitable as it is already desirable.

Conclusions Rightly Drawn by Malthus

That, I suggest, is a fair picture of the
present interaction of population trends and
the world’s biological resources. We cannot
escape the conclusion which a great man
reached long ago. Dr. Malthus was indeed
essentially right. The truth of his principles
for over a century has been blurred and
neglected. We need not to-day discuss the
reasons for that neglect. Certain aspects.
have been revealingly set out recently by
142

Flugel in his small but very helpful book,
Population, Psychology and Peace,* in a
chapter headed ‘‘ Why Malthus is so hard
to swallow.”’ There is no gainsaying the fact,
whatever the theoretical possibilities, that
there are alive in the world to-day more
people than there is food enough to supply
them adequately. Even supposing the rate
of improvement of productive efficiency was
accelerated to run parallel with population
increase (and suitable administrative and
other arrangements were made) still there
must be a limit to the total of people who
can be adequately nourished on the surface
of a globe of fixed size. C. B. Fawcett, in a
recent paper,t has concluded, “It is clear
from the estimates here given that the world
as a whole is capable of supporting a population much more numerous than that which
it carries to-day. The immediate problems of
over-population are limited to some few
areas; and the present-day ‘pressure of
population’ is not against the limited resources of the earth but against the various
barriers, natural and artificial, which hinder
access to those resources. Yet the fact that
the size and natural resources of the earth are
fixed and limited ensures that its human
population cannot increase indefinitely.
With our present powers of production the
world may be able to support three times its
present population in reasonable comfort.
But if the present rates of increase are maintained that number will be reached in less
than a century from now.”’ In fact of course,
even our present population of two thousand
millions is not supported in reasonable
comfort.

Limitation of Population

There can indeed be very little doubt that,
despite all our efforts, during the coming
century world population will continue
chiefly to be limited, as it has been in general
in the past, by factors which are painful to
the individual and distasteful to educated
sentiment. The Punjab and Egypt are
woeful recent reminders. Floods, fires and
earthquakes will take their usual toll, but

*C. A. Watts, 1947 : The Thinker’s Library, No. 117.
1 The Advancement of Science, 4, No. 14, June 1947.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the main limitation on world numbers will
be from famine, disease and strife which are
directly or indirectly density-dependent in
their incidence. All populations of animals
are in fact believed necessarily to be limited
by such factors.* The use of contraception
itself is probably dependent upon density,
though often indirectly through economic
influences. When eventually man _ limits
populations deliberately in the common
interest, that limitation, too, will in fact be
directly dependent upon density. Surely
such controled limitation must be more
acceptable to the sentiment of a thinking
world than the present uncontrolled and
painful factors of limitation.

The Possible Effect of Population Density on

the Individual

I should like to digress here for a few
moments on the subject of the reactions of
dense populations limited by the usual distasteful factors. Take, for example, the
extremely dense and poverty-stricken populations of the poorer parts of Cairo or Calcutta
—populations living in squalor, with a
dietary far below what is nutritionally
desirable, and scourged by disease—populations of great density in which the environment presses very severely on the individual.
I suggest that in such populations there is
observable something similar to what is
well known in populations of lemmings,

- locusts and certain other species when the

density has risen above a particular threshold
level. The lemming, normally a timid, nocturnal animal, becomes aggressive, excitable
and active in the daytime and moves in
swarms when density becomes high and food
supplies scarce. The locust under similar
conditions passes from the solitary to the
gregarious or migratory phase, anatomical
changes taking place in addition to changes
in individual psychology or reactions. In
densely populated cities of men, burdened by
excessive environmental pressure, do we not
observe similar and comparable changes,
an increase of individual excitability com
* For example see summary provided by A. C.

Crombie, “‘ Interspecific Competition,” J. of Anim.
Ecol., 16, No. 1, May 1947, p. 44-73.
EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND .THE WORLD’S RESOURCES 143

monly leading, under the influence of quite
minor stimuli, to banding together, mass
violence, mob hysteria, or call it what you
will? A rumour, a broken shop window, a
child run over by a car, may stimulate a
sudden riot bearing no relation in its violence
to the trifling stimulus.

Thinking along these lines is important.
Certainly such ideas, I believe, throw a useful light upon what has been happening in
India, and what to expect there and elsewhere.

Conscious Limitation of Populations to

Optimal Sizes

I return from the digression to our main
theme. Limitation of populations by conscious control must come. Let us hope, let us
strive to arrange, that in the long run the
individuals which make up populations will
be sufficiently tolerant and educated to use
their personal free wills in the common service, both in limitation via contraception,
and in reproduction.

When limitation of numbers in the common interest approaches, a whole host of new
problems will arise. Now is not too early to
begin facing them. Many have already
realized that for any particular standard of
nutrition and material well-being, which
may be chosen as desirable, there must be an
optimal population. The optimum may be
assessed on a world or on a regional basis,
and it will vary in time with changes in
environmental factors, technical — skills,
mutual trusts, and so on. But the existence
of an optimal population is a reality, and
departure from it will inevitably be accompanied by some degree of misery, or reduced
well being. So far, however, those who
appreciate the reality of an optimum in
populations have, in general, thought of the
optimum only in terms of food or economic
advantage. But in fact there must be an
optimal population corresponding to whatever feature may be chosen as especially
desirable. Thus we are forced to seek to
decide our ultimate goal and purpose as
men on earth. Do we seek a world in which
the main criterion is that each individual
shall have the best possible diet, or the most
luxurious surroundings, or the best physical

development, or the greatest spiritual wellbeing, or what is it? We are forced to consider these possibilities. Most, I think, of
whatever persuasion, will approve a goal
defined as a state of affairs in which every
individual shall have the opportunity to
develop to the full all the talents with which
he is endowed, physical, mental and spiritual,
in the service of his fellows. We must then
appreciate that if this is the goal it will be
necessary to limit populations in accordance
with it. The optimum in fact will probably
be very different from an optimum determined on a basis only of food or economic
advantage. For example, it may well be
that individual mental and spiritual development will always demand opportunity of
solitude in surroundings unchanged by man.
That might require considerable areas of
land not being given over to production or
cultivation.

The Eugenic Content of Limited Populations

So far in speaking of populations there has
been the tacit assumption that each individual is the equivalent of every other. That,
of course, is very far from being so. On
whatever basis optimal populations are
sought by deliberate limitation of numbers,
it will be of paramount importance to arrange
that those populations shall be composed of
suitable individuals. In fact, to approach the
ultimate goal, there must not only be
optimal populations but those populations
must have optimal contents in terms of
heritable individual qualities.

Conclusion

I have tried to focus to-day’s discussion on
the major physical and biological factors
whose influence seems to be inescapable.
Political, emotional and other factors I have
excluded. The difficulties before us are
clearly immense. The first requisite of all is
that there should be wide appreciation of our
present state and future course, then the
reasons, both physical and philosophical.
Once there is appreciation we may begin to
move, but the obstacles can scarcely be
over-estimated. But, on the other hand, lack
of wide appreciation now is no reason for
144

present inactivity. Anything which can be
done at this stage by the few to improve the
average quality, the gene content, of the
individuals making up populations in the
near future, will have an accelerative influence in the pace of future advance. That,
I suggest, is the background against which
our present eugenic effort must be viewed.

The whole problem is one of urgency and
importance. It exists because we strive to
control mortality and yet possess a sense of
values.

Discussion

Dr. S. Vere Pearson: My arguments are
going to revolve around two texts, viz. :

1. For every mouth born into the world
there is a pair of hands.

2. Nature ordains that, since knowledge
and skill advance, man is able to live
comfortably on smaller areas.

Therefore it is possible for a full personal
development and the enjoyment of a higher
standard of living to be attained without
“active regulation of population sizes” if
these two statements are accepted and
sensible action be founded upon them. For I
believe procedures under man’s control could
increase food production and distribution to
an enormous extent if only we should awake
to the possibilities, and overcome the
obstacles which thwart us from using our
opportunities.

This is a big subject impossible to cover in
the course of a discussion. I shall therefore
confine my attention to two points, (a) The
population and resources of India, and (5) A
brief reference to the present-day obstacles
to improved food supplies for the masses.

As far as we can tell the vast majority of
the people of India have always been poverty
stricken. But the evidence seems to prove
that, up to about thirty or forty years
ago (and I shall not attempt to travel
beyond that date), British rule there improved matters materially by comparison
with previous ages. How was this accomplished? It was largely by means of the en
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lightened and beneficent method of taxation
introduced at the beginning of our régime.

In discussing population trends now, as
happened round about 125 years ago, I am
always sickened when the name of Malthus
is mentioned because almost invariably a
harping back occurs to his theories on the
Principles of Population, theories now largely
exploded, and no reference is made to his
chief contribution to the betterment of
society. He and his friend Ricardo did more
than anyone else to influence rule in India.
This benefited its inhabitants and enhanced
the renown of the British. It should never
be forgotten that for twenty-nine years he
was Professor of Political Economy at
Haileybury College, where all those going to
India, under the East India Company, were
trained ; and in particular that he elucidated
the law of rent and enabled those responsible
to prescribe a great improvement of the land
system in India ; and that increase of food
production and of population resulted.
Previously the laws and practices of the rulers
of India had taken for revenue a share of the
gross produce of the land, thereby penalizing
all improvements by the tenant and actually
preventing a good deal of industry. But
through Malthus’s and Ricardo’s teachings a
crop share tenure was based on the net produce, consequently waste land was redeemed,
and poor cultivation was replaced by a vast
growth of food production. Not only so, but
the servants of the Indian Civil Service
through the wise start given by Lord Clive
during the two years of his rule in India,
“the most glorious years in his life’ (J. R.
Green), were not allowed the least personal
interest in land (which was declared to be the
property of the State and the source of its
revenue) or in any other business in India.

In Bombay Presidency (excluding Sind)
there were, according to the first reliable
survey of 1850-1, only 12} million acres
cultivated (and about 1827 far less) whereas
seventy-five years later nearly three times
this amount was under cultivation; and
during this period a great increase of the
population occurred.

Unfortunately for the people of India,
cultivators have slipped back into the preEUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD’S RESOURCES 145

British condition of economic bondage, not
to the State, but to the landlord, who was
squeezed in between the State and the
worker ; and not only the cultivator of the
soil but also the workers who live in the
cities. In ancient days urban land hardly,
existed. At the outset of British rule, largely
through mishaps, large areas of town and
village sites remained outside the beneficent
action of the just system of raising revenue,
and the unfortunate mistake of the “ Permanent Settlement ’’ was made covering the
very large area called Bengal (a larger one
than the present), more than half of which
area was at that time waste or unused. Consequently, whereas about the time of the
Settlement (introduced in 1793) the rights of
the Zemindar was only one year’s revenue,
twenty years later when this settlement that
_was to be permanent was still in its infancy
land sold at about twenty-eight years’ purchase. And since those days the mistake has
become more disastrous still owing to an
increase of urbanization and the exemption
in urban areas of “‘ unimproved ”’ site values
for assessment for revenue.

The chief obstacle to the masses obtaining

better food supplies in these days when the
people of many parts of the world easily
produce surpluses and when transport facilities are so well developed is their poverty ;
and that is not unconnected with the mishaps
and mistakes governments have made and
continue to make, in particular those connected with taxation. I have just given some
obvious hints in my references to systems of
levying revenue in India and cannot elaborate them now. Beyond these hints, however,
let me say: Are there not too many interferences by the governments of the world,
not only upon the freedom of exchange—I
am a life-long and unrepentant Free Trader
—but also upon the freedom of production
through the restrictions and regulations that
are imposed upon individual enterprise and
through the heavy burdens of taxation ?
These restrictions and burdens seem to me
to bring also, amongst other things, currency troubles and public debts, and conflicts of all sorts which tend to breed war. I
am not one of those people who try and
imagine that wars have a eugenic effect on
population trends.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIX, No. 4
