THE CAUSES OF HUMAN VARIABILITY.!
By R. A, FISHER.

THE great service which the modern development of statistics
has rendered to eugenics is that it supplies a definite method
of measuring and analysing variability. Only so can the true
causes of variability be ascertained and the factors which are
of no effect, the false claimants to importance in this regard, be
excluded from consideration.

The practical method of measuring the variability of a
population is extremely simple, although explanations of it are
apt to appear complicated at a first reading. If a measurement
of stature, for example, is made upon a sufficiently large sample—
1,000 to 10,000, let us say, of a population—the measurements
are usually found to be grouped symmetrically about a mean
value, the average stature of the sample. The deviations from this
average follow very closely in their distribution what is known
as the law of errors, that is to say the frequencies with which
deviations of different magnitudes occur are related in the same
way as the frequencies of errors of observation. Consequently
the amount of variability may be measured, as errors of observation
are habitually measured, by the mean of the squares of the
deviations of different individuals from the mean, this mean
square deviation being strictly comparable to the mean square
error used in astronomy and in all physical science.

Thus from 1,052! measurements of stature, Karl Pearson
and Alice Lee found a mean stature 62°48! inches, and a mean
square deviation 5'712 square inches. This mean square deviation
I term the variance, and use it as the measure of variability, by
reason of this important property, namely, that two independent
causes of variability acting together produce a variance which is
the sum of the variances produced by either separately. The
square root of the variance has long been known as the standard

deviation. The variance, then, is a measurable feature of the

* Trans. Roy, Soc, Edin. Vol. LIT., Part II. (No. 13), pp. 399-434. The Correlation between Relations on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance.

3 These measurements are those of the mothers, of whom the number measured is
given. .
214 . EUGENICS REVIEW.

population, and indicates the extent to which its members differ
one from another; applied to an individual it is meaningless,
although each individual measurement is taken into account in
calculating it. In the same way it should be clearly understood
what we mean by a cause of variability. If we say, “This boy
has grown tall because he has been well fed,” we are not merely
tracing out cause and effect in an individual instance ; we are
suggesting that he might quite probably have been worse fed,
and that in this case he would have been shorter. We are, in
fact, suggesting that existing differences of nutrition can account
for differences of stature comparable to the standard deviation
of stature. Now this is just what is meant when we speak
of nutrition as a cause of variability ; we thereby mean that in
a population absolutely uniform in regard to other causes, such
as breeding and exercise, existing differences of nutrition would
produce a certain variability—in fact, that @ certain percentage of
the variance must be ascribed to nutrition.

This point of view throws a flood of light upon the meaning
to be attached to the results of biometrical research. The statement that the correlation, in stature, between father and son is +
may be interpreted in several ways. For our present purpose
it means that 7? represents the fraction of the total variance of the
sons, which is due to the fact that their fathers differ in height. A
selected population of sons of fathers of identical height would
have its variance reduced by this fraction. Since 7 is about ‘51 we
may say that 26 per cent. of the variance is due to the stature
of the father ; the remaining 74 per cent. must have some other
cause. Now this very value for the parental correlation has been
freely used to prove that the influence of heredity is all-important.
It has been contrasted with correlations such as ‘o5 obtained from
particular environmental conditions. These latter evidently make
no sensible contribution to the total variance, but it is just as
evident that inheritance, although making an extensive contribution, has not been shown to furnish so much that there may not be
other factors, equally or more important. An advocate of the
importance of environment might easily point to a dozen causes to
which height or shortness is commonly ascribed, such as regular
athletic exercise, or accidental illness in childhood, and it would
THE CAUSES OF HUMAN VARIABILITY. 215

be difficult to prove without a specially designed investigation for
each alleged cause that these do not contribute important proportions of the total. The task of ascertaining the importance of
environment in this way is an endless one, since always new
environmental causes could be suggested, each more difficult than
the last to define, measure and investigate.

On the other hand we have evidently not done fnstice 1 to the
importance of inborn character by considering merely the contribution of a single parent. We must obviously also take the mother
into consideration. The maternal correlation is almost exactly the
same as the paternal, and if father and mother were uncorrelated

PROPORTION OF VARIANCE IN STATURE DUE TO

PE aT tT TT Pree errerrrrelL cata
Peco it ty Ty TEP ETT Tare eH OD

  

         
     
     
            

|
CECE eH sans TTT MME
PCC eee PEELE
PPT TT Ed Yaiyayw 75
HERRERA eee
ri TTT ETT ra LiITII Tl TT gxxya,
HTT OZ
BERR EERE Ee Lit tT TT Tage
Ltt Baw Sg 50
PTET Yaa TM
H+ HE Aan aa
Ss AH Aaa YYZ
ptt A | aa | | ae
betet || | PMA | S| MA ia 25
OA ++ Wy | s Wea
YOUGY GEEEEZZZZZ +4 COGOGEEEEEZZZZ
UA \ | | WA | VT AA VT Ye
ITA | | | | CAAA | TA tT Taya
daa IN | |VMZA TEa T I ~—«n
vw
height of heights of ancestors genetic 2
one parents (all qualities nature 3
parent ; of allancestors) u
vu
a

we should have simply to double the amount of variance already
accounted for, There is, however, in stature, quite a large marital
correlation ; so that the influence of the mother has already to
some extent been allowed for in the paternal correlation. Taking
the paternal and maternal correlations both equal to *5066, and
the marital correlation equal to °2804, calculation shows that zhe
heights of the parents alone account for 40°10 per cent. of the
observed variance.

It is clear, however, that in taking the parental heights
merely, we are not getting at the whole influence of parentage. It
has long been known that the grandparents make an independent
216 . EUGENICS REVIEW.

contribution, and since this influence is transmitted by the parents
it shows that the whole parental influence is not revealed by their
stature alone. If the correlations for successive groups of ancestors
were known, it would be possible to increase the 4o'10 per cent. of
the parents by taking account of the stature of the whole ancestry.
Even this would not be sufficient, for characteristics of the organism
not necessarily associated with stature in the ancestry might easily
exert an influence upon it in the son. Stature is but one feature,
but the whole organisation i$ derived from the parents. It is
reasonable to suppose that children of different parents, chosen to
have the same stature, would resemble each other less than children
of the same actual parents, in point of stature as well as in other
ways.

The only direct way of ascertaining the total effect of ancestry
is, in fact, by measuring the amount of divergence between brothers
and sisters of the same fraternity. This is what is done in ascertaining the fraternal correlation, and it may be shown that the
fraternal correlation itself measures the fraction of the variance for
which parentage, including ancestry, is responsible. The fraternal
correlation, taken from the same data as before, is °5433 ; hence,
although only 40°10 per cent. could be ascribed to the stature of
parents, the total effect of parentage is responsible for 54°33 per cent.

This result precipitates the enquiry, “ If parentage only causes
54 per cent. of the variance, to what is the remaining 46 per cent
due? Is there any other important cause of the observed differences, besides heredity? Is it possible that environment, acting in
some subtle ways undetected by statisticians, can have so large an
influence?” To these queries, in the case of stature, the facts
appear to give a decided negative. Brothers show the same
decided differences whether the experience of their early life is
closely similar or very different. The argument in favour of the
preponderant importance of heredity is enforced by Galton’s
observations of identical twins; for he found that in certain
cases twins resemble one another very decidedly more than
do ordinary brothers and sisters, and he suggested that these
twins, developing from the same zygote, partake of the same innate
constitution, whereas brothers and sisters, including ordinary
twins, do not possess the same hereditary qualities.
THE CAUSES OF HUMAN VARIABILITY. 217.

The fact is that qualities which are hereditary in the strictest
sense, need not necessarily be inherited. In Mendelism, the
cross breed, or heterozygote, hands on one quality to half his
offspring and another alternative quality to the other half.
Children of the same parentage may therefore differ among
themselves by the segregation of hereditary qualities. It may be
that features such as stature, in the distribution of which no
discontinuity is apparent, may in reality be determined by a
large number of Mendelian factors. These factors no doubt
affect other features as well, and this would account for the
high correlations which are known to exist between different
measurements of the same individual ; but whatever other effects
they may have, each may be supposed to exert a small and
definite influence upon stature. This theory has been previously
discussed by Pearson! and other writers, and it appeared to be
believed that the facts of biometry were not susceptible of such
an interpretation. The theory, however, which I had the advantage of discussing on several occasions with Major Darwin,
appeared to me so well worth a thorough investigation that I
decided to make a detailed mathematical study of the biometrical
properties of such a population. The methods and analysis have
been published in a recent paper,? and the results are far more
simple and definite than I had dared to hope.

Pearson had found that the assumption of Mendelian
heredity led him to the low value, 3s for the parental
correlation and various values not exceeding ;, for the fraternal
correlation. These were obviously far below the true figures,
but it was subsequently suggested by Yule (Conference on
Genetics, 1906) that both parental and fraternal correlations could
be raised to 4 by abandoning the assumption of perfect dominance;
with this view Pearson subsequently agreed. When I came to
investigate the point I took care, therefore, to make no assumptions
about dominance. Yule had suggested that dominance had an
effect analogous to environment, or to arbitrary errors introduced

* Mathematical Contributions to the Theory of Evolution, XII. On a generalised
theory of alternative inheritance with special reference to Mendel’s laws. Phil. Trans.,
1903.

2 The Correlation between Relations on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance.
Trans. Royal Soc., Edin., Vol. LII., Part II., pp. 399-433.
218 EUGENICS REVIEW. '

into the readings, and I soon found that on the most general
assumptions I could make the whole effect of dominance could
be represented by a single fraction, by which the parental correlation was reduced. This confirmed Yule’s suggestion, but I was
astonished to find that the fraternal correlation was reduced only
to half the same extent. In this respect, then, the effect of
dominance differs from that of arbitrary errors; for the latter
reduce all correlations alike. By this means the two reduction
factors may be separated, and we may estimate how much of the
reduction of the parental correlation is due to dominance and how
much to “environment,” using this term to include all non-genetic
causes of variability.

Before this could be done it was necessary to face the
greatest analytical difficulty of the problem, viz, to make
allowance for the correlation of father and mother. This correlation has the most profound effects upon the distribution of
factors in the population, for, by virtue of it, similar phases
of different factors become associated ; the taller of two alternatives occurs in the same individual with the taller of another pair
more frequently than random association would allow. Consequently the variance is increased, the extremes of high and low
stature becoming more common. With stature I find the variance
increased from 5°611 sq. inches to 6°760 sq. inches,? so that 17 per
cent. of the total variance is due to the mating of like with like.

Another effect is to increase the ratio between the correlations
of successive ancestors. The correlations diminish, in accordance
with the “ Law of Ancestral Heredity ” in geometrical progression.
Without homogamy the common ratio would be }, but for eye
colour it is known to be as high as ‘62, and for stature its value,
calculated from the marital correlation, is ‘6205.

The dominance ratio, which, in the absence of homogamy, is
the fraction by which the parental correlation is reduced by the
effect of dominance, does not appear to be less than would accord
with complete dominance. For stature I find the value to be
"276, whereas the value upon Pearson’s assumptions of complete
dominance and equal frequency of the alternative types of gamete
should be °333 ; the ratio may be reduced not only by incomplete

* These are mean values for fathers, mothers, sons and daughters.
THE CAUSES OF HUMAN VARIABILITY. 219

dominance, but by one type of gamete being more or less frequent
than its alternative. If this inequality is not weighted in favour
of rare recessives, then the dominance ratio is diminished. I see
no reason to postulate incomplete dominance. :

The parental and fraternal correlations are raised to high
values about 3, not by the abandonment of dominance, which.
would make them equal, but by homogamy, which raises their
values while maintaining the difference between them.

The total proportion of variance which is due to innate and
heritable causes may be calculated from the difference between the
fraternal and the parental calculations; this is a small difference,
and unfortunately, in our present data, errors of random sampling
may modify it by a considerable proportion. The estimate of the
possible effect of non-heritable factors, which is small, is consequently smaller than the probable error of this determination.
The factor representing the proportionate effect of innate causés is
actually greater than unity, but exceeds it by an amount less than
its standard error; the actual figure is 1‘o1, with a standard error
‘08 ; the value is therefore very unlikely to be less than ‘93, and
we may take ‘95 as a low estimate. This conclusion is strengthened by the fact that the mean of three determinations of this
constant for three different features is ‘982.

There is, then, in this analysis of variance no indication of any
other than innate and heritable factors at work, and a strong
probability that whatever non-heritable factors are at work, including
errors of measurement, do not contribute more than 5 per
cent. and perhaps much less, to the total variance. Any such
residue could be determined by a somewhat more accurate
numerical knowledge of the relationship correlations, and in
particular of the fraternal correlation. Fortunately this is of all
the correlation coefficients the one for which it is easiest to gather
data, and it is, in my opinion, the one with the simplest and
most important meaning.

The conclusions of my investigation may be summed up as
follows :—

(1) The facts of Biometry do not contradict, but in many
ways positively support the theory of cumulative Mendelian
factors.
220 EUGENICS REVIEW.

(2) If this theory is correct a sufficient knowledge of the
correlation coefficients for any one feature, between different pairs
of relatives, would enable us to analyse completely and estimate
numerically the percentage of variance due to heritable factors. ,

(3) A provisional examination of the existing data shows it
to be unlikely that more than 5 per cent. of the variance
of the physical measurements of man is due to non-heritable
causes. Of other features for which the data is at present insufficient, it would. be wisest to judge by comparison of the known
facts with those of the physical measurements.

It should not be forgotten that 5 percent. of the variance
would allow considerable scope for the action of environment in
individual cases. It amounts to ‘338 sq, ins,, so that the standard
deviation if all else were constant would be °58 ins. We may
put this another way by saying that any factor producing 5 per
cent. of the variance is correlated with stature with a coefficient as
high as ‘224. I am not aware that any environment correlation
has ever been established which is more than one-fifth of this
amount. So that if there really is a residve of 2 percent. or 5
per cent. of the variance due to non-heritable causes, there is no
evidence of any single environmental cause of sufficient importance
to account for the whole of this residue.

In conclusion it is right that I should express my deep sense
of gratitude to the Eugenics Education Society, who have most
generously assisted me throughout; and in particular to Major
Leonard Darwin whose continual kindness and encouragement has
enabled me to carry through the work.
