ELIOT SLATER
M.D., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.

Galton’s Heritage

AST YEAR the world was celebrating the
| scenes of the publication of The
Origin of Species. In comparison with his
cousin, fame has passed Galton by. If Galton’s
work had less world-shaking consequences than
that of Darwin, it is not because he was a man
of lesser ability. In a letter of 1871 Darwin
wrote:
I have been speculating last night what makes
a man a discoverer of undiscovered things; and
a most perplexing problem it is. Many men who
are very clever—much cleverer than the discoverers—never originate anything. As far as I
can conjecture the art consists in habitually
searching for the causes and meaning of everything which occurs. This implies sharp observation
and requires as much knowledge as possible of
the subject investigated.
Both Darwin and Galton had this compulsive
curiosity.

Variety of Scientific Interests

Galton’s contributions were scattered over
an immense field. Karl Pearson, and others
since, have tried to find some unifying thread
linking them all together. It seems to me that
the only connecting thread was Galton’s wayward personality. He was the scientific dilettante
at his super-excellent best. Like Darwin, he never
received any adequate scientific education.
What he got was the first few years of a medical
training and enough mathematics at Cambridge
to attain a poll degree. He had no apprenticeship,
no mentor, and never knew the discipline of a
research laboratory. Throughout his scientific
life he worked on his own, turning his hand first
to one thing and then to another, as the fancy
took him. It was his fortune that the fields to
which he turned his attention were almost
unexplored. It has been rightly said that the
discoveries of fundamental importance are
always made by amateurs, since in a new and

*The Galton Lecture delivered in London on February 17th, 1960.

9g!

untouched field there can be no experts. But the
amateur who makes discoveries in new territory
is usually an expert in some more established
field. Galton was an expert in nothing. Pearson
says that at the age of thirty-two he knew more
mathematics and physics than most biologists,
more biology than mathematicians, and more
pathology and physiology than either.

His scientific career began at the age of
twenty-eight, when he undertook a journey of
exploration in south-west Africa, to which he was
attracted by the expectation of encountering big
game. He was advised to put himself in touch with
the Royal Geographical Society, and was
briefed on how to make observations of the
needed accuracy and reliability for map-making.
He did his work with such efficiency as to receive
the Society’s Gold Medal and in due course to
become a Fellow of the Royal Society. It is to
the friendships and connections he made in
this way that his subsequent scientific evolution
must be traced. He developed an immense
respect for his fellow-scientists, the reverence
of the amateur for the professional. He wrote:

A collection of living magnates in various
branches of intellectual achievement is always a
feast to my eyes; being as they generally are
such massive, vigorous, capable-looking animals.

About his own status he was modest to the
point of unconsciousness. Pearson notes that
Galton did not regard himself as one whose
faculties gave him rank in the extreme tail of a
frequency distribution.

He would have recognized such a position for
half his friends, before he thought of it for
himself.

Galton had a strongly mechanical bent. Even
before his African expedition, in 1849 when he
was twenty-seven, he had published a pamphlet
on the telotype, a printing electric telegraph.
This was the first of a long succession of mechanical inventions, others being an instrument for
sun-signalling, a shield for the protection of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1960, 52, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

riflemen, stereoscopic maps, spectacles for
divers, the Galton whistle for testing the power
of hearing for high notes, a wave-engine, and
many others. Remarkable as the ingenuity of
these contrivances must have been, one suspects
that they all had the defects of lack of professionalism, since they have all suffered shipwreck
on the river of time. Pearson notes that in the
Galton Laboratory there was a whole series of
models, ““Galton’s toys,” the very purpose of
many of them being unknown.

Composite Photography
One of Galton’s devices which is of much more
lasting interest and importance is his invention
of composite photography. It will be remembered
that, by superimposing upon one another a
number of under-exposed photographs he tried
to extract from them some common quality.
In his way he tried to demonstrate a phthisical
facies from the super-imposed photographs of
tuberculous patients, and in another instance to
show up the common quality in the countenances
of violent criminals. He found the technique
exceedingly difficult, although he tackled the
mechanical problems involved with his usual
untiring patience and ingenuity; and indeed the
whole method was beyond solution by the
technological resources of his day.

We are now beginning to enter an era in
which Galton’s idea may bear fruit. As an
example of a modern application I may mention
the work of Dr. G. D. Dawson in the Neurological Research Unit at the National Hospital.
Dawson had reason to believe that in the normal
subject an action potential evoked by the
stimulation of a peripheral nerve could be
detected by electrodes placed on the scalp over
a particular part of the opposite side of the
head. However the action potential would be so
weak that it would be wholly obscured by
adventitious electrical changes, occurring in
the electrical circuits and in the scalp of the
subject. In the terms of the communications
engineer, the signal would be indistinguishable
from the noise. However, by superimposing a
large number of tracings, forty or more, he
obtained a thick and fuzzy band with discernible
waves, whose time of onset and whose period
could be roughly measured. This result led to

92

a further great improvement in technique, by
which averaging was substituted for superimposition. A rotating switch was used to sample
the signal voltage at regular intervals after
each stimulus. Corresponding charges were
stored in capacitators and progressively summed;
and the accumulated charges could be examined
continuously on a cathode ray tube, from which
a photographic record could be obtained. In this
way the entire scatter of the observations was
eliminated and a single clean line, corresponding
to mean values, could be obtained, which showed
even minute features of the wave-forms and
allowed more accurate measurement.

It is noteworthy that Galton set himself the
immensely complex task of examining the
human face, while Dawson was concerned with
a single wavy line. Yet Dawson needed some
fifty different ordinates to describe this curve.
To accomplish a corresponding task with human
faces one would need something like a television
scanner with storage units running in number to
the order of 10,000 or so. However, simpler
tasks may be found lying to hand. It has been
suggested that such a problem as photography
of the canals of the planet Mars, where also
small regularities in appearance are swamped
in adventitious light variations, could be tackled
along a similar line.

There is another association between Galton
and the planet Mars with an even more contemporary echo. At the end of the last century
there was a near approach between Mars and the
earth, which caused some discussion on the
possibility of communication with an intelligent
form of life on Mars, if such there was. Contrary to the generally expressed scientific
opinions, in an article of 1896 Galton pointed
out not only that the possibility existed but also
what its method would be. The emission of dots
and dashes could be used to build up first
a system of numerals, then to characterize 7,
and from that to proceed to the communication
of directions and movements, and finally of
pictures. Once pictures were being sent and
received, the problem would be solved. At the
end of last year we learned that listening for
interstellar signals is to begin at the Radio

.Astronomy Laboratory at Green Bank, Virginia.

The Project OZMA, based on the work of
GALTON’S

R. W. Meadows, relies on the feasibility of the
means of communication outlined by Galton,
and on the fact that there is one particular wavelength, the radio emission line of neutral hydrogen, which would have a very high probability
of being chosen for long distance communication
by any advanced world.

Imagery
Another field, in which the stream of inspiration starting from Galton has seemed till lately
to have dried up in sandy soil, is that of visual
imagery. Here he was a pioneer out on his
own, and he had to gather all the facts for himself. By patience and system he described an
immense variety and richness of visual imagery,
of spontaneous origin, which he found to be
especially prominent in childhood. Numberform, for instance, which he described, is the
visual form in which numbers, or numerical
data such as months and days of the week, may
present themselves to some people in the mind’s
eye. Galton describes one subject who could
both imagine and mentally manipulate a slide
tule, so as to be able to carry out difficult
computations in his mind with speed and
accuracy. Into this fascinating world Galton
was not able to penetrate very far; indeed, the
principal conclusion of a general and comprehensive kind which he was able to draw was that
most people think of their own mental processes
as being of a universal nature, to which the thinking of all others must conform. They find it
almost impossible to believe that others may
have ways of thinking which are to them
unknown, and who may find their ways incomprehensible. The science of analysis of human
communication has not progressed sufficiently
to see just how far this principle will take us.
For many years no further work of any
importance was done on the line pioneered by
Galton. One might perhaps mention attempts
made, in the first place by Golla, Hutton and
Grey Walter (1943), to correlate Galton’s
personality types with EEG characteristics—
‘attempts which have led to no profitable results.
It is a different matter, however, when the
psychologist turns to the influence of imagery
on imagination and creative thinking, as has
‘been done by Professor McKellar in a fascinating

HERITAGE

book. There are references to Galton on some
thirty pages scattered throughout this work;
and his ideas are the starting point for a systematic study of the appearance of imagery in
normal and abnormal states of mind under
experimental conditions. There is great interest
in the analysis of the relations of autistic and
logical thinking, and the estimation of the role
played by spontaneous imagery in creativity.

McKellar draws attention to the restricting
effect of imagery on abstract thought. The image
that at some times supplies a fruitful model for
understanding, may at other times mislead, as
has for instance been the case in the past with
the concept of the luminiferous ether, and with
the rival wave and corpuscular theories of the
nature of light. Galton believed that a habit of
suppressing mental imagery must characterize
men who deal much with abstract ideas. But he
maintained also that the visualizing faculty
should be developed in education. We should
be able to call up at will a clear, steady and
complete image of anything recently examined;
visualize it freely from any aspect; project its
image on paper and draw an outline; and
construct images from description.

This bringing of imagery into relation with
education is of interest in connection with the
educational theories of Cuisenaire and Gattegno,
which are beginning to be used in schools in
this country and on the Continent. Cuisenaire,
a mathematics master in a Belgian school,
found that if he provided his children with
ready-made number-forms, their capacity to
use them to understand abstract mathematical
ideas, such as the commutative law, or power
and logarithms, or infinite sets, led to very
rapid progress. The number-forms supplied are
exceedingly simple, and consist of sticks of
wood, 1 cm. square in cross section, and
from 1 to 10 cm. long, coloured so that each
prime in succession starts a new colour sequence:
the sticks 2, 4 and 8 cm. long belong to the red
family, 3, 6 and 9 to the blue family, 5 and 10 are
yellow and orange, and 7 is black. Such models
are obviously very much more adaptable and
convenient for mental manipulation than some
of the eerie number-forms described by Galton,
which the child develops for himself out of his
untutored. imagination. They indeed look like

93

ER—S5
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

things which have been dwarfed and stunted
through lack of proper nourishment. There is
no knowing how much value the average man
might derive from his capacity for visual and
auditory imagery, if it were developed by
education instead of being systematically ignored.

Correlation and Variation

The scientific work a man does, which is fully
developed and exploited by others, becomes in
the course of time part of the general body of
knowledge. The individual stamp is lost, so that
his name may hardly be remembered, and his
personal contribution is relegated to a matter of
historical record. This has been the case with
Galton’s work on meteorology, where he has
the fame of having discovered and named the
anticyclone, and the great merit of having been
the first to construct weather maps. So also it
has been with his work on finger-prints, on twins,
on anthropometry and the measurement of
human variation, and in the development of
the calculus of correlation. His work in any one
of these fields is of an originality and a fundamental importance which would satisfy a firstclass scientist for the whole of his life-work.
To this there is not much one can add. The
mathematical tool of correlation, which Galton
developed single-handed from its beginnings, is
a fantastic achievement for a man who never
had the advantage of any very adequate mathematical education. However, though the calculus
of correlation has become the most powerful
tool available to the psychometric psychologist,
and is used as a basic instrument over a great
variety of scientific fields, in conceptual importance it seems to me to come second to Galton’s
study of quantitative variation.

When one is concerned with human attributes,
the change of attitude involved in considering
people as showing a characteristic to a greater
or lesser degree, instead of merely having or not
having it, is revolutionary. Even where the
characteristic with which one is concerned is
beyond the present reach of measurement, the
change from the one way to the other of thinking
about one’s observations has the most farreaching consequences. One may take the
example of “neurosis.” It used to be universal
and it is still common for medical men to think

94

of people as being either “neurotic” or “not
neurotic.” When one thinks in terms of more
and less, ‘‘neurosis” loses its unfortunate
pathological implications and comes to be seen
as a mode of normal variation. A shift of this
kind may be called for in the most unlikely
looking places. For many scientific purposes it
is more appropriate to think of maleness and
femaleness as the poles of a continuous rather
than a discontinuous distribution.

The Basis of Creativity

If we want to get an impression of Galton’s
personality as a creative worker, we must look,
not only on the greatest of his achievements but
also on his least. Galton’s mind, except when
he was asleep, was never still. There seem to
have been but few subjects which offered a
problem to a lively intelligence, and practically
none where an answer might be obtained by
counting and figuring, which did not claim his
interest. Thus in the 247 works in Blacker’s
definitive bibliography, there are “Statistical
Inquiries into the Efficacy of Prayer,” “The
Average Flush of Excitement,” “Free-will,.
Observations and Inferences,” “Measure of
Fidget,” ‘Arithmetic by Smell,” “Terms of
Imprisonment,”’ “Three Generations of Lunatic
Cats,” “Temporary Flooring in Westminster
Abbey for Ceremonial Processions,” “Strawberry Cure for Gout,” “Number of Strokes of
the Brush in a Picture,” “Cutting a Round Cake
on Scientific Principles.” In this bizarrely
variegated collection there are some items which
are wholly ephemeral and trivial, but not many;
and some, like the “Inquiries into the Efficacy
of Prayer” are a delight to read.

Galton’s scientific work is characterized by
the simplicity and lucidity of his thinking. His
approach to a problem was a naive one, without
preconceptions, and one is invariably impressed
by the luminous intelligence with which he
tackled a problem. He attained his ends mainly
by ingenuity, logic and abundant patience and
capacity for hard work. He also showed a naive
trustfulness and courage. Though a praeternaturally shy man, he did his own field work,
applying to fellow members of learned societies
for details of their private lives, and to friends
and acquaintances for information about their
GALTON’S

 

FIGURE 1

DR. G. D. DAWSON’S DEMONSTRATIONS OF A
SINGLE SWEEP WITH NOTHING TO BE SEEN BUT
THE ‘‘NOISE’’ OF THE AMPLIFIER, THOUGH WITHIN
IT THERE 1S A 0Q-:25 MICROVOLT PULSE. IN
OPPOSITE QUADRANT AN AGGREGATION OF 220
SUCH SWEEPS, AND ABOVE THE AVERAGE OF THOSE
220 SWEEPS, WITH ALL NOISE’ EFFECTIVELY
ELIMINATED

ways of thinking and imagining. Ernest Jones,
in his study of genius in the person of Freud, has
said that an element in the achievement of a
man of scientific genius is credulity. This may
well have been true of Freud, whose ideas came to
him intuitively, and who had to believe passionately in their truth in order to make progress.
It was not true of Galton. He, too, had his
sudden flashes of intuitive insight—he names
the place and time when the concept of correlation descended on him— but he relied on them
relatively little. His works are characterized
by self-criticism and dispassion. He was remarkably surefooted, and seldom went seriously
astray. There are, however, points where he
took a false path, and some of these are important. Thus he went astray on assortative
mating, considering that people are attracted
by their opposites up to a limiting point after
which the tendency is reversed. This led to a
neglect of the effect of assortative mating in the
maintenance of able families. There are other
instances which we shall have to notice later.
Galton was secure as long as he relied on reason;
it is only when he comes to the formulation of
his religion and particularly eugenics conceived
as a religious aim, that he steps outside the
guidance of reason alone, with fateful results.
Galton’s maxim was “whenever you can,
count.” Pearson notes that in his day the Galton

HERITAGE

Laboratory possessed no fewer than five
“registrators,” small mechanisms designed to
be carried in the pocket, to record a count by
such means as the prick of a pin on a card,
without exciting the notice of the company.
While Galton was having his portrait painted
he was counting the strokes of the artist’s
brush. At a scientific meeting when he lost
interest in the theme of the speaker, he would
be counting the fidgety movements of the audience, and relating them to sex and age. Walking
the streets of the city he recorded the percentage of attractive, indifferent and repellentlooking women he met, with the object of
forming a Beauty Map of the British Isles.

A great deal of his incessant intellectual
activity must be put down to the delight he
must have felt in the use of his own powers. It
suggests the restless playful activity of children,
or the athletic young man turning handsprings
at the side of a swimming-pool. Yet the psychiatrist also receives a strong impression of a
compulsive quality, of a need to count for counting’s sake, or for the sake of engaging a mental
engine that would shake and rattle without aload.

Obsessional Traits
Obsessionality was a feature of Galton’s
family history. According to Pearson one of his
father’s sisters
had a triple inkstand with three coloured inks,
triple penwipers and pens; every conceivable
apparatus for writing, printed envelopes for her
various banks and_ business correspondents;
printed questions for her grooms, ‘‘Has the mare
had her corn?” etc.; a dozen or more cash boxes
elaborately arranged to receive in separate
compartments each kind of coin from each type
of her property . . . As many as 100 painted
labels have been counted ina flower bed of hers of
12 square feet. In short, we appreciate what
Francis Galton meant when he said that the desire
to classify and organize which existed in his family,
he felt at times as almost a danger to himself.
Galton’s father was a wealthy banker of
meticulously businesslike habits. He required
his son to provide the most exact statements of
all his expenses, and to account for the money
allowed him down to the last penny. Galton
says his mother was described to him as having
been in her early years joyous and unconventional, but does not say that she remained so

95
ER—6
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

after years of marriage. It must have been from
his Quaker father, and not from his mother,
that he derived a weight of puritanical guilt, of
whose existence one only knows from its eventual
removal. The reading of The Origin of Species
brought, he says, a real crisis in his life, and
freed him from the constraint of his old superstition as if it had been a nightmare. That
occurred when he was about forty, and the
damage was done.

Galton was liable to nervous symptoms
almost throughout his life, and twice had a
breakdown. The first was at the age of twenty.
In his Memories he writes:

It was during my third year at Cambridge that

I broke down entirely and had to lose a term and

go home. I suffered from intermittent pulse and

a variety of brain symptoms of an alarming kind.

A mill seemed to be working inside my head; I

could not banish obsessing ideas: at times [

could hardly read a book, and found it painful

even to look at a printed page. Fortunately I did

not suffer from sleeplessness, and my digestion

failed but little. Even a brief interval of complete

mental rest did me good, and it seemed as if a

long dose of it might wholly restore me.

Both Galton and Pearson attribute his illness
to doing too much. Since this too much consisted
in rather desultory reading for mathematical
honours and a great deal of social life, the explanation is not very convincing. Apart from
the “obsessing thoughts,” there seem to have
been symptoms of somatic anxiety—palpitations
and dizziness are mentioned in a letter to his
father of November 1842—and some degree of
depression. Early in 1843 he wrote poems, of
which two begin with the lines:

Well may we loathe this world of sin, and strain
AS an imprisoned dove to flee away;
and

How foolish and how wicked seems the world.

Nevertheless the condition does not ring quite
like a simple anxiety state, and the depressive
element could not have been severe in view of
the lack of interference with appetite and sleep.
His later illness, at the age of forty-four, is
described as follows:
During the whole of this interval I find from
old diaries that I frequently suffered from giddiness
and other maladies prejudicial to mental effort,

but that I invariably became well again on completely changing my habits . . . The warning I

96

 

FIGURE 2

FRANCIS GALTON, AGED THIRTY-EIGHT, FROM A

PHOTOGRAPH OF 1860

received in 1866 was more emphatic and alarming
than previously, and made a revision of my mode of
life a matter of importance. Those who have not
suffered from mental breakdown can hardly realize
the incapacity it causes .. . After recovery seems
to others to be complete, there remains for a long
time an impossibility of performing certain
minor actions without pain and serious mischief...
This was a frequent experience with me respecting
small problems, which successively obsessed me
day and night, as I tried in vain to think them out.
These affected mere twigs, so to speak, rather
than large boughs of the mental processes, but
for all that most painfully.

One must conclude, I think, that Galton’s
trouble was a liability to painful compulsive
rumination.

Puritanism

In his Memories, all that he has to say about
his mother is confined to one short paragraph,
recording nothing of her emotional relationship
to him or of his feelings to her. The main feminine
GALTON’S HERITAGE

 

FIGURE 3

FRANCIS GALTON IN HOLIDAY GARB; TAKEN AT
VICHY, AUGUST 1878, WHEN AGED FIFTY-SIX YEARS

influence in his childhood was a much-loved
sister, older by twelve years, who spent the
greater part of her life lying on her back and who
devoted herself to his education. Apart from
her, the dominant influence on his life was certainly that of his father. Nearly all his letters as a
boy and a young man are written to his father,
whom he loved and who dominated him. It
was his father, who pressed him on to make a
career for himself; and once his father had died
all plans of that kind were immediately discarded. This relationship possibly explains the
extreme reserve with which Galton touches on
the most personal of his experiences, though it is
clear that his feelings were both warm and
deep.

Pearson comments ruefully on his incomprehension of the psychology of women. When
ideas came up for discussion on how women
might play their part in the eugenic movement,

his only notion was that they might throw open
their houses for drawing-room meetings. That
women might have their own ideas about the
breeding of the next generation had not occurred
to him. He naively imagined that the abler men
could have the abler women for the asking, while
Pearson comments that the abler men, either by
choice or necessity, do not mate with the abler
women, and the latter, either by choice or necessity, remain to a large extent unmarried.
Galton married in 1853, at the age of thirtyone, and enjoyed forty years of married life;
yet as far as one can see, his wife had practically
no influence in moulding his personality or his
views. There is hardly a word about her in
Pearson’s biography. During their life in
London she probably saw very little of him, at
least alone; practically the whole of his day must
have been taken up either with scientific work
or with his very numerous commitments in the
Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Society,
the Anthropological Institute, the Biritish
Association, or the Observatory at Kew, etc.

 

FIGURE 4
FRANCIS GALTON IN THE SIXTIES

97
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

FIGURE 5
FRANCIS GALTON IN THE SEVENTIES

Both husband and wife came from large sibships,
yet their marriage was childless. Pearson
supposes that the lack of children must have been
a grief to Galton, but notes also that he was
alarmed by children and did not find the right
words to say to them.

The couple travelled a lot abroad and were
also accustomed to making visits to spas under
medical direction. Not only was Galton liable
to nervous symptoms, but his wife also seems to
have suffered from one of those nameless forms
of chronic ill-health which one finds not infrequently in the women of Victorian times. Pearson
says he was wonderfully patient with her. One
is compelled to wonder whether their life together
was of a kind to have much chance of producing
children. Galton’s biographers note that the subject of sex was one which he found distressing
and preferred to ignore.

Though he must have been a man of acute
sensibilities, he seems to have denied himself
the pleasures of the senses. His niece, Millicent

98

Lethbridge, presumably describing his old age,
wrote:

He enjoyed his food as keenly as a child,
although he was a very small eater and most
abstemious in every way. He delighted in afterdinner coffee, of which he allowed himself two
teaspoonfuls, and that only when I, or some
other coffee-drinker, was staying with him to set
a bad example.

She notes also that he loved the sunshine, and
even on the hottest day would insist on walking
on the sunny side of the street.

Nevertheless, for his London residence he
chose what must have been a gloomy house,
where his work-room looked out on a lightshaft. Though fond of travel, he does not seem
to have been impressed by magnificent scenery.
Art, whether in colour, form or verbal expression, was no essential need for him. He was
totally unmusical. He was not fond of animals,
and had no comprehension and love of young
things.

A Feminine Trait?

To this side of his nature one gets a clue from
his photographs, which show a lower half of the
face which is ill-matched with the upper. The
nose, eyes and forehead show nobility, energy
and intellect. The chin is fined away and the

 

FIGURE 6
FRANCIS GALTON FROM A PHOTOGRAPH OF 1902
GALTON’S

mouth is held in a compressed and prim expression. Furthermore, as it seems to me, there
is a sexless or even feminine quality to the
countenance, which if anything gets more marked
with increasing age.

The final point which emerges from these
photographs is the remarkable extent to which
he remained physically preserved into old age.
There is but little sign of ageing shown in the
photographs between the fifties and the eighties.
This resistance to ageing was, of course, also
shown mentally. Of his old age he wrote that
it was a very happy time for him, provided one
accepted its numerous limitations. From his
studies on Hereditary Talent he concluded that
“the highest minds in the highest races seem to
have been those who had the longest boyhood.”
In his own case he did not make a beginning
with the serious business of life until he was over
thirty. Pearson says he was young till his death.
Even between forty and fifty he was a boy who
must try his powers on all things that came his
way. At the age of seventy-four he complained
for the first time that his brain power was not
as vigorous as formerly.

The feminine streak was also a source of
strength. He was a remarkably unaggressive man.
Though often taken by his work into the fringes
of controversy, for instance, in the conflict
between his science of finger-prints and the
Bertillon system of personal identification by
bodily measurement, he succeeded in not getting
involved. As Blacker says, there are no polemical
writings, and he seems to have made no personal
enemies. In the closing years of his life there were
acute disagreements between Karl Pearson, his

Education Society, who were the representatives
of his faith for the future. Though he might have
been torn in two by opposing loyalties, he

dealt with the situation gently and without

rancour, and largely held aloof.

The Hero-Worshipper

One of his most boyish and most engaging
qualities was his capacity for hero-worship.
His admiration for Darwin knew no limit.
When he died, Galton wrote:

I feel at times quite sickened at the loss of
- Charles Darwin. I owed more to him than to any

|

scientific heir, and the direction of the Eugenics |

 

HERITAGE

other man living or dead; and I never entered his
presence without feeling as a man in the presence
of a beloved sovereign.

He was particularly impressed by intellectual
eminence, but he appreciated excellence in any
mode of competitive endeavour. In 1864 he was
turning over ideas of breeding both dogs and
men for intelligence. The trouble was that even
the best were, he thought, not good enough:

The general intellectual capacity of our leaders
requires to be raised, and also to be differentiated.
We want abler commanders, statesmen, thinkers,
inventors, and artists . . . The foremost minds of
the present day seem to stagger and halt under an
intellectual load too heavy for them.

Galton thought that the leaders of mankind
were set apart from the rest both psychologically
and biologically. Thus in his essay of 1872 on
““Gregariousness in Cattle and in Men,” he
traced to this gregariousness “slavish aptitudes,
from which the leaders of men and the heroes
and prophets, are exempt.” On the biological
side he was of the opinion that extreme ability
does not blend:

Very gifted men are usually of marked individuality, and consequently of a special type.
Whenever this type is a stable one, it does not
blend easily, but is transmitted almost unchanged,
so that specimens of very distinguished intellectual
heredity frequently occur.

On this fundamental but fallacious idea
Galton’s preoccupation with the “noble stirps”
arose.

The role of the average man was, he thought,
a very subordinate one.

The average man is morally and intellectually an
uninteresting being. The class to which he belongs
is bulky and no doubt serves to help the course of
social life in action. It also affords, by its inertia,
a regulator that, like the fly-wheel to the steamengine, resists sudden and irregular changes. But
- the average man is of no direct help towards
evolution, which appears to our dim vision to be
the goal of all living existence . . . Some thoroughgoing democrats may look with complacency on
a mob of mediocrities, but to most other persons
they are the reverse of attractive. The absence of
heroic gifts among them [for Galton never saw
the common man in times of war] would be a
heavy set off against the freedom from a corresponding number of very degraded forms. The
general standard of thought and morals in a mob
of mediocrities must necessarily be mediocre, and,
what is worse, contentedly so. The lack of living

99
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

men to afford lofty examples, and to educate the

virtue of reverence, leaves an irremediable blank.

All men would find themselves at nearly the same

dead average level, each being as meanly endowed

as his neighbour.

Galton would not allow that the class of the
mediocre might be leavened by men of exceptional potentialities who never showed their
capacities. He did not believe in “mute inglorious
Miltons.”’

If a man is gifted with vast intellectual ability,
eagerness to work, and power of working, I
cannot comprehend how such a man should be
suppressed.

This view shows a remarkable lack of insight into
his own case. From a reading of his life story
one would think that it was the sheerest accident
that diverted Galton himself from a life of hunting and shooting. This was the life his brothers
lived, and the life he led contentedly for some
years, until an impulse took him into African
exploration. Even after that he might have gone
on as an explorer, had not his health been
adversely affected.

Of the “lower middle classes” Galton thought
still worse; they might be summed up as mentally
and physically litter-scatterers. They and those
still lower than them made up “‘the present army
of ineffectives which clog progress.”

Galton’s excessive admiration for heroic
virtues, for the leaders of men, and for the
extreme deviant generally, no doubt had its
emotional roots in his relation to his father, and
to such later father-figures as Charles Darwin.
It had, however, a rational basis. This was
derived from his way of looking at normal
variation.

Galton never made use of the concept of the
standard deviation. He thought of people who
had been measured in some characteristic as
being drawn out in a long line, the man with
the lowest measurement to the extreme left,
and the man with the highest to the extreme
right. So arranged they would show the “‘ogive
curve,” which runs almost level over the middle
part of its course, but dips or rises with increasing steepness towards either extreme. This
distribution was then divided conceptually into
parts equal in length, quartiles, octiles or
centiles—percentiles as we now call them. When
looked at in this way, the man at the extreme

1090

right would exceed his neighbour to the left by a
larger margin than that man would exceed his
other neighbour. This led Galton to the misleading idea that there was more variation at
the extremes of the distribution than about its
middle. The correct view is that variability is a
quality of the group as a whole, but that its
effects will be more openly manifested at the
extremes than near the mode. _
An example which Galton chose to illustrate
his idea is certainly striking. In two years of the
mathematical tripos at Cambridge, out of 17,000
marks as total, the top man scored between
7,500 and 8,000. The runner-up was 2,000 marks
behind, in the 5,500 to 6,000 class; while behind
him, in the class 500 marks below there were no
fewer than three men. Pearson says: “It was at
this time that Galton first realized the great
principle that while between men of moderate
ability there is scarcely any difference, between
‘illustrious’ and even ‘eminent’ men there are
extraordinary differences.” At the end of his life
at the age of eighty-two he made an elegant
application of this idea by calculating the proper
proportions for the distribution of a sum of
money between first and second prizes. Taking
only 100 individuals, supposed to follow a normal distribution, the interval between the fiftieth
and fifty-first is only one-tenth of the interval
between the ninety-ninth and 100th. On this basis
the intervals between the first and the second
and between the second and the third prove to
be as three to one, and it is in this ratio that the
total prize money should be divided. From this
Galton draws a moral:
Differences in ability in power to create, to
discover, to rule men do not go by uniform stages.

We know this by experience—our Shakespeares,

our Newtons, our Napoleons have no close
compeers in the populations of their own generations—but we see a reason for the gulf which
separates the genius from ourselves...

The Existence of an Elite

We must now look at Galton’s ideas on the
subject of an elite, since they determined the
way in which he thought a eugenic policy would
have to be implemented. The pont I shall now
maintain is that there is no class of human being
which can be regarded as constituting an elite.

Instead we have only individuals, who do indeed
GALTON’S

excel, but excel in a limited range of performance.

To begin with, we must distinguish between
the man and his achievement. Galton does not
tell us that the man, who scored 2,000 more
marks than his runner-up in the mathematical
Tripos, did anything very remarkable in his
later career; and there is no reason to think that
he did. Darwin showed more insight than
Galton, when he observed that the discoverers
of undiscovered things were often less clever
than those who made no discoveries. There are
elements of chance and will which intervene
between ability on one side and achievement on
the other.

Small quantitative differences in causes may
lead to large or to qualitative differences in
effects. This phenomenon may be met with in
intelligence testing. We may pose two intelligent
subjects with a problem which the one solves in
three minutes and the other in thirty. If we now
give them a second and more difficult problem, it
may be that the first can be expected to solve it
in an hour, and the second in fifty years, that is
never, within the limits of a lifetime. In a walledin courtyard full of prisoners, it may be that the
one man who can jump an inch higher than his
fellows will catch a glimpse of the horizon,
while the others can never see more than
the sky.

High achievement is the reward of the
specialist, and his specialization has to be paid for
by compensatory deficiencies. Take any expert
off his home ground, and the mediocrity of
the performance is painful. Indeed, if the
subject of debate is minimally off-centre, the
same can often be said. Listen to one of the
B.B.C.’s “Critics” discussing a visit to a picture
exhibition, or to a learned judge giving his views
on juvenile delinquency, or even, let us say, to
a well-known psychiatrist on the subject of
human personality, and it would be pardonable
to suppose that the man was clueless. To achieve
his fantastic level of performance, Galton himself had to sacrifice practically everything else.
Judged solely by the standards which can be
attained in the arts, humanities and sciences,
even the best of us are incompetents in all
senses but one—mental cripples with a single
hypertrophied organ. The mind of the specialist
is a precision tool which can only show what it is

.HERITAGE

capable of within its own limited range of
application. The transcendent value to the community of the possessor of such a mind is almost
entirely social and hardly at all biological.

Discussing the “Worth of Children,” Galton
took the view that the brains of the nation lay in
what he called the W and X classes, i.e., in
persons making up approximately one-third of
one per cent of the population. This view is
conditioned by the confusion already noted
between social and biological values, or between
genotype and phenotype. It is probably true
that the valuable innovations, new ideas, new
creations, which accrue from one generation to
the next are received at the hands of one in 300
of the population or less. But the genes which
provide the constitutional element in variation
in intelligence are distributed throughout the
entire population. There are a great many more
of these valuable genes among the vast hordes
of those of average intelligence, or even in the
lesser hordes of those of subnormal intelligence,
than there are in the chromosomes of the intellectual aristocracy. The trouble is, of course,
that in the lower ranks genes of positive effect
are in dilute concentration. But if we are to appraise the value of a mine, we do not take account
only of the nuggets of pure gold and forget the
ore.

Ignorance of Mendelism

Galton’s misconceptions arose because he had
to do all his work without the aid of Mendelism.
Thus when he supposes that, if the W and X
classes were removed from a community it
would be left with a dead level of mediocrity,
he missed the fact that a single generation of
random mating would restore the previous
variability. The men of middle ability who
make up the bulk of a population may not
distinguish themselves by the creation of new
social values; but, looked at biologically, they
constitute the treasury of genetic variability
and provide the raw material out of which the
extreme deviants are made.

Finally, brief notice must be taken of Galton’s
disdain for the “army of ineffectives which clog
progress.” Of course, he was right to emphasize
the way in which human progress is retarded

IOI
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by sheer stupidity. But the drag on progress is
not the stupidity of the stupid but the stupidity of
the intelligent. All the really disastrous things
which have happened to mankind can be laid to
the account of intelligent, indeed, frequently
brilliant men. For these tragedies the intellectual
proletariat are blameless.

Galton thought that eugenic policies could be
furthered by encouraging the fertility of families
in which eminent men had been known to occur.
This was a consequence of the mode of research
he had to follow in studying hereditary genius,
and of the limited range of results which this
approach could provide. His ignorance of
Mendelism led to an important misconception
of the biological nature of the family. He saw
that there might be resemblances between a man
and one of his grandfathers which were not shown
with the intervening parent. To account for
this, he derived one-quarter of the hereditary
equipment of an individual from each of his
two parents, one-sixteenth part from each of
his grandparents, and so on, leading to a series
whose sum is unity. The model is misleading.
All of a man’s genes come from one or other of
his parents, and there is no remainder of
genetic variability to be allocated elsewhere.
The view that a man might base a claim for
differential treatment on close relationship to
an eminent man alone is quite unbiological. To
take an example, we have no reason to suppose
that a man of average intelligence will sire more
intelligent children if he is the son of parents of
superior intelligence than if his parents were as
average as himself. The biological worth of an
individual depends on his individual constitution, regardless of what that of other members
of his family may be.

Ends and Means

This argument leads to the view that the means
by which Galton proposed that eugenic ends
should be attained are not the right ones. We
have to abandon, I think, the whole of his ideas
about diplomas of eugenic worth, the encouragement of fertility in eminent families and imposed
restrictions on the fertility of the socially incompetent. They all suffer from a fatal defect, that
of dividing humanity against itself. All mankind
is in one boat together, and those of us who in

102

some specified field of activity are rather
less feebleminded than the average will have do
what we can for those who are rather more so.

However, if we abandon the means proposed
by Galton, does it follow that we should abandon
his ends? I do not think it does. To be sure, we
must not blink the fact that the whole complex
of ideas comprised under the heading of eugenics
arouses strong opposition, not least among
biologists. During his lifetime Galton had to
suffer the disappointment of failing to arouse
an echo among his scientific colleagues. He presented his ideas in the second Huxley lecture of
the Anthropological Institute, “but the seed
fell on barren soil,’ and the address was never
published in their journal. Galton’s critics
pointed to the effects of the environment, as in
the slums; and the resistance that any normal
man would offer to interference with marriage.
It was said that “at present the care for future
man, the love and respect of the race, are quite
beyond the pale of the morals of even the best.”
Karl Pearson stigmatized these ideas as unsupported by statistics, and half-baked. We are
likely to rate them higher now, and the statistics
are beginning to come in. Yet is it still true that
even the best can take no care for the genetical
future of mankind? I do not think that there is
any biologist, even among those who shun this
Society, who would not agree that care for
this aspect of our racial future should occupy us.
The point on which they would insist is that
social efforts, which are not supported by the
weight of the evidence and by a consensus of
informed opinion, should be held in reserve.

In some respects I think that our critics go
too far. It is indeed true that all wild populations
carry great numbers of genes of deleterious effect,
and yet maintain their vitality. It is true that
mankind can safely foster the infirm, and
indeed permit their reproduction, without
alarm for the future of the race. The variability
of a race is its source of strength, and variability
is the contribution of the heterozygote. But we
can make a fetish of the heterozygote just as
Galton made a fetish of the extreme deviant.
We must have some sense of proportion. How
far would the balance of heterozygote and homozygote be shifted by, say, a raising of the mean
intelligence by half a standard deviation? Surely
GALTON’S

to a negligible extent; yet such a rise would
transform our society. To give priority to the
biological advantages of heterosis is to value
reproductive vigour higher than vigour of the
mind. As matters stand we are embarrassingly
rich in the one and poor in the other. Stupidity
is an enslavement of the spirit of man. If for
biological reasons it is unsafe to contend
against it, then those are risks we shall have to
take. The biologists must tell us how to do it,
and not that it shouldn’t be done. |
Perhaps it might be possible to find, entirely
outside the field of genetics, principles which
would have a directive influence on reproduction,
which would not be dysgenic in their effect, and
which might receive almost universal assent.

HERITAGE

This century is marked by increasing concern
for the welfare of children. All that we might
ask is that every child should be given a fair
chance in life. To be an unwelcome guest in the
home into which it is born does not constitute
a fair start; and people who for whatever reason
are unwilling to be parents should be provided
with foolproof methods of avoiding conception.
Furthermore if there is any accident, whether it is
ill-health, or poverty, or unhappiness, which for
a time would make it difficult for prospective
parents to give their child the background and
the upbringing it needs, they should for that
time think well before they saddle a new human
being with an unfair handicap. With this proviso
we might safely forget criteria of eugenic worth.

REFERENCES
Blacker, C. P. 1952. Eugenics: Galton and After.

Duckworth.

Dawson, G. D. 1954. A summation technique for
the detection of small evoked potentials. EEG
Clin. Neurophysiol., 6, 65.

Galton, Francis. 1908. Memories of My Life.

Methuen.

Golla, F., Hutton, E. L. and Walter, W. G. 1943.
Objective study of mental imagery. J. Ment. Sc.,

89, 216

Jones, E. 1956. The nature of genius. Brit. med. J.,

ii, 257

McKellar, P. 1957. Imagination and Thinking.
London, Cohen and West.

Pearson, Karl. 1914-1930. The Life, Letters and
Labours of Francis Galton. 4 vols. Cambridge

University Press.

Trivett, J. V. 1959. The coloured sticks. New
Scientist, 6, No. 160, 1183.

The portraits of Galton are reproduced from
Volumes II and IIIA of Pearson’s Life with the
kind permission of the Biometrika Trustees.

103
