SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE
STATE”

By T. H. MARSHALL, C.M.G., M.A.

Professor of Social Institutions in the University of London

T is a great honour, which I highly appre
ciate, to be invited by the Eugenics

Society to deliver the Galton Lecture, and
it is an honour which may, I think, appropriately be bestowed upon a sociologist. But
for a sociologist who, like myself, is ignorant
of biology and genetics and unskilled in those
statistical techniques, now so widely and
expertly used in social surveys and psychological investigations, it is also an embarrassment. What subject should I choose? I
pondered over this for some time before I
felt sure I could accept the invitation. Social
selection seemed to be the most promising
general field, but I knew it was one in which
I should have to walk warily. For I should
find in it signposts pointing in directions in
which I must on no account allow myself to
travel—signposts bearing such words as
“Nature and Nurture,’ “Fertility and
Intelligence,’ or perhaps the mystic letters
“g, F and k”’ pointing the way to certain
shady paths in and around the garden
commonly known as “ I.Q.”

So I devised a title, a rather elaborate one,
which would keep me out of danger and
also make it fairly clear what I intended to
talk about. But it had two disadvantages.
It was too long to get on to the cards and
notices of the lecture, and it might have
committed me in advance to a task which I
should later find it impossible to execute. So
I decided to seek refuge in brevity and
obscurity, with the result that you have
before you: “‘ Social Selection in the Welfare
State.” This title gave me no pleasure,
partly because “‘ Welfare State ”’ is a term for
which I have developed a strong dislike, and
partly because the subject indicated was
obviously far too big for a lecture. But when
I began to consider it more carefully, I found

a
* The Galton Lecture delivered at a meeting of the
Eugenics Society on February 18th, 1953.

81

it was better than I had expected. I think it
really does mean something, which is a great
relief. But I shall have to spend a little time
explaining what it is that I think it means.

There need be little ambiguity about

“ social selection.”” I take it to refer to the
processes by which individuals are sifted,
sorted and distributed into the various
positions in the social system which can be
distinguished one from another by their
function, status, or place in the social hierarchy. I shall be considering, in this lecture,
social selection through the educational
system.

The Principles of the Welfare State

The Welfare State is a tougher proposition,
because it would be difficult to find any
definition acceptable both to its friends and
to its enemies—or even to all its friends.
Fortunately I needn’t try to define it ; I have
only to explain what are the characteristics
of the Welfare State which seem to me to
provide a distinctive setting to the problem
of social selection. I take the most relevant
aspects of the Welfare State, in this context,
to be the following.

First, its intense individualism. The claim
of the individual to welfare is sacred and
irrefutable and partakes of the character of
a natural right. It would, no doubt, figure
in the new Declaration of the Rights of Man
if the supporters of the Welfare State were
minded to issue anything so pithily dramatic.
It would replace property in those early
French and American testaments which
speak of life, liberty and property; this
trinity now becomes life, liberty and welfare.
It is to be found among the Four Freedoms
in the guise of “‘ Freedom from Want ’’—but
that is too negative a version. The welfare
of the Welfare State is more positive and
has more substance. It was lurking in the
82 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Declaration of Independence, which listed
the inalienable rights of man as “ Life,
Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness.”’
Happiness is a positive concept closely related to welfare, but the citizen of the
Welfare State does not merely have the right
to pursue welfare ; he has the right to receive
it, even if the pursuit has not been particularly hot. And so we promise to each child
an education suited to its individual qualities, we try to make the punishment (or
treatment) fit the individual criminal rather
than the crime, we hold that in all but the
simplest of the social services individual
case study and family case work should
precede and accompany the giving of advice

or assistance, and we uphold the principle.

of equal opportunity, which is perhaps the
most completely individualistic of all.

But if we put individualism first, we must
put collectivism second. The Welfare State
is the responsible promoter and guardian
of the welfare of the whole community, which
is something more complex than the sum
total of the welfare of all its individual
members arrived at by simple addition. The
claims of the individual must always be
defined and limited so as to fit into the
complex and balanced pattern of the welfare
of the community, and that is why the
right to welfare can never have the full
stature of a natural right. The harmonizing
of individual rights with the common good
is a problem which faces all human societies.

In trying to solve it, the Welfare State
must choose means which are in harmony
with its principles. It believes in planning—
not of everything but over a wide area. It
must therefore clearly formulate its objectives and carefully select its methods with a
full sense of its power and its responsibility.
It believes in equality, and its plans must
therefore start from the assumption that
every person is potentially a candidate for
every position in society. This complicates
matters; it is easier to cope with things if
society is divided into a number of noncompeting social classes. It believes in
personal liberty because, as I choose to define
it, it is a democratic form of society. So
although, of course, like all States, it uses

some compulsion, it must rely on individual
choice and motivation for the fulfilment of
its purposes in all their details.

How do these principles apply to selection
through the educational system? The general
social good, in this context, requires a balanced supply of persons with different skills
and aptitudes who have been so trained as
to maximize the contribution they can make
to the common welfare. We have, in recent
years, seen the Welfare State estimating the
need for natural scientists, social scientists
and technicians, for doctors, teachers and
nurses, and then trying to stimulate the
educational system to produce what is
required. It must also be careful to see that
the national resources are used economically
and to the best advantage, that there is no
waste of individual capacities, by denying
them the chance of development and use,
and no waste of money and effort, by giving
education and training to those who cannot
get enough out of them to justify the cost. 
On the other side, the side of individualism,
is the right of each child to receive an
education suited to its character and abilities. It is peculiar, in that the child cannot
exercise the right for itself, because it is not
expected to know what its character and
abilities are. Nor can its parents wholly
represent its interests, because they cannot be
certain of knowing either. But they have a
rather ambiguous right at least to have their
wishes considered, and in some circumstances
to have them granted. The status of parental
rights in the English educational system is
somewhat obscure at the moment. There is
no reason to assume that the independent
operation of the two principles, of individual
rights and general social needs, would lead
to the same results. The State has the
responsibility of harmonizing the one with
the other.

So far I have merely been trying to explain
the general meaning which I have discovered
in the title of this lecture. As I have already
said, I shall first limit this broad field by
concentrating on selection through the
educational system. I shall then limit it
further to the two following aspects of the
problem. I shall look first at the selection
SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE 83

of children for secondary education and try
to see what is involved in bringing it into
harmony with the principles of the Welfare
State. I choose this particular point in the
selection process partly because of its intrinsic.and often decisive importance, and partly
because so much has recently been written
about it. I shall look in the second place

rather at the social structure and consider

how far it is possible to achieve the aims of
the Welfare State in this field—particularly
the aim of equal opportunity—in a society in
which there still exists considerable inequality
of wealth and social status. In doing this I
shall be able to draw on some of the still
unpublished results of researches carried out
at the London School of Economics over the
past four years, chiefly with the aid of a
generous grant from the Nuffield Foundation.

Selection for Secondary Schools

We are all, I expect, aware that for some
time past educationists (both teachers and
administrators), and psychologists and statisticians (I sometimes find it hard to distinguish the one from the other) have been
hurling themselves at the problem of
selection for secondary schools with a determination and a ferocity of purpose which
are positively terrifying. A good general
survey of the campaign can, I think, be
extracted from four sources. There is first
the Report of the Scottish Council for
Research in Education on Selection for
Secondary Education, presented by William
McClelland in 1942. This is an impressive
document which might be described as a
bold and challenging advance by the forces
of pure science and exact measurement. It
was met and held in check by a counterattack delivered by the National Union of
Teachers in its Report on Transfer from
Primary to Secondary Schools, published in
1949. Meanwhile there had opened, in June
1947, a friendly contest conducted under
strict tournament rules in the British Journal
of Educational Psychology, in the form of the
“Symposium on the Selection of Pupils for
Different Types of Secondary Schools,”
which continued until February 1950. .It
was richly informative, and contained a

little bit of everything. Finally we have the
two Interim Reports of the Committee of
the National Foundation of Educational
Research on The Allocation of Primary School
Leavers to Courses of Secondary Education,
published in 1950 and 1952. It is too soon to
say exactly what position this new detachment will take up on the battlefield, but the
wording of its title is highly significant when
compared with that of the Symposium.
“Selection”? has been replaced by “ allocation’ and ‘“‘ types of secondary school ”’ by
“courses of secondary education.”

The first point to note is that, in this
matter of selection for secondary education,
the State is in full command of the whole
situation. It provides the primary schools
which prepare children for the examination,
it designs the secondary school system for
which they are being selected, and therefore
determines the categories into which they
are to be sorted, and it invents and administers the tests. Such power is dangerous. It
is easy in these circumstances to make sure
that one will find what one is looking for,
and it is, no doubt, gratifying to discover
that one’s artistic masterpiece has been
faithfully copied by Nature. I find it unfortunate that, just as there are three main
types of secondary school, so there are three
types of ability with which educational
psychologists juggle—g or general, F or
technical and k or spatial. I am afraid people
may come to regard this as evidence of collusion, when in fact, of course, the two
trinities do not correspond.

The second point to note is that the
principles of the 1944 Act, which I take to be
the principles of the Welfare State, have not
yet been put into effect. The Act, according to
the N.U.T. Report, “‘ has given the problem
of transference from the primary to the
secondary school an entirely new form,”
which necessitates a thorough reassessment
of our old methods of selection (p. 16). The
profound change referred to is that from
competitive selection of a few for higher
things to allocation of all to suitable schools,
or, as Kenneth Lindsay phrased it nearly
twenty years before the Act, from “ selection
84 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by elimination’ to “selection by differentiation.”* | When allocation is working
fully, says the N.U.T., “ the situation ought
not to arise in which it is impossible to send
‘a child to the school most suited to his needs
because there is no place available for him
in a school of this kind” (p. 20). We are
still a long way from this, and “ for the time
being the sole certain indication for a modern
school is unsuitability for a grammar or
technical school ” (p. 18).

I see danger lurking here too. If too long
a time passes during which an ideal cannot
be realized, it may become unrealizable—a
myth, as it were, which has lost contact with
the world of experience, and which has never
been through the testing which must lie
between the blueprint and the finished
machine. There is a danger, too, that we may
imagine we are preparing the instruments
for use in the new operation when in fact we
are only perfecting those which are suited
for use in the old. In the first Interim Report
of the National Foundation there occurs the
sentence: “‘ It is the procedure of competitive
entry to grammar schools that has been
responsible for the undue importance which
has been attached to objective tests and to
external examinations”’ (p. 62). Note
“‘ external examinations,’ for there is something pretty fundamental there.

But the principle of allocation is not a new
idea. It was implicit in the Act of 1918,
which stated that sufficient provision must
be made to ensure that no children are
“ debarred from receiving the benefits of any
form of education by which they are capable
of profiting through inability to pay fees,”’
and it has been steadily developing since
that date. And the importance attached to
objective tests and external examinations is
not an old phenomenon which happens to
have survived into the new age. It has
grown side by side with the growth of the
idea of allocation, and continued to grow
after the passing of the 1944 Act.

The movement in the field of ideas towards
allocation iristead of selection, and the movement in the field of practice towards uniform

*Social Progress and Educational Waste, p. 28.

general standardized testing have been contemporaneous. I think, too, that any reader
of the Symposium must be struck by the
intense interest shown in the possibility of
devising objective tests accurate enough to
be used for allocation on the basis of special
aptitudes, as well as for selection on the basis
of general ability. There are, of course, signs

‘of movement in other directions among

education authorities, such as the greater
use made of cumulative school records and
so on; and, as regards the Symposium, it
must not be overlooked that Sir Cyril Burt
opened boldly with the statement that the
problem was “administrative rather than
psychological.”’ * This sounded very much
like the old-fashioned rebuking the newfangled, and no doubt some psychologists
thought that he was letting the side down.
In all this I seem to see evidence of a clash
between what I earlier referred to as the
collectivist and individualist elements in the
Welfare State. Allocation, interpreted along
N.U.T. lines, represents unqualified individualism. The right of each child to receive the
education best suited to its unique individual
needs should not be inhibited by reference to
the cost of providing the necessary schools
and teachers nor to the demand in society
at large for particular numbers of persons
educated and trained in particular ways. But
to the collectivist principle these limiting
factors arise from rights of the community
as a whole, which the Welfare State cannot
ignore. And they may favour a provision
of grammar school places which is less than
the provision needed to accommodate all who
could benefit from a grammar school education. As long as this happens, competitive
selection will remain with us. How long that
will be, I do not propose to guess. But, when
selection is competitive, the authorities must
reach a decision somehow, using the best
means at their disposal. And they must be
able to enforce the decision negatively (that
is to say, the decision not to admit) against
the wishes of the parent. When faced with
the necessity of filling the last five places in a
grammar school from twenty applicants, all

* Loc. cit., June 1947, p. 57-.
SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE 85.

backed by ambitious and determined parents,
you may feel that the best means of selection
are either to follow the mark order or to toss
up. The public may prefer you to follow the
marks, even though you know that in this
border zone the verdict of the marks has no
real validity. So the use of imperfect selection methods can be justified by the inadequacy of the educational system, as judged
by the ideal of allocation.

But in my view, if allocation replaced

selection, then no amount of improvement

would make the tests sufficiently exact to
carry the weight of decisions enforceable
against parental wishes. For the question to
be answered in each case would not be: “ Is
this child better suited to a grammar school
than the other applicants? If so, we must
tell the others we are full up.”’ But : ““ What,
as judged by absolute standards and without
reference to competing claims, is the education best suited to this child’s needs?” I
feel convinced that, in the majority of cases,
‘questions in this form will remain unanswerable by tests and examinations—unanswerable, that is, with the degree of assurance
necessary before the answer can be made the
basis of administrative action. So we should
find, I think, that instead of allocation in the
sense of the definitive assignment of each
child to an appropriate school or course, we
should have something more like an advisory
service which left the responsibility of
decision to the parents. And that, I understand, is what happens now in so far as the
principle of allocation already enters into our
system. And in support of the view that it
should be so, I can quote, from the Symposium, Mr. Dempster of Southampton, who
writes: ‘‘ The wishes of the: parents are
possibly the best guide at present available
to selectors in deciding between grammar
and technical school education.”’ *

This sounds in many ways a very attractive
prospect, though we ought to know a little
more about how parental wishes work before

we acclaim it, and I shall have something to —

say on that later. But I fancy it conflicts
with another aspect of the collectivist element
in the Welfare State. The principle I have in

* Loc. cit., November 1948, p. 130.

mind is the one which says that all should be
judged by the same procedure, as impartially
and impersonally as possible, that favouritism and privilege must be eradicated, and
also the effects of differing social environments on the critical turning-points in life.
So far so good. The principle must be
allowed to have full weight. There is one
obvious point at which it favours objective
tests. Because children come to their
examination at 11+ from schools and
neighbourhoods of very different quality,
they cannot be judged by their attainments
only; an attempt-must be made to discover
natural abilities which may have been frustrated by circumstances but may still be
able to come to fruition if given a fair chance.
But latent capacities are concealed, and
something more scientific than a teacher’s
judgment or a school record is needed to
reveal them.

But the collectivist principle goes farther,

-and sometimes assumes shapes which are

more open to question. The doctrine of fair
shares and equal opportunity sounds admirable, but it may become so distorted as to
merit the cynical comment that fair shares
means “‘ if we can’t all have it, nobody shall,”’
and that equal opportunity means “‘ we must
all have an equal chance of showing that
we are all equally clever.’’ And the present
situation may encourage this type of distortion, if it leads us to regard competitive
selection as a necessary evil. If the Welfare
State is to bring its two principles into
harmony, it must conceive of the basic
equality of all as human beings and fellowcitizens In a way which leaves room for the
recognition that all are not equally gifted

- nor capable of rendering equally valuable

services to the community, that. equal
opportunity means an equal chance to reveal
differences some of which are superiorities,
and that these differences need for their
development different types of education,
some of which may legitimately be regarded
as higher than others. The notion, therefore,
that selection, even competitive selection,
can be eliminated from our educational
system seems to me to be a pipe-dream and
not even a Utopian one.
86 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Obstacles to Equal Opportunity

I will defer making any general comment
until [ have considered my second question,
to which I now turn. This relates to another
dilemma or antithesis inherent in the
principles and structure of the Welfare
State. It is the problem of establishing equal
opportunity without abolishing social and
economic inequality. I say this is inherent
in the nature of the Welfare State because
it is my opinion—which I do not propose to
argue here—that the Welfare State, as we
know it, must necessarily preserve a measure
of economic inequality. This problem, therefore, is a permanent and not a transitory one.

One of the most striking passages in
Kenneth Lindsay’s well-known and _farsighted study of this question in the interwar period is the quotation from Lord
Birkenhead which runs: “ There is now a
complete ladder from the elementary school to
the university, and the number of scholarships

from the elementary to the secondary school 
is not limited, awards being made to all
children who show capacity to profit.” *
This fantastic illusion was blown  skyhigh by Lindsay’s book, and later studies
showed that equality of educational opportunity was still a distant ideal at the outbreak
of World War II. The research carried out
at L.S.E. during the past four years, to which
I have already referred, has drawn in more
firmly the outlines of the picture and added
some details. We can see pretty clearly what
the situation was when the Welfare State
took over and what were the obstacles it had
to overcome.

This research included a 10,000 sample
survey of persons aged 18 and over in Great

Britain in 1949. Mobility was examined on |

the basis of the seven-point scale of occupational status, widely known as the HallJones scale, which had been prepared for
this study. Groups 1 and 2 include the professional and managerial occupations, and
groups 3 and 4 the supervisory and clerical—
to give a rough idea of their character.
Together they comprised about 30 per cent.
of the sample, which can be called the middle
* Op. cil., p. 9.

class section (the upper class is too small to
appear in a sample of this size). Group 5,
including routine non-manual and _ skilled
manual jobs, was a very large one comprising
40 per cent, while groups 6 and 7, semiskilled and unskilled manual, provided
approximately another 30 per cent. Of the
general picture I will say little; I would
rather wait for the papers to be published
with full statistical tables. But one or two
points may be noted. We find that the
social forces holding a son to the occupational group of his father are significantly
strongest in groups I and 2 and weakest in
group 5. We can summarize crudely by saying that money and influence count for most
at the top, and life’s chances lie most widely
open, for good or ill, in the melting-pot in the
middle of.the scale. This is interesting,
because it is at this middle point in the scale
that we might expect to find many families
ambitious for their children’s future and
ready to forgo their earnings while they get
secondary and further education, but not
in a position to pay fees. It is precisely
among such families that the building of an
educational ladder is likely to have the
greatest effect.

The second point of relevance in the
general picture is that the returns show what
to many may be a surprising amount of
downward movement. There is a common
saying, which in the United States has had
the force of a political dogma, that ‘‘ there is
plenty of room at the top.”” And one remembers benevolent members of the upper layers
of society who have strongly advocated the
building of a social and educational ladder
under the impression, apparently, that it
could carry one-way traffic only, and that
the ascent of the deserving from below would

not have to be accompanied by a descent on

the part of any of their own children to make
room for the newcomers. But, if we take
all the male subjects in the sample, we find
that 35:2 per cent had the same occupational
status as their father, 29-3 per cent had risen
and 35-5 per cent had fallen. These figures
probably exaggerate the falls because they
include the young men in the sample who
had not yet reached their final occupational
SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE

level, and, of course, they tell us nothing of
the distance risen or fallen, which is an
important factor. The believers in one-way
traffic thought that upper- and middle-class
jobs were increasing faster than jobs in
general, while upper- and middle-class families
were producing fewer children than families
in general. But it seems clear, and the 1951
census sample confirms this, that this was
true, as regards middle-class jobs in general,
only of women’s employment. The proportion of occupied men in such jobs showed no
significant increase from 1911 to 1951, while
the proportion of occupied women in such
jobs rose approximately from 24-5 per cent
to 45-5 per cent. There was some increase in
clerical jobs for men, but even here the
spectacular advance was in the employment
of women. In 1947, to quote one illustrative
case, of those leaving secondary grammar
schools at the age of 16 to go straight into
jobs, just about 43 per cent of the boys went
into the “ clerical and professional ”’ category
and of the girls 68 per cent, or, if nursing is
included, nearly 77 per cent. Since there was
an expansion of grammar schools during this
period, and since grammar schools were
largely an avenue to middle-class jobs, these
facts are interesting. There may have been
many boys who hitched their wagon to a
white collar without realizing that their most
serious competitors were their own sisters.
The educational data in the survey confirm and extend the picture presented in
1926 by Kenneth Lindsay. The most interesting general lesson to be drawn is that it
is harder than one might suppose to ensure
that the new opportunities created go to the
people for whom they are intended, provided
the fundamental principles of a free democracy are preserved. The survey covered the
period of the introduction and expansion of
the Free Place system in secondary schools,
and its successor, the Special Place system,
and it is possible to compare the experience
of the first wave of entrants following the
Act of I902 (those born from 1890 to 1899)
with the last prewar wave (those born from
1920 to 1929). In the period covered by this
comparison the percentage of boys in families
belonging to the top three occupational

87

groups who went to grammar schools rose
from 38-4 to 45-7, and the corresponding
figures for group 5 (the skilled manual and
routine non-manual workers) are 4-1 and
10-7. The percentage increase for the working-class group is much greater than for the
middle-class group, but the inequality that
remains is enormous. And it is still greater
if one includes boarding schools. The reason
for this was not only that the total provision
was insufficient, but also that a considerable
part of the benefit went to the middle classes.
It is true that the proportion of children in
grammar schools who are occupying free
places increases as you go down the social
scale. But the proportion of the whole company of children of an occupational group
who hold free places in grammar schools is
highest at the top, 13-2 per cent in status
groups I and 2 (upper middle class) and 5
per cent in group 5 (upper working class).
I have picked these pieces of information
from the analysis which Mrs. Floud has
made of this part of the survey and which
contains many more points of equal interest.

My point is this. It may look at first sight
as if the bourgeoisie had, as usual, filched
what should have gone to the workers. But,

‘in the circumstances, that was bound to

happen in a free democracy and is bound to
go on happening in the Welfare State. For
the Welfare State is not the dictatorship of
the proletariat and is not pledged to liquidate
the bourgeoisie. Of course more and more
middle-class families made use of the public
elementary schools as the quality of these
improved, and of course more and more of
them competed for admission to secondary
schools through free and special places.
And since the children were backed by a
better educational tradition and stronger
parental support, because more of their
families could afford to forgo the earnings
of the children, because they came from
more comfortable homes, where it was easier
to work, and from smaller families, they were
certain to be more successful. And when it
came to deciding as to remission of fees for
Special Places, many of the middle-class
families had a genuine claim. Today, with
the 100 per cent free place system in main88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tained schools, there can be no question of
discriminating against middle-class families,
and the competitive advantages of social
and economic status can operate without
check. Other inquiries conducted at the
L.S.E., either within or in close relation to
the main project, have begun to throw some
light on the nature and extent of these competitive advantages.*

That there is a greater preponderance of
working-class children in the modern schools
today and of middle-class children in the
grammar schools is a fact which no one is
likely to dispute. In an article in the March
1953 issue of the British Journal of Sociology,
Messrs. Halsey and Gardner produce evidence
to show that, in the London areas they
studied, this uneven distribution could not be
attributed solely to the intelligence of the
children, but must be in large part the result
of social forces. When, for instance, comparison was made of two groups with the
same mean I.Q., one of which had been
assigned to a grammar school and the other
to a modern school, it was found that the
middle classes were heavily over-represented
and the working classes, especially the unskilled families, heavily under-represented
in the grammar school group. It is also
interesting that of working-class children in
grammar schools in the areas studied 63 per

cent came from small families with one or
two children and 37 per cent from larger
families with three or more. Among workingclass children in modern schools the proportions were almost exactly the reverse, and
among middle-class children there was no
significant relation between type of school
and size of family. No known correlation
between fertility and intelligence could
possibly explain this, and it is clear that
powerful social influences are at work. And
they show themselves in other ways. A
similar, though less marked, correlation with
size of family appears when we ask how much
thought parents give to their children’s
school career, how much interest they show

* The work has been done by Dr. Hilde Himmelweit,
Mr. Martin and their associates. Since the information
has been collected in intensive local studies it cannot
be used for generalization for any kind as yet.

in their work and progress, and how ambitious they feel about their future. Here,
then, is a social factor causing what might be
called “‘ unfairness ”’ in social selection about
which the Welfare State can do very little.
Positive action, by improving the physical
conditions in poorer families and by stimulating greater interest and ambition among
apathetic parents, can only be a very slow
process. Family differences will continue to
have their influence as long as the family is
the basic cell in the social structure.

Social Ambition and Educational
Achievement
The interest of parents may be shown by
their giving thought to the matter of secondary schooling for their children. In one

‘county area parents of children about to sit

for the examination for secondary schools
were asked whether they had thought a
lot, a little, or not at all about the matter.
The proportion claiming to have thought a
lot declined steadily as one moved down the
social scale and was little over a third among
the unskilled workers. But the preference for
a grammar school education, though it
showed the same trend, did not fall so low.
The lowest proportion preferring the grammar school was 43-4 per cent and the highest
preferring the modern school 23-9 per cent—
these figures being those for unskilled
workers. But over two-thirds of the unskilled
worker parents preferring the grammar
school did not want their child to stay there
after the age of 16. Their ambitions were
limited. And about half the professional and
a quarter of the clerical families said that if
their child did not get a grammar school
place they would not send it to a modern
school. .
The picture is slightly distressing. It
suggests that those who care about education,
and some who do not care much, almost
automatically aspire to a grammar school
for their children ; but the aspiration may
vary from the desire of a steady job, with
good prospects, to be entered at sixteen, to
the hope of admission to a university and a
professional career. There cannot be much
homogeneity of purpose in a grammar
~ SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE. 89

school population. And, looking at the other
side of the picture, we find a low opinion of
the modern school which to many appears
as a catastrophe and a disgrace. Talk of
“parity of esteem” is a little premature.

Now these likes and dislikes owe something, no doubt, to real or supposed differences in the quality of education received in
the different types of school: But I doubt
‘whether most parents are following the
advice of the N.U.T. to concentrate on the
“present educational needs of the child ”’
and not to think too much “ what these
needs may be at some later stage in his
development.” * “ They are thinking of what
the school may lead to in the way of employment or further education, and perhaps
of what it stands for in terms of social
prestige. This last point is one on which
it is extremely hard to get reliable information, since much of the mental process
involved may be only semi-conscious. If
social status is not offered by the questioner as a possible reason for aiming at a
particular school or job, it is not likely to
be put down spontaneously ; if it is offered,
it may score a fair number of votes, but less
than such job attributes as good prospects,
security, and interesting work. Another
cause of difficulty is the lack of uniformity
in the use of class‘names. People differ widely
in the way they classify themselves or typical
occupations as middle or working class, and
it is clear that the term “ lower middle class ”’
is becoming abhorrent. But, in spite of this,
there is fairly close agreement as to the
order in which jobs should be ranked, even
though there is disagreement as to the social
class to which they should be assigned.

The material dealing with job ambitions
is too complicated to be briefly surveyed in
an intelligible form. So I shall confine myself
to two points. In a sample of adults in two
urban areas who were asked what occupation
they would like their son to enter, more than
a fifth of the working-class subjects chose a
profession and less than 8 per cent a clerical
job; the commonest choice (about 36 per
cent) was for a skilled trade. The figures
are not complete, as a good many said their

* Op. cit., p. 20.

son must choose for himself. In the middleclass section of the sample, clerical jobs were
even less popular, and the total vote for
independent. business was practically negligible. A similar dislike of the sound of clerical
and office jobs was found by Dr. Jahoda
among school leavers in Lancashire—that is
to say, among the boys. The girls put office
work at the top of the list. When boys were
asked what jobs they most definitely rejected, office work was the one most often
chosen, but half of those who named it. did
so because they did not think they were quallified for it.* It would be very rash to jump
to conclusions from such fragmentary evidence, but it does seem possible that office

work is losing its charm. It is often described

as dull and monotonous, and perhaps the
rise in wages for manual work and familiarity
with conditions of full employment are
robbing it of some of its other former
attractions.

The second point of interest is the clear
evidence, at present confined to one area,
that working-class boys who get into grammar schools have very high expectations that
they will rise in the world, while middle-class
boys in modern schools are inclined to expect
to fall below the position of their parents.
No less than 63 per cent of the boys of lower
working-class origin in grammar _ schools
expected to rise at least two steps ona fivepoint status scale above their fathers; only
12 per cent of their comrades in the modern
schools were equally ambitious. But, if we
measure the rise by the boys’ own estimate
of it and not by objective’ standards, the
percentage falls from 63 to 21. This inquiry
was reported in Dr. Himmelweit’s article in
the British Journal of Sociology, June 1952.
It suggests that the boys themselves feel
that selection for secondary schooling has a
decisive effect on future careers, and that
boys from the humbler working-class families
who get into grammar schools may overrate
their chances without fully realizing how
ambitious their success has made them. So
long as this is the case, “‘ parity of esteem ”
is hardly possible.

* Occupational Psychology, 26, pp. 132-4.
90 ‘THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Effects of Social Distance

My last point relates to the possible effects
of social distance on life in a grammar school.
Grammar schools, one might say, have a
tradition, an educational atmosphere, and
contacts with the world outside which have
for some time past belonged to the way of
life of the middle classes. And the middle
classes are over-represented in the school
population, even though the skilled workingclass families may supply the largest absolute
numbers. If, then, we introduce boys and
girls from outside this circle, can they fit in ?
Can they become sufficiently assimilated to
enter into the life of the school and get out of
it what it has to give, and yet retain enough
of their identity to break down, in the course of
time, any class barriers which exist, and
thus make the way easier for their successors,
and for the Welfare State ? Much study is
needed before this question can be fully
answered. We have evidence to show that
middle-class boys in grammar schools (in
the area studied) do better on average in
class examinations in pretty well all subjects
than working-class boys, and that, when
teachers are asked to rank the boys in their
class in terms of such things as industry,
responsibility, interest in school affairs, good
behaviour, and popularity, the middle-class
boys do. definitely better than the rest.
And working-class boys are inclined to care
less about their marks and to take less part
in general school activities, and yet, as we
have seen, they expect great results from
their grammar school status when the time
comes for them to get a job. On the other
hand may not a school have an assimilating
influence and mould its members into a
more homogeneous group than they were to
start with, thus producing in reality the
category of children which until then existed
only in the imagination of the seelctors ?
That is a question which points the way to
a fascinating piece of research which has
hardly yet been begun.

The Americans have similar problems
today, and there is much evidence of statusconsciousness in the high schools of the
United States. The book Who Shall Be
Educated ? by Lloyd Warner, Havighurst and

Loeb (1946) is a revelation on this point,
We hear a junior high-school principal say:
“You generally find the children from the
best families do the best work. The children
from the lower class seem to be not as capable
as the others,’ and on this the authors
comment that “this correlation holds true.
There is a strong relationship between social
status and rank in school.’”’ A teacher then
says that there is a lot of class feeling in
the school. “ Sections [i.e. streams] are supposed to be made up just on the basis of
records in school but it isn’t [szc] and everybody knows it isn’t. I know right in my own
A section I have children who ought to be in
B section, but they are little socialites and
so they stay in A,”’ and there is much more
in the same strain (p. 73). But the problem
there is allocation between streams or
courses, rather than between schools.

It was on this general question that Sir
Cyril Burt made one of his most challenging
remarks. “A realistic policy,’ he wrote,
“must take frankly into consideration the
fact that a child coming from this or that
type of home may as a result be quite
unsuited for a type of education, occupation’
or profession, which lies at an excessive
“social distance’ from those of his parents
and friends.” * Whereupon Dr. Alexander
descended on him like a ton of bricks, saying
that no Authority could act on the view
“that the present social circumstances of a
child should be a criterion limiting his future
opportunity.” + Undoubtedly he is right.
No Authority can act on the principle that
social circumstances must limit educational
opportunity, but in fact.they do, and the
accepted methods of educational selection
cannot wholly prevent this. The remedy lies
in the reduction of “ social distance.”

Conclusions

I must now try to sum up. The Welfare
State, as I see it, is in danger of tying itself
in knots in an attempt to do things which
are self-contradictory. One example, I submit, is the proposal to assign children to
different schools, largely on the basis of

~ * Loc. cit., June 1947, p. 67.
t [bid., November 1947, p. 123.
SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE gI

general ability, and then to pretend that the
schools are all of equal status. If this means
that we shall take equal trouble to make all
schools as good as possible, treat all the
children with equal respect and try to make
them all equally happy, I heartily endorse
the idea. But the notion of parity of esteem
does not always stop there; and I feel it
really is necessary to assert that some children are more able than others, that some
forms of education are higher than others,
and that some occupations demand qualities
that are rarer than others and need longer
and more skilled training’ to come to full
maturity, and that they will therefore probably continue to enjoy higher social prestige.

I conclude that competitive selection
through the educational system must remain
with us to a considerable extent. The
Welfare State is bound to pick the children
of high ability for higher education and for
higher jobs, and to do this with the interests
of the community as well as the rights of
the children in mind. But the more use it
can at the same time make of allocation to
courses suited to special tastes and abilities
the better. It further seems to me that, for
the purpose of selection on grounds of
general ability, the objective tests , are
already accurate enough to do all that we
should ever ask them to do, while, so far as
“allocation ’’ is concerned, they will never
be able to give a decisive verdict in more
than a minority of cases, although they can
be of great value in helping to decide what
advice to give.

So I agree with Sir Cyril Burt that the
problem which now faces us is more administrative than psychological. There is less to
be gained by trying to perfect the tests and
examinations than by thinking how to shape
the structure of our educational and employment systems. It is better to. minimize the
effects of our decisions in doubtful cases than
to imagine that, if we only try hard enough,
we can ensure that all our decisions in such
cases are correct. The word “correct” has
no meaning in this context; it is a bureaucratic fiction borrowed from the office where
there is a correct file for every document.

By “ minimize the effects of our decisions ”’

I mean refrain from adding unnecessary and
artificial consequences to acts whose real
meaning and necessary consequences I have
been urging that we should frankly recognize.
A system of direction into distinct “ types of
secondary school’”’ rather than “ courses of
secondary education’”’ (to use the titles I
quoted earlier) must, I think, intensify rather
than minimize the consequences. Iam aware
of the educational arguments on the other
side, but do not intend to enter into a controversy for which I have no equipment.
The other point at which artificial consequences may be added is the point of passage
from education to employment. The snobbery of the educational label, certificate or
degree when, as often, the prestige of the
title bears little or no relation to the value
of the content, is a pernicious thing against
which I should like to wage a major war.

There is another matter on which the
Welfare State can easily try to follow
contradictory principles. It relates to occupational prestige, social class and the distribution of power in society. All I can do is to
throw one or two raw ideas at your heads as
a parting gift.

Although the Welfare State must, I
believe, recognize some measure of economic
inequality as legitimate and acceptable, its
principles are opposed to rigid class divisions,
and to anything which favours the preservation or formation of sharply distinguished
culture patterns at different social levels.
The segregation when at school of those,
destined for different social levels is bound
to have some effect of this kind and is acceptable only if there are irrefutable arguments
on the other side. Further, a system which
sorts children by general ability and then
passes them through appropriate schools to
appropriate grades of employment will intensify the homogeneity within each occupational status group and the differences
between groups. And, in so far as intelligence is hereditary and as_ educational
chances are influenced by family background
(and I have produced evidence to show that
they are), the correlation between social
class and type of school will become closer
among the children.
92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Finally, the Welfare State, more than
most forms of democracy, cannot tolerate a
governing class. Leadership and power are
exercised from many stations in life, by
politicians, judges, ecclesiastics, business
men, trade unionists, intellectuals and others.
If these were all selected in childhood and
groomed in the same stable, we should have
what Raymond Aron calls the characteristic
feature of a totalitarian society—a unified
élite. * These leaders must really belong
to and represent in a distinctive way the

* British Journal of Sociology, March 1950, p. 10.

circles in and through which their power
is exercised. We need politicians from all
classes and occupational levels, and it is good
that some captains of industry should have
started life at the bench, and that trade
unions should be led by genuine members,
men of outstanding general ability who have

climbed a ladder other than the educational

one. It is important to preserve these other
ladders, and it is fortunate that the selection
net has some pretty big holes in it. It is
fortunate too, perhaps, that human affairs
cannot be handled with perfect mechanical
precision, even in the Welfare State.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 2
