COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION
TO POPULATION GROWTH
By Professor T. H. DAVEY

School of Tropical Medicine, University of Liverpool

of the continuing increase in the world’s

population is contributed by underdeveloped areas with a low standard of living,
in which Western influences are beginning to
operate. These territories are in those stages
of the demographic cycle which have been
described by Blacker (1947) as the early and
late expanding phases, and into these categories fall most of the British Colonial territories. It is probably correct to state that
the transition into these phases from the
primitive state, in which birth- and deathrates balance over a period of years at a high
level, has been mainly caused by social and
administrative advances, such as abolition of
slavery or inter-tribal warfare and famine
relief. To offset the factors tending to save or
prolong life those tending to increase the
death-rate or reduce fertility have been of
negligible importance. The total effect has
been greatly to augment population growth.

In our Colonies the medical services
originated in an attempt to safeguard the
lives of officials and traders, and hence they
were mainly confined to the administrative
centres. They were primarily curative services for these immigants, and only slowly
did they become available to the indigenous
people in other towns and the larger villages.
When preventive medicine was introduced it
combated first the most obvious environmental causes of disease, such as pollution
and insect vectors. It was essentially a
sanitary service, and only in recent years has
rit taken an active interest in other common
causes of ill health such as malnutrition and
tuberculosis. The Colonial medical service is,
in fact, a replica of the medical organization
in civilized communities, with the emphasis
on cure rather than on prevention.

Vital statistics are not available in primitive areas, which would permit us to determine the effect of curative medical services

| T is an accepted fact that the greater part

on population growth, but there has been
little in the past to suggest that they have
produced any marked reduction in mortality throughout the community. The
reasons for this failure were, firstly, the small
proportion of the population to which the
service was readily available, and, secondly,
the apathy of the people who tended to come
only when the illness was at an advanced
stage and difficult to cure. It must be understood that the diseases of the tropics are
widespread to a degree not realized in civilized communities; for example, in some
communities every child from soon after
birth until eight to ten years of age suffers
continually from malaria; again, 80 per cent
of the community may be infected with one
of the pathogenic worms, and a considerable
proportion suffer from ill health as a result.
It is not surprising that a service which
attempted to cure the sick should have been
overwhelmed by the wealth of material
available and that the vast expenditure
necessary should have prevented it becoming
sufficiently widespread significantly to
improve the health of the multitude.

One way in which there was some real
progress was in the attack on epidemic
disease. It is not possible to calculate the
saving of life which resulted from the control
of epidemics among the communities we are
considering. Plague, typhus, malaria, smallpox, cerebro-spinal meningitis and other
epidemic diseases have, in the past, spread in
waves from their starting-point, decimating
the population in their path. With freedom
of movement resulting from peace and safety
the people travelled from infected areas to
markets and in search of work, often spreading infection all along their route. The
opening up of the country, and with it the
increase of information from remote areas,
enabled the medical organization to undertake the control of epidemics at their start.

190
COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 1o91

As an example of the effect of such control
one may quote the epidemic of sleeping sickness which spread widely in Northern
Nigeria after this was opened up. As a result
of the new security the people dispersed from
their walled towns and with them sleeping
sickness spread until it menaced a population
of some six millions. A survey of the position
during the years 1930-35 revealed infectionrates averaging 13-6 per cent among one and
a quarter million people examined
(McLetchie, 1948) ; in some districts steady
depopulation was occurring. Control of
transmission was attempted by means of the
treatment of all infected persons in the
epidemic areas ; this has been carried on ever
since, and in the years 1941-46 the average
incidence of infection was 1°5 per cent among
some half million people examined. The
localization and control of such epidemics has
undoubtedly been followed by a reduction in
the death-rate, and so must have contributed
to the growth of the population, but the
saving of life in this way and as a result of the
hospital curative services must be small
compared with the heavy and constant toll
taken directly by the ever-present community-wide diseases such as malaria and
malnutrition, and indirectly by the sapping
of vitality resulting from worm infestations
and other widespread but not mortal
infections.

This was, in general, the position at the
outbreak of the second world war. During
this period attention was concentrated on the
elaboration of methods for the prevention
and cure of disease in the tropics in order to
protect the health of the large bodies of
susceptible troops which had to be maintained there. An advance of outstanding
importance was the discovery and use of the
new insecticides D.D.T. and benzene-hexachloride. Many of the community-wide
diseases of the tropics and sub-tropics are
insect-borne. These include malaria carried
by the anopheline mosquito, typhus and
relapsing fever carried by the louse, plague
carried by the flea, kala-azar by the sandfly,
yellow fever by the stegomyia mosquito, and
much of the dysentery by the housefly. These
insect vectors are killed rapidly by brief

contact with minute quantities of the insecticides, and so spread of the disease is checked.
The following results have been obtained by
their use: malaria has been eradicated in
Upper Egypt, Cyprus and part of British
Guiana, while the disease has been brought
under control and is being abolished in
Ceylon, Sardinia, numerous areas of India,
and elsewhere; numerous epidemics of
typhus and relapsing fever have been
stamped out in a few days ; plague epidemics,
which once spread through the world causing
the death of millions, can be rapidly brought
to an end ; the transmission of kala-azar and
yellow fever in epidemic form is preventable
by reducing the numbers of the vectors to a
level at which only sporadic cases can occur.
Insect-borne epidemics, which once, by the
mortality they caused, helped to balance the
prodigious fertility of primitive populations,
are now being controlled and the inhibitory
effect they had upon population growth is
largely removed. It is probably correct to
say that provided D.D.T. or benzenehexachloride are used efficiently and early
none of the diseases listed above can develop
into an epidemic. Moreover, the World
Health Organization has proposed to make
these insecticides readily available to all
nations requesting them, together with the
expert personnel to demonstrate them and
teach their use. In the history of the human
race there can be few, if any, advances so
significant for man as that just outlined, in
which a number of the most important causes
of premature death can be controlled or
eradicated within a short period of time by
the employment of substances which can be
manufactured cheaply and used by personnel
of a low grade of education and training.
These insecticides are now, in fact, employed
in every major epidemic for which they are
suitable, and increasingly they are being used
to control endemic insect-borne disease.
Only one factor prevents their universal
adoption throughout the tropics, namely, the
cost of their use on the requisite scale, and
often the tropical peasant proves willing to
pay quite heavily for control which involves
no work on his part. Other writers, better
qualified, have queried the advisability of the
192

widespread use of these extremely potent
msecticides, and that subject will not be
discussed here. Similarly it is outside our
scope to consider whether the rapid control
of certain diseases may not pave the road to
disastrous epidemics. It is, however, the
object of this paper to estimate, if possible,
to what extent in the past these diseases of
the tropics retarded population growth and
how far their control will accelerate the rate
of expansion.

Though opinions are widely and strongly
(and often incorrectly) held regarding the
direct and indirect effects of various diseases
on the primitive community, it is surprising
that precise data have rarely been collected.
In the absence of specific facts an impression
may be formed, more or less accurately, by
comparing the death-rates and other statistical returns from communities before and
after control of a specific disease. The differences found, after making allowance for
other factors, probably represent the effect
of that disease on the community. One of
the few diseases for which some figures of
this nature are available is malaria. A few
workers have tried to estimate the effect of
malaria on the community, and some surveys
have been carried out before and after
malaria control schemes, the results of which
may be held to represent trends.

Malaria might conceivably affect the
growth of population in several ways, e.g.
by increasing the infant mortality-rate or the
general death-rate, by increasing stillbirths
or by preventing conception ; some observations on these matters are to be found in the
literature.

Blacklock and Gordon (1925) studied
malaria infection in late pregnancy in Freetown, Sierra Leone, and in a series of 155
pregnancies found no evidence of malaria
affecting maternal mortality. There was,
however, an effect on the children, as shown
by the fact that of fifty-one children born of
mothers with malaria parasites present in
the placenta 25-5 per cent died within seven
days of birth, while of ninety-three born of
mothers whose placentas were not infected
only 5:4 per cent died within the same
period. Thus of the eighteen children dying

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

within a week of birth 72 per cent were from
mothers with malarial placentas and 28 per
cent were from mothers whose placentas were
not infected. Walton (1949) quotes infant
mortality-rates in Freetown for the period
1927-46, and shows that a significant reduction in the infant mortality-rate occurred in
1943 after the commencement of a malaria
control scheme in 1942. This low rate was
maintained until 1946, when malaria
increased temporarily, and this, together
with other factors, was believed to have
caused a transient return to pre-control
levels. Subsequently, in 1947 and 1948, the
reduction in infant mortality was continued
and the rates closely approximated those of
1945.

The island of Ceylon, as is well known, has
for many years been ravaged by malaria
due to both benign and malignant tertian
parasites. Within the last few years an
extensive malaria control scheme has been
carried on which started in November 1945
on a small scale, included a few more areas in
1946, and in 1947 was extended to cover
practically the entire malarial part of Ceylon.
The system of registration of births and
deaths there is efficient, and accurate returns
are available since 1897. In Table‘I are
shown the general death-rates of Ceylon for
the years 1936 to 1948.

TABLE I

SHOWING THE GENERAL DEATH-RATE FOR CEYLON FOR
THE YEARS 1936-48, BASED ON THE ESTIMATED
POPULATION AND THE NUMBER OF DEATHS REGISTERED

Year Death-rate
1936 21-9
1937 21°7
1938 21°0
1939 21°8
1940 21°8
1941 18-7
1942 18-6
1943 2I°4
1944 21°3
1945 22:0
1946 20°3
1947 14°3
1948 13°2

These figures show that an unprecedented
fall in the death-rate occurred in 1947 following the wide extension of malaria control.
The Annual Medical Report for 1947 records
this general fall in the death-rate and notes
COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 193

also a decrease in the maternal mortality from
15°5 to 10-6 per thousand live births, and in
infant mortality from 141 per thousand in
1946 to ror per thousand in 1947. It was
stated that “this big reduction in different
mortality-rates is without any parallel in

In many communities where malaria 1s
endemic the stress of the disease is believed
to fall on the infants and young children. It
is of interest, therefore, to examine the Ceylon
figures and find out what age-groups are most
affected by the eradication of malaria.

TABLE II

COMPARING THE AVERAGE DEATH-RATE IN CEYLON DURING THE YEARS 1936-46,
BEFORE MALARIA CONTROL WITH THAT DURING 1947 AND 1948
AFTER CONTROL, IN DIFFERENT AGE-GROUPS

 

 

Under 5 5-9 | 10-14 15-19
1936-46 60°5 7°4 3°7 ovr
1947 & 1948 ... 2°0 3°2

47-2 | 472

Ceylon or any other country in the world, and
should be attributed primarily to the efforts
of the Medical Department, particularly in
relation to maternity and child welfare services and the control of malaria. The attack
on malaria, which was until 1946 the chief
cause of mortality and morbidity in Ceylon,
has been achieved by the residual spraying
of D.D.T.” Other’ factors are listed—
improved standards of living, development
of public health conscience, provision of free
school meals, milk feeding centres for infants
and absence of serious epidemics—which
contributed to the reduction of these mortality-rates, but general experience has
shown that these other factors are incapable
of producing such a dramatically rapid fall
in mortality-rates though their cumulative
effect over a period is well known. The
major part of the reduction must be accepted
as due to the eradication of malaria. A
similar result is reported from Mauritius
where, according to the Annual Medical
Report for 1948, the malaria death-rate for
that year showed a decrease of 39-6 per cent
as compared with 1943, which had the lowest
figure for the years preceding the beginning
of malaria control. Again, it was reported
(B.M.]., 1950) that the death-rate in Cyprus
during 1948 was one of the lowest in the
world and that the infant mortality-rate had
fallen from 180 to 70 in seven years, mainly
as a result of malaria control by D.D.T.

Age-groups
55 and
20-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 over
8:4 99 13°5 Ig'I 74°8
5°5 | II-l 42 ‘Oo

6-4 71 |

These figures show that, although the
reduction in mortality is numerically greatest
in the age-groups under 5, and 55 and over,
there is, nevertheless, a significant reduction
ranging up to 50 per cent in the death-rate
in each age-group. It would appear that in
Ceylon malaria was a killing disease at all
ages and that it also reduced the potential
fertility of the population by reducing the
proportion responsible for reproduction. The
death-rate in the group aged 15 to 45
before malaria eradication averaged 9-4, but
after eradication it fell to 5-6.

Some corroboration of these figures may be
found in the report by Giglioli (1948) on the
results of mosquito control in British Guiana.
As in Ceylon, malaria was caused by both
benign tertian and malignant tertian parasites, and the death-rate fluctuated considerably according to its intensity. In some parts
of the territory the disease was heavily
endemic, in other parts lightly endemic and
subject to exacerbations and even to epidemic waves. The normal excess of births
over deaths in a healthy area was reported to
be between 26 and 30 per thousand of the
population, while in hyper-endemic areas the
excess of births over deaths was only onethird to one-half of this, and in one area
deaths exceeded births, though even here,
during a remission of malaria, births exceeded
deaths by 19-1 per thousand. It was concluded that malaria was the main factor in
194

retarding the natural increment in the
Colony’s population. Eradication of the
disease from the populated coastal region
was proposed, and control commenced on a
small scale in 1945 and expanded on a progressively increasing scale, which became
Colony-wide in 1946. In the coastal area four
districts are available in which births and
deaths are registered, and in them one can
compare’ birth- and death-rates averaged
over the years 1938 to 1946 preceding control, with a single year after control.

TABLE III

COMPARING THE DEATH-RATES IN FouR REGISTRATION

AREAS IN BRITISH GUIANA: BEFORE MALARIA CONTROL

DURING THE PERIODS 1938-46 WITH THE DEATH-RATE
FOR 1947 AFTER CONTROL

1938-46 1947

Average
District Average Annual Death-rate
Population | Death-rate

Peter’s Hall 20,253 23°2 (range : I1-2
16°8-30°7)

Belle Vue ... 14,729 24°9 (range : 20°7
; 17°4-34°2)

Highbury ... 2,554 28-6 (range : 6:9
16°7-39°3)

Cotton Tree 15,492 15°9 (range : 9°4
11°6-25-°8)

These figures show that the control of
malaria was followed by a considerable
reduction in the death-rate ; this was especially marked in the Highbury area of Berbice
estuary, a hyper-endemic area in which
depopulation had been going on for some
years. Over the four registration areas in
the nine years before 1947 the average annual
death-rate was 21-8, and in 1947 was only
131. What is more striking is that the 1947
rates are, with one exception, lower than the
lowest figure in the range of death-rates over
the nine years before control, even though in
1940 and 1941 there was a malaria remission
owing to drought.

It is clear from the figures recorded by the
five countries quoted that malaria control
is followed by a considerable reduction in the
death-rate.

It was suggested earlier that malaria might
reduce the birth-rate by increasing the numbers of abortions, miscarriages and stillbirths, or by interfering with conception.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

There is some evidence that this is true.
Blacklock and Gordon (1925) state that in
their series of 155 pregnancies, of fourteen
children born dead 71-4 per cent were of
mothers with malaria-infected placentas and
28-6 per cent were of mothers whose placentas
were not infected. They concluded that, if
such a small group could be taken as representative, malaria had a definite and important effect on the production of a high proportion of infant deaths 7 utero and in the
first week of life.

Gill (1940) made a detailed analysis of the
influence of malaria on natality with special
reference to Ceylon. He points out that the
effect of malaria on natality might differ
according to whether the disease was epidemic, hyper-endemic or endemic. Gill
divided Ceylon into five zones characterized
by progressive intensity of malaria. His investigation amply confirmed the conclusions
already reached regarding the effect of
malaria on mortality-rates. For example, during the period 1901 to 1930 the mean deathrate—ranging from 24-8 to 43-0—varied
directly with malariousness, as did also the
infantile mortality-rate, ranging from 131 to
150. Standardizing the statistics on the basis
of Zone I, in which malaria was virtually
absent, the standardized death-rate became :
I, 21-4; II, 23:8; III, 30-4; IV, 40-1; V,
553; and the infant mortality-rate as
follows : I, 128 ; II, 167 ; III, 194 ; IV, 169;
V, 332. These figures demonstrate a striking
direct correlation between the death-rates
and the degree of malaria. On analysing the
birth-rate, however, he found little variation
in the five zones, the range being from 131 to
150, though the lowest figure was in the most
malarious zone. When standardized, using
Zone I as the standard ,the birth-rates for the
various zones were: I, 40; II, 44:8; III,

.40°8; IV, 41-7; V, 39°8. The absence of

significant variation indicated but little
effect of malaria on fertility. The natural
increase of the population, however, varied
inversely with malariousness, with a range
of +15°2 to — 5:3.

When the monthly frequency of births in
the other zones was compared with that in
Zone I, which was regarded as normal because
COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 195

malaria was absent, it was found that almost
without exception the rates were below
normal throughout the winter period and
above normal throughout the summer period
by an amount which was directly related to
the height of the zonal spleen-rate. The total
decrease in the birth-rate in the winter
period in the malarious zones almost balanced the total increase during the summer
period, and the total winter deficit (-— 134-5)
was offset by the total summer increase
(+140:0). This curious inversion of the
monthly frequency of births associated with
malaria was corroborated by figures quoted
from Kenrick in the Indian Central Provinces, and these two examples suggest a close
relationship between the intensity of endemic
malaria and the monthly distribution of
births.

Gill also analyses the effect of epidemic
malaria on the birth-rate. The grave
epidemic which flared up in Ceylon in 1934
caused a large reduction in the birth-rate
during the year in which it mainly occurred,
and this was followed by recovery of the
birth-rate to well above the normal figure in
the second year after the epidemic, and by a
return to approximately normal in the third
year. The examination of the monthly
incidence of births during the epidemic
showed that the births. due to pregnancies
which commenced before the onset of the
epidemic were reduced by 11-2 per cent
during the first nine months, presumably
due to premature, still and missed births,
4.e. miscarriages and abortions. The effect
in the first two months of the epidemic was
to increase the birth-rate, presumably due to
premature births, with a larger than normal
reduction subsequently. Births due to pregnancies which commenced during the course
of the epidemic showed an average reduction
of 44:2 per cent below the normal expected
for those months, with a maximum reduction
of 70 per cent. This inverted peak resulted
from the cessation of sexual intercourse,
owing to sickness of one or other parent, or to
temporary impotence or sterility, or to the
early expulsion of the fertilized ovum. The
decline was, therefore, due to missed conceptions. Births due to pregnancies which com
menced after the end of the epidemic were
above the mean except for the first four
months, and they returned to approximately
normal in about nineteen months. During
these nineteen months there was an increase
in births of Io per cent above the mean, and
this increase is to be attributed to a temporary increase in the number of pregnant
women as a result of missed births and missed
conceptions. There were, in fact, more
women in a condition to conceive. He concluded that the gain in births during the
nineteen months after the epidemic more
than counterbalanced the loss of births during the first nine months of its course. Hence
the decline in the birth-rate over the whole
epidemic was mainly due to a _ reduced
frequency during the eight months’ intermediate period when it was at its height,
amounting to a 44 per cent reduction below
normal.

Gill’s conclusion was that epidemic malaria
markedly reduced the birth-rate but that
endemic and hyper-endemic malaria did not
appreciably influence the birth-rate in Ceylon ; the monthly distribution of births was
modified but the birth-rate itself was unchanged. He stated his belief that endemic
and hyper-endemic malaria do not in any
part of the world cause any appreciable
reduction in the indigenous birth-rate.

Gill’s conclusions were subject to proof
when the possibility of large-scale malaria
control was accepted and put into practice.
In Ceylon it is reported that the birth-rate
has shown no significant change. On the
other hand, Walton (1949) in Freetown found
a rise in the total number of live births
recorded in the years following intensive
mosquito control. There were significantly
more births and more survivals than in
previous years. In Freetown, however,
malaria is almost exclusively due to the
malignant tertian parasite in contrast to
Ceylon where it is caused almost equally by
benign tertian and malignant tertian ; this
may have been associated with the difference
noted in the result of control. Moreover, in
Ceylon living standards are rather higher
than in West Africa. In British Guiana
where, as already noted, the species distribu
D
1y6

tion of infection is approximately the same
as in Ceylon and where malaria occurs
similarly in epidemic, endemic and hyperendemic forms, Giglioli (1948) has recorded
the effect of malaria control on the birthrate.

TABLE IV

SHOWING IN FouR REGISTRATION AREAS THE AVERAGE

' POPULATION AND THE AVERAGE BIRTH-RATE FOR THE

YEARS 1938-46 BEFORE MALARIA CONTROL, COMPARED
WITH THE BIRTH-RATE IN 1947 AFTER CONTROL

 

 

1938-46 1947

Average ‘
or Average | Annual BirthDistrict Population] Birth- rate

rate

Peter’s Hall} 20,253 31°4 38°8
Belle Vue... 14,729 34°2 43°6
Highbury... | 2,554 24°7 26°7
Cotton Tree, 15,492 34°1 41°9

The effect of malaria control on the birthrate is not shown here with any certainty.
Results are only available for one year, and
other factors may have been operating.
Moreover, the periodic remissions and exacerbations of malaria in that territory have
shown a considerable influence on the birthrate, as demonstrated in the wide range
noted over the years 1938 to 1946. That fact
itself is significant, since the highest birthrates within the ranges of the four districts
are associated with malaria remissions and
the lowest with epidemics or severe endemic
conditions. Following control of the disease
the 1947 birth-rate is higher, with the exception of Highbury district, than at any time
in the previous ten years. The variation in
the birth-rate inversely correlated with the
intensity of malaria, and the possibly acceptable increase in the birth-rate in 1947,
together suggest that in British Guiana
endemic or hyper-endemic malaria does affect
the birth-rate. The Freetown and British
Guiana figures thus do not support Gill’s
statement regarding the effect of endemic
malaria. Giglioli believes that the great
improvement recorded in 1947 is only the
beginning of a new trend in the vital statistics
of the Colony.

Malaria in all its epidemiological forms is
undoubtedly responsible for a high death
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rate; epidemic (and possibly endemic)
malaria is responsible for a reduction in the
birth-rate owing to failures to conceive, and
possibly the disease in hyper-endemic and
highly endemic form has this effect also,
though clear evidence on the point is lacking.
Malaria is the major medical problem of the
world, claiming its victims annually in millions, and it is important to note that it
shows its greatest prevalence in the underdeveloped communities of the tropics whose
potentialities for population growth are
greatest. In these areas malaria has remained
the main factor in slowing up the growth of
the population, and its removal may more
than double the rate of increase. In such
places as Ceylon and British Guiana, which
are at present under-populated, the removal
of this check on expansion will not for many
years be followed by land pressure, but where
population pressure already exists, as in
India, Java, Kenya and areas of Southern
Nigeria and Uganda, the widespread control
of malaria is likely gravely to affect an
already serious problem. Any factor tending
to accelerate the natural growth of overpopulated areas will cause a deterioration in
their standards of living.

Malaria is not by any means the only
epidemic or endemic disease which is providing a check on population growth in the
tropics. Cholera and kala-azar in India have
decimated large areas. In Africa sleeping
sickness has depopulated great tracts. In
Northern Nigeria, for example, where a careful census of the affected area is made before
diagnosis and treatment are undertaken,
Lester (1945) reported that a 12 per cent
decrease in population had occurred as a
result of the sleeping sickness epidemic
during the years 1923-33. On making a
survey it was found that 20 per cent of the
people were infected, and treatment was
commenced in 1933. In the period 1933-43,
as a result of treatment, the population
showed a 24 per cent increase. Harding
(1940), also in Nigeria, found a direct correlation between sleeping sickness incidence
and the death-rate. Where the incidence of
the disease was 18-6 per cent the death-rate
was 71-4, where the incidence was 28-6 per
COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 197

cent mortality was 84:2. In these areas treatment was carried on over the years 1933 to
1943, and during this period there was a
25 per cent increase in the population.

Though no accurate statement of the
effect of disease on primitive communities is
possible, malaria and other infections prevalent in these areas appear to have important
effects in stabilizing populations, and many
of them can be easily controlled or eradicated
by modern techniques. If these methods
were to be applied widely over the tropics
the rate of population growth would be
greatly augmented. No factors can be
expected to operate which, within some fifty
years, would act so drastically in retarding
the increase except malnutrition, famine,
and warfare on the part of over-populated
communities, which might well attempt to
wrest from their neighbours colonial territories into which they might expand. The
civilized world, through the World Health
Organization and the Food and Agricultural
Organization, has undertaken everywhere to
reduce disease and to raise the standard of
nutrition to a certain minimal level. It is
extremely doubtful whether F.A.O. had considered the effect of the activities of W.H.O.
on the problem confronting it. If the
materials and personnel can be made available, and that is W.H.O.’s function, it is
probable that in the vast under-developed
tropics the death-rate can be halved or even
more drastically reduced and possibly fertility increased. It is very doubtful whether
the standard of nutrition has risen in underdeveloped areas as a result of F.A.O.’s
policy, except in the case of famine relief,
but there is evidence of a quickening of the
rate of population growth in the tropics as a
result of the introduction of modern medical
methods.

In these circumstances it is pertinent to
inquire whether the problem of disease and
population growth is being dealt with in the
proper way. The tendency to departmentalize activities in the colonies so that the
medical, agricultural and other problems are
dealt with separately, indicates a failure to
recognize the fundamental fact that man is
an animal in ecological balance with his

environment, and that if this balance is not
maintained man will necessarily suffer.
There does not seem to be any general acceptance of the idea that problems of disease
must be considered in relation to the environment, nor has it been suggested that in one
area malaria can safely be controlled because
the country can immediately absorb a much
greater population, while in another disease
should not at present be combated because
to do so would rapidly present a problem of
population pressure. It is clear that Western

- influences operating in primitive areas have

already upset the ecological balance and in
some places have caused serious pressure on
the means of subsistence. In the last ten
years science has placed in our hands the
capacity to save and prolong life, and possibly
to increase fertility over whole communities.
Moreover, the methods now available can
control disease with almost incredible speed.

In the consideration of this problem it
may be helpful to study the disappearance
of community disease in civilized countries.
It is worthy of note that in this country
preventive medicine was first organized on a
small scale as late as 1830, following an
epidemic of cholera. Before that date
medicine had been personal, z.e. the sick
patient had been treated and sometimes
cured, but no medical man had made any
rational attempt to prevent widespread infection in the community apart from the segregation of individuals suffering from some
contagious disease. Nevertheless, though
there was no attack on transmission, many
infections had disappeared or shrunk to small
proportions. Leprosy had ceased to be a
problem ; malaria, once widespread over
large areas, had receded to a point where it
was of purely local interest and concern ;
helminthic infections were seen only in
children, and infestation-rates were so low
as to be of minor medical importance. How
did the incidence of these infections diminish
in the absence of any organized campaign ?
They decreased and disappeared over a
period of centuries as a result of the steady
rise in standards of living. In this country
disease control became organized only after
the community diseases resulting from pollu198

tion and an insanitary environment had been
reduced by purely social advances. This is
corroborated by the study of the decrease of
malaria in the United States of America.
Andrews (1948 a and 8) points out that
malaria existed throughout most of the
U.S.A. in the middle of the nineteenth century. Shortly after this it began to retreat
from the North, and the authorities are agreed
that this was due to the effect of improved
socio-economic conditions and standards of
living. In the upper Mississippi Valley the
recession was spontaneous and independent
of conscious efforts at malaria control. In
the Southern States also economic improvement is believed to have been the prime
cause of the decrease in malaria, z.e. better
housing, drainage, home use of insecticides,
better animal husbandry and _ increased
industrialization. If economic advancement
is accepted as the basic reason for this
improvement in health it would seem that in
the tropics we are trying out a vast experiment in community disease control for which
there is no apparent precedent in the medical
history of civilized countries. In _ these
disease disappeared slowly, while man all the
time maintained ecological balance with his
surroundings. As standards of health
improved and population increased higher
standards of living were adopted and agricultural methods became better so that more
people could be maintained on the land. As
living standards continued to rise the family
became smaller. That is the natural and
normal evolution of community disease control. Modern medicine evolved in urbanized,
industrialized surroundings in response to the
needs of the communities living in that
environment, and it is still being modified as
living conditions and standards change.
Only recently has preventive medicine begun
to combat the community diseases of our
society. On the other hand, the rapid control
of the prevalent infections of the tropics by
chemical and other means leaves the
inhabitants still at subsistence level but with
a greatly increased rate of population growth,
and the need for encouraging influences
which would tend to stabilize it has not been
recognized. In its existing form Western

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

medicine is totally unsuited to the needs of
the dispersed rural populations in our
colonies and in the tropics generally, where
some 80 per cent of the inhabitants are
peasant agriculturalists amongst whom community-wide disease is the basic medical
problem. It would be just as absurd to expect
a forest tree to flourish if dug up and transplanted to a new environment, as to expect
the medicine of civilized societies to succeed
when transplanted into communities such as
we are considering here, some of which have
only reached the developmental level of the
early metal age. The wise course is rather to
plant the seed and tend it as it grows to the
size and form which is determined by the
environmental influences of soil, rainfall and
temperature. Medical organization and technique in the tropics, if they are satisfactorily
to solve the problem confronting them, must
develop in accordance with the needs of the
communities served, and the path along
which they evolve may lead them far from
the form which has been reached in this
country. Western medicine will have its
part to play in the tropics later when
development has produced industries and
towns and a society resembling our own, but
at the present time its widespread introduction is likely to tilt the ecological balance to
man’s disadvantage. Looking at the situation from the demographic angle it is fortunate that, according to Forrest (1945), only
some 12 per cent of the world’s population
is receiving any large proportion of modern
health services. If the death-rate were to be
reduced markedly and rapidly, malnutrition,
which is believed to be prejudicing the health
of at least 85 per cent of the world’s population, would be very much more serious.

The argument advanced above might be
summarized at this point. Firstly, Western
medicine developed in response to the needs
of urban communities which were already
showing declining birth-rates. Secondly,
diseases the same as or with the same sort of
causation as those prevalent now in the
tropics, were brought under control in
Western countries by the elevation of
standards of living before preventive medicine was consciously applied. Thirdly, the
COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 199

application of Western medical techniques to
a number of the more important diseases in
the tropics is capable of controlling them with
remarkable speed. These diseases are responsible for a large proportion, possibly the
major portion, of the premature deaths in
tropical communities, and are at present
probably the most important factor in limiting the rate of population growth; their
control is likely to lead to an unprecedented
expansion of population in the first, second,
and, to some extent, the third phases of the
demographic cycle described by Blacker
(1947). The total population of communities
in these three phases amounts to 1,833 millions or, excluding the third phase, in which
expansion would be less marked, 1,347 millions, or 62 per cent of the world’s inhabitants.

Destructive criticism is of greater value if
it indicates or is accompanied by constructive proposals. Before closing it would be
advisable briefly to suggest a general plan,
the adoption of which would tend to preserve
the balance between man and his environment. The discussion of the effect of modern
medical methods on the death-rate in underdeveloped areas and the history of the
disappearance of some of the community
diseases in those countries which are now
civilized, indicate that the problem must be
regarded as an ecological one ; that, using the
term in its broadest sense, the environment
of these backward communities must be
regarded not as a collection of separate
influences, some favourable, some adverse,
but as a complex of interwoven elements of
which the physical unhealthiness of their surroundings is only one factor. The situation
becomes dangerous if one element is singled
out for attack without regard to the others
and the ecological balance thus upset. If
disease is prevented before the people themselves are prepared to co-operate in its control by their own efforts, and before preparations have been made to absorb the increase
of population which will result from the
saving of life, then, unless the population
density is well below the carrying capacity
of the territory, the standard of living is
bound to fall within a short space of time,
and the last state is likely to be worse than

the first. The background of the whole
problem of development of primitive communities is poverty in all its aspects. This
applies as much to the medical situation as
to any other. The poverty of their housing,
their agriculture, their social customs, all
serve to spread and perpetuate the diseases
which afflict them, and their lack of capital
and low standard of education determine the
type and scope of their health services.
History suggests that the proper sequence
of events in advancement is that economic
development should come first, and with it
mass education (not necessarily literacy) and
improvement in agriculture. Results of
progress in these spheres will inevitably
accrue slowly. Economic development will
supply the capital for progress in other
spheres and will permit a raising of standards
of living. Mass education will cause a desire
for higher standards, will indicate the way to
reach them and will, at the same time,
attach a higher value to individual life than
those communities possess at the moment.
This, one would expect to be associated with
a desire on the part of the parents for a better
life for their children and, subsequently, with
acceptance of family limitation. Improvement in agricultural methods and the introduction of new crops would raise the carrying
capacity of the land and so would accommodate the increased population which
would follow emergence from their primitive
state. At this stage the function of medical
services would be to hold disease in check so
that depopulation and disabling conditions
could not interfere with the advancement of
the community ; the disorganization resulting from epidemic diseases with high mortality must be prevented. In the case of
endemic disease where depopulation is occurring as in sleeping sickness, kala-azar and,
in some instances, malaria, the control of the
disease is essential for the development of the
area. Similarly, such diseases as produce a
high incidence of crippling, for example,
yaws, must be brought under control. The
function of the medical service should be to
enable the population to take advantage of
the progress made in other spheres. Much of
the disease due to defective environmental
200

conditions and to bad social habits can be
eradicated at low cost with the active cooperation of the people and by the education
of public opinion. Here the health and
educational services must co-operate, for if
the community climbs up by its own efforts
the advance is permanent. Too much of the
progress now made in the less-developed
areas of the tropics is the result, not of an
enlightened public opinion, but of docile
obedience to pressure from above. Such
progress is unlikely to be permanent ; when
the pressure is removed the new practices are
abandoned unless public opinion has been
educated to demand them. Malaria has been
controlled or eradicated in a number of areas
by teams of workers employed by the
central authority and using techniques which
involve only a small degree of co-operation
from the inhabitants. With the.exception of
a very small number of places this expensive
control must be carried on indefinitely as a
health measure, because it is not aided by the
activities of the people themselves and is not
integrated into a wider scheme such as land
utilization by drainage.

A rise in the standard of living will at first
be accompanied by population growth, but
later by a tendency for the birth-rate to fall
progressively. As greater value attaches to
the life of the individual, medicine can afford
to become more interested in his health as
opposed to the health of the community,
because community disease will have been
largely controlled by the people themselves.
Then Western curative medicine with its
emphasis on the individual will be demanded
and can be afforded. The environment will
have changed since, owing to the development of the country’s resources, urban concentrations of population will have increased
and some degree of industrialization will have
occurred and so the hospital system will be
available to an important proportion of the
population. This, however, cannot occur in
the financial circumstances at present obtaining in primitive peasant agricultural communities, and until economic development
and the concentration of the population
permit the adoption of such a medical
organization, progress in this sphere should be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by the widespread employment of medical
auxiliaries of good local standing but with
education little better than that of the
people amongst whom they will work. The
function of these auxiliaries would be to
educate the people to change their environment by their own simple activities and to
abandon such customs and habits as contribute to their ill health. Qualified medical
staff would be best employed in education
of their subordinate medical staff, in education of public opinion by constant propaganda, in the control of those epidemic and
endemic diseases which are retarding
advancement, and in maintaining the health
of those engaged in the development programme. The clock, however, cannot be put
back. It would be improper to reduce or
remove Western medical organization from
primitive areas in which it has been established, imperfectly adapted though it may
be to the physical and social environment of
the people. . Political considerations make its
maintenance imperative. The organization
need not, however, be expanded in that form
until circumstances demand it and until
simpler and more effective public health
measures have received the active co-operation of the people.

In the co-ordinated plan of development
the territorial funds available should be
allocated to the various activities according
to a plan which would permit the balanced
progress of the community, advancement in
each sphere being integrated into the general
scheme so that progress would be simultaneous over a broad front, no single activity
outstripping the others. Advance would
necessarily be slower than would be desirable ; it would, nevertheless, be progress and
not merely the appearance of progress. The
great danger is to attempt to hurry development by by-passing some of the stages, but
careful attention, help and education of the
right kind will enable a child or a primitive
community to achieve as rapidly as possible
the maturity which represents its own full
flowering.

Discussion
Dr. A. S. Parkes, Dr. F. Yates and Mr.
COLONIAL MEDICAL POLICY IN RELATION TO POPULATION GROWTH 2o1

J. P. Brander took part in the discussion
which followed at the Members’ meeting to
which this lecture was addressed.

Dr. Parkes said: “I already knew something of Professor Davey’s work and views,
and for the last month I have been looking
forward to this occasion. I have not been
disappointed. Many of us have begun to
wonder whether the present rapid growth of
world population, greatly facilitated by
medical discovery and practice, can continue for long without leading to a crisis in
food supply or to explosions due to pressure
of population in particular areas. In the
light of these general considerations Professor Davey’s remarks about Colonial medical policy seem to me to be most important.
I was particularly ‘impressed by his comments on man as part of an ecological
system, disturbance to any one component
of which inevitably has repercussions on the
others, comments which I should like to see
inscribed on the door of the new Colonial
Office. Professor Davey ‘has emphasised the
problems which are arising, and are going to
arise more acutely, in the Colonial territories
due to rapid increase in population following
the application of recent medical discoveries.
I need hardly point out that the same thing
is happening on a vast scale in many parts
of Asia and the Far East. Sooner or later we
shall be obliged to co-ordinate medical policy
with other practical considerations. This is
a terribly difficult problem. It is the ethic
of the medical man that life must be saved
if only for the gallows, or prolonged if only
for months of suffering. In the same way, it
is the ethic of medical science that disease
must be conquered no matter what risks of
war or famine are incurred thereby. In so

far as medical science is unable to deal with
everything at once, the logic of the population
situation suggests that attention should be
given first to diseases that disable rather than
to those that kill. Few of us, however, would
care to pursue this line of thought very far.
On the other hand, few who have studied
the matter will deny the urgent need to
evolve, within or without existing ethical
standards, a co-ordinated and coherent
medical-demographical-agricultural policy.”

REFERENCES

Andrews, J. M. (1948 a). Present proportions of the
malaria problem in the Nearctic region. Proc. 4th
int. Congr. trop. Med. Malar., 1, 903.

(1948 6). What’s happening to malaria in the

U.S.A. ? Amer. J. publ. Hith., 38, 931.

Blacker, C. P. (1947). Stages in population growth.
Eugen. Rev., 39, 88.

Blacklock, D. B., and Gordon, R. M. (1925). Malaria
infection as it occurs in late pregnancy ; its relationship to labour and early infancy. Ann.. trop.
Med. Parasit., 19, 327.

British Medical Journal (1950). Colonial Health Services. 2, 772.

Ceylon (1948). Adm. Rep. Div. med. sanit. Serv., 1947.

Forrest, W. P. (1948). Health aspects of international
approaches to problems of under-developed areas.
Millbank Memorial Fd. Quart., 26, 280.

Giglioli, G. (1948). Malaria, filariasis and yellow fever
in British Guiana. British Guiana: Med. Dep.,
Mosquito Control Service.

Gill, C. A. (1940). The influence of malaria on natality
with special reference to Ceylon. J. Malar. Inst.
India, 3, 201.

Harding, R. D. (1940). The influence of sleeping sickness on mortality in two districts of Northern
Nigeria. Trans. R. Soc. trop. Med. Hyg., 33, 483.

Lester, H. M. O. (1945). Further progress in the control of sleeping sickness in Nigeria. Ibid., 38, 425.

McLetchie, J. L. (1948). The control of sleeping sickness in Nigeria. Jbid., 41, 445.

Mauritius (1949). Rep. med. Hith. Dep., 1948.

Walton, G. A. (1949). On the control of malaria in
Freetown, Sierra Leone. II. Control methods and
the effects upon the transmission of Plasmodium
falciparum resulting from the reduced abundance
of Anopheles gambia. Ann. trop. Med. Parasit.,
43, 117.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, Nos 4
