SEX EDUCATION
AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS’
By CYRIL BIBBY, M.A., MSc., F.L.S.

COUNT it a pleasure and a privilege to
have been invited to address you tc-day
—a pleasure because it is always a stimu
lating experience to lecture to an audience
such as this; a privilege because your
Society has many members who were pioneers
in the field of sex education.

It is sometimes forgotten, I think, by many
educationists to-day how much is owed to
these pioneers. Whatever differences of
opinion there may be about the desirability
of the specific measures they recommended,
it is clear that the great advance in sex education which is taking place to-day could not
have occurred if they had not prepared the
ground. Asa result of their work, views that
were novel and unorthodox are now almost
commonplace, and acceptable even in the
Ministries of Health and Education.

Results of Official Support
Perhaps the greatest turning-point on this
path towards official recognition was the
transference in 1942 of the major part of the
work of the British Social Hygiene Council to
the Central Council for Health Education.
What this official support has meant to the
cause of sex education is perhaps best illustrated by one or two figures.

Since some of the bodies carrying out this
work publish no statistical report, it is
impossible to give figures that would be allinclusive. The bulk of the work, however,
was carried out by the British Social Hygiene
Council until April 1st, 1942, and by the
Central Council for Health Education since
that date. The sex education lectures given
by these two bodies during the past five years
are as follows :

Audience 1940-1 1941 1942 1943-4 1944°5
Teachers 9 83 86 231
Youth Leaders 17 35 33 59 117
Parents 21 39 37 75 132
Young People 257 612 580 1,348 1,469
Schoolchildren 71 87 IOI 208 189

-*A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May
29th, 1945.

Tie total attendance at these meetings
during 1943-4 was 68,712 (the figures for
1944-5 are not yet available) while, if the
audiences at meetings and film shows on
venereal diseases are included, the total
attendance during the year was some 300,000.
To these figures, moreover, must be added
the people reached by thé distribution of
nearly half a million pamphlets on sex education during the same year.

_ Quantitatively, then, the present position
is fairly satisfactory. The number of people
who have received some sort of sex education
during the last five years is considerable. It

‘is clear that there has been of recent years a

radical and widespread change of public
opinion on the question of sex education.
The time has passed when it was necessary to
state with some vehemence the case against
sheer obscurantism. Probably there will
remain with us for many years a few frightened adults who will continue to foster the
cult of ignorance, but an increasingly large
section of the population is allowing the
myths of the gooseberry bush and the stork
to fade into oblivion. The blank wall of

opposition has been breached. The general

public, educational and medical administrators, churches and social organizations,
teachers and youth leaders, parents and
pupils—all are ready to go ahead. 
It seems likely that the pioneer battle
against obscurantism is now over. It is no
longer necessary to press the claims of sex
education in language more vigorous than
profound. The need now is for careful study
of the many educational issues involved.
Only after such study is it likely that sex
education will be satisfactory in quality as
well as quantity.

Aims in Sex Education

The first issue for study js that of objective.
What are the aims of sex education, and
what are its possibilities ? To serve as a basis

157
158

for useful action an objective must be desirable, attainable and sufficient—and this
cannot be said of some aims that have been
propounded.

There are, for example, those who use “ sex
education ’’ as a euphemism for dilation on
the horrors of venereal disease, and hope*to
frighten young people into “ goodness.”” But
sex education is not mere anti-venereal
propaganda; it is preparation to live a
joyous, well-balanced and fruitful life. There
are others whose aim is to produce
“morality ’’ by threats of fire and brimstone. But with such “ goodness’’ and such
“morality ’’ the educationist can have no
truck. A morality that is worthy of the

name is not to be based merely on fear,

whether it be fear of disease in this world or
of damnation in the next. Such aims fail on
the test of desirability.

Other aims, perhaps desirable enough in
themselves, fail on the score of feasibility.
To expect by sex education alone to wipe out
prostitution and casual promiscuity, to make
all marriages successful and all divorces
disappear, to abolish adultery and prevent
all fornication, is to be hopelessly unrealistic.
The sexual ills of society are many and deepseated, and education unaided will not
eradicate them. Economic and _ political
changes and a new social and spiritual vision
are needed, too.

Now what of the criterion of sufficiency ?
A great many people seem to imagine that
sex education consists merely of imparting
the so-called “‘ facts of life,’’ although one
would have thought that the inadequacy of
this conception were abundantly clear.
Admittedly, the most obvious task is that of
imparting information. Here is the very
foundation stone of sex education. It is
part of the inalienable intellectual heritage
of our people that they be told the truth.
With it, they may not in all cases act wisely ;
but without it they have no basis for judgment.

Yet sex education is more than mere imparting of information. Knowledge of the
truth is very rarely harmful and is u3ually
beneficial, so that any person who helps to
clear away the vast mountain of ignorance on

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

this subject may feel that some good has
been done. But a study of ancient or contemporary history, or even a superficial
knowledge of the lives of one’s acquaintances,
will rapidly dispel any illusion that there is
necessarily a close correlation between the
extent of an individual’s knowledge and the
excellence of his actions. Something more is
needed.

The teaching of the obvious biological facts
will make it clear to our children that the
human sex organs are essentially similar to
those of other mammals, such as the rabbit.
And if sex education were to stop there, it
would be logical for a child to deduce that the
sexual behaviour of a healthy young human
should not be very different from that of a
healthy young rabbit. But since presumably
we do not wish to adopt the rabbit as the
model for our sexual behaviour, sex education
must break these narrow bounds. It must,
at the appropriate stages, deal also with
those respects in which humans differ from
the other mammals, and in particular with
the consequences of the unique development
of our nervous system and of our peculiar
sociabjlity.

But still something else is needed. Even
thorough intellectual understanding of these
factors is not enough. Our children must be
inspired with a feeling of the excellence of
sex and of its immense potentialities. Our
young people, if they are to deny themselves
the immediate sensual pleasures with which
their bodies can so richly provide them, must
see some reason for such a sacrifice. If they
are to be asked to wait, they must feel that
they have a future, and a future that is
worth waiting for. If society is to make
demands, it must see to it that its members
think sufficiently highly of it to be willing to
accede to them. Behaviour is dependent
upon ideals and inspiration as well as upon
factual knowledge and intellectual understanding.

It is, however, easy enough to criticize
aims expounded or implied by others. Much
more difficult is the task of formulating a
statement to take their place. I do not feel
sufficiently confident to do so at all dogmatically, but at any rate a tentative effort

Gamer
SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

should be made. I would, theretore, define
the aims of sex education something along
these lines: “‘ That our people should grow
up learning the appropriate facts in the best
possible way ; that their general attitude to
sex should be a completely healthy one ; that
they should draw up for themselves a code of
conduct after careful consideration of all the
issues involved and should endeavour to
behave according to this rationally determined code ; and that they should react to
the behaviour of others. with sympathy,
tolerance and charity—but without spineless
‘acquiescence in a code inferior to their own.”
No doubt this statement of aims could be
much improved, but it will serve as a working
basis for the time being. Let us theretore
look at it a little more closely.

Imparting Factual Knowledge

First, what constitutes ‘‘ appropriate ”’
knowledge and at what age should it be
imparted ? This latter question is clearly one
to which there is no simple answer. No one
age can be prescribed for sex education, any
more than it can for any other aspect of
health education or character training. Sex
education should surely be a continuous process from early years to later life, and the
question should really be re-phrased to read :

“What aspects of sex education are particularly appropriate to different ages?”
This is obviously difficult to answer in general
terms, for no one human is exactly like
another. But if we call to our aid that
mythical creature the “‘ average ’’ person a
reply may be attempted.

I would suggest that by about the age of
two or three years children should be
learning the polite terminology for the sex
organs, just as they learn the words “‘ arm,”
“leg ’’ and “‘ head.”’ By the time they go to
school at about five, they should in most
cases know that the baby grows inside the
mother and is born via an opening between
her legs ; and should understand something
of the similarities between birth in humans
and birth in the domestic mammals. During
the next two or three years the child should
learn that the father contributes the sperm
cell which fertilizes the mother’s egg, and

159

that the penis is placed in the vagina during
mating.

These apparently dogmatic statements
about the order in which information should
be imparted are not made without reason.
The suggested order is that indicated by
analysis of the questions typically asked by
children of various ages. It is interesting to
observe that whereas courtship, mating,
fertilization, pregnancy and birth occur in
that temporal order, children usually display
an interest in these processes in the reverse
order. Questions about birth and pregnancy
tend to be asked first of all. It is usually only
later that the child inquires about the réle
of the father, and thus elicits explanations of
fertilization and copulation. My belief is
that, in general, the right time for enlightenment is when the child seeks it, not when
some adult thinks that an appropriate age
has been reached.

There are some things, however, in which
the adult must act as pacemaker, because the
adult knows what sort of ground lies ahead:
and the child does not. Some time from about
the age of twelve onwards a girl will begin
her menses, and she needs to be prepared in
advance by a simple biological explanation
at the age of about eleven. And since menstruation can scarcely fail to be an inconvenience, girls should be encouraged to
understand its value and its significance
from the point of view of child-birth. An
inconvenience is more gladly borne when
there seems to be some point in bearing it.
Boys also, I believe, should have an idea of
the significance of menstruation, so that they
do not build up on a basis of ignorance an
atmosphere of mystery about their sister’s
periods.

But more important for boys is a prepara
‘tion for the changes which will occur in

themselves during adolescence. As _ their
testes become active from about the age of
fourteen onwards, they will probably have
occasional night losses of semen, the so-called

“seminal emissions.’’ These, accompanied
as they often are by erotic ‘dreams, cause
adolescent lads a good deal of worry, and it is
our duty to tell them what to expect and
explain to them the naturalness and harm160

lessness of these emissions. Minds worried
and terrified by the outrageous allegations
which still circulate: about the alleged illeffects of masturbation (ranging from insanity to venereal disease and from consumption to impotence) need also to be set at rest
—or better still, so tortified by the truth that
the worries and tears never materialize.

So far no mention has been made of any
other than the reproductive aspect of sex,
and there is, I believe, good reason for this.
It is clear from their whole attitude that most
children of under about twelve years (or even
older) think of sex as a purely reproductive
matter, and have no conception of its amatory
aspect. This attitude was summed up in the
question of the eleven-year-old, who was
aware that sometimes children are undesired
and asked in all simplicity : “‘ If people don’t
want a baby, why do they doit ?”’ The idea
of a couple having sexual relations except
with the fixed intention of producing a child
was clearly beyond his emotional understanding.

Within the three or four succeeding years,
however, the endocrine changes of adolescence begin to produce deeper sexual feelings ; an understanding of the love aspect of
sex begins to dawn, and with it an interest in
the morals and social conventions of sexual
behaviour. This interest is particularly
marked in girls, who are at this period considerably more mature emotionally than
boys of a similar age. It is noticeable that
many of the questions that are asked by
members of youth clubs show an increased
awareness of the emotional aspects of sex as
compared with. that of the younger child ;
-and sometimes seem to betray some personal
experience, if not of actual intercourse, at any
rate of preliminary love-making. This,
therefore, I suggest, is the period when a
point should be made of explaining something
more of the influence ot the endocrine secretions on the body. and the emotions. This,
too, is probably the -best time for discussing
questions such as courtship and marriage,
“necking and pétting,’ promiscuity and
prostitution, and for stressing the elementary facts about the venereal diseases.

Towards the end of adolescence and in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

early adult life, general sex education
merges into specific marriage preparation and
guidance—a topic too large to consider in
any detail now. It may be suggested, however, that apart from a knowledge of the
actual technique of intercourse, sex education
during the courtship stage should emphasize
the importance of each partner understanding well the emotional peculiarities of the
other, and exercising delicacy and restraint
in whatever degree of lovemaking may be
mutually agreed upon. It is necessary, too,
to make clear that, as the saying goes,
““ There is more in marriage than four bare
legs and a bed.’’, Couples contemplating
marriage should be encouraged to learn something of each other’s physical and mental
health ; to understand the economic implications of marriage and parenthood ; to reach
agreement on how their future home is to
be run; and they should be informed of the
sources to which they can turn for further
information and guidance. :
Sex education, however, should not end
with marriage. Apart from any continuing
guidance in the technique of intercourse, I
believe that all married couples should have
some training in child care and parentcraft
and—of particular relevance here—should be
given some understanding of the normal
sexual development of children and of how
to cope with the problems arising from it.’
Here, however, the sex education of one
generation merges into that of the next,
and perhaps we had better leave the matter
for the time being.

Encouraging Healthy Attitudes

The next problem is that of the encouragement of a healthy attitude to sex, and this is
a difficult matter, partly because there is by
no means unanimity about what in fact
constitutes a healthy attitude. I can do no
more, therefore, than register my own
personal credo.

It seems clear that the first few years of
home life are of fundamental importance
in emotional development. On impressions
gained and attitudes formed in the first five
years of life depend to a considerable extent
the emotional balance and happiness of the
SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

adult. Let us therefore examine some of the
factors influencing these wmpressions and
attitudes.

Because of the close physical proximity
and nervous connection between the voiding
and the genital organs, attitudes developed
with reference. to the former are likely
to be transferred to the latter. Any feeling
of distaste for the process or the products
of voiding may therefore have a decidedly
unfortunate influence on later feelings about
sex. Thus it is patently important not to
encourage such feelings but, on the contrary,
to convey the impression that voiding, like
eating, is a perfectly normal and proper
process.

Then there is the question of the so-called
“infantile masturbation.”’ It is .unfortunately the case that many parents, mistaking
the exploratory path of innocence for the
broad highway of incipient vice, either tell
the child not to be ‘‘ nasty” or “ rude”’ or
by some action show their disapproval.
What is the poor infant to think—that it
may safely pull its nose and may twiddle its
toes with impunity but if it does the same in
a region halfway between it incurs displeasure? Clearly there is nothing better

calculated to encourage the feeling from the |

earliest days that there is something quite
isolated from the rest of life, something unclean, about the sexual organs and hence, at
a later date, by association, about the sexual
functions. This too, therefore, must be
avoided.

Now, what of the question of nudity? In
ancient Sparta, youths and maidens would
play and wrestle with each other quite naked,
and this was in no way regarded as indecent.
During the Christian epoch, however, “* the
flesh ’’ has to a considerable extent been
regarded as shameful, so that by the time
Queen Victoria came to the throne the
movement against nudity had . achieved
victory, and missionaries all over the world
seemed to regard it as one of their major
tasks to clothe naked tropical converts.

I dare, however, express the hope and
belief that this excessive zeal for bodily
concealment is disappearing rather rapidly.
It is important for our purpose that it should

161

do so, for it is a commonplace that attitudes
to sex are often associated with similar
attitudes towards nudity. Thus, if a child
from the first learns to regard nudity as in no
way an indecent phenomenon, it is reasonable
to hope that it will be helped in the development of a healthy attitude to sex. Naturally,
however, children must, to save both themselves and others from embarrassment, learn
as they grow up that there are occasions and
places, including most public occasions and
public places, in which nudity is frowned
upon.

A great opportunity for encouraging a
proper attitude to sex occurs when another
child is expected in the family. There is not
time to go into any detailed suggestions as to
how a sense of pleasurable anticipation may.
be aroused and crowned with a feeling of
family solidarity when the baby arrives ; but
it is perhaps worth while to quote from a
correspondent—who would, I am_ sure,
describe herself as a fairly ordinary wife and
mother—to show what a delightfully natural
attitude can be induced towards this event.
She writes :

As the months passed and my figure
changed, John and Elizabeth took more
and more interest in the baby’s coming,
and I realized that I need not have felt
embarrassed about telling them ; it was a
matter of delight and wonder to them, and
they enjoyed taking care of me. ‘‘ Can we
feel the baby?” they would ask, or if I

started doing anything specially strenuous,

“Mummy, do be careful, you'll hurt the

baby.” Their altruism even went so far as

to suggest that I should eat the last
helpings of their favourite puddings ‘‘ for
the baby.’”’ It became not merely a family
secret but a co-operative preparation on
the part of the whole family. ...

That, surely, is the goal to aim at.
During these early years, moreover, there

are certain attitudes not specifically sexual in

“nature, which are nevertheless, I believe, of

fundamental importance in laying the foundations for a successful family life in later
years. I have in mind the development of
habitual friendliness to the other members of
the family, of affection and consideration for
162

others, of willingness to share possessions and
to co-operate amicably in activities with
playmates. I have in mind also the’ growth
of interest in and ot a sense of wonder at the
workings of nature, the growth of an
zesthetic sense, of a desire for personal health

and cleanliness, of admiration for vigour and

smartness, of distaste for furtiveness and dishonesty. Sex education, indeed, interpenetrates indissolubly with general character
training.

With the onset of adolescence, however,
other .more specifically sexual attitudes
become important. One should endeavour,
I believe, to arouse a sense of pride in
approaching maturity—and this involves
particular care that topics such as menstruation and seminal emission are so dealt with
as to instil no sense of repugnance, as is too
often the case at present. It is important
also that each sex should develop an attitude
of sympathetic consideration for the other,
regarding friendships as perfectly natural
and quite desirable,
exercise of discretion and restraint.

This is the period too, I suggest, when one
should particularly endeavour to encourage
an attitude of distaste for obscenity and
pornogra phy--without, however, going to the
other extreme of prudery or priggishness.
There are those, I know, who believe that sex
is so sacred that it should never be the object
of humour. For my part, I do feel that certain aspects of sex and sex behaviour are
sometimes rather ludicrous, that sex may

sometimes quite properly be the occasion of

humour ; and in consequence I would therefore emphasize the importance of avoiding
the sin of hypocrisy. The distinction to make
is surely that between hearty, unashamed
laughter and nasty, shamefaced sniggering ;
between something which is funny and
incidentally sexual and something which is
merely filthy in nature. I ‘subscribe to the
comment once made to me in conversation
by the late Dr. Temple: “It is all right
making jokes involving sex ; what one must
not do is to make sex into a joke.”

By the time adult life is reached basic
attitudes are already largely determined. It

is important, however, if the idea of sex.

but as needing the

S

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

education is to be widened, as I believe it

should be, into asconception of education for

family life, that those contemplating marriage should be encouraged to discuss,
reasonably and in a friendly spirit, such
matters as the economic running of the
home, the division of domestic duties, family
planning and so on; and that we should
endeavour to ensure that married persons
should be considerate in all things towards
each other, should not regard the wedding
ceremony as terminating the period of court-.
ship, should have a proper attitude to the
upbringing of their offspring. But once
again we have made the circle, and have
reached to the next generation.

Sex Education and Sex Behaviour

We come now to what many people will
regard as the crux of the matter—when the
appropriate facts have been imparted and
healthy attitudes have been encouraged,
what may we expect to be the outcome in
terms of sexual behaviour ? What, indeed, do
we wish to be the outcome ?

We heve to recognize that in Great Britain
to-day there is a wide divergence of opinion
on questions of sex morality and, in particular, on the question of pre-marital intercourse. For those of our feilows who accept
the Church’s teaching in its entirety no
queries will arise about the validity of the
marriage institution. But young people are
increasingly demanding some other justification for it, and those concerned with sex
education must either find the justification
or honestly admit that they know of none. I
believe, however, that the search is not a

very difficult one.

Those who see no intrinsic evil in sex may
well feel that in a new Utopia the institution
of marriage would have no place, that sex
relations would be so governed by universal
harmony that any contractual basis for living
together would be quite unnecessary. But
we are’ not living in a Utopia of perfect
beings ; we are part of a world made up of
imperfect people. We are not starting out to
plan a new society from scratch ; we are
faced with the much more difficult task of
adapting one already in existence, with all
SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

its faults and failings. And whatever may
be our differences of opinion about the
institutions ot Utopia, most of us, I imagine,
feel that in our present society the married
state has a good deal to be said for it.

I believe, however, that a disservice is
done to the cause of sexual morality by those
who fail to recognize any gradation in
standards of behaviour, and lump together
all types of pre-marital intercourse under the
omnibus title of ‘‘ fornication.’’ It seems to
me that the relationship between an unmarried couple, living in love together, cannot reasonably be placed in the same moral
category as that between a prostitute and
the man who has bought the temporary usage
of her body.

I feel some impatience, moreover, with
those of our eminent fellow citizens, both
cleric and lay, who seek by their statements
to convey the impression that young people
to-day, in contrast with the virtuous youth
of their own generation, are sunk in sexual
vice. It might restore them to a sense of
perspective were they to read the words of
Alcuin of York, written before ever William
of Normandy set foot on these shores.
“« Since the time of King Aelfwold,’’ he wrote,
“the land has been absolutely submerged
under a flood of fornication, adultery and
incest, so that the very semblance of modesty
is entirely absent.’’ Substitute the name of
any recent monarch, and there is the gist
of many a modern lamentation.

Fulmination, I feel, is a good deal less
effective with young people than reasoned
argument. It is my experience that the
much-maligned youth of to-day will pay
some attention to the views of a sympathetic
adult who seeks to persuade them that not all
conventions of sex behaviour are hypocritical
and not all restraints puritanical. |

In discussions on sex morality, as in any
other matter, it is clear that a democracy

must concede the right of any individual to.

try to persuade others to his viewpoint,
whatever it may be. Normally, however,

except where parents are instructing their

own children, sex educationists do not speak
purely as individuals. As officiais of an
organization, as employees of a local

163

authority, as voluntary workers in a club,

they cannot completely divest themselves of

their corporate status and speak purely as
private people. Some compromise, therefore,
is essential, for it is necessary to respect other

‘people’s convictions without surrendering

one’s own. That this can be done is well
shown by the fact that in sex education today there collaborate in this country Protestants, Roman Catholics, Jews and. Agnostics.
In a different society such compromise might
not be so necessary—and might indeed
scarcely be possible. But in drawing up
plans for sex education in our particular
society at this particular period of history
it is, I feel, necessary to compromise on some.
points in order not to jeopardize the whole
work,

- Let us not delude ourselves, however, that
even with the most reasoned arguments in
the world all pre-marital sex relations would
disappear. No amount of mere talk will of
itself dam up the sexual urge of lusty youth.

Far-reaching social changes are needed too,

and among them is the removal of the all-toomany barriers to early marriage. Equally
important is the need to give young people
the feeling that they have some future and
that there is something for which it is worth

while to postpone their sexual satisfaction ;

that there is something that they can give to
society, and which will give them an honoured
place in it; some burning sense ot purpose
such as, in the years between the wars,
inspired the young builders of the Soviet
Union—-or such as, in earlier days, inspired
the first Christians. Such self-dedication
would, I believe, be immensely more potent
than any appeal to fear or threat of punishment.

One last word about my suggested definition of aims. I stated that sex behaviour
should be according to a rationally determined code, but I do not, you will notice,
prophesy what that code will be. This I
point out, lest it be thought that the lack of
specification is the result of oversight. Such
is not the case.

It would be possible, I imagine, for us.so to
condition each new generation that it almost
automatically thought and felt as we desired,
164

almost automatically fitted in with our code
of behaviour. Experiment along these lines
has achieved some considerable degree of
success during the last twelve years in Nazi
Germany. But, for me at any rate, no such
reflex subservience to an authoritarian moral
code is included in the aims of sex education.
I am content to teach the facts as well as
may be, to encourage an open and healthy
attitude to sex, to insist on the need for
determining conduct rationally—and to have

faith that a generation so educated will be |

at least as capable of making ‘correct moral
judgments as I am.

Potential Dangers

When we leave the definition of aims and
begin to draw up plans for action, there are,
it seems to me, several dangers that must be
avoided.

The first is that of Utopianism. There is a
great temptation in sex education, as indeed
in education generally, to draw up magnificent schemes that are totally irrelevant to the
particular social setting within which they
are to be put into practice. Let our plans,
therefore, be impregnated through and
through by an appreciation of what is
possible and desirable here and now, not
what might be in a brave new world.

The second danger is that of wasting
energy on barren argument about whose job
sex education is. For too long parents and
teachers and medical practitioners have been,
to use an Americanism, “‘ passing the buck ”’
to each other. Sterile disputation about the
precise allocation of degrees of responsibility
must give way to serious preparation for
getting on with the job in hand and to close
collaboration between all who have any part
to play.

Another danger is that of over-emphasizing
sex and isolating it from the rest of life. To
this danger some of the early pioneers fell
prey. The perhaps inevitable result of their
determination to bring sex into its place in
the educational picture was that they
painted a canvas on which it loomed overlarge. In their rightful insistence that
children should not remain in black ignorance, they tended sometimes to overload

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

them with information beyond the bounds of
their curiosity, intellectual ability or emotional . understanding. This tendency we
must avoid like the plague. Sex education,
like health education and character training
generally, should permeate the whole of life.
The better it is, the less obvious it will be.
It will just fit in naturally and inconspicuously into the ordinary life of home, school
and community, and will be noticeable only
to the degree to which it is imperfect.

But time is short, and I must proceed to
more definite suggestions. If-these suggestions seem very obvious, that will only be a
very encouraging reflection of the recent rapid
change of attitude in this matter. They
would not have seemed obvious ten years ago.

Short-Term Plans

First I may mention the enlistment of
general community support. Never, I think,
has the mental atmosphere of the country
been so favourable to sex education as now,
and now is the time to crystallize support.
Talks to public meetings, men’s and women’s
guilds, educational and other discussion
groups, and so on, should be arranged in each
area. Radio talks, film shorts, posters, newspaper advertisements, etc., can be used to a
similar end on a national scale. If this were
done with energy and determination, |
believe that all opposition to sex education,
except that of the confirmed obscurantists,
could be overcome within a very short period.

There is another immediate problem that
needs mentioning. While we are perfecting

our long-term plans and awaiting their

fruition, our schools.send out into the world
each year vast numbers of children who have
had no sort of reliable sex education. We
cannot afford to be perfectionists and do
nothing because we cannot do the best. It
must be recognized that only a second-best.
result can be achieved in their case, but that
is better than nothing. Indeed, it is astonishing how much can be done to re-crientate the
attitudes of young people to sex by means of
a few friendly talks. As a temporary
measure, therefore, talks on sex should be
arranged in youth clubs and the like and
specially devised lessons given in the schools.
SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

Long-Term Plans

I am sure, however, that you will agree
that the sooner we get rid of this patchwork
procedure, the better.

We must surely concentrate a Zod deal of
attention on the education of the educators,
so that a continuous scheme of sex education
may be put into practice at the earliest
possible moment. Long-term plans must
include drastic alteration in school, university and training college curricula—but we
cannot wait for that. Side by side with these
changes must go the organization of immediate help to present parents, teachers, youth
leaders, déctors, nurses and religious and
social workers. What can be done to give
such help ?

Help for Parents

I would agree with Charles Dickens when
he wrote: ‘‘ We thought that, perhaps, it is
right to begin with the obligations of home,
sir; and that, perhaps, while those are
overlooked and neglected, no other duties
can possibly be substituted for them,” and
shall therefore consider parents first.

It is reasonable to hope that children who
have had their questions answered sensibly
in the home; who have learned biology at
school, including the biology of human reproduction; who have joined with other
lasses and lads in mixed swimming and games
and rambles and camps; who during courtship have had adequate preparation for
marriage—that these parents of to-morrow
will be able to play their part in the sex
education of their own children. Such at

least is the view of the thirteen-year-old —

London schoolgirl who wrote: “If the
children know about it now, when they grow

up and have children they will not be.

frightened to tell their children.”

But that lies in the future. What of the
parents of to-day? Rosy optimism is worse
than useless, and it must be recognized that
many present parents are too ignorant to
explain the facts of sex to their children, too
indolent to remedy their ignorance, and too
tangled in their emotional attitudes to be
able to do much were they very encyclopeedias of sexual knowledge. But not all

1605

present parents. Many are well informed,
and many others anxious to inform themselves. Many have a thoroughly healthy
attitude to sex and many others are eager to
attain it. With such there are great possibilities.

Courses could be arranged for the parents
of new entrants to the nursery or infant
school, and perhaps again when their children
pass on to the secondary stage. More systematic help and guidance could be given to
expectant and nursing mothers at the clinics
and welfare centres. The matter could be
dealt with at village institutes, community
centres, co-operative guilds and the like.
Admittedly only a minority of parents would
attend courses of this nature, but it is a
valuable minority that should not be
neglected.

Equipping the Teachers

So far as teachers are concerned, it is
reasonable to expect a much more thorough
preparation. Most of what is needed to
provide the necessary background to sex
education for the non-biologist student
should indeed be part ot the normal professional training course. All teachers need an
understanding of the child’s bodily, intellectual and emotional development, and this
can only be based on a knowledge of fundamental physiological and psychological principles. It would also be very valuable for
teachers to have an understanding of the
sexual behaviour and problems characteristic
of children of various ages, and to study in
more detail those of the age-range which they
are specially preparing.to teach. Moreover,
since sex education in the school will be

effective in proportion as sex education in

the home is not neglected, teachers need also
to understand something of the problems of
home life and infant training. All teachers
should also be equipped with certain fundamental data which will enable them to answer
adequately questions which happen to arise
in their school lessons. This implies thet all
teachers in training—whether they are going
to teach the functioning of living things. or
the structure of dead languages—should take
a course in human and social biology.
166

Some training is needed also in the technique of sex education. The ways in which
the various subjects of the school curriculum
may be utilized as media of sex instruction,
the value of various extra-curricular activities
in the development of character, the effect
of the general school routine and tone upon
the fixing of sex habits and attitudes—all
these should be studied.

If it be objected that there is no time to
study all this, so much the worse for the
miserably inadequate period of training
which is still considered sufficient for most of
our teachers.. In our schools is built our

future, and those who are its architects should.

no longer be satisfied with an apprenticeship
of a duration which would not qualify them
to mend a leaking lavatory.

Specialist teachers such as biologists naturally need fuller preparation along these lines,
but at present they do not receive it. Biological courses in the universities are in the
main of a formalized nature, appropriate
only to the training of ‘biological research
workers—and the training colleges tend to
repeat the same lectures at second hand.
Alumni of these institutions are likely to be
fairly familiar with the genetics of Primula
and Drosophila, but to know little or nothing
about that of Homo sapiens; to have more
than a nodding acquaintance with the reproductive peculiarities of the obscurer myxomycetes and with the ecology of salt marshes,
but to be almost completely ignorant of the

sexual life of humans and of the functioning
of their society.

We may hope that biology teachers of the
future will have taken courses of nature
study which have concentrated rather less
upon the details of leaf venation and rather
more upon such themes as reproduction,
care of offspring, family life and social cooperation over a wide range of living organisms—not excluding humans. They may
have included in their studies a consideration
of the relationship (which is by no means one
of identity) between sex and reproduction,
of sex dimorphism, of sexual emotions, of

courtship and of mating, of the origins of

human society and its conventions of marriage and of the social control of sexual

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

expression. Their courses will have covered
the workings of the endocrine glands and the
influence of their secretions upon bodily and
emotional development, and will have recognized the interdependence of physiological
and psychological factors. Thus equipped
with specialist knowledge, in addition to the
general training which all teachers should
receive, their special part in. sex education
will present them with few difficulties.

In the future we may have such teachers,
but there are few to-day. In the meantime,
then, what can be done? A great deal.
Most present teachers of biology have the
background which will enable them to pick
up the necessary extra factual knowledge
quite quickly, and many of them have the
requisite personality. What is most needed
in such cases is courses of instruction by
specialists, dealing in part with those physiological and psychological aspects of sex which
are not normally covered in university and
training college syllabuses, and in part with
the technique of sex instruction in the
school.

The organization of such courses is recognized by progressive education authorities as
being of prime importance, especially since
the great majority of our teachers left college
many years ago. It would obviously be
desirable for certain members of school staffs
to be released for a full term or year of concentrated study, but equally obviously this
will for some time ahead be possible in very
few cases. The next best alternative is the
arrangement of vacation courses of perhaps
a fortnight’s duration, in which a good deal
of.ground could be covered. But even this
will not be feasible for all teachers. Yet it
must be very rarely that an authority would
be unable to organize for its school staff,
during the school term, a course of perhaps
six or eight lectures on the materials and
methods of sex education, and experience
has shown that even in this limited time it is
possible to do much good.

Youth Leaders and Welfare Workers

Now what of youth leaders? It is encouraging to note that the 1944 McMair
Report comments that: ‘‘ There are three
SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

matters which are of great significance for
young people—religion, politics and sex.
They are certain to arise, sooner or later, in
any discussions with boys and girls on social

conditions or their own physical, mental or

spiritual problems. Leaders must therefore
be prepared to face them.’’ When the
county colleges envisaged in the new Education Act become a reality, they will presumably provide a useful channel for guidance
in these matters, and plans should, I believe,
be drawn up now for education in these
colleges for family life, so that when the bus
does come, albeit rather belatedly, we shall
not miss it.

In the immediate future, we shall have to
do the best we can under the present very
difficult conditions of inadequately. trained
youth leaders, miserable club accommodation and so on. The difficulty is, moreover,
accentuated by the fact that most of the club
members will have received little or no sex
education in earlier years. Apart; therefore,
from definite lectures to the young people
themselves, such as were suggested earlier,
the main advance must, I think, be that of
giving a general background of knowledge to
youth leaders, which will help them to deal
more effectively with the problems of behaviour which always arise in youth work
and to give helpful personal guidance to their
club members.

We must recognize, however, that young
people spend only a few hours each week in
their youth organization, and the major part
of their waking time at work. Parallel with
what is done in the club, therefore, it seems
essential to tackle also the environment in
factory, shop and office. The improvement of
conditions of work, the proper organization
of canteens and social and educational
activities, the radical cleaning up of dirty
urinals and closets which simply invite
obscene epigraphy, the arrangement of discussions with the adult workers to enlist
their co-operation in guiding their juriior colleagues—all these are matters which may
exert a powerful influence for good, and are
matters within the province of the industrial
welfare worker. The co-operation of these
workers, and of shop stewards and trade

167

union officials, should therefore be enlisted
in any balanced programme of sex education
work. .

Medical Practitioners

Now let us consider the medical profession. What part has it to play in sex education? The quite common opinion that
doctors are peculiarly qualified to give sex
instruction is, I suspect, a hangover of the
feeling that sex is in some way pathological,
and therefore to be handled only by medically
qualified persons. It is also, in part, perhaps,
a result of the historical fact.that doctors
played a pioneer part in sex education and
have therefore been responsible for a good
deal of the literature on the subject. But in
general, just as teachers (even those with a
good knowledge of human physiology and
pathology) have not the necessary clinical
experience to qualify them as doctors, so
doctors (even those with a good knowledge
of educational theory) have not the pedagogic experience to qualify them as educators.
If, therefore, doctors are to play their full
part in sex education, it is important that
they should equip themselves with this
experience.

Any other than elementary instruction on
the venereal diseases is the doctor’s province,
as are other problems of sexual pathology,
while a great deal of work in preparation for
marriage, concerning the technique of intercourse, the practice of contraception and so.
on, is largely medical in nature. Medical
practitioners also, particularly those specially
concerned with the young child, should be
able to give much helpful advice to ‘parents.

But those medical practitioners who aspire
to be sex educators will need to give careful
study to the psychological aspects of sex as
well as to its physiology ; and they will need
sociological insight too. Sex relations and
marriage are not purely. medical problems.
Equally they are problems of politics and

‘economics, of passion and of friendship, of

intellectual companionship and mutual respect. Is it too much to hope that medical
training might in the future pay more attention to these and other related matters ? No
doubt, as in the training of teachers, there.is
168

the difficulty of already overcrowded syllabuses. But would not some little study
along these lines be of more value to the
general practitioner and his patients than a
painfully acquired familiarity with the fine
details of human‘anatomy? The answer
would appear to be such an unqualified
affirmative that it is to be hoped. that
medical practitioners will follow the example
of the teachers who, up and down. the
country, are attending special courses to help
to equip themselves to undertake sex education.

Other Health Workers

Other health workers, too, have a part to
play. Particularly in rural areas, the district
nurse and health visitors could do much to
bring about a more enlightened attitude to
sex among the parents with whom they come
into contact. When a new baby is expected,
they can suggest that the other children be
told the truth about it ; and when it has
arrived they can give enlightened advice on
such matters as toilet training and infantile
masturbation. But to be really helpful to
the mothers they meet, they will themselves
in most cases need further preparation.
Having already a good background knowledge, it should be fairly easy for them to
extend their understanding. In the future
this extra field should be part of their
training; for the present special short
courses should be arranged.

Personal Qualities in the Sex Educator

The question now arises : Suppose that all
these different categories of people do attend
special courses of instruction—will that
guarantee their suitability to play a part in
sex education? The answer, I suggest, is
quite clearly “‘ No.’”’ He who would undertake sex education with success needs many
qualities which may bear little or no relation
to special training or academic attainment.
The first essential is personal sex adjustment
and an absence equally of any prudish disinclination to discuss sex and any prurient
tendency to discuss it to excess. In all
education the teacher needs a sympathetic
understanding of the pupils, but this applies

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with special force in sex education. Hypocrisy and narrow-mindedness are fatal.
Honesty and tolerance are essential. Imagination is needed too—the ability to sym‘pathize with the feelings of a child and to
understand the perplexity of the adolescent,

while yet retaining the mature judgment and

emotional stability of the adult.- One other
quality I would add—that of a sense of
humour. I know no solvent of strain more
effective than laughter, and the person who
cannot throw in a joke now and then has no
place in sex education.

It would, I think, be difficult to improve
on the words of Havelock Ellis, who once
wrote that : |

To fulfil his functions adequately, the
master in the art of sexual hygiene must
answer three requirements...he must
have a sufficing knowledge of the facts of
sexual psychology, sexual physiology and
sexual pathology .. . he must have a wise
and broad moral outlook, with a sane
idealism which refrains from demanding
impossibilities .. . finally, a genuine /sympathy with the young, an insight into their
sensitive shyness, a comprehension of their
personal difficulties, and the skill to speak
to them simply, frankly and humanely.

If, indeed, it is a question of choice between,
on the one hand, an adult who is free from
embarrassment, who understands children, is
honest, sensitive, broadminded and tolerant,
and yet has but the meagrest academic
knowledge ; and on the other hand an expert
biologist, with a detailed knowledge of

psychology, pathology and sociology, able to

write theses on educational technique, and
yet lacking in these warm human qualities,
the former has the advantage every time.
This is both a warning and an encouragement. It is a warning against judging
people’s suitability for sex education by their
paper qualifications, and an encouragement
to those thousands of good-hearted but
modest folk in the street, who wish to help in
sex education but have been doubtful of
their ability to do so.

Co-operation and Research
The major part of this lecturing, preparaSEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

tion of literature, distribution of films and
so on, must, it seems to me, be carried out by
the Central Council for Health Education.
Whether one likes it or not—and I know that
there are some who do not like it—the various voluntary organizations in this field
cannot hope to compete with a body having
such considerable support, financial and
otherwise, from central] and local government
bodies. But the word ““ compete ”’ is perhaps
a somewhat unsavoury one to use in this
context, and I will not pursue the idea of
competition. Co-operation, however, is
another matter, and surely one of the most
important jobs waiting to be done should be
that of securing effective co-operation between all bodies in any way concerned with
sex education. Apart from purely administrative considerations, there is an educational
harvest to be reaped.

It is generally agreed, I hope, that sex
education should no longer be considered as
an isolated subject, and its integration with
the rest of education, it seems to me, has two
main aspects. One aspect is that of sex
education as part of health education generally and, as I have already indicated, there is
already a central body making great efforts
along these lines. The other aspect is that of
including sex education as part of a wider
education for family life, and here, surely, is
a worthwhile task in which many of the
organizatiqns I have referred to could play
an important part.

What I should like to see in this country is
a body carrying out work similar to that of
the American Institute of Family Relations.
Probably some sort of federal structure
would be the most practicable in our case,
for British voluntary organizations are extremely loth to commit suicide. But could
not sex education grow into something much
wider and richer if really close collaboration
and co-ordination were achieved between all
the bodies doing sex education work, the
moral and social welfare organizations, those
concerned with marriage guidance and family
planning, organizations dealing with heredity,
eugenics and population problems, those
working in the field of maternal and child
welfare, and so on? This is obviously a

169

matter requiring close and critical consideration by all the organizations concerned, but
at any rate I commend the suggestion to
their attention.

Among other matters which are simply
crying out for attention is that of research.
A very considerable volume of sex education
work is being carried out—and, J venture to
think, with some success. But we cannot
close our eyes to the fact that it is all being
done quite empirically. We have our ideas
about the amount and degree of accuracy of
the sex knowledge of the people we are trying
to educate—but we have no exact knowledge.
We have general impressions of what their
attitudes to sex and sex behaviour are—but
we have no exact knowledge. We make
estimates of the relative efficacies of the
various techniques of sex education—but
again we have no exact knowledge. The
securing of this exact knowledge should, I
feel, be high up on our list of priorities. Just
how it should be carried out I am not competent to say—that would need the combined intelligence of educationists, medical
practitioners, psychologists, social workers,
statisticians and experienced field research
workers. But that the job must be done I
am certain.

The Social Setting

I should like to go on to say something
about» the whole attitude of our society
towards sex, about the shoddy back-street
bookshop which flaunts sex and the public
library which quite ignores it, about the
influence of cinema and radio, andsoon. But
to do this would take me on to a whole programme of social reconstruction, and even if
time allowed for this my knowledge would
not. But I should like to close with the comment that people’s attitudes to sex, like their.
attitudes to any other aspect of human life,
do not crystallize in isolation, but are shaped
and impregnated by the views of their fellow
citizens and by the whole structure of the
society in which they live. That is why some
enthusiasts for sex education live in a fool’s
paradise. Imagining that it is possible in a
few lectures to overcome the influence of
years of living in a society with distorted
170

views of sex, they are due for disillusion.
The best results will follow from sex education only when the whole of our society is
remodelled and our children grow up from
the earliest days surrounded by adults who
feel that sex is an excellent and joyous thing
in which man and woman join as equal

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

partners, sharing benefits and responsibilities
alike. Meanwhile, our scheme of sex education must not be drawn up 7m vacuo, as if sex
attitudes and sex behaviour were things
fixed and immutable. If it is to be really
potent, it must be sex education for our particular social setting.

GREGORY KING AND THE POPULATION OF
ENGLAND AND WALES AT THE. END OF
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY

By D. V. GLASS

REGORY ‘KING, that “curious
computer,’ as Chalmers called him,

affords one of the most intriguing
puzzles in the history of British demography.
e was described, on his monument in the
Church of St. Benet, Paul’s Wharf, London,
as “‘a skilful herald, a good Accomptant,
Surveyor, and Mathematician, A curious
Penman, And well versed in Political Arithmetick. .. .”* In this last province, political
arithmetic, he achieved marked contemporary recognition, being widely quoted
by Davenant, who depended upon him for
calculations in fields as diverse as population
and coinage. Chalmers, who resuscitated his
work and found both the manuscript of the
Natural and Politicall Observations and
Harley’s comments upon it in the Harleian
collection, referred to him in the most enthusiastic terms : “‘ He who surpassed Petty,
as a political calculator, must be allowed to
have been a master of moral arithmetick.’’+
*Dallaway, J. I nquirtes into the Origin and Progress
of the Science of Heraldry in England, Gloucester and
London, 1793, Appendix II, p. xlviii.
f Chalmers, G. An Estimate of the Comparative

Strength of Great Britain, London, 1804, Appendix,
p. 27. The 1804 edition is referred to throughout this

paper.

This high regard persists to-day. Yet King’s
only publication in the field of political arithmetic was a broadsheet summarizing the
rates and duties payable under the Act: of
6 and 7 William and Mary,.c. 6 (levying
duties on marriages, births, burials, bachelors and childless widowers).* The Natural
and Politicall Observations, upon which King’s
position now largely rests, though forming
the basis of much of Davenant’s work—
evidence that King was, as Chalmers says,

“of a very communicative disposition ”"—
remained in manuscript until first published
by Chalmers in 1802 as an appendix to his
own book, and the only modern reprint is
that edited by Barnett.t

Moreover, the Natural and Politicall Observations themselves, bold and even startling
as they are in their approach to the question
of estimating the size and structure of the
population of England and Wales—with
which the present paper is concerned—raise
more questions than they answer. In fact

* B.M., 816.m. 6/80.

¢ Barnett, G. E. Two Tracts by Gregory King,
Baltimore, 1936, which also contains a facsimile of the
title page of the Observations, and a. valuable intro
duction, to which I am greatly indebted for source
references.
