THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON
OFFSPRING

By RoBERT J. Ewart, M.D., M.Sc., F.R.C.S., D.P.H.

THERE are two methods by which the ideals of the Eugenist
may be attained, each of which has a sphere of usefulness in our
efforts for the common weal. The first has for its object the
improvement of the breed, and the second making the best use
of what we possess under the present conditions of mating.

The first method selects the parents, whilst the second secures
the most favourable conditions for the production of the young,
and as these two ideals have different applications to the general
scheme, they require different handling. It is quite obvious that
interference with the free choice in selecting a mate is for many
reasons undesirable, though there is good evidence to believe
that some restriction of the choice might be followed with
beneficial results. We may take it, that the majority are in
favour of some form of segregation of the unfit, though there
may be considerable difference of opinion as to the meaning to
be attached to that word.

In considering the question of breeding, in the collective
sense, our object is to decide, not what we desire to produce,
but what we wish to get rid of. When, however, we turn to the
question from the point of view of the individual, we must
approach the problem from the other end of the scale, and see
how we can make the best of marriages under the system of “ free
and unrestricted selection.”

Collectively, our desire is to obliterate the undesirable,
genius being left to take care of itself. Individually, the
positive knowledge of how to produce the best types is stronger
than the negative ideal of how to avoid the production of idiots
and the physically feeble.

I think it will be admitted that the possibility of good
202 R. J. Ewart :

is more likely to decide a line of conduct than the chance of evil.
Thus, when considering collective eugenics, we decide what types
or kinds we wish to eliminate. We must put before the individual the ideal of the best, the fear of evil consequences being
relegated to the background. It is easy to say what is
undesirable with some chance of unanimous assent, but any
endeavour to delineate the best would hardly meet with the same
success.

With some the acquisition of the necessary knowledge will
be sufficient to dictate a right course ; whilst others, lower in the
scale of humanity, ignoring acknowledged rules will act wantonly
and without purpose. The proper regulation of their own lives
is impossible; they approach, if they do not actually enter, the
sphere of collective eugenics, and should be dealt with under
that head.

We see that the principles of our creed may demand something from us all, and I should say that he was a poor eugenist
who could not produce as the result of his own actions and
daily life a progeny that was the best attainable under the
existing conditions.

The message that we wish to convey to our countrymen concerns not only the less fortunate sections of our community, but is of great importance to every individual member.
I am sure that if the laws concerning reproduction without
reference to selective breeding, which I propose to delineate,
were obeyed, much of the stigma attached to modern social life
would disappear.

I do not wish in any way to detract from the importance of
the segregation of physical and mental abnormalities, but simply
to point out that this method can be only part of a comprehensive scheme, the object of which is to embrace all who disobey
the eugenic law in such a way as to interfere with the production
of the best. To define what is meant by the best, is a matter of
considerable difficulty; for what is best in one circumstance is
notso in another. Thus subtlety of mind may not be the quality
most needed by a coal-heaver, though it may be of use to him;
physical robustness may be desirable to an organiser, though
perhaps intellect would be more serviceable. No doubt those
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 203

possessing the characters most suitable to the needs of their class,
whatever they may be, would be the best in a certain sense.
But in all circumstances there are certain conditions of physique,
intelligence, and vitality, that we consider better than others.
Our plan will therefore be to discuss under these headings
certain happenings connected with birth, and I scarcely think
there will be much disagreement as to the conditions under
which the best types are born.

Criteria of superiority, when applied to individuals, as a
means of classification, offer a very unreliable and insecure basis
of judgment, but the same standards in respect to the mean of a
large number, give very trustworthy data. Thus A may be taller
than B, but that is no evidence that A is in any way more physically fit than B. On the other hand if the mean height of 100 A’s
is found to be 1n excess of 100 B’s, then there is strong presumptive evidence that the A’s have a superiority over the B’s. And
further, if the crucial test of competition could be applied, it
would be found in all ordinary occupations that the A’s were on
the whole more successful than the B’s. Hence, height may be
taken as a good standard of physique, in any selected group of
individuals of the same race.

Intellectual capability in its relationship to supremacy needs
no comment, as its advantages are obvious. That the ordinary
classification, as adopted in our schools, is a safe guide, is open
to discussion. There is no doubt, that many individuals, who
promise well in their earlier years, do not fulfil these expectations
when they enter upon the race of life for which we all are
trained. The causes of their failure are numerous and need
not detain us. When, however, we deal with groups, and not
with individuals, the correspondence between success in earlier
and later life is unquestionable. Hence, we are justified in
taking the standard of intellectual development as indicated
by scholastic results, as a good and fair test of success in later
life.

The causes of death are very various, and it would not be
accurate to assert, that because X died at the tenth year, his
inherent vitality was less than that of Y, who lived to the

sixtieth. Such a deduction, however, approximates closely to the
2
204 R. J. Ewart:

truth in the case of groups of individuals if judged by average
results. Thus, we may conclude that height, scholastic aptitude
—as judged by the conventional standards and power of survival,
may be taken as the criteria of physical fitness, mental development and vitality, and that that section of a community which
ranks highest in all of these may be safely classed as “best,”
and further, that an individual who excels in any one, is better
than he who excels in none. Biologically our criteria are
synonymous with differentiation of function. The more specialised
an organism the higher it stands on the phylogenetic tree.

We wish, then, to know under what conditions men,
possessing these characteristics are most likely to be produced.
The influences at work can be divided into three divisions, which
tend to merge into each other: the hereditary, the natal and the
developmental. Hereditary conditions I do not propose to deal
with ; developmental effects from birth onwards I have discussed
in another place. My present purpose is with natal influences
only.

These again can be divided under numerous headings, of
which I have selected the following for discussion, v1z.: the age
of parents at birth; the interval after a previous birth and season
of year in which birth occurred.

We have thus to consider, the influence of age, parental
exhaustion, as judged by birth interval, and season, on physical
fitness, mental development and vitality.

A search amongst the published summaries of knowledge
furnishes us with practically no reliable information on these
points.

This is surprising, for one would imagine that a matter
which, after all, is so essential to our well-being, would have
been the subject of much analytical thought. We practically
know nothing of the conditions, favourable or otherwise, at birth
to the production of the triumvirate of the soul, the mind and the
body of man. Speculations there have been, and in the public
mind there is a vague feeling arising, from primitive instinct, as
to what should be avoided; but we possess no accurate
knowledge.

Whilst I must regard myself, in a sense, as something of a
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 205

pioneer, I have no wish to take up the position of a prophet, or
the attitude of a dogmatic teacher. Rather is it my object to
stimulate the interest of those who are so placed, as to be able to
verify or confute the conclusions I have formed from such matter
as has, through much patient search, come to my notice.

My first enquiry concerns the influence of the age of the
parent at birth. We can investigate this point in two ways—
that is either by what I may term the collective or statistical
method or by the individual or experimental method. In the
former we simply take things as we find them, measuring all and
sundry, forming groups according to the age of parent at birth,
and noting the mean of each rank.

In the second method we take a few individuals and note
the relationship of each member of the family, the conditions
being such as are relevant to the point under investigation.
This laboratory method, we cannot, of course, use at will, but it
is easy to find, in any community, examples which will answer
to the restrictions of an organised experiment. Unfortunately,
owing to what is known as individual variation, considerable
numbers must be taken to obtain reliable averages of any group,
and to be quite sure of our results, there should be from thirty to
sixty examples studied.

The data on which I based my work, were collected at the
town of Middlesbrough, with a population of 105,000 inhabitants
of a very mixed kind. The town is prosperous and rapidly growing. The main industry (iron-working) is strenuous, and the
conditions of life are severe, the death-rate and rate of infantile
mortality is high—higher usually than any other community
of a similar size in this country.

The types selected for my purpose were the children in their
sixth and thirteenth years—that is, all those who were born in the
years 1905 and 1898 and who were still living in 1911, a period
in which there has been no trade disturbance or epidemic of
sufficient severity to seriously affect these groups of individuals.

As far as possible, both the individual and collective methods
were used, though the main deductions were based largely on the
latter. It should be noted that the professional and monied
class were not included. This does not in any way weaken
206 R. J. Ewart:

the general application of the conclusions, for I have shown elsewhere that in the town under consideration the children of the
better working-class rather exceed than fall beneath the average
standards of the professional classes and what is usually called
the “‘Gentry.”’ The reason for this is, I believe, the strong
influence of selection and the more normal and less pampered
life. In no class can we say with greater surety, that the race
is to the swift or that it is more fairly run, than amongst the
workers in such industries.

Tables I. and II., show in a concise way the effect of the age
of both the parents at birth on the development the child will
obtain at its sixth year in a normal population, figures being
given in all cases where the numbers are sufficiently large to give
reliable results. Table III. gives the best age combinations for
father and mother. The sequences of means in the various
groups is worthy of a little study. It will be seen, with respect
to the mother only, that she produces her best girl before her
twenty-fifth year, and her best boy in the 26-30 age period, the
average being a little over °5 of an inch above the mean height
for boys, and a little under that figure for girls.

It is further seen, that towards the end of the reproductive
life of the parent, a second rise in the height occurs in both boys
and girls. This rise, as will be shown later, is not due to a
parental age influence but to another factor. Considering the
father, practically the same results are noticeable with respect
to boys, though the maximum is reached in the 30 to 35 age
period, and not 25 to 30 as with the mother. In respect to girls,
the results are not so uniform, though the same trend can be
seen. In both cases there is a rise towards the latter end of life.
It must be borne in mind that there is a strong correlation
between the ages of mothers and of fathers, and hence, an effect
that was correlated with the one would, of course, be correlated
with the other. Referring to the body of the table, it will be
seen that there are even greater differences than those mentioned
above. Thus, with a father between 31 and 35, and a mother
between 26 and 30, we get a boy of 41°87 inches in height, an
excess of nearly two inches over the mean of those born before
the twentieth year.
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 207

TABLE I.—AgGeE oF PARENTS AT BIRTH AND HEIGHT IN INCHES or Boys aT
END OF SIxTH YEAR

Age of Father at birth Mean
Age of sitother 20 and ai to 25 26 to 30 31 to 35 36 to 40 over 4o Totals Penson
soand under © (25) (3) (1) (37) 40.54
— 40°76 — —
t (4) (69) (48) — (10) (3) (2) (136) + 49°99
21 to 25 __. 40°94 40°79 _ _ —_—
26 to 30 _ (9) (76) (60) (11) (4) (160) 41"09
— 4603 487° — —
_ _ (8) (43) (27) (8) (86) = 40°93
3 10.35 — 40°96 4043 —
_ (1) (4) (32) (30) (67) 40°58
36 to 40 — 7 “= 4067 40°24
(2) (2) (25) (29) 41'5
over 40 —_ — — “ — 41°36
Totals (ra) (103) = (136) = (180) (75) (69) = (515)
Mean Height
<n inchee, 39°99. 40°93. «4T'OI «= «420. 40°70. 40°99

Numbers in brackets give the number of instances recorded.

TABLE II.—AcGeE or PARENTS AT BIRTH AND HEIGHT IN INCHES OF GIRLS AT

Age of Mother 20 and
under

at birth

20 and under

21 to 25

26 to 30

31 to 35

36 to 40

over 40

Totals

Mean Height
$0 inches

(5)

(9)

(15)
39°58

(58)
40°94

(6)

(79)

40°71

(6)
(39)
40°78

(84)
40°64

(3)

(132)

40°68

(1)
(12)

(44)
40°75

(47)
40°69

(5)

(109)

40°73

END OF SIXTH YEAR
Age of Father at birth

ar to 25 26 to 30 31 to 35 36 to go over 4o Totals

(2)

(14)
(30)
40°37

(24)
40°79

(r)

(71

40°63

(4)
(10)
(14)
(21)

40°43
(49)

40°98

(27)

(114)

(153)

(90)

(43)

(22)

(449)

Numbers in brackets give the number of instances recorded.

Mean
Height

ins snches

40°37

40°83

40°63

40°59

40°76

40.44
208 R. J. Ewart :

TABLE III.—Suowine Best AGE COMBINATIONS FOR FATHER AND

MOTHER
Ages of Mean height tn sixth Mean height in sixth

Father Mother year of boys born year of girls born
20 to 25 under 20 40°76 39°58
26 to 30 ai to 25 40°79 40°78
31 to 35 26 to 30 41°87 40°75
36 to 40 31 to 35 40°43 40°37
41 and over 36 to 40 40°24 —

Best combination for a boy is five years later than that for a girl.

TABLE IIJa.—SuHowina INFLUENCE OF AGE OF MOTHER ON PHYSIQUE
OF CHILD AT 13'°5 YEARS OF AGE (SELECTED CHILDREN)

Boys Girls

Age of Mother Number Mean Height Mean Height

20 and under 25 55°9 inches 56°2 inches
21 to a5 127 56:0 573 on
26 to 30 158 56°6 ” 57'0 ”
30 to 35 105 568 566
36 to 40 75 556 45 56°44
41 and over 19 556 9 56°0 9

Total 509

Note.—Best age combination for boys, is father 30 to 35 and mother 25
to 30. The mean height of such offspring at 134 years is 57°2 inches, for
girls, father 25 to 30, mother 21 to 25, mean height is 57°5 inches.

The smallest children in this group were born when both parents were
over 40 years, mean heights being found to be 55°8 inches for boys and 56'0
inches for girls.

The same may be noted with reference to the girls. If we
take fathers of the same age—and mothers variable—that is
reading the table from above downwards—or mothers of
constant age and fathers variable, that is from side to side,
the same differences become apparent, though of the two, it is
more marked in taking the mothers of a constant age. The
same rise in both cases is again noted late in the lives of the
parents, that is, after the thirty-fifth year.

The contention that the differences we observe are purely
nutritional and are dependent on the incubation period of growth,
cannot be sustained, for if such were the case the mother alone
should be the determining factor.

That pre-natal influence plays a predominant part, however,
is shewn by the fact that her influence is greater than that of the
father, the causes of which have yet to be considered.

A few measurements made of infants within the first week
of life show practically the same correlation with the age of
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 209

parents, and negative the ‘argument that the differences shown
are due to the conditions of life subsequent to birth (Table IV.).

TABLE IV.—AGE or MoTHER AND PuysicAL DEVELOPMENT OF CHILD

AT BIRTH
Age of Mother Number Length of Child Weight
19 to 24 8 19°6 inches 72\bs.
25 to 27 32 19°75 8°55;
28 to 30 50 20°53 8°8 ,,
31 to 33 25 20° yy 86 ,,
34 to 36 22 198 _ ,, BE ,,
37 to 39 II 196 5, 735
40 and over 9 20° ,, 84 ,,

TABLE V.—SHoOwWING INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL GRADE ON THE AGE CURVE OF PHYSICAL
DEVELOPMENT AT END OF SIXTH YEAR
Inhabitants of

Superior Artizan Class Msxed Class Slum Property
Age of Mother Number Mean Height Number Mean Height Number Mean Heght

Twenty yearsandunder 15 41°6 inches 21 39°5 inches 28 40°5 inches
21st to 25th years 77 4rs ss, 103 40°94 70 398 = a
26th to 30th years 105 416 ,, 139 406 ,, 69 40°3 ”
31st to 35th years 45 404 3 79 40°6_—(=»; 52 405
36th to goth years 26 89-407 55 49 403 » 35 403) ow
Over 4oth year 13 40°55; 25 41°54 13 4755

Returning to the individual method of inquiry, and selecting
only those individuals who fulfil certain conditions, and classifying them accordingly, we see a little further into our problem.
When the data under consideration are divided into three classes
according to the social grade of the parents—namely, (1),
those who can procure everything that is now considered necessary ; (2),an intermediate class in which the supply of necessaries
isnot acertainty, and (3) our slum population. We see that inthe
first case the age influence of the parents is well marked and there
is no late rise, in the second the same correspondence is still
distinguishable, though the last decade shows an improved
tendency, and in the third, the effects are almost the reverse of
what is seen amongst those living under more favourable
conditions (Table V.). (In this case the boys and girls are
grouped together.) In Tables VIII. and IX. the foregoing results
are shown in the form of curves for boys and girls respectively.
The first of these Tables-shows in a marked manner the point
under discussion.

For wealthier children the curve rises considerably in the
210 R. J. Ewart:

TABLE VIII.—Curve SHowinc INFLUENCE OF AGE OF MOTHER AT
BIRTH ON PuHysicaAL DEVELOPMENT OF GIRLS AT END oF SIXTH
YEAR AMONGST WELL-TO-DO AND Poor CLass POPULATION

Se mm me = Well-to-do class. ——— = Poor class.
¢
\
£38
Oro om. _--#%
re ” x gee ~ = ie a
s 2
Z 8
y ares we , .
Eee a \
Yeo SP as ~ ay
4, _ f .
~e é;
a e ‘
& ‘
e
a
aloe i
é ‘
t c
a
é e
é
£ oh > ,
3q the oy are5 oe ro. ry L£, ee os ‘ai po

TABLE IX.—Curve Swowinc INFLUENCE oF AGE OF MoTHER AT
BirTH ON PuysicaAL DEVELOPMENT OF Boys IN THEIR SIXTH
YEaR AMONGST WELL-TO-DO AND Poor CLass POPULATIONS

eee me = Well-to-do class. — = Poor class.

 

  

i sas tap a war fant

age of Wether

my ae ee ae

centre, with a marked fall at each end. Amongst the poor,
though the curve shows the upward and downward tendency at
the beginning and end of the reproductive period, in the middle
there is a well-marked depression. The question naturally

arises, ‘‘ Why does this happen?”
In the EuGcenics REvIEw, July, 1911, I showed, as had
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 2II

already been indicated by Dr. Duncan in 1879, that fertility in
women is greatest at the twenty-ninth year; falling off both
before and after that age. Now it is a well-known fact that the
average family is greatest amongst the very poor, and further
that the birth interval is shortest at the time of greatest fertility,
being, in the class under consideration, less than a year and a
half. I think it may be stated as undeniable that no woman can
suckle and nurture children at the same time without one or
other of her offspring being damaged thereby; a contingency
that is especially likely to happen amongst the slum households
where the general conditions are unfavourable.
TABLE VI.—SHOWING RELATIONSHIP OF INTERVAL OF BIRTH OM

PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF CHILD AT END OF SIXTH YEAR,
Boys AND GIRLS

Interval Number Mean Height Mean Weight
First births 204 41'4 inches 40'albs.
3 years’ interval and over 154 41°74, 30°4 5,
24 and under 3 years’ interval 172 40°26, 3Q°I 4,
2andunder 234s, we 180 399 4 38° ,,
Less than two years 156 386s, 37°2 55

TABLE VII.—SuHowi1nGa RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INTERVAL OF BIRTH AND
PuHysIcCAL DEVELOPMENT OF THIRD AND FourTH CHILD Born
BETWEEN TWENTIETH AND THIRTIETH YEAR OF THE MOTHER
AT END OF SIXTH YEAR, IN A PooR Crass POPULATION

Interval Number Mean Height Mean Weight
24 and under 3 years 63 41°2 inches 39°7lbs.
2 and under 2} years 72 413 ” 30° 45
Less than 2 years 58 40°5 : 38°5 4,

In Table VI. are given the average heights in their sixth
year, of children born at various intervals, the intervals being
the averages for each family, and not those from the preceding
births. It is at once seen that, should the average be
three years or over, the mean stature is greater than that of the
first birth, whilst if it is less than that, the stature is less;
in fact should the interval be under two years the deficit, compared with first births is over two inches. This deficit, as will
be shown later on, is not confined to height only, but shows
itself in both the vitality and the intellect of the children. If
we confine ourselves (Table VII.) to the third and fourth child,
of a series born between the twentieth and thirtieth year, the
influence of adequate spacing is still apparent, though not quite
so marked.
212 R. J. Ewart:

We can now understand why amongst our poor class population the age curve becomes reversed. The female is used
to the greatest extent that her fertility will allow; births at
intervals of eleven months being quite common. The fertility
before the twenty-third and after the thirty-eighth year, is of
such a nature as to ensure a sufficient period of rest for some
recuperation of her powers; but between these ages, the birth
interval may be so short that the mother is unable to bring her
whole vitality to bear. Thus one child, as it were, spoils the
next, and the net result is the inversion of the age curve, as
already shown. Many of the children born in this class do not
long survive, and the high infantile rates in slums are notorious.
The incidence of death, as I have already shown, follows closely
the age and fertility curve. In this connection, a suggestion
has been made which is worthy of some consideration, namely,
that it is only the more physically robust women, and those
who have used themselves well, who will reproduce after the
fortieth year, and that this may also help to explain why a rise
in the curve occurs at this period. The majority of births occur
between the twenty-fifth and thirtieth years, and the differences
in the age curves may be one of the causes of the variation in
stature between the grades of society. We may put to ourselves
the query, ‘‘ which is the more desirable, three children of a mean
height of 39°5 inches or two of 41°o inches, with all the other
attributes of manhood altered in the same proportion?” As
regards the individual, there is no hesitation as to the answer ;
but from the point of view of economic production it is quite
possible that the three inefficients may be better and do more
work than the two efficients. Racial supremacy, however, is
not a question of numbers, and concerns individual fitness only.

It must not be imagined, moreover, that women escape
without permanent injury from any excessive strain that they may
undergo. To estimate the loss in collective health is almost
impossible, and we must fall back upon a rather unreliable source
of information, namely, the impression one obtains from working
amongst the poor, and attending to their ailments.

These overstrained mothers may be roughly divided into
threeclasses. Firstly, thoseamongst whom the yearly reproduction
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 213

of a child seems to be the normal occurrence. In this class the
mortality of the children is very high, though some do survive
and attain a fair degree of development. Secondly, those cases
in which both mother and children are hit, the latter dying and
the health of the former being much undermined. Lastly, a
few cases where the children are quite healthy, though their production seems to have completely sapped the strength of the
mother, and her decease, from some debilitating ailment, occurs
somewhere between the thirtieth and fortieth year.

This wastage of life, and production of immature progeny
with its consequent misery and suffering to the mother, can to a
much larger extent than is generally believed, be traced directly
to the unfortunate fact that the fertility of women between their
twenty-fifth and thirty-fifth years exceeds their power to reproduce healthy offspring. One cannot help wondering what was
nature’s object in substituting the polycestrous habit of man for
the moncestrous condition of our ancestors. The yearly breeding
season, SO common in lower animals, would have suited our
purposes very well.!

From the above facts, it might be argued that the sequence
of birth is a more potent factor than the age of the parents. Ina
previous paper’ the relative effects of these two factors on infantile mortality were discussed, and it was shown that under proper
conditions of rest, etc., the majority of women, barring accidents,
are in every way improved by child-birth. It appears as though
the exuberant vitality of the growing offspring pervades through
the tissues of the mother herself and makes for her well-being.

TABLE X.—SEQUENCE OF BIRTH, INTELLECTUAL STANDARD AND PHYSICAL
DEVELOPMENT OF ALL CHILDREN AT END OF SIXTH YEAR

Percentage in Ratio between Class I.

Number Mean Height Class I. and Class III.
First birth 225 41'4 inches 33 U3
Second birth 186 41°35 33°5 1°8
Third birth 140 40°7 455 34 1'6
Fourth birth 100 40°24, 28 1°O
Fifth birth 89 399 » 25 0'9
Sixth and over 203 39°71 24 09

1 See ‘‘ Breeding Season in Man,’’ Medical Officer, July rg1r.
3 Aristocracy of Infancy, EUGENICS Review, July, rgtr.
214 R. J. Ewart:

TABLE XI.—GIvine In AN HyYpoTHETICAL FAMILY THE PuysicaL DerVELOPMENT, AND MENTAL STANDARDS OF AN AVERAGE CHILD AT
END OF SIXTH YEAR SUPPOSING THE MATING OCCURRED AT 23RD
YEAR FATHER AND 2IST YEAR MOTHER AND AN INTERVAL OF THREE
YEARS BETWEEN EACH CHILD

Sequence Ageof Mother Mean Height of Child Percentage in Class I.

First ai 41°4 33%
Second 24 41°9 35%
Third 27 42°5 40%
Fourth 30 41°8 38%
Fifth 33 41°2 35%
Sixth 36 40°0 30%
Seventh 39 39°9 28%

TABLE XII.—INTERVAL AND SEQUENCE OF BIRTH AND PuysicaL DEVELOPMENT OF CHILD IN SIXTH YEAR

Age of Mother at Age of Motker at

birth 20 te 30 btrth 30 to 40
Average Mean Mean
Interval of Birth Number Hetght Number Height
1st, 2nd and 3rd child 2 years 177 41°49 45 40°Ig
4th, 5th and 6th child 1? years 78 39°94 49 40°84

When we class the mean heights at the sixth year—see
Table X.—in order of the sequence of birth, we obtain a series,
which corresponds fairly closely to the power of surviving one
year under the same conditions.’ If the correspondence were
complete, we should expect to find the second birth exceeding
the first, in physical development, but actually it is a little less.
From the second birth onwards, however, the resemblance is very
close. Thus greater probability of death in the first year is
associated with a lower degree of physique in the event of the
child surviving.

We have here direct evidence of the selective character of
our death-rate in these early years; for we see that infantile
mortality falls, with a heavy hand, on those groups? which attain
a lower degree of physical fitness, and the presumption is, that
had all the offspring lived, the means already given would have
been lower still.

In Table XI. is given the heights and intellectual development of a hypothetical family of seven, at their sixth year, the
first birth occurring at the twenty-first year of the mother—and
the rest at a three yearly interval.

In an actual family known to me, the accuracy of this table

1 Dr. Buchan, ‘* Public Health ”’ and ibid.
2 Aristocracy of Birth, tbzd.
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 275

has been borne out as regards the sequence of height and
development attained. The divergencies observed, from these
ideal conditions, were a shortening of the birth interval to two
years, from the second to the fifth, and a lengthening to over
three, subsequently, between the third and fourth. Owing tothe
strain on the mother at that time, a mishap occurred and the
fourth birth, though still living at the fourtieth year, has not
enjoyed such robust health as the rest of the family. With these
alterations, this table may be taken as an example of an
experimental finding.

Returning now to the age curve of attainable development
in Table I. and II., we can understand why we get an apparent
rise in the physique of children of a poor population born in the
later years of life. It can be explained on two grounds, firstly,
that the children born at these ages, and surviving at the sixth
year, represent approximately a little over half of those brought
into the world, and that this heavy selective rate has removed
the weakly and those likely to reach a stature lower than the
mean; and secondly, by the lowering of the physique of the
children born in the 25 to 30 age period, due to maternal
exhaustion consequent on the excessive breeding.

In a population consisting of all classes, as is given in
Tables I. and II., the rise and fall in physique acccrding. to
age of parents, is still seen, though the curve is very much
flattened and tends to be irregular. The inference to be drawn
is that the majority of children born must receive at birth
something approaching the maximum endowment that the
mother can give, though in a fairly large number, this is far
from being the case.

An interesting sidelight might be mentioned at this point,
which has some bearing on the changes in racial characteristics.
The question arises, ‘“‘ Are the children born in the most productive period of the parents life more likely to hand on their
acquired characters, than those born before or after?” To
answer it from direct observation is, of course, almost impossible
in the present state of our knowledge. I suggest that the
differences of physique noted in our various social grades
may arise largely from the better born being economically
216 R. J. Ewart:

more productive, obtaining greater remuneration for their
work, and thus rising in life. These selected workmen will
mate with the better females, and will produce a generation
which is some improvement on its ancestry, and thus distinct
grades of mankind may be produced.

Selective and restricted breeding has, as we know, become a
marked feature of the professional and leisured classes, and this
may in some measure account for the increase in height and
intelligence that has been one of the most marked features of the
history of the upper middle class during the last 100 years. It
further offers a very plausible explanation for the great differences
observed in the heights of individuals even of the same race, and
further—and this is a point of some fundamental importance—
it throws great doubt on Weissmann’s hypothesis, regarding the
transference of acquired characteristics, for after all, age is
essentially acquired. If we are to regard the influence of theage
of the parent as being indelibly woven into the being of the
child, and the effect to be of such a nature as can be transmitted,
then this theory is no longer valid. Lastly, we see how alterations may occur in a race without resource to the hypothesis of
chance modification, which according to their suitability or
unsuitability to the environment, become the characters of a new
kind or are totally exterminated. If this contention be true,
then we can easily understand how: other factors, besides our
immediate surroundings are concerned in framing our future,
and that our destiny is more within our grasp than we formerly
believed. So much then for physique.

We must now return to the intellectual side of our life. It
is unfortunate that we are unable to measure mind with a foot
rule; and, an intimate acquaintance with the subjects of our
inquiry would be necessary, even to form a rough idea of their
intellectual classification. I have no doubt, however, that could
one person know all the thousand or more children dealt
with, a classification could be made, as accurate as that for
height, but such is hardly possible. Further, to take the
personal opinion of a number of different observers concerned
with the various sections would also fail, owing to the want of
uniformity in standard.
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 217

If, however, a simple test is decided on, and is applied by
those who are naturally unbiassed, and who know the children
well, some chance of uniformity is possible. In the present
instance the standard taken was the power to read or recognise
letters, and the head teachers of the departments concerned
acted as examiners.

The mental equipment necessary for the recognition of a
word, and the interpretation of its meaning, is a good intellectual
test at the sixth year of life, and three fairly well-defined grades
can be formed. (1), those who can read little simple stories,
and understand their nature; (2), those who can read short
sentences, or who know the meaning of a few separate words
only, and (3), those who can recognise letters only and who
are scholastically termed ‘“‘ babies.” Some of the children,
however, who have entered on their school life later than
others, are found to be wanting in instruction, rather than in
their power to acquire knowledge. Still even in their case it
was thought advisable strictly to adhere to the test selected.

There is, moreover, no object at the age of 6 in differentiating between the intellectual attainments of boys and girls, the
differences being small, and if anything, in favour of the former.
Hence, for purposes of classification, I have grouped them
together, and have expressed the grade of each group by the
percentage that Class I. forms of the total number in that group.
In Table XIII. are given the relative positions of each, and
taking a general survey of the table, we observe, with slight
exceptions, the same sequences as were observed with reference
to height, with the difference that the 26-30 age period of both
father and mother is the best of the series. There is also a
similar improvement in association with the closing years of
reproductive life—that is 40 years and over—though it is not so
marked. The relative influences of the parent also seem to
follow the same trend, and in the body of the Table, where
the age of one parent is constant and the other variable, we see
that both participate, with the exception of the periods 36 to 40
of both parents, and 41 and over of the mother, where for some
reason the standard reached seems to have been better than
would have been expected.
*s8¥]/9 YOO UI J9quING [e}0}
94} JO edujueored v se MOAIS O1e “| S$L[D Ul 9804} puY ‘sy 9a1t} EN} UT AoMeTOYoId 0} SuIpI00¥ “IJ 10 “[] “] $e posselO oI¥ UAIP[IqO—'ALON

%Os % be % gz MLE Urs —

%of 1gz +E6 ze gf %9 c6 gy 9 *[ 88¥][D Ur o}IG
gII IbI was ogs GLI oz Joqunyn [8}OL
Cle — — — — —
Gre = et 6+ ZI — — — — — *] SS¥[D Ul OIG 4900 Puy IP
vy € Zz — — - JaquNnN [e}OL
% ez €z — — a —
% bz Se gol oI ZI € — — — *[ SS¥]D Ul OIG oF 03 of
by €¢ 8 I — — JaquiNnN [e}0L
~— %EE % bz — — —
% gz gr 1Z1 9 gI Iz ¢ — — *] S8¥[D UI OIG CE 07 1
QI SS «Lg II — — JOqUINN [e}OL
— %0z %SE %1v — —
SLE 11 vot v *G * SE bg 9 — *[ SS¥[D Ur OIG O£ of Qe
8 Gz OOI gSI SI — JaquUINN [B8}0L
— — % ez Be % 9% —
%Le Lo Crz — I ° c ” gz " ¢ € *[ SSeID Ul OIG Cz of 1%
z ¢ €z bg ZZ L JOqUNN [e}0]L
— ema mates — gz —
%Sz SI 19 — — — Zz w9e ¢ *] SS¥[D UlOWIG Jepun pu sivak oz
_ ana z 8 gt €1 Jequinyy [e}oO]L
‘[ SSw1Q 49qmINNT IvIOT sdQopuviIb oF o7gE SE 0718 OL oQe Se o,1e Asspun puY $4v2x OF PIYD fo yI44g
priyd fo yg 30 saysvyq fo a8y 1v aaypoyy forsy

HLalg LY SLN@IVG AHL a0 ‘EDV ENL OL dIH8NOILVIEY NI YVAA HLXIS AO GNA LV LNANAOTHAGG IWNALOATISIN] ONIMOHS—'[IIX HIGVL
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 219

It would be interesting to know at what age of the parents
the most noted personalities of the past have been born. I
think I might prophecy that the results of such an inquiry would
coincide fairly closely with these statistical findings.

The differences observed between the effects of the influence
of age of parents, and of other conditions affecting the health
and vitality of the mother can be explained by the fact that, in
all nutritional disturbances, nerve tissues, particularly the brain,
are affected less than any other part of the organism; for it has
been found by experiments on starvation that these parts of the
systems lose least in weight. The experience is, that in disturbances of sufficient severity to seriously prejudice our cerebral
organisation, life becomes impossible. Thus it happens that
whilst both mother and father are concerned in the development
of the physical and intellectual, the influence of the former, though
more marked in both cases, is paramount on the physical side of
life.! Again, considering the same point in the light of the
sequence of the birth, Table X., we see that the first and second
do not differ very much in stature, and that the fall begins really
from the third onwards. In respect to intellect the third appears
to be the best when judged by the standard we have adopted,
34 per cent reaching Class I. I think anyone will be able to
verify the truth of this point should they happen to know a
family sufficiently well to grade the intellectual qualities, and
provided that the marriage had occurred in early life. Under
ordinary conditions it is usually assumed that the eldest is the
best, and hence his legal status. Thus the accident of being
first makes an enormous difference in the life of that individual.
That the first born should be regarded by the parents as being
in some way different from the rest of the family is perfectly
understandable on grounds of sentiment, but his claim to be more
physically fit, and the superior of his kinsmen, cannot be sustained.
There is no doubt that he often appears to be so, because he has
the advantage of being a few years older than his brothers.
Could we in our minds remove this factor, and classify all the
members of a normal family as they appeared at the same age,

1 The old aphorism of the father for brains and the mother for health, finds

some support.
3
220 R. J. Ewart:

there would be no difficulty in verifying the truth of the foregoing
conclusions from our own experience.

We thus see that the law of primogeniture is based really on
sentiment and not on what is rational and I think most of the
heads of our notable families would naturally choose, were they
able to do so, the best of their progeny to bear the honour of the
name.

In a normal population, the first and second children are
physically very similar, but the third reaches the highest standard
intellectually, if a suitable birth interval has been allowed. The
want of exaet correspondence between physical and mental
development as judged from the point of view of sequence,
probably finds its explanation in the relative influence of
nutritional (and other) factors.

TABLE XIV.—INTERVAL or BIRTH AND INTELLECTUAL STANDARD IN
THE SIXTH YEAR OF CHILDREN BORN WHERE THE AGES OF BOTH
PARENTS WERE BETWEEN 25 AND 35 YEARS

All Births
Interval from previous birth
Standard First Births Second Less than 3 years Movethan 3 years
Class I. 29 26 69 32
Class II. 22 18 102 29
‘Class ITI. 4 13 46 24
Percentagein ClassI. 52% 48% 31% 32%

TABLE XV.—INTERVAL oF BIRTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT
AT END OF SIXTH YEAR. WELL-TO-DO CHILDREN

Number Class I. Per cent.
First births — — 42%
Over three years’ interval 85 36 42%
Under 3 years’ interval 137 51 37%

The relatively smaller influence of nutritional disturbances
on the development of mind as opposed to physique is further
supported by the observation (Table XV.) that the percentages
of children attaining the highest intellectual standard is very
much the same in those born over and under the three yearly
interval, the percentages in Class I. being 31 and 32 per cent.
respectively in those born between the twenty-fifth and thirtyfifth years of the mother. On the other hand the change in
attainable height is marked.

This table further shows an apparently contradictory statement, namely, that at this age period the second births do not
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING zal

reach such a high intellectual development as the first. It is
explained by the fact that the period includes three years of
rise to maturity and seven years of fall, and naturally the
majority of the first births occur in the earlier period and seconds
in the later.

Table XVI. is of some interest and may be regarded as the
reverse aspect of the previous line of argument. In this instance,
instead of dealing with the best, the incidence of actual mental
defect between the seventh and twelfth years is considered.
According to the official standards of the epileptic and feebleminded, sixty children out of 9,980 were found suitable for special
instruction. In all these cases the age of the mother at birth was
obtained, and the 9,980 were divided in a similar manner as before
as regards the age of the mother, and the incidence of mental
defect calculated on a basis of 1,000 children in each group.

TABLE XVI.—AcGeE or MoTHER AT BIRTH AND THE PRODUCTION OF Frren:ie-MINDED
CHILDREN

Age of Mother
20 and undey 21 to 25 26 to 30 31 to 35 3640 40 41 and ovey Totals
Number of Feeble- os
minded born and 5 7 17 19 10 5 63
still living
Number of children

born and still sur- 650 2,550 3,050 2,370 1,140 220 9,980
vivin

Feeble-minded per
1,000 8 3 5 8 9 23 6

It is seen that the probability of a child being mentally
weak is least at the age period of 25 to 30, only 0°3 per 1,000
being then found, whilst the chances increase towards both
extremes, being eight times as great after the fortieth year.
With regard to the father a similar correlation is observed, only
the group of 25 to 30 appears to correspond to 20 to 25 of the
mother.

Here again we possess corroborative evidence of an age
influence, corresponding to that on physique.

Borrowing one of Euclid’s axioms, we may state it in a
modified form—thus: ‘‘ Things that are correlated to the same
thing are correlated to each other.

Now, as we have seen that physique and mind are associated
222 | R. J. Ewart:

with age at birth, we should expect mind and physique to vary
synchronously. This is seen to be the case though it only holds
good in what I may term normal life, that is, where something
approaching the conditions already enumerated have been
obeyed.

TABLE XVII.—Curve SHowING RELATIONSHIP OF HEIGHT TO INTELLECTUAL
DEVELOPMENT. WELL-TO-DO CLass POPULATION

 

3 B® 0 RT HE BT

Nuk wr auhin

Table XVII. graphically illustrates this point. Where we
see that as the mean height of any group increases so does the
percentage of children attaining the higher standard.

It would be unjustifiable to assume from this that a small
person is stupid and a big one intellectual. There are, no doubt,
many examples of men below mean stature who have had great
influence over their fellows; but it does appear that the factors
of age of parent, and to a less extent, nutrition, or anything
affecting development, do influence both stature and intellect in
a similar way.

This conclusion does not agree with Mr. Heron’s and others’
findings for the children attending the elementary schools of the
London County Council; but his basis of intellectual development is open, as Mr. Heron admits, to serious criticism. We
now come to the third part in the above-mentioned triumvirate,
namely,—vitality. In a previous paper (Aristocracy of Birth)
this point was discussed in detail with reference to the power of
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 223

an infant to survive one year, in relationship to age at birth, and
sequence. In both we found the same trend of events as have
already been shown in connection with physique and mentality.
We wish now to consider these different classes of individuals
and see what is happening. The scope of this portion of the
inquiry is of course limited, as the information procurable is
very meagre, ending at the fourteenth year.

The interesting subject of the relationship of death and its
immediate cause to the age of parents at birth is one which has
received no attention, and even my own investigations, such as
they are, may be summed up in a sentence; though I have
sufficient evidence to make me believe that where data are procurable it offers a very fertile field for research. Shortly, we
may say that cancer seems to fall more heavily on the younger
than the older members of a family, as if this disease is more
prevalent at maturity and in old age, and if some of the influence
of time is transmitted to the offspring, the real age of the younger
children should be regarded as being greater than the number of
years they have lived; and hence the reason of this greater
incidence of cancer. Again, consumption seems to be least
frequently found in the children born at the central periods,
beyond these somewhat vague findings it would, however, be
unsafe to go.

In constructing a life table, with particular reference to our
specific object, the almost essential feature is the consideration of
the way in which the deaths occur in relation to the age of
parents at birth. Data bearing on this point, without the help
of the Registrar General, cannot be obtained.

Individual doctors in practice can of course get some information, but the numbers thus obtainable are much too small to base
any conclusion upon, as thousands, at least, would be necessary.
We can, however, get some idea of what is occurring by considering the living. This method has been adopted as the only
possible one in Table XVIII. In the first column is given the
distribution of a number of births (as many as could be obtained)
with regard to the age of the mother. The father in this case
was not considered. In the second column the numbers are
reduced to a basis of 1,000. In the third column, the number of
224 R. J. Ewart:

children living at the end of the first year is given and distributed
in the same way; and in the fourth and sixth columns we see
how the constitution of these populations at the end of the sixth
and fourteenth year of life is varying. As time progresses the
proportion of those born at the extremes decreases, whilst that
of those born at maturity increases. The reason of this is
obvious; death falls with a heavy hand on the children born
before the twenty-fifth and after the thirty-fifth year.

TABLE XVIII.—SHowING NUMBER SURVIVING PER 1,000 (EXPECTANCY OF LIFE) AT THE
END OF THE FIRST, SIXTH AND FOURTEENTH YEARS OF LIFE ACCORDING TO THE
AGE OF THE MoTHER AT BIRTH

Age of Mother

at which child Births End of 1st Yeay Endof 6th Year End of 14th Year

was born Number Pert,ooo Number Perv 1,000 Number Perv 1,000 Nummer Per 1,000
Twenty years&under 57 77 45 75 43 71 38 64
2ist to 25th years 185 249 156 260 151 250 148 a5I
26th to 30th so, 210 283 178 296 186 308 181 307
31st to 35th 168 226 130 216 135 224 138 235
36th to goth _s—,, go 121 68 113 64 106 60 IOI
4I years and over 33 44 24 40 25 41 25 42

Totals 743 601 604 590

Notr.—The above are random selections from some 2,000 in each age period living in the
town under consideration.

NUMBER SURVIVING PER I,000 OF EACH PERIOD, IN RELATIONSHIP TO THE
‘* REPRODUCTIVE PLATEAU ”’

End of End of End of
Births Fivst Year Sixth Year Fourteenth Year
Born before or after, that is
before zoth year or after 242 228 218 207
36th year
Born during the ‘‘ Reproductive Plateau,” that is from 748 772 782 793

the 21st to the 35th years

This point is shown more clearly at the bottom of the Table
where the two periods before and after the establishment, and
during what I have termed the “reproductive plateau’’ are
compared. It is interesting to note, that as time progresses,
the number of children born between these years is relatively
increasing. How things fare after the fourteenth year I have no
data to show, but I should think the results would be in correspondence with the number of years lived. It would seem that
the expectancy of life of those born at maturity of parents is about
50 years, and at the extremes is about half that figure. Itisa
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING a25

point of some interest that, after the forty-third year of the mother
the expectancy is about 25 years, which is scarcely sufficient
to bring the offspring into the reproductive period. Now as the
object of reproduction is to reproduce, births in these late years
ase in a collective sense valueless, and did we depend on them
the race would be rapidly exterminated. If these deductions are
correct, then we have strong support to Professor Pearson’s contention that 75 per cent. of the deaths are selective in nature ;
for we are able to see what kind of lives are removed from our
midst, by a study of these tables. In fact, should all survive, the
mean height and intellect of our race would be even lower than
it is to-day. Sentiment, I think, is right in holding to the ideal
that, once life is created everything should be done that is
possible to preserve it. It becomes vapid, however, when it
upholds the ideal of immense families, irrespective of type, as
something laudable. Their production is just as much to be
condemned as any other form of intemperance, and this form of
indulgence is as great a cause of evil as any other that human
flesh is heir to, actual immorality, of course, excepted. The
Greek ideal of ‘‘ Temperance in all things,” seems to hold good
in every sphere of life.

There can be no question that the most effective way to
arouse the interest of man is to appeal to him through his.
cupidity. If we can show that any factor in life has an
immediate relationship to finance, and may be used by any
individual for his benefit in that respect, we can rest assured
that the spread of such knowledge will be much facilitated.

Now from what has been said in respect to vitality, and
supposing that the influences persist throughout the whole life,
a supposition that is highly probable, we see that the expectancy
at birth must vary on the lines already given. We can thus
form a much more accurate estimate of the number of years an
individual will live than was formerly the case, and gauge more
accurately the value of a life for insurance purposes.

Taking Government annuities as an example, it is obvious
that no person would invest his money in this way unless he was
in good average health at the time. The payments necessary
are based mainly on the actuarial tables deducted from the
226 R. J. Ewart:

Registrar General’s returns, and partly on the experience of the
office. Now we have information which the department does
not possess, and which it will be slow to recognise.

We can decide whether such an investment is likely to bring
us a larger or smaller return than the open market allows.
Thus, supposing that no obvious disease is present and that the
life would be placed in the highest class under ordinary conditions, that the birth occurred between the twenty-fifth and
thirtieth years (a year or two over 30 for the father and under
for the mother), that the interval was at least three years or
over from the previous one, and that the birth occurred at the
true breeding seasonin man (January, February and March), then
we can be reasonably sure that the annuity age will not only be
reached, but that the number of years of life subsequent will be
considerably greater than the present calculations on which
this form of business is based. In fact, if my data held good,
and all who satisfied the conditions I have laid down obtained
such investments, payment beginning at the sixtieth year, by
the time the full number of lives matured, the government
would lose about half a million per annum, supposing of course
that the existing terms were not altered in the meantime.

At the present time it is impossible to tabulate more
accurate data in absence of sufficiently detailed information, or
to assign to each factor its relative influence on this aspect of
our being. Sufficient be it to say, that even from their financial aspects, the influences of the conditions of the birth on the
subsequent development of the man merit careful and detailed
study. One point still remains which is of interest both
scientifically and sociologically, namely, the influence of season.

That in human beings there is a season at which conception
is more likely to occur than at other times is well known, this
point having been investigated by Haycraft and myself.’

The season in primitive man, corresponding to the ‘‘ rut ”’
in the lower animals, occurred in the spring ; and its oceurrence
is still symbolised by the May Day Festival, the births occurring
the following January, February or March; and in most

1 Medical Officer, 1911 Loeb (Das Weith) and Fraser (Golden Bough).
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 227

communities it will be found that the greatest number of births
still occur in these months.

There is some doubt as to whether the dicestrous animal,
like the sheep, or the polycestrous animal like the human being,
is to be regarded as the later phylogenetic development. In
general the advantages lie with the sheep, and if the polycestrous
habit is to be considered as a later development, it is hard to see
what object has thus been achieved. The view, however, that finds
most general acceptance is that the spring season of heat in man
is comparable to certain anatomical structures formerly of use,
but now vestigial, such as the appendix, and is to be regarded
as a remnant of a former habit which in course of time is becoming obliterated. It would seem as if much benefit would accrue
could the habit be re-established through the agencies of the
will.

There are certain changes in our physiological organisation
that have relation to season, and it would be quite natural to
assume that the ordering of life in accordance with such variations would lead to a greater potentiality for development and
greater expectancy of life. Further, if a child is born in the
late winter, and is suckled, it avoids the dangers of the intestinal disturbances of the summer so fatal to young children, and
it begins to assume an independent diet when over twelve months
old, at atime of year, namely, the spring, when errors in feeding
are not so likely to have serious results. It can be said to have
enjoyed two summers to one winter.

Bearing these points in mind, we might naturally conclude
that those born in conformity with these laws will achievea
greater development than those born at any other season. When
this subject is actually investigated the deductions we have made
appear to be borne out by facts.

TABLE XIX.—SuHowinc INFLUENCE OF SEASON OF BIRTH ON PHYSICAL
DEVELOPMENT ATTAINED IN THE FE LEVENTH YEAR

Season Number Mean Height Mean Weight
Jan., Feb., Mar. 83 51°6in, 61'45lbs.
April, May, June 82 50°'62in. 60'S4lbs.
July, Aug., Sept. g2 49'95in. 57°8glhs.

Oct., Nov., Dec. 79 50°33in. 57°88lbs.
228 R. J. Ewart:

TABLE XX.—SHowinG INFLUENCE OF SEASON OF BIRTH ON THE NUMBER
LivinGc (EXPECTANCY OF LIFE) AT THE END OF THE SIXTH AND
ELEVENTH YEARS

At Birth At Sixth Year At Eleventh Year

Borin in Number Perv 1,000 Number Perv 1,000 = Number Per 1,coc
Jan. to June 3,000 519 25320 559 3,040 597
July to Dec. 3,340 481 1,860 441 2,060 403

Table XIX. gives the height of children in their eleventh
year, according to the season in which they were born. It is at
once seen that those born in conformity with the prehistoric habit,
achieve the greatest development, the height of those born in
the first quarter of the year being 51°6 inches as compared
with the group of lowest stature born in the third quarter with
an average height of 49°95 inches.

It is to be noted that the change of diet would, in the latter
class normally occur at the worst period of the year. It is not
surprising then, to see in Table XX. that the same correlation is
to be observed with reference to vitality. Thenumber per 1,000
at one, six or fourteen years of age who were said to have been
born in the first quarter apparently increases in direct relationship to time, and hence this group must be more vital than
any other. In fact the correspondence between these two
characteristics 1s very close. We are now in a position to
discuss with some prospect of arriving at a definite conclusion
the question whether our race is degenerate or not, though
degeneration is not a good word to use. It is better to confine
ourselves to the formation of an hypothesis concerning the
alterations likely to occur in the nature of our race through the
agency of time. If those changes that are now occurring are
rendering us less suitable to our surroundings, then we are
degenerating—and if not—our race is still following its triumphant
march.

The main point turns on the contention that has already
been stated—namely, that the children of those born of mature
parents receive in some degree an enhanced physique, and that
the gift may extend to the third generation, though of course
the relationship to the age influence of their immediate parents
is paramount; that is to say, if a thirtieth year birth mated
with another thirtieth year birth, and if the births resulting
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 229

from such unions again mated in a similar way, an upward
trend would be established in physique, mental power and
vitality.

Assuming this to be true, the alterations of our race would
depend on the grouping of the births round about the thirtieth
year, and the way in which individuals combine for purposes of
reproduction, supposing that each birth is not detrimentally
influenced by the preceding one.

If there is any actual degeneration in our race, there is no
doubt that it can be directly traced to the serious errors in the
way in which the young are produced and not to environment.
It does appear as if severe conditions in after life seem to have
rather a refining influence than otherwise.

This line of argument is, unfortunately, contrary to the
hypothesis formulated by Weissman, and which has become an
axiom in works dealing with heredity, namely, that characteristics
acquired during the life of the individual are not transmitted.
Thus, a hard and fast line is drawn between hereditary transmission of character and nutritional influences, but in the light
of my own work I strongly doubt that such a line exists, and I
believe that nutrition and heredity slowly merge into each other
through the medium of age; or, to put it another way through
the influence of time on the individual. Thus, in its effects on the
offspring, we can draw no line between the influence of nutrition
and of variations in the interval of birth, between that of the
interval of the birth and the age of the parent; and lastly, one
cannot separate age from purely hereditary influences. Thus, we
might say that heredity is the influence of time in the past, and
nutrition the influence of time in the present; and as there is
perfect continuity of time, so there is perfect continuity between
the factors moulding our race. This theory rather negatives
Weissman’s axiom, and gives to chance selection as an agency
of phylogenetic history a share only, in modifying our destinies.
It is a point of some interest to note, that as the mean of one
generation does not vary appreciably either from that preceding
or following, the mean of the children of maturity must
eventually exceed the development that the parents may have
reached. That is to say certain of the offsprings will be better
230 R. J. Ewart:

in physique, mentality and vitality than their progenitors.
We are now in a position to briefly summarise the result of our.
inquiries.

Firstly, the reproductive life of both parents may be
delineated by a curve rising fairly quickly at the beginning of
the sexual life, up to the twenty-first or second year, and then
more slowly until, in the mother, the twenty-eighth or twentyninth year is reached, and in the father the thirty-second or
thirty-third, and then slowly declines (‘‘reproductive plateau”’).
With the mother there is an abrupt fall to zerd commencing
about the thirty-eighth or ninth, but with the father it is more
gradual. In accordance with this age-influence, the physical
and mental development and the vitality of the progeny varies.
The best girl seems to be produced shortly before the summit of
the curve is reached, and the best boy a year or two later.
Sex also is influenced; for we find more girls before and more
boys after the apex of the curve is passed.

As would be expected, the fertility is greatest when the
capability of producing the best has been reached. The two
curves seem to coincide. This fact, in certain sections of our
community, unfortunately renders the birth interval so short
that the age influence is completely obliterated. The economic
loss this entails through the impairment of natural physique
is beyond measure, our late trade disturbances being quite
insignificant compared with it. There is evidence, of a special
breeding season in man, and children born in conformity with
these ancient habits do appear to attain a greater development
than their less fortunate brothers and sisters.

The influence of these findings, if true, is obvious. They
show us, amongst other things, what improvement is possible in
our race and enable us to calculate the loss to mankind through
indulgence ; also they show us how the spread of the ideal of
temperance, together with the education and training of the
will to master self, are really the most potent factors for good in
our future. Scientifically, these influences form a connecting
link between mere heredity, arising from chance selection and
environment, in shaping our destiny. And further, they give us
some idea as to the position of our race in the wheel of time.
THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 231

Races, like individuals, are subject to the same master, and
from the position of the summit of the age curve, I should say
our heyday is past, but that with sobriety and restraint, a
glorious and vigorous old age is before us.

APPENDIX

In Table XXI.is given the correlation co-efficient for the various
combinations of conditions already considered. The special
co-efficient obtained in each case being, the correlation ratio
and the correlation itself, and it is assumed, if it is within the
probable error, it is equal to it, and the correlation is linear and
a straight line can be used. Some of the data obey this law,
others do not, suggesting a regression of the curve. From these
mathematical findings we may say that in the better classes of
the population, a relationship between age and physical development may exist, the correlation co-efficient being equal to o'15
andthe probable error being + ‘05. With a poor class population
it falls to ‘06, with a probable error cf + ‘03. This would agree
with the conclusions we have already formed, where we saw that
the high fertility at the time of the best period of a woman’s life,

TABLE XXI.—CorRELATION VALUE BETWEEN AGE OF PARENTS AND HEIGHT oF CHILD

Boys

Girls

39

Boys

99

Girls

9

IN SIXTH YEAR

Well-to-do Class Population

Number oa c 0 r
Father 2oth to 45th year 148 2°0202 1°437 2327 ‘108
Mother ” ” 149 2°O211 1°448 "2508 ‘073
Father ” is 130 = 1°8 46 1'306 = 1752 ‘02
Mother 9 ” 126 1°501 I°321 3 "342

Mixed Populatton—Mostly Poor

Father 20th to 40th year 429 2'056 2°486 ‘160 "081
Mother % ‘9 454 2°05 2°663*134 "027
Father ” % 389 2°05 2°531 “112 *123
Mother %9 ” 495 2°029 2°59 "1225 "O17
Both parents (good class popula- . .
tion) for all children (Mean) 304 a4e% 153
Both parents (poor class popula- B91 ‘1321 ‘062

tion) for all children (Mean)

+'057
+'062
+°055
+052

+°032
+1033
+'029
+'033

+°056

+°O31
232 R. J. Ewart:

if used to the maximum, destroys the age influence, and under
certain conditions the children then produced may actually be
the smallest and least physically fit.’

It is worthy of note that the mean for the mother in
better class children is ‘2 + 06 and for the father is ‘1 + °05,
which is just half. In poorer people even this suggestion of a
relationship with the mother does not exist r being within the
probable error (‘022 + 03). With the father the correlation is
‘r + ‘03, that is the same as found in the better class children.
This may indicate that the cause of the differences between these
two groups is to be found in the mother, and in the way in
which the child is nurtured before birth and not afterwards.

This application of Prof. Pearson’s methods shows further
that really to get surety, and not simply the suggestion of
probable law, thousands of instances are necessary. As my
data, though based in all on between 4,000 and 6,000 observations,
contain groups where the number on which a mean is based
does not exceed 20, I hesitate to take the stand of a dogmatic
teacher, but rather throw out suggestions for other workers.

1 A second and totally independent series of data give practically identical
results so that the ‘‘ factor of error’’ becomes much reduced and the assumption
of the accuracy of the values given is probable.
