MENDELISM AND FARM LIVESTOCK

How Improvement Has and Can Be Achieved

By A. D. BUCHANAN SMITH, M.A., M.Sc., B.Se., F.R.S.E.

(From the Animal Breeding Research Department, University of Edinburgh.)

lism—using the term in a wide sense to

include ‘ Morganism’ but not ‘ Mullerism ’*—-has_ revolutionized methods of
plant improvement and in this way has had
a tremendous etfect on agriculture. As Mr.
Roberts in a recent issue of the EUGENICS
REVIEW has pointed out, Mendelism has been
accepted somewhat uncritically in regard to
eugenics, where it certainly has not affected
the improvement of human stocks to anything like the same extent. Midway between
its effect on the improvement of plants and
of humans, stands Mendelism in regard to
farm livestock. Herein, that the problem of
the improvement of animals is more nearly
akin to that of eugenics, lies the reason and
apology for what follows.

Compared to plant improvement, Mendelism has not greatly affected the methods
of stock improvement. ‘These are much the
same as they were at the beginning of the
present century. For this there are two
principal reasons. Firstly, there is the slow
rate of reproduction in farm livestock, combined with the high monetary value of
existing good stocks. And secondly we must
face the fact that any mass improvement of
stock has as a prerequisite the improvement
of the minds of the breeders of those stocks.
Whereas plant improvement can be effected
by a few men, animal improvement requires
many ; few farmers are plant breeders, while
at least 50 per cent. are animal breeders.
Thus it is not reasonable to expect rapid
progress in the application of Mendelism to
stock improvement. ‘The science of genetics

| T is no exaggeration to say that Mende
—- ——--—
 

* Morganism implies the mechanism of heredity,
while Mullerism means ‘ monkevying’ with that
mechanism by X-rays, etc., thereby ‘ short-circuiting’ the normal processes which govern the transmission of heritable characters.

is not like that of wireless. For the farmer
to get results from the latter an understanding of the use of certain levers, buttons,
aerial and earth is sufficient without any
probing into the whys and wherefores. In
animal breeding it is necessary that the
farmer should understand certain basic laws
in order that he may adjust them to particular circumstances. This requires a new
generation of farmers.

Before proceeding further there is one
point which stands greatly to the credit of
the science of genetics in respect of stock
improvement; indeed it cannot be overemphasized. Granted that methods of stock
improvement have not greatly altered in the
past thirty years, nevertheless genetics has
provided an understanding of the methods
adopted by the great breeders and has justified the majority of their practices. By providing a logical basis in place of empiricism,
a distinct advance has been made, and all
the more so in the case of the rising generation of stockbreeders on whom depends
future improvement, for they can now start
where their fathers left off.

POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE BREEDING

As in eugenics, there are two principal
modes of stock improvement, the positive
and the negative : the conscious selection for
the best and the elimination of the unfit.
Legislative and private methods cut across
both of these. For instance, in Great
Britain subsidies are given, largely to smallholders, enabling the use of a sire of a
higher standard than would otherwise have
been possible. As an example of the negative method we may cite the law requiring
stallions to be licensed for public service.
Ireland has gone further : no bull is allowed
to exist that is not likely to leave good stock.

25
26

‘The success which has attended such legislation, both in Northern and Southern Ireland, has convinced many that if the rest of
Great Britain were to adopt such ‘ scrub
bull’ legislation, this would be followed by
an immense improvement in the quality of
our cattle.

‘The improvement of farm livestock differs
from eugenics principally in the emphasis
that is placed on the sire. ‘‘ The sire is half
the herd,’’ is a true statement and is in
accord with the science of genetics for two
reasons. Firstly, the sire contributes to the
hereditary complex of every animal born
in that herd ; the remaining part of that contribution is made up by the female stock.
Secondly, as the sire is frequently from a
pedigreed breed, he is presumably more
homozygous than the female stock and
therefore more prepotent and likely to impress his qualities on his offspring more
markedly. ‘The position is thus rather
understated when to the sire is attributed
an importance equal to the sum of the
females.

Before going into detail it may be interesting to eugenists to know how improvement
has hitherto taken place. The earliest
improved breed of modern times is the
thoroughbred horse. Prior to the publication of the first stud book in 1793 the wiser
breeders had already adopted, probably unconsciously, two methods as a basis of their
operations. (The same methods were employed by Bakewell of Dishley in the formation of the breeds of Leicester sheep and
Longhorn cattle, and were also followed by
those breeders who built the surer foundations of the three great beef breeds of cattle,
Shorthorns, Herefords, and more recently
the Aberdeen-Angus.) ‘They practised inbreeding to achieve homozygosity and prepotency and to measure these they applied
the progeny test. To these must be added a
definite conception of the qualities, in relation to the environment, that they desired in
their animals. Genetics has justified their
practice, and the mission of the scientist who
deals with animal breeding is to emphasize
these points, with the caveat on inbreeding
that it should only be employed by a breeder

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

possessing first quality material and a long
purse. The progeny test is the more important weapon, for, if experience goes for anything, nothing is more misleading than to
base breeding operations on phenotype alone.

THE NEED FOR MEASUREMENT

The majority of the pedigree breeds of
Great Britain date from the seventies of last
century. In theory, at any rate, the commercial stock of this country is improved
by the use of pedigree sires. At the present
time pedigreed animals do not constitute as
much as 5 per cent. of the total of farm
animals. In its earlier years pedigree had a
great influence on the commercial stock, but
there is reason to believe that this is on the
wane. Certainly the commercial beef cattle
of to-day are not any better than they were
twenty or thirty years ago.

Nor is the reason for this hidden from the
scientist. ‘The majority of our farm livestock
—except dairy cattle, horses, and laying
hens—are raised for meat production. ‘This
is a quality which is not amenable to
measurement, and hence one which cannot as
yet be analyzed by science. ‘The effects of
environment and nutrition cannot be clearly
separated from those of heredity. That
heredity plays a part there is no doubt. Is
that sufficient ? It is. The first thing that the
scientific animal breeder has to determine
is whether or not the character with which he
is dealing is fundamentally a hereditary one.
All else is secondary. Even if it were
possible for science to locate these genes concerned with meat production, the knowledge, under the circumstances which at
present constitute the industry, would not
advantage the breeder greatly.

If the character is hereditary and if it is
a productive quality—meat, milk, eggs,
wool, etc.—we may be certain that it will not
be inherited as a Mendelian recessive. There
remain the following main possibilities.

1. Single factor—simple dominance.

2. Single factor—blending inheritance
(i.e. no dominance).

3. Multiple factor— showing some dominance in cumulo.
MENDELISM AND

. Multiple factor—blending.

Multiple factor—-showing some recessivity in cumulo.

. Sex-linked inheritance.

. Sex-linked combined with either 3,

4, or 5.

From evidence available the first two can
be ruled out. ‘The third is probably the

SHO WP

manner in which meat qualities are
inherited, since the best animals are
frequently crosses between breeds, and

heterosis is dependent upon a number of
genes acting in at least a partially dominant manner. In milk production (total
yield) dominance can play only a very small
part, while for butter fat the evidence of
Gowen and others seems to indicate slight
recessivity : there is also some reason to believe that, in addition to multiple factors of
a blending nature being concerned with milk
production, some of the genes are inherited
in a sex-linked manner. If multiple factors
are established for any character, then it is
hardly worth while to determine their precise effect. What is important is to discover
whether sex-linked factors play any appreciable part, since if they do, it modifies the
type of inbreeding which the constructive
breeder should employ. Incidentally it
might be stated that this may furnish the
reason why so little inbreeding has occurred
in the creation of our dairy, as compared
with our beef, breeds.

SEX-LINKED CHARACTERS

The method adopted by the present
writer and his colleagues of ascertaining
the existence and importance of sex-linked
genes is based on the fact that the paternal
grandsire cannot contribute a sex chromosome to his granddaughter. This may be
explained diagrammatically. (See top of
next column.)

Correlations of the relative exhibition of
a certain characteristic between an individual
and each of its four grandparents should disclose the existence of sex-linkage. If sexlinked genes for the particular character are
of importance, then the correlation with the
paternal grandsire will be lower than that

FARM LIVESTOCK 27

SEX CHROMOSOME DISTRIBUTION IN A PEDIGREE.

Paternal Paternal Maternal Maternal
P2 Grandsire. Grandam. Grandsire. Grandam.
ox XxX ox xX
‘ Ne yee
Pr Sire ox KX Daim
ve . “7
Fi XX
Cow |

For a human pedigree substitute a Y for the O.

with the three other grandparents. This was
found to be the case as regards the total yield
of milk in pedigreed Ayrshire cows (and also
in American Holsteins).

Three principal objections to this method
exist :

1.—The bull does not yield milk, hence
a method of indirect correlation has to be
adopted, which means that the correlations
with the grandams cannot be compared with
those with the grandsires.

2.—There is a statistical difficulty, ‘‘ nonlinear regression.’’

3.—If breeders in their selection have been
laying greater stress on one sex, or if they
have changed their standards, then the correlations will be affected.

To overcome these objections, particularly
the first and second, Dr. R. A. Fisher of
Rothamsted suggested a method which we
have been using for two years. ‘The
principle is the same—i.e. the determination
of the influence of each of the four grandparents upon their grandchildren. ‘This
depends upon the amount of variability
expressed between pairs of animals of the
same generation and related to each
other by the same ancestors in the same
position in their pedigrees. If the variability is as great amongst full brothers and
sisters as amongst unrelated animals, then
it is doubtful whether the character considered is due to genetic causes, though the
point requires further investigation before
it can be resolved. If the variation is less
and at the same time the variation found
amongst the various degrees of relationship
28

increases as the relationship widens, then
it is almost certain that heredity plays no
unimportant part. The test for sex-linkage
lies primarily in the variation found
amongst animals related by a common
grandparent. If the variability is greater
amongst those connected by a common
paternal grandsire than amongst those connected by a common maternal grandsire,
then there are grounds for suspecting sexlinked factors.

The results obtained by this method confirm us in the opinion previously obtained
by the correlation method, that sex-linked
factors do govern the inheritance of milk
yield. Owing to the absence of large enough
numbers for certain relationship groups, the
matter cannot yet be taken as proven. Incidentally it must be pointed out that this
method of Dr. Fisher is an excellent one for
obtaining information as to whether or not
a particular character is of genetic or other
origin. In addition, this method is to be
commended for its fundamental simplicity,
which outweighs the disadvantage of the
considerable labour involved.

WHERE SUCCESS HAS BEEN GREATEST

Thus far can we get and thus far will
it be profitable for us to get. Finer determinations are of no immediate value since
they cannot be applied. ‘They may be of
value when the industry is reorganized—
probably by the State, for the matter is
too big for any private breeder to risk
entering upon—and when some sure means
have been discovered of economic artificial
insemination. At present we are only entering this stage.

In many aspects both the scientific and
the practical animal breeder await the invention of methods whereby the economic product of the animal with which they are concerned can be measured. It is not coincidence
that within recent years greater improvement has occurred in dairy cattle, wool
sheep, and laying hens than in any other
class of stock, for the product of these can
be measured and weighed. Thirty years ago
the idea of a cow giving in a year three thousand gallons of milk, or a hen laying three

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hundred eggs, or a sheep with a wool clip
of forty-five pounds would have been dismissed as absurd. Yet such things have
happened. And these achievements are due,
not to the application of genetics, but to the
appreciation of the existence of methods
whereby production may be measured, and
to the application of these methods to the
selection of breeding stock. Here the writer
is at one with Mr. Roberts when he says,
‘“ It may well be that the task of the human
biologist is far more to measure, to distinguish, and to relate.’? But the animal
breeder’s task is more to discover the
method of producing the homozygous sire.

An example of positive livestock improvement without Mendelism may be found in
the pig-testing station which has been long
established in Denmark, and of which there
is an example at Edinburgh. A_ breeder
wishes information about a certain boar and
sow. Accordingly four piglings nearest to
the average in one litter are sent to the
station. They are called a ‘‘ litter group.”’
Other litter groups come from other litters
and breeders. Each group is kept by itself.
Nutrition and environment are kept as constant as possible throughout the test. Food
consumed is measured, and the time taken to
reach bacon weight is also noted. All groups
are marketed through the same factory,
where measurements of percentage live to
dead weight and dead to curable bacon are
taken, as well as many other points. From
such work two points of value emerge.
Firstly, to the owner of the pigs who receives
a report and is able by this progeny test to
judge the genotype (though he doesn’t call
it that!) of his breeding stock ; and secondly
to ourselves who, since environment, etc.,
are held practically constant, can determine
which characters are hereditary and which
are not.

ELIMINATING THE UNDESIRABLE

Breeding for production is only half the
story of animal improvement, the positive
half. There remains the negative, the elimination of defects. A priori most defects
must be inherited in a recessive or partially
recessive manner dependent on one or more
MENDELISM AND

genes. The number is not important, but
the fact of inheritance is.

How is the fact to be established? It
may be proved by planned experimentation,
as Warwick has done in the case of scrotal

hernia in pigs. By selecting for this
blemish he increased the percentage of
defect. The abnormality is dependent on

more than one recessive gene: it matters
little on how many. Following on the publication of Warwick’s work, it was found
that the pigs in our herd in Edinburgh carried the recessive factors for hernia. As it
was not our intention to trace the inheritance of this defect, we decided to breed it
out. At the same time, we could not afford
to scrap the female stock. By making sure
that the boars we purchased came of stocks
which did not exhibit this defect we have
not had another case, though, if we were to
inbreed, the defect would almost certainly
crop up again.

Another example is that of sterility in
stallions, which also lies in our files at Edinburgh. A stallion himself prolific left many
relatively unprolific sons. Some of these, in
their turn, left yet more unprolific sons.
One of these left a few sons of almost normal prolificacy, though the greater number
were relatively unprolific, while he also
left some colts who were absolutely sterile,
in that neither testicle descended. A condition associated with this sterility was that
the testicles were small. The advice we give
to breeders on this point is that they should
assume the offensive—i.e. breed for fertility, not necessarily multiple births but
regular production.

It is not always that there are facilities
to conduct such an experiment as Warwick’s, which in cattle or horses would have
been costly and lengthy, or that opportunity
provides such an observation as that concerning the stallions cited above. Nor are the
numbers of the defective animals sufficient
to enable a statistical study, as that outlined
for the productive qualities, to be carried
out.

An answer as to whether or not a certain
defect is inherited may be obtained—partially at least—by the same method as that

FARM LIVESTOCK

29

adopted by eugenists, by a study of pedigree. Here the scientific animal breeder is
enormously helped by the existing records.
But unless pedigrees are handled intelligently, they can be most misleading. ‘The
proper method is to combine a study of
defects with a complete analysis of the
breed.

This is done by analyzing the amount of
inbreeding : Sewall Wright’s coefficient is
the best to use. This analysis must be from
the earliest records and is best done by taking a random sample for each year and then
calculating in five-year periods. This must
be followed by an analysis of the percentage
influence of the various notable animals in
the breed. Then the pedigrees of the defective animals are tabulated and compared
with the average of the breed. Unless a
standard for comparison can be established,
the mere study of the pedigree of defective
animals is liable to prove misleading.

Using the official returns of stallions which
owing to some defect have been refused
licences, we are able to state quite definitely
that roaring is hereditary and almost certainly inherited as a simple recessive; but
this cannot be proved till the mating of roaring by roaring can be made. Sidebone is
also inherited, or at least the diathesis to it.
Of others we are not quite so certain, ringbone, shivering, and stringhalt fairly certainly, but in whistling the evidence is not
so definite.

SUCCESS BY CASTRATION

Having determined that a defect is inherited, what is the next action? It is the
elimination of the unfit by castration. ‘The
effect of the Stallion Licensing Act of 1919
is now being felt. No person qualified to
give an opinion can be found to condemn
that Act. The percentage of defective horses
has fallen greatly. By merely eliminating
the defective sires the average quality of the
stock can be improved. Hence the writer
cannot find himself in agreement with Mr.
Roberts’ argument in the October issue of
the Eucrnics REviEw, though he is conscious that the importance of the sire makes
a big difference when comparing problems
30

of stock improvement with those of eugenics.

‘Take Mr. Roberts’ conundrum as to
whether the sister of a hemophilic should
marry. (Hemophilia is recessive and sexlinked in its inheritance.) This question
can be put in simpler form, for the sister of
a heemophilic may or may not be a ‘ carrier,’ whereas his daughter must be.
Accordingly, in reply to this query I would
like to ask Mr. Roberts another :

*“ Would you approve of a marriage between the Prince of Wales and the daughter
of a hemophilic?’’ ‘The chances are equal
that the first son of such a marriage would
show the defect—in other words it would be
a toss up whether or not the future KingEmperor would be a ‘ bleeder.’

Under exceptional circumstances, with
adequate facilities for testing genotype, such
a mating may be justified in livestock breeding, but hardly in eugenics. The hemophilic should not have been allowed to breed.

It is not the purpose of the writer to trespass on the field of the eugenists, but to
point out the general lines along which livestock improvement is at present heading,
since they more nearly approximate those
lying ahead of eugenics than does the work
of plant improvement.

Mr. Roberts has done a service in drawing
attention away from simple Mendelism—a
word the present writer uses most reluctantly—to the importance of multiple factors
and in particular to the test by results. He
is right when he states that it is more
important to know the progeny than the
ancestry. ‘The value of the progeny test is
becoming more and more clearly realized as
the basic method of stock improvement. At
the same time, this must not be taken as
decrying the value of pedigree. The progeny
test 1s expensive and takes a long time to
give the result. It is the final criterion.
But pedigree is a useful indication. On
this point the lesson from stock improvement is decisive. The very least that pedigree can do is to make a useful short leet
(as we call it in Scotland) for the progeny
test. In the absence of the progeny test it
is invaluable.

* a * *

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Finally, stock improvement has this in
common with eugenics, that it depends on
much more than its basic science, genetics,
for its success. Thus the lessons from stock
improvement, while they cannot be quoted
chapter and verse for the problems of the
eugenists, do give him some help. It was
recognition of this that led Mr. Henry
Twitchin to help our Society in so many
ways, and finally to bequeath to us the
residue of his estate. Mr. Twitchin was a
practical stockman and his interest in the
improvement of the human race dated from
his attendance in 1888 at the Downton
Farming School, where he was _ livestock
prizeman. Modern experience in the improvement of livestock endorses his statement :

‘“T should not, if I were you, condemn ‘ stockyard methods,’ so-called, so
severely. What are they but the practice
of the very essence of eugenic principles—
the prevention of the breeding of the unfit
and making it possible for only the best
types to do so. It may be good policy
for the present not to go too far, but if
eugenic teaching is ever to do any practical good for the human family, stronger
measures will have to be taken than any
so far advocated.’’

Nor is it coincidence that the only other
large gift made for the permanent improvement of the human race also came from a
stockman. Like Mr. Twitchin, Mr. Metcalf, who left a large sum of money to the
American Genetic Association, was also a
man well versed in the improvement of farm
animals. As was pointed out in a recent
issue of the Journal of Heredity, both
men started as immigrants to a new country
and both made their fortunes in livestock.

Equally for the improvement of livestock
as for that of the human race, more is
required for success than the science of
genetics. To achieve the object other things
must be taken into consideration, and of
these for both problems the most important
is the individual himself.
