The Mental Deficiency Acts and their
Administration.

By H. B. BrackENBUrY,

{Vice-President and Chairman of Education Committee, Central
Association for Mental Welfare; Chairman of Managers of the
Joint Special Schoo] for Finchley, Hornsey and Wood Green;
Vice-President of the Association of Education Committees of
England and Wales; Member of Council and Deputy Chairman
of Representative Body of the British Medical Association.)

The Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feebleminded was appointed in the year 1904 and its Report was issued in
1908. The Defective and Epileptic Children Acts are dated 1899 and
1914. and the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913. The Act:; them elves
are interdependent, but they have never, as a whole, been fully brought
into operation or zealously administered. Partly owing to the seeming inability of many public men to envisage the importance of the
problem with which the Acts deal, partly owing to a division of
administrative powers and duties with regard thereto, and largely
be ause of the disturbed financial position produced by the War and the
Peace, most of the duties imposed on Local Authorities by these Acts
are very imperfectly performed, in many areas many of their more important provisions are a dead letter, and, indeed any active steps
towards doing what the law requires have not only not been enforced but
in some instances have been imperatively discouraged or forbidden by
the two Government Departments centrally responsible. This state of
affairs is still continuing. It is to be hoped that the period of inactivity
will not be allowed to last much longer; but we ought at least to use the
pause to review the position, to revise cur ideas and to gather such
wisdom as we may from the partial experiments and limited experience
which the conditions of the last nine years have permitted.

To have a considerable portion of the population permanently
incapable of reaching the lower limit of the normal human mind is
obviously a very serious social problem. It is an enormous handicap
not only to the nation but to humanity at large. Left to itself this
sore of society shows no tendency towards cure. On the contrary it
becomes more accentuated generation by generation. Feeble-minded
persons are mo-e fecund than the normal]; they have a tendency to mate
together, and so to produce offspring markedly partaking of the
parental characteristics. There are no reliable statistics as to the
number of mentally defective persons. Those of the Royal Commission still remain the best. These gave for January Ist, 1906, a total of
138,529 in a population for England and Wales of 34,349,435, or one
mentally defective person in every 248. This is almost certainly an
under-estimate. Even at that time the figures were based upon the
number of defectives in institutions, rescue homes, workhouses and
prisons, i.e., places where all failures congregate. There was no
394 EUGENICS REVIEW.

evidence of the number at home and well cared}for—or at all events not
an intolerable economic burden or markedly impossible in conduct—
in all classes of society. To-day, in addition to this, even the very
partial administration of the Acts has shown that certifying medical
officers may have very different standards; that want of trained and
experienced officers results in great hesitancy in certifying high-grade
defectives; and that such defectives are more numerous than was at one
time believed. On the basis of the original figures there are in every
hundred mentally defective persons 6 idiots, 18 imbeciles and 76
feeble-minded morons. The Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Board of Education for 1921 gives :—feeble-minded 31,000, imbeciles
5,000; idiots 1,000; but this estimate of 31,000 feeble-minded children
of school age must be a very conservative one indeed. Some of the
reasons are obvious. The estimate of numbers may be fairly reliable
in areas where special schools exist; but in the far larger number of
areas, especially county areas, where there are no such schools, the
examination is far less thorough, and the lack of experience both of
teachers and of medical officers causes the numbers reported to be much
smaller than would otherwise be the case.

The first business of the community with regard to defective persons is discovery—early discovery wherever possible—and classification. The acts leave this function mainly to the Local Education
Authorities. The Poor Law Guardians and the magistrates are of
course also concerned especially in cases which have escaped discovery
during childhood. A double kind of classification has at once to be
attempted. The definitions of the three principal degrees of defect—
idiocy, imbecility, feeble-mindedness—given in the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, may or may not be scientifically the best, but they
are practically useful. It is a help to have a defective child definitely
recognised as being in one or other of these groups. It is to be remembered that the boundary lines are by no means distinct, but as the
differences are of degree merely and not of kind, it is not a matter of
great importance in which class a border-line case is placed. It isa matter
of much greater administrative importance to beable to distinguish a
high-grade feeble-minded child from those of lower grades,:as the
practical methods of dealing with them may be very different. This is.
true also of the other kind of classification required by the Acts into
educable, and uneducable or no longer educable. Unfortunately
there is in this case no definition of the terms. The words of the Act
‘‘incapable by reason of mental defect of receiving benefit or further
benefit from instruction in special schools or classes’’ are really worse
than useless. They make the drawing of a reasonable line practically
impossible. This is in fact perhaps the most important point to which
we can at the present time direct our minds, to see whether experience
will not enable us to frame a useful definition of educability in this.
connection, with a view to its practical application. I shall return to
this point later. Meanwhile we have to note, as stated above, that
this business of discovery and classification is as yet very imperfectly
carried out.

The problem presented to society by these mentally defective
persons is three-fold—first, so to deal with them as to make their

 
THE MENTAL DEFICIENCY ACTS. 395

individual lives as healthy, happy. and full as may be; second, to
protect the community as far as possible from the economic and social
and hygienic consequences of their inevitable failure to meet the conditions of life; third, to prevent them from becoming ancestors of likeminded descendants. Each of these is of great importance. I do not
know that one ought to be put before the others, but perhaps the second
is the mo.t immediately urgent to-day. Fortunately, some of the
means of dealing with the problem will accomplish all these purposes
alike and simultaneously.

The means of dealing with this social and eugenic evil are, broadly,
—training, supervision, segregation, and sterilization. The last of
these is of a different character from the others and must be considered
separately, though it is obviously not incompatible with the rest.
The others are not mutually exclusive; they are interdependent and
are being used piecemeal in this country. There is no considerable
area where they are all being applied consistently, completely and
intelligently. Reasons for this serious neglect are, that there is division
of authority ; that it is realised—or at all events dimly apprehended—
that the administrative system is faulty and wasteful and that the
training of some defectives is costing, or will cost, much more than they
are worth; and that there is in some areas no one of sufficient public
spirit who undertandss the problem and knows what to do, and no one
from the central departments of government concerned who will help
to do anything or msist that anything shall be done. The result is
patchiness and confusion; zealous authorities wasting much of their
effort , inert or parsimonious authorities laughing at the law; individual
lives neglected and undeveloped, preventible social evils perpetuated
and paid for, and a new generation growing up with the same problem
to tackle aggravated not ameliorated.

The persons with whom we are concerned require communal help
not primarily because they are destitute or poor, not primarily even
because they require education, but primarily because they have
defective minds. The help they need varies very much in extent and
in kind, but so far as they need it, they require it throughout the whole
of their lives. Either they can never face the world at all, or if they
can in some cases face it, they can not do so without disaster unless
they have some kind of prop, and this they will never be able to do
without. The Authorities now constituted to care for these people
are the Board of Control and Local M.D. Control Authorities ,—the
County Councils and County Borough Councils, acting through Committees supposed to be made up of members who are interested in or
have knowledge of the problem with which they have to deal. It has
been found convenient, however, to entrust the Local Education
Authorities with large and important powers and duties of discovery ,
training and notification in connection with mental defectives. Inthe
great majority of cases the Local Control Authority and the Local
Education Authority do not deal with the same area. They are com
posed of different people and have different officers. There is no provision for representation of one upon the other. They act indepentdently. So we have the spectacle of a Control Authority making provision to do its part and willing to do it, with a Local Education
396 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Authority affording it no adequate preliminary help: and we have an
Education Authority faithfully discovering, classifying, educating and
notifying its defectives, with a Control Authority either not functioning at all, or, through inefficiency or neglect, quite unable to provide
suitable care for the children as they leave the school. Sometimes
neither control nor Education Authority does anything, and each
excuses itself by the delinquency of the other.

Other difficulties make themselves evident even when each Authority is doing its best, or where the two Authorities are the same (though
acting through different Committees) as in County Boroughs. There
is the difficulty of knowing exactly when a child who is not an idiot
or a low grade imbecile should be transferred from the care of the
Education Authority to that of the Control Authority. With the
greatest wish to transfer a low-grade moron to the home or institution
where he will be best cared for, it might be difficult for a head teacher
or a medical officer to certify that he is ‘‘incapable of receiving further benefit from instruction in the special school or class.’’ There
is the difficulty of the County Education Authority, whose cases are
few and scattered, to provide the expensive residential school that
circumstances dictate as necessary, whereas it would be less difficult
to place these children with others in a suitable institution under the
aegis of the Local Contro] Authority. There is the difficulty experienced when the high-grade moron is leaving the school, that the
Education Authority is not able to notify him as requiring, nor is the
Contro] Authority bound to provide, that form of care—supervision—
which may be most appropriate for the case in question.

The fact is that the menta! deficiency Act, 1913, urgently requires
amendment in various ways, among others in this, that ‘‘education’’
by the Local Education Authority and ‘‘supervision’’ by the Local]
Control Authority should be made more strictly complementary to one
another. There are some low-grade mentally deficient children who
do not require communal! help at all because they come from homes
where all the requisite care and control can otherwis~: be provided, but
even of these cases there ought to be knowledge, as circumstances may
at any time change. There are others who require only supervision
because they come from homes where, with a little instruction and
enccuragement, all that is necessary can still be done. Most lowgrade cases, however will require institutional care of some kind
throughout life. High-grade morons on the other hand, when properly
educated, can meet successfully many of the circumstances of life,
and can do a good deal of useful work provided that it does not require
initiative or planning, with but little supervision. Supervision,
whether the child or young person be at home or in suitable residential
employment, consists of visits and. advice to the parents or guardians
or employers as to training, efforts to secure proper occupation, and
the establishment of friendly relations, so that those responsible may
apply for help when needed and so that immediate reference may be
made to the Local Authority should institutional care be desirable. It
is obviously necessary that supervisors should have received special
training for their work. Such training is provided under the auspices
of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, and supervisors are
THE MENTAI, DEFICIENCY ACTS. 397

in many areas paid or voluntary workers in connection with Local
Associations established by that organisation, while in other areas they
are public health visitors or special officers appointed by the Local
Control Committee.

A degree of independence and usefulness needing only such supervision as this can never be secured without special education. The
place of the special schoo] in the scheme of things cannot yet be regarded
as finally determined. Such schools are very costly, so costly as to
prophibit the provision of such accommodation for all mentally defective children who could ‘‘receive benefit’’ from them. In my opinion
the main purpose of such schools or classes should be to provide the
training necessary for those high-grade feeble-minded children who
will be able to take such a place in the world as that indicated in the
preceding paragraph; and the criterion of suitability for such a school
should be, not capacity to receive benefit therefrom, but probable
capacity to take such a place in the world after leaving the school. As
soon as a child was found to be short of this capacity he shoud be
removed from the care of the Education Authority to that of the Control Authority usually with a view to being placed in an institution.
To establish this position would mean that less school-places would be
required than would otherwise be the case (though more than those at
present existing), but that all such schools should be staffed by certificated teachers with special qualifications, paid at a somewhat higher
rate than their colleagues in the public elementary schools. A subsidiary but still necessary purpose of the special school or class would
be the tempcrary training of doubtful cases pending a decision as to
their exact nature. Such a definition of the place and purpose of a
special school would have the further advantages of making the parents
of the high-grade moron more willing to send their children, for they
have a natural reluctance to associate them with those of a very low
type; and of allowing some places for the education of some of that
large but varied class of children with unstable but not defective minds
who need care and training in schools and institutions similar to those
for mental defectives but who cannot and should not be brought under
the Acts.

This does not mean that those imbeciles and lower grade morons
who were excluded from the special schools would go without training.
Many would at once be provided for in suitable institutions. Others,
especially in urban areas, would find suitable places in such Occupation
Centres as those which have recently been established in a number of
localities. The object of these is not to replace or act as alternatives
to special schoo]s for high-grade children but merely to supply opportunities for training other defectives in discipline, manners and conduct,
and in simple domestic and manual work. They are, in fact, part of
the supervision provided by the Loca] Control! Authority. It is almost
impossible to give a defective child the right sort of training and occupation in an ordinary home. This particular kind of simple individual
training would be almost as impcssible in a special school of the type
indicated above, and a waste of time and effort for a highly certificated
teacher to undertake. Most of the children who could attend an Occupation Centre would eventually go to institutions and with some definite training in good habits they would have a better chance there.
398 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The training of other low-grade defectives is carried on in the
institutions or colonies to which they are sent for care, and in which
they will live. In most cases they will be, and in all properly classified cases they should be, inmates of these institutions or colonies
until death. In these cases training is correlated not with supervision,
technically so called, but with segregation—both under the authority
of the Board of Control, with the Local Control Committees, or sometimes unfortunately the Poor Law Authorities. The following analysis of the accommodation in such places is taken from the Board of
Control’s list of September, 1922 :—

State Institutions for dangerous or violent de
fectives .. . e .e . for 300 cases.
Certified Institutions provided by Local Author
ities a . we we ee ,, 4,385 ,,
Certified Institutions provided by Voluntary

Committees .,6,928 ,,

Institutions (160) approved under Section 37 7.e.
Workhouses and Institutions other than
M.A.B. .. ee os oe oe 3, 0,877,
M.A.B. Institutions under M.D. Act (Total
accommodation in M.A.B. Institutions, —

 

7285)... _ _ _ _ ,,1,316 ,,
Certified Homes a .. a a .. 830 ,,
Approved Homes », 3899 ,,

Total 19,535 ,,

This is, however, fallacious. The aid of the Poor Law Institutions
was necessary as a war economy, but it prevented the Local Authorities
from providing places of their own. The accommodation in Section
387 places is either (a) in special Institutions provided for the purpose
only, or (6) in part of an ordinary workhouse set apart for defectives,
or (c) in the general workhouses, where only a few defectives are received and mingle with the other inmates. Of these institutions 18
take children to the approximate number of 2710, and of these only
three are certified by the Board of Education for 223 children. Thus
much of the accommodation in these Poor Law Institutions is either
unsuitable, or not generally available, on the ground that only local
cases, or only special classes of cases, are taken in. In spite of the
fact, therefore, that a considerable proportion of the accommodation
above enumerated is vacant, the Board of Control is quite right in
saying that many more places are required. In practice, accommodation can be secured by strenuous effort for most ordinary cases of
defect in need of institutional care, but not for very low grade children,
epileptic defectives, immoral or troublesome cases. The present
accommodation does not afford classification for all types of cases; and
it does not even make adequate provision for teaching children in all
places where children are taken—an obvious iniquity.

The provision of proper and sufficient accommodation in institutions or colonies for the mentally defective is essential for all the three
purposes which the state and those who are dealing with mental defectives wish to accomplish. It is necessary in the interests of the defecTHE MENTAL DEFICIENCY ACTS. 399

tives themselves. Institutional care does not entail unhappiness.
It is true that some defectives resent such care, but these are usually
persons of markedly anti-social propensities so that for other reasons
their liberty must be restricted. The great majority of defectives are
found to be much happier in suitable institutions, associating with their
mental equals and having a congenial occupation, than in the midst
of the difficulties of the outside world to which they feel themselves
unequal. Such segregation is specially necessary for the protection
of the community from the effects of the anti-social] conduct or economic
failure of the defectives. In an institution or colony a proportion of
even low-grade defectives can be helped to contribute something towards the cost of their upkeep : some few may be made self-supporting.
It has been calculated that 54 per cent. of the idiots and imbeciles are
paupers, and that about 18 per cent. of the workhouse inmates of this
country are feeble-minded. It is not surprising that a very large proportion of the mentally defective should sooner or later, under present
conditions, have to be maintained by the Poor Law Authorities. This
should not however be regarded as a normal state of affairs. They
should be discovered, trained as far as possible, and cared for from their
early years by authorities whose business it is to deal with mental
defect, and not by those whose primary business it is to deal with destitution and poverty. Similar provision should prevent the fall of the
great majority of those mentally deficient persons who in adolescence
or early adult life become criminals, inebriates, or prostitutes. They
ought to be tested and protected before life applies the test under which
the individual fails. It needs no laboured proof to show that the social
and economic gain would be enormous.

Segregation in institutions is necessary, too, for the prevention
of the propagation of mentally defective children. It is obvious that
the compulsory segregation of mentally defective persons during the
reproductive age would accomplish this so far as potential parents of
this class are concerned. But mentally defective persons are not alone
the procreators of mentally defective children. It has to be recognised
that a majority of such children are the offspring either of parents who
appear to be normal (although frequently ‘‘carriers’’) or of those suffering from insanity, psychoneurosis, or a mild degree of mental abnormality or instability which is not certifiable. Nevertheless, this third
reason for segregation holds good. It may be taken as established
that where both parents are mentally defective all the offspring are the
same, that where only one of the parents is mentally defective a majority of the offspring are exceedingly likely to be so, and that the proportion of mentally defective children to the entire population is undergoing a steady increase. If we can stop only one certain source of the
supply it is a great gain; and may perhaps !ead the way to the stopping
of other sources later on.

y- Of late years it has been increasingly argued that sterilization, not
segregation, is the remedy. Now, this may very well be true in some
individual instances, and few would wish to rule these out. The
necessary operation in the male is simple and safe, and in the female
not very much less so. It is however with sterilization as a public
policy and routine practice that we are concerned, and it is difficult
4C€0 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to see how it can reasonably be contended in the light of present knowledge that sterilization has any advantage over adequate segregation.
If it be answered that segregation is not, in fact, adequate and cannot
be made so, the reply to this is that the difficulties in the way of adequate segregation are to-day certainly less than those in the wav
of routine sterilization. The limitations of both procedures as effective preventives of mental deficiency are the same, and segregation
has the advantage of dealing at the same time with the social failings
of the individual. Sterilization, on the other hand, might, and probably wculd, lead to a false sense of security and so to a series of social]
disasters which might have been prevented.

To sum up, the three-fold problem presented by mental deficiency
is of immense national and racial importance. To postpone effective
dealing with it is to make it progressively more difficult to deal with.
To save money one year by neglecting mentally defective children is
to spend four-fold a few years later on the consequences of this neglect .
The Defective and Epileptic Children Acts and the Menta] Deficiency
Act together form a foundation on which successful results might be
built; but they are not at present effectively in operation. The
Mental Deficiency Act cannot be administered unless the provisions of
the other Acts are fully carried out. These Acts are the only preventive
measures for securing the protection of defectives. Yet there are at
least 16000 feeble-minded children (as distinct from imbeciles and idiots)
under no effective instruction; and even the duty of ascertainment is
very irregularly carried out. Some Authorities do not make any effort
to perform it, being afraid of discovering cases they may have to deal
with. In other areas the Mental Deficiency Act itself is virtually
inoperative. All Local Authorities have appointed Committees.
Many of these are actively at work; others scarcely ever meet and discharge hardly any of their duties. The economy campaign has made
it difficult to put pressure upon them. Supervision is in many areas
non-existent or feeble. There is serious lack of suitable institutional
accommodation. To remedy all this the Acts should be enforced and
in some respects amended, and administration should be strengthened.
Where Committees are active a great deal can be done. The Board of
Control has directed that only ‘‘urgent’’ cases are now to be dealt with;
but Local Authorities are at liberty within wide limits to interpret
‘‘urgent’’ according te their own views. If they are enlightened they
deal with most of the cases coming under the Act taking a wide national
view of what is urgent: others take the narrowest possible view. The
specific place of the Education Authorities in this connection ought to
be more clearly defined, and brought. in practice into closer correlation
with the wider functions of the M.D. Control Authorities. No other
Authorities ought to have independent powers or to perform unrelated
functions.

There is great need, too, for the further education and enlightenment of those concerned with duties under the Acts, and for co-operation between them. In this direction the work of the Central Association for Mental Welfare is very important and useful. The Local
Voluntary Associations formed in some fifty areas in connection therewith bring together various types of workers, and have dealt with
THE MENTAL DEFICIENCY ACTS. 401

about 28,000 cases. The Association has conducted a series of educational courses for social workers and supervisors, for te .chers, for medical officers, and now is contemplating one for magistrates! All this is
pioneer work of the most valuable kind, but we ought to be getting now
beyond the pioneer stage. There is still great need for more widespread technical knowledge of mental deficiency among all these
classes, and for the enlightenment of public opinion as to the enormous
and urgent importance of this problem to the community, to the nation,
and to the race. An immediately practical step would be for the Government Departments concerned to confer together, to gather up the
results of recent experience, to review the position, to readjust the
machinery, and then to set it to work in every area with renewed
vigour and increased effectiveness at the earliest possible moment.
