THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION’
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A. MD., ERCP.

HAT is to be the future of our

population ? Will it go on growing

at the same rate as in the past, or
will it become stationary some time soon ? If
the latter, when? And what will happen
afterwards ? The answers to these questions
are of great importance for this country’s
future, not only in its international bearings,
but also in its internal social life. National
policies, such as education, housing, emigration and pensions will be directly shaped by
the numbers of people in the country and by
their ages.

A good deal of confusion has been caused
in people’s minds about questions of population by various announcements and statements in the newspapers which seem to be
contradictory and to point in opposite directions. On the one hand, we see continual
references to our large unemployment figures
and to more or less unsuccessful efforts made
by different Governments to reduce them.
We see announcements of quarterly returns
of births and deaths, which mostly show an
excess of births over deaths, and which therefore tell us that the population is increasing.
We hear a great deal about town planning,
about housing schemes and about efforts to
relieve overcrowding in slum areas. We
directly witness the increasing crush of traffic
on our roads and of people who travel in
buses, undergrounds and trains during the
busy hours. And from the roads and windows
of trains we see ribbon building along the
main thoroughfares that lead into towns, so
that it becomes increasingly difficult to get
out into the open country. But on the other
hand, we read that the birth-rate is falling to
dangerously low levels, and experts tell us

* This article was originally written as a pamphlet
for the general public, but it includes much new material
with which not all eugenists are familiar. It may be
read as an introduction to such works as A. M. CarrSaunders’s World Population, R. Kuczynski’s Population Movements, and D. V. Glass’s The Struggle for
Population. Copies of the pamphlet may be obtained
from the Eugenics Society, price 6d.

that unless people soon begin to have more
children, the country will somehow be
threatened with depopulation. English
people are given to trusting the concrete
evidence of their senses rather than the
theories of experts. ‘‘ It is all very well,” they
say, ‘for experts and statisticians to utter
these gloomy forebodings ; the plain facts are
that the population of the country is increasing and that our unemployment problem is
quite bad enough as it is. The fall of the
birth-rate is a very good thing.’ The experts
are either ignored or ridiculed.

But are the experts as wrong as all this ?
The object of this article is to explain how it
is that they are not wrong.

The factors in the problem of population as
it concerns us to-day are not entirely plain to
unaided common sense. They require a little
unravelling and careful thinking out. This we
will try to do by certain stages. First we will
consider the recent history of our population
during which it has greatly increased, and
explain that the increase has been due, not to
the birth-rate going up but to the death-rate
going down. We shall then examine how the
birth-rate has fallen and try to explain how
it is that, though the population is still increasing to-day, it is almost inevitably destined to decline soon. Lastly, we shall try to
form an idea of what is going to happen to
our population in the next hundred years.

Recent Increase 1n Population

From the year 1800 until the year 1914, the
population of England and Wales increased
in an astonishing manner ; faster in fact than
did that of any other European country. In
1801, the population of England and Wales
was about nine million ; in 1931 it was shown
by the census to be nearly forty millions.
This increase was accompanied by an enormous growth of towns and by a period of
unprecedented industrial prosperity during
which England forged ahead of other

205

C
206

countries and established a position of
leadership in the civilized world.

But in the last few years, this increase has
been slowing down rather quickly. Between
1838 and 1913, births on average exceeded
deaths by about 300,000 in each year, and
the population of the country increased every
year by about this figure, or by just a little
less because, in those days, there was more
emigration than immigration. In the nine
years which elapsed between the beginning
of the war and the end of 1923, births exceeded deaths by a smaller figure—by
220,000. In 1933, births exceeded deaths by
only 84,000. Thus the excess of births over
deaths is growing smaller. There will almost
certainly still be an excess in 1936, but it
will probably stop about 1940 or 1941.

We spoke above about birth- and deathvates, and these terms must be understood.
If we say that the birth-rate of a country for
a given year is 25 and the death-rate 20, we
mean that for every thousand people in the
country there have been twenty-five births
and twenty deaths. A thousand average persons in a country will consist of males and
females in about equal numbers, and these
will be of all ages, from newly born children
to very old men and women. Eastern
countries, such as India and China, have very
high birth- and death-rates in the neighbourhood of forty per thousand, while Western
European countries have lower rates. In
1933 the birth-rate for England and Wales
was 14°4 per thousand, and the death-rate
12-3. It is obvious that if a country’s birthand death-rates are the same, its population
(apart from migration) is numerically stable ;
if birth-rates are higher than death-rates, its
population is increasing ; if death-rates are
higher than birth-rates, the population is
decreasing.

Increase caused by lowered Death-rate

It is important to realize that the increase
of our population which we have noted was
caused, not by a rise in the birth-rate, but by
a fall in the death-rate. During the last
century, people do not seem to have had
many more children than they had in previous centuries ; but many fewer of them died.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

People now live much more healthily and
cleanly than they used to do. Not long ago
this country used to be ravaged by epidemic
diseases which are now almost unknown, such
as cholera, typhus, enteric fever, smallpox
and plague. In the early days of the industrial revolution when factories were built,
people flocked into the towns, which grew up
round developing industries, and multiplied
there. In these towns the sanitary arrangements were very primitive compared to what
they are now. In those days, too, we understood little about diet. Such diseases as
rickets and scurvy were prevalent because
little was known about the value of ftesh or
green food, and nothing about the various
vitamins which have lately been discovered.
But in the course of the last century great
improvements were made. Modern sanitation
was introduced. Food was imported from the
Dominions and from North and South
America. Many changes for the better took
place which have been well described in a
book by Mr. Talbot Griffith* which will repay
study. The epidemic diseases above mentioned, and others such as measles and scarlet
fever, used to kill in ever year a large number
of young children, particularly if their constitution was weakened by rickets or other
deficiency diseases which were the result of
inadequate or wrong diet. Cholera, typhus,
smallpox, enteric fever and plague have practically disappeared in response to improved
sanitary conditions, and the other epidemic
diseases from which children still suffer today have become much less serious because
the children’s resistance against them has
been strengthened by better feeding. What
was the result? Accurate figures about
birth- and death-rates are only available
since 1874, but figures have been computed
for earlier years. Between the year 1800 and
1875 the birth-rate remained fairly stable at
a high level between 31 and 38. But the
death-rate, which had begun to fall about
1740, declined, by 1810, to about twentyfour per thousand, and remained near this
low level till 1870, when it began to drop

* Population Problems of the Age of Malthus. Cambridge University Press, 1926.
THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION 207

further still, These movements can be seen Fall in Buirth-rate
in Chart I. Each year the population in- But about the year 1875, probably because
creased as a result of fewer people, particu- about that time people began to use birthlarly young children, dying. control methods more than before, the birthThe death-rate cannot fall indefinitely till rate which, as we have seen, had previously
it reaches zero for the very good reason that remained more or less stationary, began to
everyone born must sometime die. It would fall. People began to have fewer children.
fall to zero and stay there only if everyone The families were getting smaller. This
became immortal and none died of accidents. movement is shown in Chart I. We are not
But the birth-rate could much more easily here concerned with why people began to have
fall to zero. It would, in fact, do thisifevery- fewer children, but merely with the fact that
one stopped having children. The present they did begin to have fewer. The chart
death-rate in this country may well be _ shows that this fall in the birth-rate has conlowered by further reducing the deaths of tinued till to-day. The birth-rate which, in
newly born children. But. progress in this 1875, stood at about thirty-five per thousand,
direction, however desirable, is small com- has now fallen to about fifteen per thousand,
pared to what was possible sixty years ago. less than half the figure at which it stood

CHART |

COMPARISON OF BIRTH AND DEATH RATES IN ENGLAND AND WALES BETWEEN 1700 € 1930

40 ” 5 o-S-3—B —_ ee e ‘amen, oT e S bes
| - 0° *e ome ae oe Oe aaah
TS ate _ BIRTH- RATES SN
30} rea Oa
o 4) m ° o
25t—a “4 ® —3" = Ll peaTH RATE
Tee Speer ON
a ss ae sage Sonne 7
ity ty sft.

10
tt tt tt tt te tt TT EET

 

CECE eee eee Ts 3"
mv “Se
~—
SCE
SSRRTRTR SSR CRRERER ESE SR

8 °

The higher the black line over the dotted, the greater the survival rate and, discounting emigration, the more
rapid the increase of the population.

Observe that the population began to increase between 1740 and 1750; that this increase was caused by a fall
in the death-rate rather than by a rise in the birth-rate ; that the birth-rate began to fall drastically about 1880
and has halved in the last sixty years; that the death-rate in this period has fallen, but less quickly than the
birth-rate, and that therefore the rate of increase of the population is falling. Whereas, discounting emigration,
the population was, between 1870 and 1880, increasing at the rate of 14 per 1,000, between 1920 and 1930 it was
increasing by 6 per 1,000. If present trends in birth and death rates continue, the dotted and black lines will
cross in 1940 Or 1941, as shown in Chart 2 which continues the story into the future.

The figures between 1700 and 1840 are taken from Brownlee (‘' History of the Birth and Death vates in England
and Wales from 1570 to the Present Time,” Public Health, June and July, 1916, Vol. XXIX, Nos. 10 and 11) and
ave estimates based on records of baptisms and burials. They are not accurate statements of the number of births and
deaths, for during this time no trustworthy birth and death statistics existed. The figures from 1840 are taken from the
Registvay-General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales for 1932, and they express the average number of births
and deaths perv year for the ten-year periods ending at the date stated. Civil registration was introduced in 1837 and
became compulsory in 1874. Between these dates the figures probably under-estimate the actual births, though they do
so less tn the later periods than in the earlier. The figures after 1876 ave accurate.
208

sixty years ago. This roughly means that
mothers to-day are having about half as
many children as did their grandmothers and
great-grandmothers. But it will be seen that
the death-rate (the dotted line on the chart),
which began to fall long before the birth-rate,
has continued to fall to even lower levels than
the birth-rate. This means that, despite the
smaller families of to-day, more people are
being born in each year than die in it. How
much longer can this go on?

Falling Birth- and Death-rates

We are now in a position to examine the
question we asked ourselves at the beginning
of this leaflet. The birth-rate in England
to-day, despite its fall, is still higher than the
death-rate and the population is still increasing. Yet theexperts tellus that the birth-rate
has fallen so low that the population cannot
be maintained. How can this be? Superficially it is not obvious, but on closer examination it will be seen that it can easily occur
in rather exceptional and unusual circumstances. These exist in England to-day. The
population of this country is at present in a
state of transition. It is emerging from a
phase when many people were born, many
died in infancy, and the survivors lived a
short time, and it is entering another phase
when fewer babies are born, fewer die and the
survivors live much longer. A_ peculiar
thing happens in the transitional period
between these two phases, which can be
clearly illustrated by an example. The schoolleaving age for most children in this country
is fourteen and each year children leave
school in a number which largely depends on
how many babies were born fourteen years
before, and entered school a few years after
their birth. Now, suppose that the schoolleaving age were suddenly raised to sixteen.
What would be the effect ? It would be that
during the two years after this change, all
boys and girls, who would be leaving school
at fourteen, would get an extra two years
school life, so that nobody would leave school.
Now suppose that, during these two years,
the number of children entering school
dropped to half what it had been before ;
clearly the school population would then not

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be maintaining itself. But nevertheless the
number of children entering school would be
larger than that of boys and girls leaving 1t
because of the way the latter had been artificially and temporarily lowered by the raising
of the school-leaving age.

This is exactly what is happening with our
population at the present moment. The increasing age to which people are living is
giving to a large number of middle-aged and
ageing people an extra lease of life in exactly
the same way that the raising of the schoolleaving age in our imaginary example gave
to the boys and girls of fourteen an extra span
of school life. The death-rate is being artificially lowered by this increased span of life.
The birth-rate is falling, and indeed has
fallen well below replacement rate ; yet the
birth-rate remains higher than the temporarily lowered death-rate. (We may note
that, though our example is imaginary, it
happens to contain an element of truth. The
number of children entering school zs getting
smaller, as is to be expected from the recent
fall of the birth-rate. In a Government circular to local authorities, issued in 1933, it was
stated that in the next fifteen years the total
number of children aged five and over in public
elementary schools is likely tofall by a million.)

But there is one other factor which enters
into this interplay between births and
deaths which cannot be introduced into our
example of children leaving school. It is that
fewer children are dying in infancy. Every
death in infancy or childhood sends the
death-rate up and at the same time makes it
impossible for the child or young person who
has died to contribute to the next generation.
From the point of view of the growth of the
population, such deaths are dead losses to the
nation, differing in this respect from the
deaths of people who have passed reproductive age. A large proportion of deaths a
hundred years ago were deaths in infancy and
the death-rate was maintained at a high level
by them. Nowadays many fewer children die
in infancy. The bzrth-rate is not affected by
this, but the death-rate is lowered, so that,
on average, the fewer people who are born
live longer than they used to do, and more
grow up to reproduce themselves.
THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION 
Net Reproduction Rate

We have seen that, because more babies
are born than people die in England to-day,
it does not follow that the population is
maintaining itself. How then are we to find
out when the population is maintaining itself? Is there some other simple way by
which, for any country, this important question can be answered ? Clearly it would be
convenient if this fact could be expressed in a
simple index number which would enable us
to compare the present capacity for growth
of different countries. Such an index has
been described by Dr. Kuczynski, and is
called the net reproduction rate. Briefly this
expresses the number of women who, in the
next generation, will replace the women of
reproductive age in this generation. If the
women of reproductive age in this generation
who are mothers of children are having
sufficient girl children to replace themselves
as well as those women of their age who are
childless, the net reproduction rate is I or

209

unity, and the population is maintaining
itself. If, allowing for deaths, they are not
having enough girl children to do this, the
net reproduction rate falls below unity and
the population is not replacing itself ; if they
are having more girl babies than is necessary
for this purpose, the net reproduction rate is
above unity and the population will increase.
Why, you may ask, should we concentrate in
this way on girl children? Are not boy
children equally important? They are, of
course, but remember that the sexes are
fairly closely balanced at birth and it is the
women and not the men who bear the
children. It is not claimed that the net
reproduction rate is an ¢nfallible index of the
power of growth of a population. The girl
babies born to-day may refuse to marry when
they grow up, or they may not want children
if they are married. All that is claimed for
the net reproduction rate is that it gives the
best available index of what, if things go on
more or less as they are doing at present, the

CHART II

Shee hS eee
CEE EEE EEE EEE CES
55-59

This shows average birth and death rates per 1,000 in successive five-year periods 1925-9, 1935-9, etc., till

45-49

1925/29 35-39

EEE

 

65-69 75-79 85-89

the year 2000. The figures are calculated on the assumption that recent trends in birth and death rates will

continue.

The death-rate rises like this because, as the birth-rate gets lower, fewer babies would be born and the average
and the more old people there are, the more deaths.
which the chart is based represent forecasts made upon certain reasonable assumptions ;

age of the community would rise ;

as accurate prophecies.

Note that the figures on

Based on figures published in Special REA No. 40 of the London and Cambridge Economic Society,

by Enid Charles.

they are not to be taken

| 1 ye92
95-99
210

future size of a population will be. It gives
a much better index than does a mere comparison of births and deaths which, as we
have seen, is very misleading.

The method by which the net reproduction
rate is calculated, though much simpler for
the expert than other methods which have
been devised, is too complicated to describe
here. Particulars will be found in Dr. Enid
Charles’ book The Twilight of Parenthood
(1934, Watts & Co., 7s. 6d.), which is recommended to persons who wish to know more of
this subject.

Let us now examine the net reproduction
rates of some of the civilized countries of the
world, bearing in mind that, if it stands at
unity, a country’s population is exactly
reproducing itself, that if the rate is less than
unity, it will, in all probability, diminish, and
that if it is above unity, the numbers will
increase.

Net Reproduction Rates, 1933 :*

Denmark O'9QI
France 0:82
Germany 0-70
Sweden 0°73
Austria we .. 0°67
Bulgaria... sus ww. 3

Finland 0'9

Hungary... 0-91
Australia (1932-3) . 0:98
New Zealand : 0:98

The net reproduction rate for England and
Wales is not exactly known because, when
births are registered in this country, no
question is asked about the age of the
mother; it can, however, be estimated
fairly accurately. Dr. Enid Charles has calculated that, in 1933, the figure was 0-734.
This means that, according to fertility and
mortality rates prevailing in that year, one
thousand women of reproductive age were
producing only 734 girl children who would
grow up to replace them in the next generation.

* Kuczynski: ‘‘ The Decrease of Fertility,”” Econo
mica, May 1935.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE I*

Population of England and Wales between
1935 and 2035 calculated on the assumption
that recent trends in birth- and death-rates
will continue in the future.

Year. Thousands. Year. Thousands.
1935... 40,563 1985... 26,087
1940 ... 40,655 1990 _ ... 23,258
1945... 40,392 1995... 20,440
1950 ... 39,766 2000 ... 17,685
1955 «.-- 38,777 2005... 15,058
1960 ... 37,441 2010 ... 12,268
1965... 35,799 2015 ... 10,456
1970 ... 33,787 2020 8,563
1975 «-- 31,452 2025 6,940
1980 _ ... 28,857 2030 5,507
2035 4,426

Future of our Population

A calculation of the future number of
people in England and Wales is shown in
Table I, for the years 1935 to 2035, and
future trends in birth- and death-rates during
these years are shown in Chart II. The
figures have been worked out on the assumption that recent trends of fertility and mortality
will be continued into the future. It is calculated that our population will reach a maximum of nearly 41 millions in 1940; it will
then begin to diminish and the decline will
gain momentum as the years go by. By the
year 1975 (40 years hence) it will have
decreased to 31 millions (to the nearest
million) ; by the year 2000 (sixty-five years
hence) to 18 millions, and by 2035 (a hundred
years hence) to 44 millions. The change in
birth- and death-rates which would be
responsible for these figures are shown in
Chart II. By this time, moreover, the age
distribution of the population would be very
different from what it is now. To-day there
are, for every hundred persons in the community, twenty-three persons below the age
of fifteen and twelve above the age of sixty.
In 1975, if present trends continue, there
would be, for every hundred persons, seven
below the age of fifteen, and thirty above the
age of sixty. The number of young people

* From London and Cambridge Economie Society's
Memorandum No. 40, by Enid Charles.
THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION

will be much less than it is at present, and
that of old people much greater. This
change follows obviously and immediately
from the fact that, as the birth-rate falls,
fewer babies are being born, and as the deathrate falls, more people live to old age.

These, it should be remembered, are not
prophecies ; they are estimates based upon
the assumption that present trends in birthand death-rates will continue. They may not
continue. People may begin to have more
children, in which case the population may
diminish less quickly or may not even
diminish at all. On the other hand, people
may have fewer children than is estimated
on the chart, in which case the population
would diminish more rapidly than is shown.
It is by no means impossible that, in the
near future at any rate, people will have
fewer children than has been here estimated.
A perfect birth-control method may be
discovered which may abolish the unwanted
child ; and another big war or slump may
occur which may influence the majority of
people not to want children. But the
assumption that recent trends will be continued into the future is a reasonable one,
though it is improbable that it will be
fulfilled exactly. It is more likely to be
fulfilled in the near than the distant future.
The further ahead we travel into the future,
the more likely it becomes that new trends
will set in which will falsify the predictions
based on past trends. Few people to-day
think that fertility will continue to decline
at its present rate until 1985 ; many would
therefore think that the figures in Table I
and Chart II are unduly alarmist for the
remote future. But even if the fall in fertility
were to be arrested before 1985, the position
would still give cause for disquiet. Dr.
Charles has also shown in her estimates that
if there were no further decline in fertility
after 1933, our population would nevertheless begin to fall in the near future. It would
reach a maximum of just under 41 millions
in 1943 and fall to just under 20 millions
(half its present size) in a hundred years.
But you can verify how true these estimates
prove for the next few years, and to enable
you to do this, we give, in Table IT, the birth
grr

and death-rates for the next ten years
together with the total population of the
country, as calculated from the assumption
that present trends will continue. The birthand death-rates for the country are published
in every quarter of the year, and in 1941
there will be a census. Compare the figures
in Table II with these figures as they are
published. You will be able to form an
opinion for yourselves on how much the
trends of the last few years are being
continued.

TABLE II.

Future Birth-rates, Death-rates and
Population of England and Wales in the
next ten years, calculated on the assumption
that recent trends in these rates will be
continued into the future.

Per Thousand.
Birth-rate Death-rate. Population in
Thousands.
1935 40,563
1936 40,598
1937 12°41 12:07 40,625
1938 40,644
1939 40,654
1940 40,055
1941 40,619
1942 10°72 11°88 40,575
1943 40,523
1944 40,462
1945 . .
1949 g°2I 12°33 40,392

While many people to-day think that
England is somewhat over-populated and
would be glad to see fewer people in it, they
would almost certainly become alarmed if,
so to speak, the decline in the population
were to get out of hand and to plunge below
the lowest desirable level. It is difficult to
see how Western powers could maintain
their present state of civilization if present
trends continue to the year 2000. Let us
then not be too complacent. The birth-rate
will probably exceed the death-rate by
progressively smaller figures in the next four
or five years, and the population will still
increase a little ; but this event must not be
allowed to lure us into a false sense of
212 Ss THE EUGENICS REVIEW

security. Let us recognize clearly what lies In the preparation of this article I am
before us in the decade 1940-1950 and in the indebted for valuable suggestions to Prof.
years after 1950, if the birth-rate continues A. M. Carr-Saunders, Dr. Enid Charles and
to fall. Mr. David Glass.

Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna - FELIX ALCAN, Paris
AKSDEMISE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m, b. H., Leipzig - FRIEDRICH KILIAN’S NACHFOLGER, Budapest
EORG & Oe re - RUIZ HERMANOS, Madrid - THE MARUZEN COMPANY, Tokyo.
INTERNATIONAL REVIEW OF SCIENTIFIC

SYNTHESIS
“SCIENTIA ” "len 9,"Borthtad "a" Sunt 'F emuiGORS

IS THE ONLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really international.
IS THE ONLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

I8 THE ONLY REVIEW of scientific synthesis and unification that deals with the fundamental questions of all sciences: mathematics, astronomy,
- geology, physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, ethnology, linguistics ; history of science; philosophy of science.

18 THE ONLY REVIEW that by means of enquiries among the most eminent scientists and authors of all countries (On the philoso ophiog! principles
of the various sciences ; On the most fundamental astronomical and physical tons of current interest ; On the contribution that the different countries have given to the "development o vartous branches of nnowledee 3 On the more important biological questions, etc., etc.), studies all the main
problems discussed in intellectual es all over the world, and represents at the same time the first attempt at an international organization
of philosophical and scientific progress.

Is THE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

The articles are published in the of their authors, and every number has a supplement containing the French translation of all the articles
that are not French. The rovion'ls Las completely aoveasible to thoes who kaow out wreach: (Write for a free copy to the General Secretary of
Sctentsa, Milan, sending 16 cents in stamps of your country, merely to cover packing and postage).

SUBSCRIPTION: 560 Shillings

Substantial reductions are granted to those who take up more than one year’s subscription.
For information apply to “‘ SCIENTIA,” Via A. De Togni, 12 - Milano 116 (Italy)

PARADISE FOUND

WHERE THE SEX PROBLEM HAS BEEN SOLVED

By C. WICKSTEED ARMSTRONG, F.R.G:S.
(Fellow of the Eugenics Soctety)

This book, written in the form of a romance, is really a plea for practical schemes of Race
Betterment, in a South American setting.

The most important chapter is that entitled ‘‘ The Seminal Gardens,” where, without
resorting to such unsavoury methods as eutelegenests, the ‘“‘ Eugenians ’’ are able to bring
about very rapid racial improvement. These Gardens solve, too, the problem of unnatural
continence for the young, that of dysgenic and immoral prostitution and that of the falling
birth-rate. There are also “‘ Euthanasian Gardens,” and other social problems, besides
those of Sex and of Race, are boldly tackled.

Mr. HavELock ELLIs says : ‘“‘ There are numerous chapters J read with much sympathy and agreement.”
The Eugenics Review says: “ . their ideas are certainly interesting and there can be little doubt
that if they were universally adopted, human beings would be a good deal happier than they are .
should be read with Pleasure and pondered with profit by all eugenists.”’

33

Public Opinion says: *“*., . those concerned with modern eugenics will find much that is interesting and
provocative. . .
The Continental Daily Mail says : . However unconventional the solutions proposed . . . to eugenistic

and other present-day problenis——principally those of sex—set by the incompatibility of human nature
with modern environment, social conventions and laws, they are nevertheless extremely interesting.”’
The Glasgow Sunday Post says: ‘“‘ A remarkable fantasy, making wonderfully real a Utopia secreted
in the Brazilian forest.’

 

London: JOHN BALE SONS & DANIELSSON, 83/91 Great Titchfield St., W.1
Price 5s. net

 
