THE GALTON LABORATORY :

ITS WORK

AND AIMS*
By L. S. PENROSE, M.A., M.D.

University College, London

HAVE been invited to address this
| Society on the subject of the work of the
Galton Laboratory. Although I am not
a member, I do so with pleasure for more
than one reason. In the first instance, I
welcome the opportunity of outlining some
of the methods of research employed by my
colleagues and myself. Secondly, the Galton
Laboratory investigates man and must rely
on the goodwill of members of the human
race to co-operate in its researches, so that
it is sometimes necessary to explain what we
are trying to do. Furthermore, in IgI0,
Galton laid it down that the business of the
Eugenics Education Society, of which he
was then president, should be to make known
to the public the results of scientific work.
It does not seem out of order to place
information before their successors. Moreover, aS a representative of the academic
interests of the subject of eugenics, I have
no hesitation in expressing the views which
I hold on the subject and which probably
differ considerably from those held by many
of this Soczety’s members. I understand
that membership is open to anyone interested
in eugenics ; but interpretation of the term
is open to a good deal of latitude and
members may be interested in studying
alternative points of view.

History of the Laboratory

I will deal briefly with the past work of
the Laboratory. Many of the results are
now well known and have become classical.
A reminder on some points may be of
service to those unfamiliar with the contents
of the Galton Laboratory publications.

The recognition of eugenics as an academic
subject was slow and cautious. The definition
adopted by the University was “ The study

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on January 25th, 1949.

17

of those agencies under social control that
may improve or impair the racial qualities
of future generations, either physically or
mentally,” a formula wide enough to permit
the inclusion of any scientific work on human
heredity, on demography or on problems
relating to public health. It is difficult to
say exactly when the work of the laboratory
began. Actually, the Francis Galton Laboratory was not officially placed at University
College by statute until 1933, but the
organization emerged gradually out of much
earlier activities.

The journal Biometrika was founded in
tg0r by Weldon, Galton and Pearson in
connection with the biometrical laboratory,
but the earliest numbers contained papers
on human genetics. The Eugenic Record
Office in Gower Street began in 1904 under
Galton’s own supervision. A research fellowship on eugenics was established in 1906;
and the first to be appointed to this post
were Edgar Schuster and subsequently
David Heron. Karl Pearson, who took over
from Galton the direction of the office,
was appointed to a professorship endowed
under the Galton bequest, in 1911. The
Eugenics Laboratory publications soon
emerged ; the lectures and the memoir series,
which are still in print, covered a wide range
of problems on nature and nurture. Among
them were Miss Elderton’s studies on
consanguinity, Pearson’s on_ tuberculosis
and Heron’s on mental deficiency, followed
by the analysis of intelligence as a graded
character by Pearson and Jaderholm.
Closely integrated with the work of the
laboratory were Goring’s observations on
criminals, on the basis of which he was able
to dispose of the notion of a special criminal
type of humanity, so dear to the hearts
of nineteenth-century anthropologists.

The study of human pedigree material,
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which had been pursued by Pearson intensively from the first, found its chief
expression in the publication of The
Treasury of Human Inheritance. The original
gigantic plan, to summarize for research
workers all the known facts about hereditary
diseases, has been carried on steadily since
190g. In recent years the Treasury has owed
everything to the persistent efforts of
Dr. Julia Bell. The Annals of Eugenics,
edited by Pearson, came into existence in
1925 as a natural extension of Biometrika.
Alongside papers originating from many
parts of the world on human genetics and
related problems, it contained accounts
of the current researches in the Galton
Laboratory. Under the editorship of
Professor R. A. Fisher, over a period of
some ten years from 1934, it became the
vehicle of a great many important papers
by himself and others, many of which broke
new ground in statistical theory and method.
There were frequent contributions from
prominent biological statisticians, such as
Haldane, Yates, Mather, Stevens, and Finney. It also continued to place on record
extensive data from new genetical enquiries,
including substantial papers by Sjégren and
Fraser Roberts.

A certain type of anthropometrical investigation was regarded as very significant
by Galton. In his Memories, published in
1908, he drew attention to the pressing
need of obtaining a multitude of measurements relating to every faculty of body
and mind in more than one generation.
Analysis of measurements of stature by
Karl Pearson gave rise to the generally
accepted correlation values of these traits
in sibs. The ascertainment of measurements
in two generations, however, presented
difficulties. Much preliminary work had to
be done in finding the distributions of
measurements in the general population,
the allometric relations between measurements and the effects of environmental
agencies. Dr. Percy Stocks and Miss M.
Karn played a prominent part in these
metrical studies. There was also an
anthropological aspect to the work and,

in this, Dr. G. M. Morant became the
undisputed authority.

Under Fisher’s far-sighted direction, the
developments in anthropometry took a new
turn. Common characters which segregated
began to be studied intensively and a
serological unit was initiated. The success
of this enterprise was immediate and the
foundations were thus laid for the serological laboratory, now autonomous, at the
Lister Institute, where Dr. Race, Dr. Mourant
and their associates are enlarging the scope
of human genetics by the discovery of new
antigens at a breath-taking speed.

Present Organization

In the face of the traditions and achievements which I have outlined, it will be
readily appreciated that to live up to the
expectations of our predecessors—even without attempting to expand the field of
research—is a severe task. My colleagues
and I have, however, many advantages
which enable us to proceed in an atmosphere
of optimism. The Treasury still continues
in the hands of Dr. Bell; and Miss Karn
has been able to proceed with her statistical
analysis of environmental agencies. We are
able to maintain a liaison with Dr. Race,
which is extremely profitable to us and, I
hope, occasionally useful to him. It is
especially significant that we are always
able to obtain advice and criticism from
Professor Haldane, now the Senior Professor
in the Department of Eugenics, Biometry
and Genetics. His basic contributions to
the subject of human genetics over a long
period of years together with his knowledge
and experience ensure continuity with all
the earlier work of the laboratory. The
interplay of ideas between our own group
and those who are working on animal
genetics and upon biometrical problems is
extremely stimulating. At the present time
the trend of the researches in the Galton
Laboratory is towards medical aspects of
human heredity. The adjacent work of
Dr. Griineberg on genetical pathology and
physiology of the mouse forms a useful
bridge between medicine and the more
erudite genetics of insects. Moreover, it
THE GALTON LABORATORY :

is our aim to continue the development of
a close relationship between ourselves and
our medical friends on the staff of University
College Hospital. They provide us with
clinical problems connected with human
genetics and biometry and we try to interest
them in some of the genetical and statistical
ideas which turn up in our work. The same
applies, of course, to a great many other
hospitals and institutions with which we
are in contact. Finally, we are fortunate in
having in the laboratory an _ excellent
technical and clerical staff.

Forty years ago it needed only one person
to ascertain a few cases of an unusual
disease for quite a good paper on human
genetics to follow. But the standards are
rising. In the future, teams of experts will be
essential. At the present time, the personnel
of the Galton Laboratory is by no means
complete in this respect, but we have
sufficient expert assistance to enable us to
carry out quite a number of investigations
under close scrutiny. I will mention a few
of the lines of work which have been productive since the laboratory at University
College has become active again after the
second world war.

Special Researches on Heredity

The first problem in our work is the
identification and accurate description of
human traits known to be—or thought to be
—inherited. Some of these traits are
difficult to measure and improvements in
technique are constantly needed if the
genetical backgrounds are to be properly
understood. Many of them involve psychological problems. One interesting example
is the trait of “tune deafness,” e.g. inability
to recognize the national anthem, which
Dr. Kalmus has studied in collaboration
with Dr. Fry of the Department of Phonetics
of the College. Colour blindness, olfactory
defects, taste deficiencies and disabilities
in spelling have received a great deal of
attention. The less subjective characters
like hair form and hair colour are also under
investigation. Here again new techniques
of measurement are being developed by
Dr. Kalmus and Dr. Harris. Among other

ITS WORK AND AIMS 19

physical traits, the configurations of the
dermal ridges on hands and feet have proved
an intriguing source of information. These
markings are, as Galton himself showed,
influenced by heredity and they are easy to
record. The type of hereditary influence is
still far from being understood. Dr. Holt
has done some valuable preliminary work on
the variation of dermal ridge counts in the
general population. In order to assess
correctly the likenesses found in families
and the changes associated with developmental defects, random samples, such as can
be obtained from normal school-children are
absolutely essential. Peculiarities of configuration found among mentally defective
subjects are being studied by Mr. Fang.

One of our continual aims is to build up
a large amount of material suitable for the
study of genetical linkage in man. This
is a long-term proposition. It presumes the
establishment of a battery of tests of known
marker characters, presumably unlinked with
one another. When a disease with known
genetics is ascertained, the battery is applied
to each member of the family. The results
accumulate and are finally handed over to
the mathematicians to work out the most
likely linkage values. Usually, I may say,
the value is near zero but, sooner or later,
fairly strong linkages will be found with
increasing frequency.

Linkage investigation emphasises the team
character of modern research in human
genetics. Take, for example, the study of
ectrodactyly, a rare and striking abnormality,
which greatly interested Pearson forty years
ago. In reported pedigrees this condition
is transmitted as a dominant mendelian
trait. It does not interfere with vitality or
fertility and may even enhance these
qualities. We do not know all the effects of
the gene but it causes malformations of
the hands and feet in the cases we have
studied. There is much variability in the
manifestation and occasionally the hands
are unaffected. The pedigree was published by Lewis and Embleton in 1908*
and records of names and _ addresses

* Lewis, T., and Embleton, D. (1908), ‘‘ Split-hand
and Split-foot Deformities,’’ Biometrika 6, 26.
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

were lodged with the College of Surgeons
Library. Forty years later contact with
the family was renewed by Miss MacKenzie,
and we were thus enabled to add considerably
to the pedigree. The new individuals are
separated by a thick line from those previously
ascertained. All available members were
seen, X-rayed, palm-printed and subjected
to the battery of genetical tests, which
included serological analysis carried out by
Dr. S. Lawler. Active eugenists would tend
to pronounce judgment on this family as a
racial menace. Professor Kemp remarked
to me that in Denmark such people would
all have been sterilized. Let us look more
deeply into the question. The affected
members of this pedigree, if their hands
and feet were not observed, would, I believe,
qualify as desirable members of the human
race. Furthermore, in nature such animals
as sloths find too many digits an encumbrance. Even in human civilized life
there are skills which do not demand the
usual quantum of fingers. Ectrodactylous
subjects can excel at outdoor games, clerical
work, draughtsmanship and turning. The
eugenic objection to ectrodactyly is mainly
zsthetic—not biological.

It takes more than one family to establish
linkage in human genetics and in the study
of rare diseases, co-operation is sought from
all those who meet with suitable cases.
Recently we have been able to observe
families containing myopathics, albinos,
phenylketonurics, cases with multiple
exostoses, congenital dislocation of the hip,
polycystic kidneys and so on, which have
been brought to our notice. Dr. Fraser
Roberts very kindly put us in touch with a
new ectrodactylous family. The defect was
transmitted through two generations but
arose in the first place from unaffected
parents. Pedigrees are known where a
dominant condition skips one or more
generations, but we must also be on the
look-out for indications of fresh mutation.
The problem of measuring spontaneous
mutation rate in the human species is made
very difficult by the lack of knowledge about
the reasons why manifestation varies so
much in different individuals. When in
vestigating these matters and, indeed, many
others, the selection of striking cases of
inherited disease is undesirable. The collection of outstanding pedigrees is useful for
linkage studies but, in more fundamental
work on human heredity, population samples
or samples of cases not selected by familial
incidence are necessary. When the whole
field of ectrodactylous cases is studied, for
example, the number of easily interpreted
pedigrees is found to be few and most
instances are unique in their families.

Methods of survey by collecting all available cases of one type of disease are therefore
adopted in many of the Galton Laboratory
investigations. I can refer specifically to
the comprehensive study of the genetics of
diabetes by Dr. Harris. Up to the present
time, information on this question has been
inadequate and interpretations have been
unconvincing. In launching the present
study, Dr. Harris has had the good fortune
of the clinical advice of such authorities as
Professor Himsworth and Dr. Lawrence.
He has amassed a great quantity of data,
which he has found possible to analyse in
ways never previously attempted. It is
not for me to anticipate his conclusions
but I can mention that, as found in almost
all accurate genetical investigations on
human diseases, no simple mendelian explanation will fit all the facts. We must
give up the attempt to express results in
terms of presence or absence of diseases.
Pedigrees with black and white blobs are
useful only for crude demonstration purposes.
We must think in terms of processes with
variable ages of onset and varying degrees of
manifestation in different cases. The
environment of each individual also has to be
carefully studied. The traditional belief
that inherited human diseases are always
dominant, recessive or sex-linked has to be
greatly modified in the light of modern
researches. A comprehensive study of the
genetics of human mammary cancer, carried
out in the laboratory by Miss MacKenzie,
Miss Karn, Dr. Kalmus, and myself, gave
no suggestion of mendelian inheritance
though familial concentration could be
proved.
THE GALTON LABORATORY :

Special Researches on Environment

The specific investigation of environmental
influences as causes of congenital disease
is a rapidly growing field. The effects of
maternal age and order of birth are comparatively easy to examine objectively. They
have been considered in several papers
published in the Annals of Eugenics. The
interrelations between these variables and
the problems of maternal and infant welfare
present fundamental eugenical problems.
Statistics of premature birth, neonatal
mortality, duration of pregnancy, spacing
of births, etc., have hitherto been insufficiently analysed from the biological
point of view, and familial data are scanty.
Experiments by animal biologists have
repeatedly shown that “ phenocopies ”
(apparently genetical abnormalities) can be
produced by poisoning or infecting the
embryo in very early stages of development.
Mumps and german measles, affecting a
woman in early pregnancy, are known to
be capable of inducing abnormality in the
foetus. There are also suggestions that
incompatible antigens may be damaging to
early development. Clearly the correct
evaluation of the genetical and environmental agencies in foetal disease is a problem
worthy of close study. It is most unlikely
that simple mendelian rules will account for
more than a small fraction of the cases.
Besides environment we have to think of
new mutations and chromosome abnormalities as possible causes of such conditions as
anencephaly, mongolism and _ congenital
heart disease. Whatever the cause, one
practical point emerges, namely, that the
optimal maternal ages are about the same,
both from the point of view of the mother
and of the child. For minimal risks, the first
child should be born at about 22 years and
the remainder, up to about five altogether,
spaced at intervals of approximately two
years. It is noteworthy that the twentiethcentury decline in family size tended
especially to eliminate the children born at
late maternal ages. From the point of view
of the incidence of foetal malformation it
must have actually been a eugenic process.

A favourite method of distinguishing

ITS WORK AND AIMS aI

between the effects of heredity and environment, initiated by Galton’s own work, is
the investigation of twins. For elementary
purposes, it is obviously necessary to be
able to separate binovular and monovular
types. The biometrical and_ serological
techniques, such as are in use at the
laboratory, are helpful to this end. The
amount of genetical information obtainable
from twin studies is, however, considerably
more restricted than is often supposed.
The facts can also be most misleading for a
variety of reasons, which I cannot elaborate
here. Suffice to say that we are extremely
interested in twins and Miss McArthur
is working in the laboratory on the genetics
of multiple births ; but our approach differs
very much from the traditional analysis of
collections into concordant and discordant
pairs.

The Teaching of Eugenics

Besides carrying out a full research programme at the Galton Laboratory we are
obliged to give instruction at the postgraduate level on the subject of eugenics and
its related fields. An important branch of
teaching is concerned with the application of
statistics to genetical data. We are fortunate
in having Dr. Cedric Smith on our staff to
deal with this subject, to expound established
methods and to invent new ones as occasion
arises in the course of research work. The
instruction given in the laboratory is
integrated with that given in the rest of the
Department of Biometry, Eugenics and
Genetics, so that students attached to the
laboratory can obtain a balanced knowledge
of nearly all branches of genetical work.
The department has its own library.

One of the ends served, I hope, by this
breadth of approach, is to make those who
will study and teach human genetics in the
future aware of the immense complexity of
the subject. The results of experimental
animal genetics must be fully appreciated,
yet great caution is required in their
application to human problems. The human
race resembles a wild population and is
not a herd of domestic or laboratory animals.
It has often astonished me that advocates of
22

race improvement are so often unaware of
the difficulties in the tasks which they set
themselves. Eighty years ago it seemed
reasonable to Galton, on the analogy with
the breeding of dogs and horses, to expect
to be able to produce a superior race of men
in a few generations. But knowledge of
medicine and of genetics has increased
enormously since that time, and with it has
grown the perception of our ignorance.
It is much easier than formerly to give an
accurate prognosis of the likelihood that a
certain well-defined rare disease will be
repeated in a given relative. Problems of
this sort are constantly occurring in medical
practice. Many reach the laboratory though
not all can be satisfactorily solved. To lay
down any general rules for improvement of
the human stock in the light of modern
knowledge, however, is pretentious and
absurd. It is my personal opinion, after much
experience in research work, that active
eugenical propaganda is, on the whole,
inimical to the advance of scientific knowledge. It is premature and assumes that
knowledge is a static and not a growing
structure.

Before attempting to improve on nature
and defeat her at her own game, we must
understand her methods very thoroughly.,
Some of the processes of natural selection
are very baffling and often appear superficially dysgenic. For example, genes which
appear to be very harmful are constantly
arising in healthy stocks by spontaneous
fresh mutations. No amount of eugenic
effort can prevent this from occurring.
Mutation rate can, of course, be speeded up
experimentally by radiations and other
methods and the implications of the fact
may be of great significance to future human
generations. Incidentally, this aspect of
genetics is not neglected in the Galton
Laboratory, where the experimental production of new hereditary characters in
cultures of fungi (basidio mycetes) is being
studied by Miss Mittwoch. However, mutation is not necessarily a bad thing. Indeed
it is a valuable asset for species to be able
to experiment with new forms.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Developments of Eugenical Theory

Since the discovery of the prevalence of
maternal and foetal incompatibility, new
light has been thrown upon the mechanics of
elimination of harmful genes. In some
circumstances, as shown by Haldane, selection against a gene increases the frequency of
the foetal disease which it causes. Another
difficult eugenic situation is concerned with
the relation of inbreeding to the production
of rare recessive traits. A simple way of
reducing the frequency, say, of phenylketonuria, would be to recommend the abolition
of cousin marriages. The tendency for inbreeding to grow less during the last fifty
years in European communities may have
reduced the actual numbers of lethal
recessives in the population. But simultaneously the carriers have probably become
slightly more prevalent than formerly. Even
more disturbing to any complacency, which
may remain in the minds of eugenists, is the
problem of heterosis (or hybrid vigour) and
my remaining remarks will be devoted to
this topic.

When breeding pure lines of plants or
animals, it has been found fairly regularly
that physical vigour and fertility are likely
to be diminished. The vigour is restored by
outcrossing. In the case of maize, the
standard method of obtaining maximal
yield is to cross two pure lines, individually
both inferior to the resulting hybrid.
The phenomenon of hybrid vigour or
“heterosis ”’ is not an isolated phenomenon
and it may well apply to man. If it does,
attempts to inbreed for purposes of producing
eugenically desirable pure lines of men are
likely to fail. There are also other objections
to pure stocks. It is advantageous for a
species to be variable—to possess both good
and bad genes. Bad genes in a new genetical
context or in another type of environment
may become good. The collective quality of
variation—the energy of the species, as Fisher
termed it—is the greatest asset in the long run
in the struggle for survival. We do not know
what environments the human race has yet
to face. The present evidence suggests that
there will be no lack of variation to meet
them unless some political lunatic succeeds in
THE GALTON LABORATORY :

eliminating everyone except those belonging
toa pure stock. Fortunately, human lunatics
are variable and do not all have the same
delusions. Differences of opinion about the
requirements of the master race will probably
make its realization impossible.

To come back to more immediate considerations, it is easy to show that improvements in
health can be much more rapidly, efficiently,
and pleasantly brought about by altering
environment than by altering heredity. In
the meantime, the action of natural selection
is slow and, for most practical purposes,
the population can be expected to be in
genetical equilibrium. Now, equilibrium can
be stable, when there is heterosis, that is,
when heterozygotes are more fertile than
homozygotes. A typical example, suggested
by Haldane, is this. Juvenile amaurotic
idiocy is a condition caused by a lethal gene
in homozygous form. The carriers, or
unaffected heterozygotes, need only have

ITS WORK AND AIMS 23

more than doubled as compared with the rest
of the population ; the mental disabilities of
the parents are transmitted to the offspring ;
there is much infant mortality; finally,
assortative mating, which is very marked in
human populations as far as intelligence
level is concerned, ensures that the members
of the group usually marry one another.
Eugenists themselves are not likely to be
members of this class and it is customary to
regard it as composed of inferior stock.
To my mind this is a contradiction in terms
and I prefer a more objective attitude. If
these people are really the most fertile, then
they must, zpso facto, be most biologically fit
and the superiority of the infertile intellectuals is illusory. I will not press this point
because I want to emphasize something else.
In spite of appearances, a population
composed of two such elements, one group
intelligent and the other less so but more
fertile, can be in stable equilibrium. A

Fic. 1

MoDEL POPULATION IN STABLE GENIC EQUILIBRIUM WITH ASSORTATIVE MATING AND DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY

 

Types of Offspring

Normal Defective and | Defective and

ED SPE aT | a ES | SSeS | <a Sery ep | SSS

Type of
Parental Relative Offspring
Mating Frequency per Mating
AA x AA 9 1°89
Aa xX Aa 1 4°00
aa xX aa o 0:00

 

EN CESARE GTAP | NN AEE ESSE | Y/R R/S | Spa PSS

Total Offspring

one per cent more children as compared with
non-carrier parents to keep the gene in
circulation indefinitely (with random mating)
without having to rely upon new mutation.
This one per cent increase in fertility might
be associated with an imperceptible lowering
of mean scholastic intelligence of carriers.
I will now proceed ruthlessly to generalize
this conception.

The Eugenics Society has for some time
past busied itself with the examination of
what has been called the “ social problem ”’
group. This “submerged tenth” of the
population is alleged to have, in some degree,
the following properties. Intelligence is
grossly below the average ; fertility is high,

Fertile Aa Infertile aa
(I.Q. 108) (I.Q. 66) (I.Q. 24)
17 _— —
I 2 I
18 2 I

nation with a social problem group having
the properties outlined is not necessarily
“ silently rotting at the core’”’ as has been
feared ; it might even be improving.

Stability in a Model Population

Intelligence is commonly believed to be
inherited like an additive (intermediate)
character because the mean level of children
agrees with that of the parents. Members of
the social problem group, when they mate
with one another, naturally must have
offspring with average ability for that group
but there will also be variations above and
below this level. Some time ago, I demon24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

strated a model of an imaginary population*
with all the main properties alleged to
apply to the normal and social problem
groups, which I quote here with slight
alterations, in Fig. 1. Imagine a race composed of three main types determined by
a single intelligence gene. The type AA is
supposed to be normal; we will say it has
an I.Q. slightly above roo and people of this
type make up about nine-tenths of the
population. Their net fertility is too low
to keep up their numbers and I suppose them
to have an average of less than two children
per family. There is, next, a social problem
group making up about one-tenth of the
population, all the members of which are
heterozygous for a gene a. This gene produces
intellectual defect and is associated with a
greatly increased fertility—about double
the normal and implying an average of four
children per family. The individuals homozygous for a will be mental and physical
weaklings, incapable of reproduction. Owing
to the additive nature of the gene, their mental grades must be too low to be compatible
with mating or even survival in most cases.
Now, we assume perfectly assortative mating,
so that no unions take place between the
normals and the defectives and we set the
system in motion. We find that it has
genic equilibrium. This is due to the fact
that the defectives’ matings not only maintain
their own numbers among their offspring but
also contribute to the superior group;
the proportion of weaklings produced implies
a large infant mortality in addition. The I.Q.
levels of the groups have been chosen so that
the mean for the whole population at birth is
100. In Fig. 1, the proportions of the groups
are such that there is exact replacement in
each _—_—s generation. Furthermore, the
equilibrium is stable. If we should suppose
that the size of the normal group were
suddenly halved, the mean I.Q. would fall
below 100. However, in each succeeding
generation it would rise appreciably until
it finally settled again at 100 after the complete rebuilding of the normal group.
Conversely, if there were initially too many

* Penrose, L. S. (1948), ‘‘ The Supposed Threat of
Declining Intelligence,’’ Am. J. Ment. Def., 53.

normals, their numbers would gradually
diminish until the same stable proportions
were reached. In the region of equilibrium
the rate of change per generation would be
extremely slow. The defectives are the
genetical backbone of this population. : If an
efficient sterilization programme were instituted against this submerged fertile tenth,
it would diminish the total fertility of the
whole group and eventually lead to
extermination of the whole race.

Conclusions

The analogy between this model and
human society is probably not close but it
should perhaps give food for thought. It
supplies a reason for rejecting eugenical
theories, which assume that the group to
which the propounder belongs is necessarily
at the centre of the human _ biological
universe. The truth may be the very reverse of this and the traditional Ptolemic
system of eugenics may have to give way to
a Copernican conception, where the infertile
intellectuals are found to be peripheral to a
nucleus of fertile labourers. The essence of
this suggestion is that differential fertility
in human populations is a phenomenon due
to heterosis. The example given is only a
very simple case of a type of problem, which
has to be tackled by students of evolution
and which sometimes involves difficult
mathematics.

This particular demonstration arose from
an examination of the probable fallacies in
arguments predicting a decline in national
intelligence level from observations on
differential fertility. It seems inherently
improbable that rapid changes should be
taking place in the distribution of “‘ intelligence genes’ in the population and not at
the same time in the frequencies of other
genes. For this and numerous further
reasons I regard as invalid the conclusions
usually drawn from the negative correlation
between sib number and _ intelligence.
Naturally, the results of the experiment
which repeated tests on Scottish children
after a lapse of fifteen years were of great
interest to me. Physique and intelligence
are positively correlated and a_ slight
THE GALTON LABORATORY: ITS WORK AND AIMS | 25

improvement in the mean intelligence level
was to be expected on analogy with the results
of enquiries showing gradually improving
physique. I fully agree with the interpretation that the improvements found are
due to non-genetical causes. But, if the
results of the Scottish tests had gone the
other way, there might have been a difference of opinion. A significant drop in the
mean level would have been hailed by most
people as a confirmation of their worst
fears, whereas I would willingly have
attributed it to environmental agencies or
inaccuracies of measurement.

In this lecture I have outlined the history
and the present aims of the Galton Laboratory. I have also explained some of my
personal views on eugenical theory, for
which, of course, my colleagues cannot be
held responsible. In conclusion, it is fair,
I think, to emphasize that the orientation of
our work is towards medical research ;
five people working in the laboratory are
medically qualified. The genetical constitution of the human race is unlikely to
be changed appreciably in the foreseeable
future as a consequence of our findings.
We expect, however, to be able to make
useful, if modest, contributions to medical
science.

DISCUSSION

Professor Major Greenwood, Dr. C. P.
Blacker, Professor Aubrey Lewis and Dr.
Eliot Slater took part in the discussion, the
two latter welcoming the expression by
Professor Penrose of views which were at
variance with those held by the Soczety.

Professor Major Greenwood said that his
apology for accepting the chairman’s invitation to speak on a subject of which he had
no expert knowledge was that Professor
Penrose had stirred pleasant memories of his
youth. He was certainly not the oldest surviving pupil of ‘K.P ”’—that distinction
probably belonged to Mr. Udny Yule, who
was nine years his senior—but he spent the
academic year 1904-5 under the wand of the
magician, and 1904-5 belonged to a vanished
age. In that session he was a youth just
through the undergraduate medical curriculum and 50 per cent of the audience of

“ K. P,’s ” lectures. The other 50 per cent
was “K. P.’s”’ assistant, John Blakeman,
whose name was still associated with a long
obsolete criterion of linear regression.

To any moderately well-educated young
man or woman of 1949, continued Professor
Greenwood, the notions young people in 1904
had of heredity, or genetics, must seem as odd
as the clinical medicine of Thomas Sydenham seemed to a newly qualified medical
man in 1904. It was true that Mendel’s work
had already been rediscovered, but the
biometric laboratory of University College
was not quite the best place in which to learn
Mendelism, although the best place in which
to learn how Francis Galton’s ideas could be,
first, mathematically formulated and then
arithmetically applied to data. For young
people like himself, whose mathematics
beyond “ intermediate ’’ standard were selftaught, “K. P.’s” insistence that no
algebraical result was of value which could
not be tried out arithmetically was encouraging. He was a very great teacher. He
encouraged young people to master what
was, to them, difficult algebra because he
convinced them it was useful. Of course they
were uncritical, but he taught them to work.
His own humble share of the eugenic researches of that epoch was to help in the
compilation of a bibliography of human
albinism, and doing.so under the eye of the
master taught him a good deal. He learned
how to use a library and how to abstract.
He thought his gradual lapse from Carlovignian orthodoxy was emotional rather than
intellectual ; an increasing distaste for the
sharp antithesis of Nature against Nurture ;
a cynical suspicion that correlation coefficients which favoured ‘‘ Nature ’’ would
not have to submit to the third degree, or
Sovietic, scrutiny which would certainly be
the fate of any statistical evidence that
seemed to favour ‘“‘ Nurture.”’ Well, now,
forty-five years on, Professor Penrose told
them that such emotional reactions had, and
have, an intellectual justification. Both
Biometricians and Mendelians of 1904—to
use the old battle cries—erred and strayed
from the ways of Nature, or the Nature of
Things, but not quite like lost sheep. The
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

biometricians, inspired by the Master Biometrician, forged the intellectual tools—
vehemently rejected by the Mendelians of
1904—which the geneticists of 1949, who
were, he supposed, the spiritual children of
the old Mendelians, found indispensable. If,
in one sense, the old biometricians fought a
losing battle, in another equally real sense
they won a great victory. Even in their,
as it seemed now, naive exaggerations of
what they called Nature they were not
wholly mischievous. Professor Penrose had
told them that the orientation of the Galton
Laboratory was towards medical research
and that he and his colleagues expected to be
able to make useful, if modest, contributions
to medical science. Professor Greenwood was
sure they would succeed in this undertaking,
indeed had already succeeded. In 1904 the
medical profession was but faintly interested
in heredity and not interested at all in
statistical methods. In 1949 the picture was
changed. He thought that Karl Pearson’s
studies of tuberculosis and polemics against
eminent physicians forty years ago were the
first writings to make the “ doctors’”’ believe, or perhaps fear, that there might be
something in biometry. Indeed this was
acknowledged by Osler in his once-famous
textbook as early as I912.

It was easy to point now to weaknesses in
“ K. P.’s ” arguments and to recall that his
belief that the rate of mortality from tuberculosis would increase in the next generation
had been signally falsified ; but the speaker’s
own generation of obscure medical biometricians profited from his onslaughts. After
all, “K.P.”’ was the first “layman” of
eminence who ventured to treat what the
public called ‘‘eminent MHarley Street
Specialists ’’ de puissance a puissance, over a
medical issue and to do so effectively. Certainly our views of heredity were very different from those of Galton and “ K.P.,”
but, in these days of bettered environment
and progressive social medicine, the problems
of medical genetics were, so he had been told
by a distinguished worker, not less but more
important than two generations ago. That,
however, said Professor Greenwood, brought
him to a field on which he would be a tres
passer. His only excuse for speaking was a
desire to remind the elderly and to tell the
young of battles forty years ago. Helmholtz
said that to come under the influence of a
great researcher changed one’s whole scale of
values. That was the effect “ K. P.’”’ had on
all young people who came within his sphere
of influence. It was a very wide influence.
The affection he inspired and the anger he
provoked both did good. H. G. Wells wrote
a delightful story of a man of science whose
life work was based on a desire to disprove
the conclusions of another scientist he disliked. The history of modern biometry
provided illustrations.

Dr. C. P. Blacker also expressed appreciation of the lecture. He recalled that in
January 1948 we had listened to Dr. Henry
Harris, who was a member of Professor
Penrose’s staff; Dr. Blacker hoped to
establish a precedent by which, each year,
the January meeting should be an occasion
for a lecture from a research worker in the
Galton Laboratory.

It was understandable that workers in-the
difficult field of human genetics, wherein
new complexities were being continually disclosed, should be hesitant about eugenic
policies. Misgivings were especially felt by
those who were preoccupied with rare
segregating characters rather than with the
common, metrical and graded characters such
aS were represented in Professor Penrose’s
ectrodactyly pedigree. But it was possible
to get so lost in obscurities as to forget the
workings of simple background principles.
The biochemistry of the simplest muscular
contraction was so complex as to make
understandable the remark of the young
lady who said that she had never appreciated
how much cleverer her body was than her
brain. Preoccupation with the complexities
of genetics could cause us to forget that
evolution had taken place blindly by natural
selection ; and that it had been by a selection
almost as blind that our ancestors, from time
immemorial, had shaped in accordance with
their needs, our domesticated animals and
plants. Our ancestors knew nothing of the
laws of Mendelism, of chromosomes or genes.
They proceeded on the simple rule that like
THE GALTON LABORATORY :

produced like. We would not go far wrong
in applying the same rule.

Science could not determine our values : it
could not influence the choice of what qualities we thought good or bad. Our eugenic
values to-day were not as simple as they
had been for some of Galton’s followers and
camp-followers. We no longer thought in
terms of race or class. But the difficulty
presented by the evolution of our values
should not be confused with that arising from
the application of our knowledge. Science
was ethically neutral and could be made to
serve bad ends as well as good.

Galton’s outlook on eugenics, though
remarkably stable throughout his life, had
changed in perceptible ways which he had
described in his Memories. He had come to

ITS WORK AND AIMS 27

recognise, in his last decade, that it was not
as easy as he had first thought to translate
science into policy. Dr. Blacker quoted the
following passage, written by Galton in 1904:

Over-zeal leading to hasty action would do
harm, by holding out expectations of a near
golden age, which will certainly be falsified and
cause the science to be discredited. The first and
main point is to secure the general intellectual
acceptance of eugenics as a hopeful and most
important study. Then let its principles work
into the heart of the nation, who will gradually
give practical effect to them in ways that we
may not wholly foresee.

This was a cautious statement which we
could as readily accept to-day as when it
was written. It represented the standpoint
of the Eugenics Soctety.

UNDERSTAND YOUR CHILD
By D. B. Hupson, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H., Assistant County Medical Officer of Health for Essex.

A manual covering all aspects of child welfare from birth to school-days.

The chapters

devoted to special subjects such as Sex Problems in Childhood and Adolescence,
Maladjustments at School, The Use of the Guidance Clinic and Juvenile Delinquency,
will prove of particular value to parents, teachers and child welfare workers.

100 pages

Paper covers, 55.

SEX AND MARRIAGE

By Norman Rosertson. This book is designed to cover those aspects of the subject
which have received inadequate treatment elsewhere and those which have been dealt
with in terminology beyond the comprehension of the layman. It is a cornprehensive
textbook covering both physical technique and psychological problems and this, with
its low price, makes it ideal for distribution and recommendation by social workers.

50 pages

Paper covers, 2s. 6d.

THE DRIVING FORCES OF HUMAN NATURE

and their adjustment
By Dom. T. V. Moore, Ph.D., M.D. An introduction to psychology and, simultaneously,
a synthesis of the three phases of modern psychological thought. Philosophy, experimental

psychology, and psychiatry are presented as supplementing each other.
20 illustrations

475 pages

325. 6d.

a Ellis titles in stock

PSYCHOLOGY OF SEX. rath Printing 
SEX IN RELATION TO aremmdalal ord Printing

ON LIFE AND SEX 
WM. HEINEMANN MEDICAL BOOKS LTD.,

 

158.
21s.
- - 17s. 6d.
LONDON, W.C.I

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 1
