THE COMPLEX DETERMINANTS OF
AMENTIA*

By L. S. PENROSE, ™.A., M.D., MR.GS., L.R.C.P.

HEN people began to take an

interest in the problems of mental

deficiency, in the middle of last
century, the causes of the condition were
entirely unknown. Early investigators, such
as Ireland and Shuttleworth, accepted the
ordinary medical standards of etiological
classification and divided their cases into
congenital and acquired types. Since then
the attitude of specialists has undergone
many changes. Some have laid stress on the
existence of definite clinical types, while
others have taken the view that mental
defect is a disease entity with a specific
ztiology and pathology. The main cause is
asserted, by some authorities, to be a single
recessive Mendelian character: others have
identified the cause with defective developmental potentiality of the germ cells or with
neuronic insufficiency. The investigators
who proposed these solutions are people of
the highest knowledge and experience, and
their respective outlooks must receive the
greatest attention from those who hope to
elucidate the problems in this field of work.
From my own experience of the subject,
which, admittedly, is of short duration, I do
not find it possible to accept any simple
view of causation, and, if I use the term
“amentia’’ as an alternative to “ mental
defect,’’ for verbal convenience, I do not
wish to suggest thereby that the subjectmatter is simplified. It may be that, after
further research, I shall think differently, but
I should like to try and explain the problem
as I see it now. I shall have to compress my
description within a short compass in which
only the main lines of argument can be discussed. I hope to show how great a variety of
factors contribute to the end result of mental

* An Address to the Society at the Annual General
Meeting.

deficiency as it is known in this country at
the present time.

The determinants of amentia—it is misleading to call them all causes—can roughly
be divided into two classes: there are what
may be called arbitrary determining factors,
and there are true biological causes. The
arbitrary determinants depend upon legal
and social definitions. These definitions
reflect our social habits and are of scientific
interest to the social psychologist. The biological determinants, on the other hand, are
physical phenomena, such as the processes
of heredity, neuro-pathology and individual
mental development.

MENTAL DEFECT—A LEGAL ENTITY

Turning first to the arbitrary determinants, we have to consider the consequences
of the fact that mental deficiency is a legal
entity. The Mental Deficiency Acts contain
special provisions for dealing with persons
of inferior social ability, partly for these
people’s own benefit and partly for the benefit of the rest of society. There is, naturally,
a fairly large positive correlation between
the class of individuals defined by the Acts
and the class of individuals with inferior
ability at mental or scholastic tests. There
is also an association between those persons
who are defective within the meaning of the
Acts, and those who have weak moral
characters. For example, over one-tenth of
the patients in the Eastern Counties’ Institution are legally criminals and are cared for
there instead of being sent to industrial
schools or prisons. Adolescents are sometimes
certified because they are considered to be
in danger of becoming immoral. Patients
often have brothers and sisters whose intellects are no brighter than their own, but who
are well behaved, and are, therefore, not
certifiable. There is, again, an important

I2I
IZ2

relationship between the number of persons
certified mentally defective in a given district
and the outlook of the local magistrates and
medical officials ; and the administration of
the laws depends partly upon the accommodation available in local institutions.
Another arbitrary complication arises because a great many institutional beds are
supported by charity, as in general hospitals.
Consequently, while some parents may find
it more convenient to educate a defective
child at home, others, on account of humble
circumstances, find application for institutional training absolutely essential.

QUANTITATIVE MEASURES OF
DEFICIENCY

It may be suggested that one can shortcircuit all these difficulties and measure
mental deficiency quantitatively by intelligence tests. At the present time, none of the
tests in regular use are perfectly efficient, and
the results depend a good deal upon the
subject’s previous experiences ; but even if
precise tests for general intelligence were
available, we should still be faced with the
problem that the line between a normal score
and an abnormal score must be drawn
arbitrarily, because the frequency distribution of intelligence test scores, ascertained
in various ways for school age populations,
forms a continuous curve.

It is a statistical convention to regard as
abnormal those observational values which
fall outside twice the standard deviation of
the distribution. The standard deviation
(a convenient measure of the spread) of
intelligence in the general community varies
according to the type of community studied
and the type of test used. If only the children
in the ordinary schools are tested, the spread
is less than if the sample includes the best
educated as well as the feeblest intellects
outside the schools. The estimate of the
standard deviation, obtained by Burt, was
Ir per cent. for London elementary school
children with the Binet scale. In the
Swedish data, analyzed by Pearson, the
corresponding value was about 19 per cent. :
here also the Binet test was used in a comprehensive survey of all the children in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

community. Other investigators (Dawson,
Richardson, Terman) have obtained results
intermediate between II per cent. and 19
per cent., and it is fairly safe to assume that
the value lies between 10 per cent. and 20
per cent. This shows that, if we subtract
twice the standard deviation from 100 per
cent. intelligence, we must draw the borderline of normality between mental ratios of
60. and 80. On the other hand, we may prefer to define as defective the lowest scoring
hundredth part of the population: if so, we
should have to draw the line somewhere
between the mental ratios of 55 and 75. If
a child’s intelligence falls within the marginal
range, about 20 points wide, it will be difficult to say whether or not he is defective
—according to the existing methods of
diagnosis: we shall be guided in our decision
in any particular case by such things as the
child’s social behaviour, his educability and,
what is even more important, we shall be
guided by the available accommodation in
special schools or training centres. It was
estimated in the Wood Report that about
three-quarters of certifiable defectives have
intelligence above 50 per cent. A slight
alteration, therefore, in the position of the
borderline makes a big difference in the number of aments.

An inevitable consequence of the ambiguity of definition is that the normal
and abnormal groups overlap one another.
Even if we confine our attention to the children judged to be defective according to
the criteria of the Education Act, we find
that about a quarter of the children sent to
special schools are better at mental tests
than the lowest scoring normal children. The
overlapping is partly due to the imperfections of mental tests, but it is greatly
accentuated because social behaviour is a
criterion of defect.

OVERLAPPING OF NORMALITY AND
MENTAL DEFICIENCY
Dr. E. O. Lewis has courageously stated the
view that it is a mistake to regard mental
defect as a pathological state, because a considerable proportion of aments actually belong to the normal population. He has
THE COMPLEX DETERMINANTS OF AMENTIA

proposed the term “‘subcultural’’ to apply to
members of the group which is formed, one
might say, by the overlapping of the definitions of normality and mental deficiency. To
some people this notion seems altogether
absurd, but there is nothing very unusual
about it. Lewis pointed out the analogy
between mental grade and physical stature.
We could divide men into two classes : those
who, on account of their physique, were
suitable for the police force, and those who
were not. Among those rejected we should
find a certain number of dwarfs and poor
physical specimens, but we should also find
many men who were quite normal, though
too small to pass the required tests. Similar
circumstances are constantly arising in
medicine. We are accustomed to speak of
some deviations from the average condition
of the body as physiological changes: other
variations are called pathological. This is a
distinction partly of degree and partly of
kind. Usually, a variation is physiological
unless it is a symptom of a previously recognized disease. Thus, the pulse rate and the
temperature vary from day to day in the
same individual and they vary also in different individuals according to constitution,
but we do not regard pulse or temperature
changes as abnormal unless they overstep
some assigned limit or unless they are associated with signs of disease. Again, one may
consider the distribution, in the general
population, of refractive errors in the eye.
Few people have perfect sight, and there
exists a normal or physiological variation
which may amount even to a degree requiring
optical correction. There are also cases of
high errors of refraction which cannot be
regarded as normal. It is an interesting fact
that high refractive errors are usually associated with pathological changes in the retina
orin other structures. Transferring the same
ideas to the distribution of intelligence, it
seems reasonable to refer to feeble-minded
persons who show no associated physical or
mental abnormality as normal variants.
There is difficulty in deciding exactly what
proportion of the individuals at any given
mental level will be expected, theoretically,
to be normal variants. It is doubtful whether

123

the frequency distribution curve of intelligence conforms to the normal law of error:
it may even be wrong to suppose that the
distribution of normal intelligence is symmetrical or normal in the statistical sense.
In most investigations there is found to be a
slight skew ; that is to say, deviations from
the mean in the direction of poor intelligence
are more frequent than deviations in the
direction of superior ability. The people at
the lower end of the scale more than balance
those at the upper end. This finding is to be
expected, because accidental disturbances—
according to their magnitude—are more
likely to reduce intelligence than to increase
it. The preponderance of low intelligence
can be attributed to pathological accidents.
Whatever may be the exact form of the curve,
if the basis of Lewis’s view is sound, the prevailing definitions of mental deficiency must
be discarded in the scientific investigation of
causes. Let us forget about legal and administrative necessities in the discussion of the
causation, and speak ofinferior mental ability.

THE BIOLOGY OF INFERIOR MENTALITY

What, then, are the real biological causes
of inferior mental ability ? In the first place
there are the causes which are similar to
those producing superior mental ability.
The minor differences which produce (among
normal people) the variation above or below
the average mental powers have been studied
by all sorts of different methods. Practically
all observers agree that hereditary factors
play an important part and that environmental circumstances also contribute, though
we have little precise knowledge of how these
factors work in combination with one another. The relative proportion of these
factors in determining the individual’s intelligence varies from case to case and from
family to family. I am personally inclined
to accept the estimates of Hogben, Holzinger
and Newman, based on studies of boardedout children or twins, that, in determining
deviations above and below the mean
intelligence level, heredity and environment
are approximately of equal importance.
This estimate applies to individuals who
are part of the normal population, and it
124

therefore applies equally to that group of
defectives which can be regarded as belonging to the normal distribution.

I have previously pointed out that the
major accidental occurrences which alter
intelligence are more likely to reduce it than
to raise it. Accidents may be either environmental or genetic and they may be in the
nature of infectious diseases or injuries to
the nervous system, or they may be the
effects of uncommon gene mutations. Now
these factors do not all produce their effects
in the same way. There are two main ways
in which they behave, and these two ways are
logically distinct.

In the first place, the effects may be
cumulative. Thus, to take a simple example, a
child who contracts encephalitis lethargica
loses, on the average, about six points in its
mental ratio (or intelligence quotient) in two
years, and the deterioration is progressive.
A child with an initial ratio of 110 is in little
danger of becoming mentally defective under
such circumstances. On the other hand, a
child with an initial ratio of 80 may be expected, about three years after the onset of
the disease, to reach a level of intelligence
within the range of mental deficiency. Here
the initial dullness, with the superadded
disorganization of the brain, causes the
borderline to be overstepped. Subcultural
mentality plus organic disease is a potent
cause of mental deficiency.

In the second place, accidental factors may
combine to produce inferior intelligence,
though they have little or no effect on mentality when they act separately. The hereditary predisposition to a certain type of
disease may be of no consequence if precipitating factors are absent from the environment.
If susceptibility to tuberculosis were entirely
hereditary, this would be of little consequence to susceptible individuals unless
tubercle bacilli existed in the environment.
Conversely, the presence of pathogenic
organisms would be of no significance to an
immune race. The coexistence of susceptibility and a precipitating factor, however,
produces a disease. Not improbably, in
some of the infectious diseases which appear
to cause mental deficiency, the question of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inherited diathesis is of importance. Possibly
this is so in syphilitic amentia : some other
types of encephalitis also seem to run in
families.

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC INSTANCES

By examining exceptional types, we are
able to identify most effectively the individual factors which can combine together
in these complex ways to produce inferior
mental ability. 
Mongolism is a type of mental defect which
occurs in all classes of society : it may be due
to the product of genetic factors and specific
prenatal environment. There is very little
doubt that the maternal age at a child’s
birth is a potent cause. The father’s age
and the birth order seem to be of no significance. On the other hand, maternal age does
not seem to be the only causal factor: the
incidence is higher among some races than
among others and some families appear to be
particularly prone to produce mongol children. Like twins have always been observed
to be equally affected and mongolism is often
found in one of a pair of unlike twins. These
facts support the view that, while one child
can have a predisposition to become a mongol if the mother is elderly, other children
in the same sibship can be immune. But

maternal age at the birth of a child is not

itself a pathological circumstance. Nor are
English people to be regarded as specially
pathological on account of the relatively high
incidence of mongolism in this country as
compared with some others.

. The question of predisposition is also
important when we notice how frequently
the mentally defective suffer from some form
or other of mental derangement. Experience
in the field of mental diseases leads us: to
expect that some psychoses are the combined
product of inherited predisposition and mental strain. The mentally disordered patient
usually has an intelligence which is lower
than would be expected if his faculties were
well co-ordinated. There is a great deal of
difference between the initial capacity of a
patient who is a reliable, steady worker, and
that of a patient of similar mental age who
suffers from severe psychosis or epilepsy.
THE COMPLEX DETERMINANTS OF AMENTIA

There are numerous other special conditions. Some of these are due to genetic
accidents. The cause of amaurotic idiocy is
well established, but there are probably other
types of amentia in which a rare recessive
gene is the chief determinant. One such
condition seems to have been identified by
Sj6gren in Sweden. His method was to
examine exhaustively an inbred, isolated
community. This type of investigation is not
always practicable. The alternative method
of comparing the children of consanguineous
parents with those whose parents are unrelated, however, gives some useful hints.
I have found that institutional defectives
whose parents are consanguineous usually
suffer from diseases which are distinct from
the rest. In the consanguineous group one
occasionally finds cases of defect associated
with well-known neurological conditions
like retinitis pigmentosa or amaurotic
idiocy. Far more often these cases do not
exhibit the picture of any known disease.
Their grade, however, tends to be low, and
they are sharply differentiated from their
brothers and sisters as regards mentality.

Another type of rare genetic accident is a
dominant sublethal mutation. If this should
happen, usually only one child in the family
is affected when the parents are both normal.
An affected parent, however, transmits the
disease to half the offspring. Two examples
of dominant sublethal characters, met with
in mental deficiency, are epiloia (sebaceous
adenoma with epilepsy) and neurofibromatosis. Even when dealing with the apparently
simple genetic problems presented by such
diseases, complications are liable to arise.
Abortive forms of the disease make their
appearance in the families of affected individuals. Neurofibromatosis, for example, is
not always associated with mental deficiency.
Much analysis is required to determine
whether the inconstancy in the pathological
effects is due to environmental causes or
whether the extraneous genetic constitution
is to be held responsible.

Multiple genetic constituents of mental
capacity may be mutually additive in
their effects or may only produce a change
when they collaborate. The analysis of

125

different types and grades of mental defect
gives valuable clues to modes of action of
multiple genetic and environmental factors
in the causation of normal deviations from
the mean intelligence. I therefore do not
consider the time is wasted when we sort
out the different peculiarities associated with
amentia instead of regarding the whole group
of certified defectives as a single entity.

It is often stated that the influence of
environment is most marked in the causation of idiots and low-grade aments and that
heredity plays more part in the causation of
the milder degrees of mental impairment. I
hope I have made it clear that the causes of
amentia are too complex to admit the satisfactory division of cases into hereditary and
non-hereditary groups. The incidence of
neuropathy, however, is asserted—I believe
correctly—by Wildenskov and others, to be
much higher in the families of the feebleminded than in the families of idiots. To
my mind this fact only permits the conclusion to be drawn that heredity enters into
the causation of the high and low grades ina
different manner. The occurrence of defect
in the families of defectives (i.e. a positive
family history) is far from being unequivocal
evidence of hereditary influence. I know, for
example, a partially blind and deaf patient
who has six normal sibs and there was no
neuropathy discoverable in any relative: all
the same I feel certain that this case is
mainly of hereditary origin with a superadded element of deprivation. This conviction arises from the clinical diagnosis coupled
with the knowledge that the parents are first
cousins. Conversely, I am inclined to attribute to environment the amentia in a
paralytic child with a history of very difficult
breech labour in spite of the occurrence of
insanity and mental deficiency in a branch of
the family.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

To sum up, I have, for convenience,
divided the determinants of amentia into two
main groups. One set of determinants depends upon our way of looking at the problem, and is not inherent in the biological
126

nature of the problem itself. The other
determinants are the true biological causes
of inferior mental ability, and they act in a
variety of ways: there can either be cumulative effects or else causes which, innocuous in
themselves, may combine disastrously. If
I am correct in thinking that the causes are

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

so complex, it is obvious that no very simple
solution to the problem of prevention or cure
is possible. As in the campaign against
cancer, the attack must be made along the
whole front. We shall have to fight each
individual cause by the method which is
most suitable.

 

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

THIRD SERIES.

1. ARTICLES—

VoL. XVI. Part I.

FEBRUARY 1934

CONTENTS:

Case Law in France. Contributed by Dr. Marc Ancel.
Perpetuities in French Law. Contributed by Sir Maurice Sheldon Amos, K.C.
The Report of the Newfoundland Royal Commission.

Contributed by Professor Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.

Moslem Law in the Egyp

tian Mixed Courts— Wakf. Contributed by F. M. Goadby, Esq., D.C.L.

The Unification of the Rules of Conflict relating to Negotiable Instruments.
Contributed by H. C. Gutteridge, Esq., K.C., LL.D.
The Position of the American Indian in the Law of the United States.

Contributed by W. G. Rice, Esq., Jr.

Delegated Legislation in England as seen from Abroad. Contributed by Cecil T. Carr, Esq., D.C. L.
Dominion and Colonial Cases on the Conflict of Laws for the Quinquennium, 1928-1932.

Contributed by Professor R. W. Lee.

Indian and Far Eastern Cases on the Conflict of Laws, 1928-1933.

Contributed by S. Vesey-Fitzgerald, Esq.

Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. Contributed by Professor Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.

2 NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.

Annual Subscription, One Guinea.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, 1 Elm Court, Temple, E.C.4.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.
