HUMAN STERILITY

A Study of an Unusual Pedigree
By Professor F. A. E. CREW and Wm. C. MILLER

(From the Institute of Animal Genetics, University of Edinburgh.)

who has been married eleven years and is

still without an heir, sought advice as to
the nature of the sterility which characterized his marriage. An examination of his
family history revealed the fact that every
one of the seven males of the preceding generation (II), though married, had left no offspring. The females of this generation had
had issue, however. There was no obvious
cause for the sterility of the marriage of
III.2, and no treatment was exhibited. His
wife is now pregnant.

The fact that every one of the seven married males of Generation II was without offspring cannot reasonably be explained save
by reference to some common cause. ‘The
women they married were unrelated, and
though these themselves produced no offspring, their married sisters did. For
example, the sister of female II.2 (i.e.
female II.3) was twice married and had
families of three and of two by her respective husbands. Female IJ.1 had three
sisters, all with families. Three of the
other introductions by marriage into this
generation had brothers or sisters, but
these all were unmarried at the time of
death, or else, if still living, are still unmarried. There is no record of any sterility
in marriage in this pedigree beyond Generation II, and as is shown, the males of Generation III, as well as the females, are fertile,
though their reproductive rate is low.

The evidence, as is always the case in
human pedigrees, is incomplete. A large
number of the individuals of Generations ITI
and IV are still living, many of them being
still below the marriage age. ‘The facts,
such as they are, are clear. In Generation I
there were three brothers and one sister.

| N the pedigree now presented, male III.2,

The sister did not marry and the brothers
did. ‘The first had two sons who married
and left no offspring. The third had a son
and a daughter who did not marry. The
second had five sons, all of whom married
and left no issue, and two daughters, both
of whom married and had offspring. Of
these, both males and females are fertile in
mating, but the marriage of one son, III.2,
proves to be fertile only after eleven years.

These facts, though well worthy of record,
cannot sustain a lengthy and speculative
discussion concerning the nature of the cause
of sterility in human matings. In the
absence of greater and more intimate knowledge of the individuals concerned, it is impossible to point directly to the cause of this
sterility. It is reasonable, however, to
postulate that the seven males of Generation
II were sterile in mating owing to the fact
that they possessed 1n common, being related, some hereditary factor or factors,
leading to the development of sterility,
which they received from the related males
of Generation I. ‘These factors apparently
operate so as to produce a sex-limited condition, for the females of Generation II were
not sterile in mating, but apparently transmitted some or all of the factors corresponding to this condition, since their sons,
though fertile, exhibit a fertility that is
relatively poor. It should be stated that the
males of Generation II are socially successful through their own efforts, and exhibit no
signs of any obvious kind of physical defect
or of physiological disharmony.

For the expression of sterility in a
sexually-reproducing species two individuals are required : it is not the individual
but the mating that is sterile. Since the
females of Gencration II and the males of

127
128

Generation III of this pedigree are fertile in
mating, it is reasonable to assume that infecundity of the males of Generation II was
responsible for the sterility of their marriages. ‘The facts relating to artificial parthenogenesis permit us to assume that probably lack of fertilizing ability on the part of
the spermatozoon is a more common cause
of sterility than is an absence of response
on the part of the ovum. It would seem
that in this family the ovum is readily
fertilized, but that the spermatozoon is deficient in fertilizing ability. This deficiency

Ut

IV

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was complete in Generation II but somewhat
repaired in Generation II]. We may
assume, therefore, that the males of Generation III received from their mothers factors
which improved the fertilizing ability of
their gametes.

If, in this way, there can pass from the
female to her sons, factors affecting the
fertilizing ability of the spermatozoa, there
can be a quantitative interpretation of fertility, and an explanation of similarities and
dissimilarities in reproductive rates of the
different generations in pedigree is provided.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.
