THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.
By E. W. MacBribe.

Part IV.

IN the last article we saw that there was strong evidence to show
that the hereditary qualities of animals and plants could be
changed and that new strains could originate in two ways, viz.,
(1) by crossing them with other strains, (2) by irregularities of
cell division resulting in unequal distributions of chromatin. We
further saw that almost all the changes in animals, which have
been observed to originate in the second way, consisted in the
loss of something characteristic of the species from which the
new strain was derived. Thus Morgan’s new strains of
Drosophila ampelophila were distinguished by loss of pigment
in the eye and the reduction of the wings. Speaking broadly
it is also true that many of the peculiarities of the domesticated
breeds of animals, and of the cultivated varieties of plants, are
due to the omission of something characteristic of the wild
species from which they have presumably sprung. But this is.
not always the case. Fowls possessing the rose and pea modifications of their combs owe these peculiarities in each case to the
addition of a modifying factor absent in the wild species,
Gallus bankiva; but although we are morally certain that these
varieties originated from Gallus bankiva at some time or other,
there is no historical record of their having done so; all the
mutations in animals, of whose origin there are contemporary
records, have consisted in the loss of factors. In what category
the mutations of the evening primrose are to be placed is.
uncertain. Cnothera lata seems to owe its peculiarities to the
presence of an additional chromosome, but Cnothera gigas
seems to be distinguished by an excess of chromatin which leads.
to the formation of unusually large cells—but it has neither lost
nor gained any new description of chromatin.

But now the serious question arises as to how far these ascertained modes of origin of new varieties are capable of accounting for the bewildering varieties of species in the animal and
330 EUGENICS REVIEW.

vegetable kingdoms. In some few cases they may throw some
light on these. In the various islands of the Fiji group there
exists a kind of Parrot (Pyrrulopsis) of which a different variety
is found in each island. These varieties agree in shape, size
and general coloration, but they differ in the tint of a crest and
a collar of differently coloured feathers. Each island seems to
have its peculiar pattern. In this case the differences in tint
may possibly be due to the loss of some factor due to the
accident of the constitution of the birds—perhaps very few—
which happened to reach and colonise that particular island.
But in the vast majority of cases the differences which separate
species are not of this kind. They are reflected in a general
difference of habit which may be analysed into different proportions of a great many organs—a great number of elusive
peculiarities which may be summed up in the phrase a difference
of constitution. It would require an indefinite number of
‘* internal accidents ’’ to convert one species of this description
into a species allied to it. As we pass to forms which differ from
one another, sufficiently to be placed in different genera, we are
able in many cases to see the adaptive character of the differential
marks which divide them, that is, we see that their structures are
fitted each to its own peculiar environment. As we proceed to
greater differences than generic the adaptive nature of these
differences becomes more and more evident, and the conviction
rises in our minds that they can only be adequately explained by
the existence of some force which moulds the organism to its
surroundings. Bateson, in his latest work, confesses that the
discoveries of what may be termed ‘‘ Mendelian inheritance,”’
have failed to thrown any light on the origin of adaptation.
But it was precisely this problem which it was the object of
Darwin’s work to elucidate—it is the problem of organic
nature. It is true that in some cases upholders of the allimportance of Mendelian inheritance have been able to show
that the adaptive importance of certain structures has been
rashly assumed, but as to the general fact of adaptation there
can be no possible dispute.

Then we have in a very few cases—as for instance in the
tocks which form the sides of the Colorado canyon—a series
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 331

of sediments accumulated with practically no interruptions
during a period which must have extended over many millions
of years. In these sediments there have been discovered fossils
which show in the clearest manner the gradual evolution of
forms of life. In the Colorado sediments we can trace the
gradual emergence of the horse from a four-toed ancestor which
resembled the modern tapir. This series has been known in
outline for thirty years, but recent investigations have brought
to light torms filling every gap, and we are confronted with a
series which shows the slow change of one form into another
by steps which are so gradual that were two adjacent forms
only considered they would hardly be placed in distinct species.
There is no trace here of change by sudden jumps or advances
by the dropping out of factors—and the progressive changes are
found in teeth, limbs and proportions of skeleton.

Of course, Darwin’s explanation of series like these was
perfectly simple—it has been outlined in Part II.—and _ perfectly satisfactory if we grant his assumption of the inheritability
of minute differences. But as we have seen the evidence at
present available does not favour the theory of the frequent
appearance of small inheritable mutations, all tending in the
same direction. Is there, we may ask, no alternative hypothesis ?
Should we really be driven to the conclusion tentatively discussed
by Bateson, in his presidential address to the British Association
at Melbourne, that all evolution had consisted in a dropping of
factors, and that the talent of Shakespeare was innate in an
amoeba, but was prevented by showing itself owing to the
presence of interfering factors ?

Now all zoologists know that most animals are able in the
course of their individual lives to adapt themselves somewhat
to their surroundings. Animals exposed to cold develop longer
fur than those which are sheltered, oysters exposed to water in
which there is constant deposition of silt grow so as to turn the
edges of their shells upwards, and hosts of other instances could
be named. It was an obvious assumption to make that these
changes, which may be termed reactions to the environment,
were inheritable; were this so the problem of adaptation would
be in large measure solved. This theory of the inheritable
332 . EUGENICS REVIEW.

character of functional reaction, or, as it is more commonly
termed, thé effects of use and disuse, was put forward by
Lamarck long before the days of Darwin, and it has been
generally rejected by biologists, though at all times there has
been a considerable minority who have favoured the hypothesis.
The reasons for its rejection have been— |
(1) The difficulty of understanding how changes in the
external development of an animal could react in a representative manner on the germ-cell. It is not denied that the germcells might be affected by changes in other parts of the body,.
but for the Lamarckian theory it is necessary to suppose that
they are affected in a representative manner, 1.e., so as to give
rise to organisms showing the character impressed on their
parents by the environment independently of the action of the
environment on themselves.
(2) The lack of evidence that characters acquired during the
lifetime of the parent ever were transmitted to the offspring.

(3) The apparent impossibility of explaining many of the
modifications of structure found in animals, even if the
possibility of the inheritance of acquired qualities were granted.
| It will be observed that the third objection only holds
against the quite unnecessary supposition that one cause, and
one alone, is responsible for all types of inherited variation. —

The second objection is the really vital one, because if it
were removed—if it could be shown that acquired qualities
really were transmitted to the offspring, it would be of small
importance that we were unable to form a mental picture of how
the process was carried out; especially in view of our impotence
to form mental pictures of how such fundamental activities of
life, as growth, contraction, and nervous impulse are carried
out.
The first experiments on the inheritability of acquired
characters were made by cutting off the tails of mice and rats,
breeding them, and observing whether their offspring tended to
be born with defective tails. These experiments, prosecuted
through several generations, vielded no evidence whatever that
there was any tendency for mutilations and injuries of this kind
to be inherited.
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 333

But injurious changes forcibly wrought in individuals could
scarcely be called ‘‘ reactions to the environment,’’ and not even
Lamarck had supposed that such mutilations could be inherited.
Yet some of the instances which had been brought forward in
support of the Lamarckian idea were of this nature; thus a case
was mentioned in which a German officer had acquired a scar on
the side of his face as the result of a sword-cut received in a
duel, and subsequently had a daughter who had a mark closely
resembling the sword-cut in the same place. Weismann, who
‘was able to examine this case critically, pointed out that the
resemblance was superficial and accidental, that the daughter’s
mark when closely examined was quite unlike her father’s scar.

There is, however, a general consensus of opinion that if

acquired qualities are ever inherited it is not this kind of injury
that can be handed down, and we now turn to some cases where
the inheritance of true reactions can be studied. Agar has found
that the crustacean Simocephalus, which he used for investigating the inheritability of minute differences amongst individuals of the same brood (see Part II.), when reared in a
culture of a certain protozoon, produced individuals in which
the valves of the carapace were turned outwards—reflexed—
instead of meeting each other in a straight line beneath the
animal. When such abnormal individuals were removed to
ordinary water and allowed to breed there, they produced in the
first filial generation a certain proportion of offspring in which
the valves of the shell were reflexed to a considerable degree,
but in the second filial generation nearly all trace of this had
died out. Agar was not able to determine what the particular
protozoon was which produced this extraordinary result. The
culture was, so to speak, a chance one, consisting of water from
a heated tank in which the tropical fish Lepidosiren was kept.
He was, however able to determine that the influence proceeded from something which was eaten and digested by
the Simocephalus, and not from some chemical in the water
which might be supposed to act on the skin of Stmocephalus.

Agar determined this by centrifuging the water of the culture
and collecting the sediment; this sediment was then added to
distilled water and specimens of Simocephalus were placed in it.
334 EUGENICS REVIEW.

They produced offspring which showed the reflexed valves just
as well as specimens reared in the original culture.

The persistence of the reflexed valves was most noticeable
in the first brood produced by individuals which had been reared
in culture-water and had been removed from it to normal water
after the change to normal water had been made. This brood
developed from eggs which were laid, t.e., had passed from the
body into the brood pouch just after the parents had been placed
in normal water. Consequently these eggs had undergone the
early period of their development, z.e., the period from primitive
germ-cell to ripe egg, whilst the parent was living in abnormal

 

Fig. 1.
Normal and abnormal specimens of Simocephalus, viewed from the ventral side.
A. Normal specimen. B. Specimen with reflexed valves, af antenna, o¢ compound

_ eye.
water. Later broods produced by the samé animals, subsequently to their being removed to normal water, showed the
reflex character to a less degree, till in the third or fourth brood
it was almost obsolete. On the other hand when Simocephalus,
which had been reared in normal water, were transferred to
culture-water just before a batch of eggs was laid, these eggs
developed into perfectly normal specimens, but subsequent
broods showed the character of reflexed valves more and more;
so that if we might so phrase it, normality wears off gradually
just as abncrmality does under the reversed circumstances.

Agar, who is a strong opponent of the theory that acquired

characters can be inherited, explains his results in the following
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 335

manner. He supposes that the peculiar organisms present in
the culture when digested by the Simocephalus gave rise to a
peculiar chemical product—or ‘‘ metabolite,’’ as he calls it—
which passed into the blood and was thus carried to the growing
eggs and was assimilated by them, and produced its effect on
the embryos which developed from them. When the parent
was removed to normal water this abnormal ‘‘ metabolite ’’ was
gradually eliminated, and consequently the next brood of eggs
produced received less of it and were less affected than the first
brood.

Agar considers that there is no evidence that the “‘ living
self-propagating molecule or gene’’ was in any way affected.
On this explanation some remarks may be made. The living
self-propagating molecule is an abstraction which may be
separated in imagination from its ‘‘ metabolites,’’ but can only
be defined by its effect on what develops from it. The reason
why Agar denies that the substance which was absorbed had
affected the hereditary substance is, of course, that its effects
were transitory. In order, however, to affect the eggs in the
way in which it does, it must be conceived of as firmly incorporated with the protoplasm and to be transmitted from cell
to cell as the eggs grow, and thus to increase in quantity. If
we revert to what was said in Part I., on the laws which
govern the development of organs in the embryo, we may
remember that there is evidence that in normal development the
final form of organs is determined by substances emitted from
other organs. Thus, for instance, we remember that the optic
vesicle in the tadpole causes the formation of the lens from the
skin which lies over it. Now there may very well be some substance normally produced in the development of Simocephalus,
which causes the valves of the shell to curve inwards as they do
in normal specimens. The abnormal substance by its presence
may act as a stimulus to cause the production of more and more
of the normal substance till the effects of the abnormal substance are overcome, and yet the abnormal substance may have
affected a definite union with ‘‘ the hereditary substance,’’ by
which we suppose Agar means the nuclear apparatus. Underlying the whole of Agar’s argument is the assumption that the

“cé
336 EUGENICS REVIEW.

so-called hereditary substance is invariable, except by accidental
mutations, which is just the point that requires to be proved.
The facts are simply that in the case of this animal there is an
extraordinary susceptibility to changes in environment; and that
what is quickly produced by a change fiom environment A to
environment B is as quickly undone by a change from environment B to environment A.

Agar discovered that a somewhat high temperature causes
the developing young to be much shorter than if they were produced at a lower temperature. He further showed that if the
parents having within them developing eggs are transferred to
cooler water before these are laid, these eggs, nevertheless, give
rise to much shorter individuals than those whose parents had
lived entirely in cool water. This is an effect of the same kind
as the bending back of the valves of the shell—and it wears off
in the same way, being progressively less marked in subsequent
broods produced in cooler water and disappearing entirely in the
next generation—yet in this case it is a little difficult to attribute
it to the absorption of a ‘‘ metabolite.”’

Discussions like those of which Agar subjoins to the
account which he gives of his most interesting discoveries force
us to envisage clearly what sort of a result we might expect to
get from our experiments if acquired qualities are inheritable.
There pervades the mind of many people an idea that the mainspring in heredity is a definite substance of fixed chemical
composition, and that if through any accident it is altered, it
stays altered. But if the environment can produce inheritable
effects this conception must be modified; there may, indeed,
be a permanent chemical core of hereditary substance of
relatively fixed composition, but this core must be regarded as
capable of attracting and attaching to itself other molecular
groups, and of governing development by the character of the
groups which it throws off. If through the action of the environment, the nature of these groups which the central core can
attach to itself is altered in one generation, the effect of this may
permeate to the genital cells and affect the next generation, but
if in the meantime the original environment be restored, then
the nature of the groups circulating in the blood which the
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 337

hereditary substance attaches to itself will become again what it
was before, and this will tend to undo the effects of the former
environmental change. But we may well conceive that, ir
many cases, before the course of heredity can be deflected, a
considerable number of the altered molecular groups must
become united to the central nucleus—in other words, that the
environment must act through several generations before its
effect can be perceived. In this case we might hope that the
results of changed environment might persist in diminishing
force for several generations after the animals had been restored
to a normal environment; and this is really the maximum effect
which we could hope to get from any experiment. The successful carrying out of such an experiment would take years, and the
difficulties would be very great. Nevertheless, in our opinion,
besides Agar’s work, one such experiment has been successfully
carried out under conditions which should satisfy the most exacting critic, and as the subject is of such fundamental importance
we shall give a somewhat full account of it.

The experimenter was Kammerer, an Austrian subject, and
the animal he experimented with was Salamandra maculosa—
the common yellow and black salamander of Europe. The
salamander is an amphibian, closely allied to the common
newt of England, from which it differs, however, not only in
coloration, but in the fact whereas the newt lays eggs the
salamander brings forth living young which immediately take
to the water. The salamander is coloured black variegated with
patches of a conspicuous yellow; but the relative quantity of
these colours varies very much; some specimens are nearly
black, peppered over with a few minute dots of yellow; in others
the black is nearly suppressed and the colour becomes predominantly yellow. A fairly common variety has received the
name taentata, because in it the yellow forms two conspicuous
longitudinal stripes on the back separated by a median black
stripe. The adult animal lives on land in damp nooks, under
moss or among stones, it is often difficult to find, but sometimes
after a heavy thunder shower hundreds will be found where not
one could be seen before. Like other amphibia it begins life as
a tailed larva, which swims about like a fish in water. This
338 EUGENICS REVIEW.

differs from the tadpole stage of the frog in the reduced and,
indeed, vestigial character of the operculum, which is a fold of
skin surrounding the sides and lower part of the head. In the
frog tadpole, which when hatched has three beautiful feathery
external gills, this operculum grows backwards and covers up
the gills, and gives thus to the front of this larva its well-known
rounded plump appearance. When the arms make their
appearance they are hidden from view by this fold. In the
salamander larva the external gills remain in full view during
the whole of larval life, and the arms have begun to grow
when the creature is born, so that this larva has quite a different
appearance from that presented by the tadpole. The larva is of
a yellowish colour owing to a plentiful development of
yellowish white pigment, but this pigment is quite distinct from
the adult pigment, which only becomes conspicuous after the
creature leaves the water and metamorphosis is accomplished,
although traces of it can be seen in the larva. Traces also of the
adult black can be detected in the larva, but it, like the yellow,
increases in quantity only after the metamorphosis.
Preliminary experiments showed that young, just metamorphosed salamanders slowly altered their coloration as they grew
older, if they were kept living on black or yellow backgrounds
strongly illuminated from above. In those kept on black backgrounds the black increased in quantity and overshadowed the
yellow, whilst in those kept on yellow backgrounds the reverse
was the case. But if the background were of any other colour, or
even of black and yellow patches in even proportion, or, lastly, if
it were not brightly illuminated no change whatever took place ;
so that when an experiment was being carried out it was only
necessary to enclose a similarly coloured salamander in a neighbouring cage from which bright light was excluded, in order
to establish a perfectly satisfactory ‘‘ control ’’ experiment.
Long experience and many unfortunate failures were
required before the best way of keeping the beasts healthy was
discovered. The larvz were always kept under neutral conditions, i.e., they were kept in diffused light and were not
exposed to the influence of black or yellow backgrounds. They
were fed with blood-worms (Tubifex), which could be procured
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 339

in large quantities. The adults on the contrary were kept in
boxes of considerable size, lit from above. These were kept
damp by having in each of them a basin of water in which the
salamander could lave itself, and also a ‘“‘den’’ of moss and
stones in which it could hide. The food given consisted of
meal-worms (the grub of a beetle which infests flour mills);
these were placed in a little dish at some considerable distance
from the ‘‘ den,’’ so that the salamander had to make frequent
journeys across the open to get them.

The whole series of experimental cages were placed in a
sunny gallery in the biological laboratory at Vienna. It is,
therefore, clear that for the successful performance of an experiment of this kind a very considerable ‘‘ plant ’’ is necessary, and
it will demand practically the whole of the experimenter’s time.
Indeed, Kammerer savs expressly that any one who desires to
repeat his experiments and test their validity must be prepared
to devote a large part of his life-time to the work.

The riature of the experiments performed was as follows :—

When individuals chosen for their predominantly black
colour, which had been reared on a background of yellow loam
gave rise to young—which only happened when the parents
were three years old—these young were reared as larve on
neutral backgrounds. When they had undergone metamorphosis they were divided into two lots, one lot being reared
further on a background of yellow loam, and the other on a
background of black garden earth. Those which were reared
on yellow earth became increasingly yellow. The yellow pigment which in the parents had increased till it formed two
longitudinal rows of large spots (Fig. 2), grew in the children to
such an extent that the rows of spots amalgamated so as to form
longitudinal streaks, and finally the streaks became connected
by transverse ridges until the whole dorsal surface was predominantly yellow (Fig. 3). In those young which were reared
on black garden earth, the yellow pigment made its appearance
as two longitudinal lines of spots, and these spots for some considerable time increased in size owing to the persistence of the
influence of the yellow background on which their parents lived
(Fig. 4a); but as the young generation grew older the spots
340 EUGENICS REVIEW.

began to diminish in size, and finally when maturity was attained
the yellow pigment was reduced to two longitudinal rows of
small spots (Fig 48).

If on the contrary salamanders were chosen which had comparatively large yellow spots, and these were reared on a background of black garden earth, the yellow spots diminished in

   

FIG. 2.

Illustrating the effect of a background of yellow loam on a comparatively black
salamander. A. Young form just after metamorphosis. B. Fully-grown form.

size till by the time that maturity was attained many of them
had entirely disappeared, and those which remained had become
very small. The offspring of such salamanders, just before and
at the time of metamorphosis, were distinguished by the possession of a single median row of small yellow spots. If these
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 341

young were allowed to grow up on a background of garden
earth the yellow spots became smaller and finally almost disappeared—indeed, on the ventral surface they totally disappeared,
and an almost perfectly black salamander was produced in
appearance closely resembling the Alpine species Salamandra

   

FIG. 3.

Illustrating the effect of a background of yellow loam on the offspring of salamanders:
born from those represented in Fig. 2. A. Young form just after metamorphosis.
B. Adult form.

atra. If, on the contrary, the offspring of salamanders reared on
black earth were transferred to yellow loam, the median row of
spots slowly enlarged and finally fused to form a longitudinal
stripe of yellow, but it will be noticed that this distribution of
yellow and black was totally different from that observable in the
342 EUGENICS REVIEW.

parent with which the experiment started. As in the case of the
experiment which began by placing salamanders on yellow earth
the influence of the environment made itself felt in the constitution of the young, although these might be born and pass the
first part of their life under neutral conditions.

 

t

Fic. 4.
Illustrating the effect of a background of black garden mould on the offspring
of salamanders which had been reared on a background of yellow loam. A. Young
salamander five months after metamorphosis, showing influence of the yellow background to which its parents were exposed. B. Adult salamander, showing influence
of the black background.

It occurred to Kammerer that some part of the influence ot
the yellow and black backgrounds might be due to the amounts
of water they contained—in a word, to their comparative dampness. He determined experimentally that the yellow loam was
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 343

much more hygroscopic, and, therefore, damper than the black
earth. In order to get rid of this factor he replaced in some of
his experiments the yellow and black earth with yellow and
black paper. For the experiment in which yellow paper was
to be the background salamanders were chosen in which black

  

FIG. 5.

Illustrating the effect of exposing the offspring of salamanders reared on black
earth to the same influences as those to which their parents were exposed. A. Just
metamorphosed form. B. Adult form.

predominated ; the result of the experiment was that the yellow
increased in amount—but solely by the increase in size of spots
which were already in existence—practically no new yellow
spots made their appearance. The offspring of these parents
reared also on yellow paper showed the same phenomenon, the
large spots amalgamated into broad yellow stripes, but the
344 EUGENICS REVIEW.

yellow was of a dusky appearance, showing that it was mixed
with the black pigment, in a word, as no new yellow pigment’
had been generated the existing pigment had been spread out
in a very thin layer. When the young of parents reared
on yellow paper were reared on a background of black paper
very much the same. effect was produced as when they were
reared on a background of black earth, but there was this
difference, that the ‘yellow spots diminished in size, not by a
gathering together of the yellow pigment and a drawing in of
the root-like outgrowths of the yellow spots, which is what
happens over a background of black earth, but by a darkening
of the borders of the spots due to an invasion of them by the
black pigment (melanin). It was thus obvious that some other
factor in the background besides that of mere colour played a
part in bringing about the result ; and it appeared probable that
this was the moisture of the environment. In order to test this
a background was chosen which produced no colour reaction in
salamanders which were raised on it. A very suitable one was
found in grey river sand, which could, of course, vary very much
in the quantity of moisture which it contained without sensibly
altering in colour. ‘When young salamanders, chosen for the
small number of yellow spots which they possessed, were placed
on sand so wet that the air in the cage had a humidity of from 80
to go per cent. of saturation, then the yellow spots did not
increase in size, but a great number of small new spots made
their appearance, especially on the under surface where
ordinarily few yellow spots are to be found. The offspring of
these salamanders, just after metamorphosis, were distinguished
from all other salamanders by the great number of munute
yellow spots peppered over them. When these salamanders
were transferred to a background either of yellow earth or yellow
paper all the existing spots began to increase rapidly in size.
On the other hand, when salamanders characterised by having
numerous yellow spots were reared on a background of relatively
dry river sand in an atmosphere, the humidity of which did
not reach more than 50 per cent. of that required for saturation,
these spots all diminished in size, not as on black earth by contraction, but by the invasion of their borders by black pigmeni,
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 345

so that the yellow colour became fainter and eventually disappeared.

It appears, therefore, that the presence of a yellow background causes the yellow spots to increase in area, to throw out
roots and eventually to join with one another, whilst the presence
of a damp atmosphere causes the production of new yellow
spots, and that both these changes are to a considerable extent
inherited, insomuch that the offspring start their career at a
phase nearly, but not quite, as advanced as that at which their
parents left off.

The question now arises as to the channel through which
the environment acts on the animal. Does it take place through
a direct action on the skin, or is it indirect through the influence
of the environment on the eyes of the animal? That such
influence can take place through the eyes is known from the
behaviour of the plaice and other flat-fish. These fish are able
to alter the coloration of the upper surface according to the
colour of the ground on which they lie. Now it is well known
that when a flat-fish is blinded it remains pale and does not
take on the colour of its surroundings. The answer to the
question so far as the salamander was concerned was found by
Kammerer by a series of most ingenious experiments.

He first found out what occurred when a piece of skin was
removed and the wound became covered with new skin. Ifa
piece of yellow skin which had been originally black and had
been turned yellow by the environment was removed, and the
animal continued to live on a yellow background, then the new
skin was of an olive-green colour, due to the presence of both
yellow and black pigments in equal quantities, the black pigment being situated in a more superficial layer and the yellow
pigment showing through it, but soon the new skin became
bright yellow under the continuous influence of the yellow background. Ifa piece of black skin which was formerly yellow were
removed, the new skin began by being yellow and remained so
if the animal was placed on a yellow background. If a piece
of yellow skin which was formerly black were removed and the
animal were placed on a black background, the new skin began
346 EUGENICS REVIEW.

by being black and remained black. If, however, the skin
removed were black, but had been yellow, then, if the animal
continued to live on a black background, the new skin when
first formed was flecked with dusky yellow spots, but soon
became totally black.

Kammerer concludes that the regenerated skin tends to
repeat the history of that which it replaces, but that this history
is shortened and may be even entirely suppressed. Then the
experiment was made of transplanting a yellow piece of skin
from a yellow salamander living on a yellow background, to a
bare place on a black salamander living on a black background,
and vice versa. The foreign skin throve in its new situation
and the wound healed. If the animals were transferred to
neutral backgrounds no change at all took place in the colours
of the transplanted skin; but if the animal carrying the black
skin were removed to a background of yellow loam, then quickly
numerous small yellow spots began to appear, but they did not
grow any bigger. After a period of fourteen or fifteen months
of living on this background the spots suddenly began to
enlarge, and eventually the whole patch of skin became yellow.
Kammerer interprets this remarkable result as follows: The
appearance of yellow spots on black skin is due to the effect of
the humidity of the loam acting directly on the skin, but in
order that the yellowness of the loam should produce its effect
on the black skin, new nervous connections must be formed, and
this is a process which requires time. He concludes, therefore,
that the background, so far as it is yellow, produces its effect
through the eye of the animal. The correctness of this conclusion was confirmed by keeping yellow animals, on to each of
which a piece of black skin had been transplanted, on backgrounds of wet sand and yellow paper respectively. On the
first background the black skin began at once to develop small
yellow spots, due to the direct influence of the humidity of the
background on the skin, on the second no change took place for
a year, but, then, if there had been small yellow spots on the
black skin when it was removed from its former host these began
suddenly to increase in size, owing to the influence of the yellow
colour of the background indirectly on the skin through the eye.
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 347

It was mentioned above that amongst the many varieties of
coloration met with in salamanders living in the open a variety,
termed Salamandra taeniata, often turns up characterised by the
presence of two broad yellow stripes on its back, separated by a
narrow black stripe. It was further mentioned that a variety
identical in appearance with this was produced by exposing the
ordinary spotted variety to the prolonged action of a yellow
background. Now when the ordinary spotted variety was
crossed with the natural ‘‘ taeniata’’ variety the offspring were
all spotted, so that the ordinary variety behaved like a
Mendelian dominant. But if the ordinary variety were crossed
with the artificial ‘‘taeniata’’ a quite different result was
obtained, for in that case the offspring showed two longitudinal
rows of spots, and could justly be described as intermediate.
When the artificial ‘‘ taeniata ’’’ was crossed with the form showing one median stripe of yellow, which as described above was
produced by the action of a black background on the second
generation (Fig. 5A), then the offspring were all of the ordinary
variety—in a word, these two varieties behaved like the two
types of white sweet-pea described in Part III., which when
mated together restore the original purple of the wild sweet-pea.

These experiments of Kammerer constitute the most complete proof that the functional response excited in one generation by the environment has its effect on the next generation,
and can show itself before that environmer< has had time to
act on it—in a word, that acquired qualities are to some extent
inherited. If the validity of this proof were admitted it would
be a matter of enormous importance for students of heredity.
But many students of heredity seem to have made up their
minds that acquired qualities are never transmitted, and for this
reason Kammerer’s results were received with a storm of
criticism. Some of that criticism, such as that of Bateson
in his most recent book (“‘ Progress of Genetics ’’), was based
on an incomplete and preliminary account by Kammerer of
his experiments—and as these experiments required for their
completion a period of at least ten years, it was not unnatural
that Kammerer should, from time to time, give preliminary
accounts of his results. But with the publication of the com348 EUGENICS REVIEW.

plete work on which this account is based it seems to us that
much of this criticism will disappear. Broadly speaking, two
lines of attempted evasion of Kammerer’s conclusions have been
put forward, (1) That his results were accidental—in a word,
that there are many distinct strains amongst the natural population of Salamandra maculosa from which his specimens were
selected, which were continually inter-crossing, and that from
time to time recessive varieties were segregated, and that
Kammerer mistook this segregation for the action of the
environment; and (2) that the environment did really affect the
next generation, but that this effect was produced by its direct
action through the semi-transparent tissues of the body on the
germ-cells whilst enclosed within the parent.

Objection No. 1 can be dealt with at once. When the same
result is obtained again and again under the same conditions
with specimens selected at random, it is contrary to all scientific
principles to attribute the result to ‘‘ chance,’’ or to the qualities
of the specimens selected; especially when ‘‘ control ’’ experiments, carried out on specimens kept in subdued light, gave
no such results. To obtain the same result by constant repetition of the experiment is the universally accepted test that we
are dealing with something real.

Objection No. 2 was tested by Kammerer in a series of most
painstaking and difficult experiments. He transplanted ovaries
from females which were striped to females which were spotted,
and vice versa, and he crossed these females with males similar
to them in colour. The transplantation of ovaries rather than
testes was undertaken, because the testis of the salamander is an
elongated lobed organ, and it was difficult to make certain that
it was completely removed. When the young produced by these
crossings were examined it was found that they were sometimes
influenced by what we may term the foster-mother and sometimes not. Upon examining the matter more closely it was
found that if the foster-mother were the natural striped variety,
and if she were supplied with the ovary of the spotted variety,
then she had no influence on the offspring whatever, which
turned out exactly as if the eggs had still been carried by the
female which produced them. If, however, the female were the
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 349

artificially produced striped variety which was supplied with the
eggs of the spotted variety, then the young turned out striped
like the foster-mother. This result was produced even though
the foster-mother, during the time of the experiment, was kept
in dim light so that all direct action of the environment was
excluded. In the results of these experiments then we have a
proof of the direct action of the body on the germ-cells, which
is, after all, the crucial point in the question of the inheritance
of acquired qualities. It will be observed, that in Kammerer’s
experiments, the newly acquired qualities are those which
are most potent in influencing the germ-cells.

As we said before, it is by no means necessary nor is it
even probable that ali variations are reactions to the environment—many may be, indeed, almost certainly are the results of
internal accidents occurring during the maturation of the germcells. But we have to go cautiously in assigning modifications
of structure to this category. One of the cases, the nature of
which seemed to exclude the ‘possibility of its being due to the
inheritance of acquired characters, was that of the soldier and
worker castes amongst termites (white ants) and ants. These
are in some cases greatly modified in structure; and as they are
sterile and have no offspring to which they could hand on
modifications which they might acquire during their lives, it was
argued that these modifications must be inherent in the germ.
But the germs from which they had been derived were produced
by the normal fertile female (the queen), and should, therefore,
have reproduced her characters. In those cases which have been
investigated all the eggs produced by the queen—apart from
differences of sex—are alike, and the different types of individual
to which they give rise are due to differences in nutrition. If
this should prove to be the case generally we should have in the
forms of the worker and the soldier castes the most striking
cases of reaction to environment, even though the environment
in these cases acted only on the embryo, and there were no
descendants to which the reaction could be handed on.

The discovery that functional reactions can be transmitted
to offspring throws a brilliant light on the whole question of
evolution. Not only does adaptation become understandable,
350 EUGENICS REVIEW.

¢

but the conception of the ‘‘ survival of the fittest ’’ takes on a
different aspect. The survivors are now those which react most
vigorously to the influence of changed conditions. Kammerer,
indeed, has noted that weak or sickly specimens of Salamandra
maculosa show the colour reactions which we have described
either not at all or very feebly. The slow progressive modifications of structure, consisting -in increase in size of one organ
and diminution in size of another, of which we find evidence
in the geological record when this is at all complete, can now
be interpreted as the result of steadily changing conditions and
constant reaction to them on the part of the organisms.

The conclusion arrived at by all students of the relationships of animals living and extinct, viz., that new groups were
not evolved from the most specialized members of older groups,
but from their more primitive and least specialized members,
receives support when we realise that the great pre-requisite for
evolution is plasticity. |

We have mentioned above that one great objection to the
theory of the inheritance of acquired characters has been the
difficulty of conceiving a mechanism by which this could be
brought about. Whilst the important thing is not our conception of how the thing happens, but the proof that it does
happen, we may give an outline of an extremely ingenious
theory, propounded by Dr. J. T. Cunningham, to suggest a
partial explanation of how this inheritance may be brought
about.

The normal growth of an animal, as we have seen in
Part I., is largely regulated by substances given off from the
different drgans which circulate in the blood; so that, as we have
learnt, the outgrowth of the embryonic eye from the brain compels the overlying skin to forma lens. If we assume that all
the organs of the body influence one another in this way, then if
one organ be stimulated by the environment to extraordinary
growth, it will give off a chemical emanation into the blood
different in quantity and, perhaps, in quality, to that which
it had given off before. This chemical will act on the growing germ-cells (c.f., Agar’s experiments) and become stored
up in them. When these germ-cells develop this chemical
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 351

will affect the growing tissues and tend to produce in them
the same changes as were in the first instance produced
by the environment. In dealing with the inheritance of
sex we pointed out that Geoffrey Smith had assumed that
the sexual cells had acquired their specific character through
their power of absorbing sexual substances from the blood.
These substances are termed hormones, and we may make
the further supposition that a considerable amount of
such hormones must be absorbed before they are able to
affect the development, and consequently an exposure of many
generations to new conditions may be necessary before their
influence becomes, so to speak, engrained in the constitution of
the animal. Cases of such susceptibility as are manifested by
the salamander are rare.

The question may now be raised how far reactions to new
conditions have been responsible for the production of the
domestic varieties of animals, on which it will be remembered
Darwin’s original theory of evolution by natural selection was
built. Those who believe that only ‘‘ mendelizing mutations ”’
are inheritable, naturally imagine that our domestic varieties
originated in: the appearance of occasional monsters produced
by the dropping out of factors. That a few of them did so is
hardly open to doubt. Such things as the white-flowered races
of sweet-pea, white mice, and other albinos are to be reckoned
in this category. So, too, the weird Niata cattle, in which one
jaw is longer than the other, and the bull-dog, in which both
jaw bones are too short for the skin which covers them, may
have been similarly produced.

It will be observed that varieties like this have a ‘‘ fancy
value,’’ and owe their desirability to the fact that they are curious
and different from what mankind is accustomed to. When we
come, however, to domestic breeds of high economic value, such
as the large cart-horse, the merino sheep, and so on, and are
asked to believe that they owe their origin to the chance
appearance of monsters, common sense and experience alike
revolt from the conclusion. All the evidence collected by Darwin
goes to show that these valuable qualities have been slowly
acquired by the continual selecting and mating together of those
352 EUGENICS REVIEW.

members of the flocks and herds which were a little better than
their brothers and sisters. It is always, however, tacitly assumed
by Darwin that amongst the offspring of any one of these selected
matings there would be some that would show the desired
character in greater degree than either of the parents; and that
these offspring would have such an hereditary constitution that
the mean value of this character in their progeny would be at
the level attained by the particular parents from which a given
brood had been derived, so that by a continuance of selection any
assignable increase in the character would be attained. It ‘is
not at all obvious why this should be so, but if the original
modification of character were a reaction to the conditions of
domestication, and these conditions continued to act so long
as the experimental breeding continued, then it is easy to see
why a continuous intensification of the desired character should
be looked for.

Now domestication can be analysed into changes of habit
and of food. Man is not able to supply food of exactly the same
nature as that which the animal would pick up in its natural
surroundings, and if he desires to improve the breed he supplies
food in abundance. Now Agar’s work has taught us that curious
disproportions of growth may arise in a totally unexpected way
from alterations in food, and it seems to us quite probable that
the initial stimulus to the production of some of the strange
varieties of pigeon for instance, may have come about in this
way. In the case of the cart-horse the animal is called on for a
type of exercise which bears no similarity whatever to anything
that its wild ancestor did, and this exercise continued through
generations may have slowly modified its structure. If we take
the egg-laying habit of the domestic hen, we find that many
birds if the first laid eggs be removed, have the power of laying
more; and here, again, the practice of stealing the eggs for
human consumption continued through generations and thus constantly evoking the stimulus to lay more, may have modified the
egg-laying habit. It is true that Pearl, in his recent work on
Poultry, has claimed to have shown that the power of laying
many eggs is transmitted through the male, and is due to the
presence in the zygote of two ‘“‘ factors’ belonging to different
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. 353

pairs. But Kammerer’s experiments have taught us that a
character like the yellow stripes on the back of the salamander
may be acquired as a reaction to the environment, but that after
it has become engrained in the hereditary constitution it can be
transmitted as a Mendelian factor. Presumably, the capacity
to act as a factor must consist in a gathering together or crystallising of similar molecular groups which have become attached
to the hereditary substances from the body-fluids, so that in the
maturation divisions of the germ-cells they are transmitted in
one piece.

The greatest interest in studies of heredity lies in their
applicability to man; and the great point about experiments
with animals is that we may experiment with them, but we are
forbidden to experiment with our fellow-humans.

Now the lessons that may be learned from. all the experiments which have been detailed in these articles are as follows :—

First.—In all cases where large numbers of a given species
of animals are raised under somewhat artificial conditions a certain number of monsters will be produced, apparently owing to
a disturbance of the germ-cells in their growth and ripening.
This is true both of insects raised on banana-peel and of human
beings raised in a large city. These monsters in most, but not
in al! cases, differ from the normal type, in the loss of some
feature which the normal type posseses, and hence are to be
looked on as defectives.

When crossed with the normal type these defectives act as
Mendelian recessives, and no trace of the defect appears in the
second generation, but it reappears in the third, and cannot be
entirely eliminated from the blood of a strain when once this
has been infected by it. |

Secondly.—Exercise of the functions tends to enlarge the
organs by which those functions are carried out, and this
exercise continued through generations slowly modifies the
structure of the stock, till eventually the resulting change can
show itself in the young before the exercise has been begun.
Conversely persistent disuse of function tends slowly to atrophy
the organs by which they are carried on, till eventually these
organs are only developed in a reduced form. Thus, Darwin,
354 ° EUGENICS REVIEW.

by weighing the wing bones of abundantly fed domestic ducks
was able to determine that these were lighter than in wild ducks
of the same size. |

Reverting now to the first point among the defects which
have been proved to be transmitted in a Mendelian manner, we
find they include night-blindness or the incapacity to see in the
dusk, hzmophilia or the liability to bleed to death from a small
wound, albinism or the lack of colour, and what is more
important than all these, mental defectiveness or feeble-mindedness. Mentally defective people never attain more than the
mental development of children, and from lack of the power of
self-control are prone to immorality and give rise to numerous
offspring who are reared, if they survive at all, under wretched
conditions. Epilepsy seems to belong to the same category as
feeble-mindedness. |

Now in former times such defectives were produced, no
doubt, as frequently as now, but in medizval times, the struggle
for existence was so severe that they did not affect the general
constitution of the population nearly as much as they are liable
to do now. The birth-rate was high, but owing to defective
knowledge of medicine and sanitation the death-rate was appalingly high. A historian has said: ‘‘In the ‘ good old days’.
people died as quickly in the rural districts as they now die in
the slums of large towns, and they died in large towns as quickly
as white people now die on the coast of Guinea.’’? -Under such
circumstances the defectives were rapidly eliminated and the
main stock of the population was healthy. If we go still further
back to classical times we find that eugenic principles were put
in force with a ruthlessness that would shock the most progressive reformers to-day. In ancient Sparta weak and deformed
children were exposed, 1.e., were left to perish of cold, and
the same seems to have been true in ancient Rome also. But
with the growth of humanitarian principles not only are
numerous lives preserved, which in older times would have
perished before reaching adult life, but all destruction of defectives is rigidly forbidden. At the same time those who have
the welfare of their children most at heart rear the smallest
families, and yet it is precisely of people like this that one would
THE STUDY OF HEREDITY. . 355

wish the fibre of the future population to be composed. It
seems to us, therefore, that the segregation of people with
inheritable defects and their sterilization is a measure which
society ought to demand for its own protection. It is not right
that the earnings of sane prudent people should be absorbed in
an attempt to rear the numerous children of the recklessly
imprudent and mentally defective.

How far diseases like consumption are hereditary is a
question which will be answered in different ways according to
the meaning which one attaches to the word hereditary. Undoubtedly, medical research has shown that this disease is due
to the attack of a bacillus and that it is an infectious disease;
but on the other hand the infection is so ubiquitous that it is
practically impossible to escape it, and the bulk of men and
women are so resistant to it that even when infected the disease
does not develop in them, whilst certain types of people of a
recognisable physical build fall easy victims. It is an obvious
dictate of prudence that people of this type should not marry
similar people. Other so-called hereditary diseases, like those
afflictions of the reproductive organs, called venereal diseases,
are not really hereditary ; the offspring are infected through the
womb of the mother, and if the disease is cured in them they
do not transmit the evil any further.

Coming now to the second point, we are able to dissipate to
a certain extent the hyper-calvinistic gloom in which the science
of heredity has been enshrouded by those extreme Mendelians
who assert the unalterable character of the hereditary substance,
or what they term the ‘‘ germ-plasm.’’ For we saw reason to
believe that the effects of exercise are in some degree transmissible to descendants, and that these effects are cumulative.
Now all real education is exercise of mind or body, or of both.
If this type of education is followed and persisted in, we have
reason to hope that not all the benefits received by any one
generation will be lost when they pass away, but that the next
generation will start at a very slightly higher level of capacity
than their fathers, and that a slow progress in ability of the
whole race will take place.
