JOHN HURRELL CROOK
Department of Psychology, University of Bristol

Co-operation in Primates

Problems of Definition and Approach

THE SEARCH FOR animal origins of human
attributes, and hence for an explanation of man’s
behavioural evolution, has found renewed expression in recent inter-disciplinary symposia.
On each occasion zoologists, psychologists,
anthropologists and sometimes historians have
attempted to find common themes. The result
has usually been a disappointing semantic
muddle in which terms used by one speaker have
not had the same meaning when used by the
next. This is not to say that such discussions are
valueless, but it suggests that the presence of a
linguistically oriented philosopher, who could
provide a precise analysis of terminological
usage, might be a valuable means of stimulating
more productive discussion between participants.
In the absence of help of this kind, care is needed
in the choice of words.

The biological use of the term “‘co-operation”’
is far from satisfactory. It lacks the respectability
of its main antithesis, “competition”, which even
the most elementary Darwinist can employ with
some felicity. The whole superstructure of
evolutionary thinking is built primarily on the
basis of inter-individual competition. Cases in
which it seems even relevant to discuss interindividual co-operation are distinctly rare.
Nevertheless in two fields—the ecology of animal
communities and the analysis of social processes
in groups—the term has come into a kind of
soft-thought vogue. As long ago as 1911 Geddes
and Thompson !! wrote: “Huxley’s tragic vision
of nature as a gladiatorial show and consequently
of ethical life and progress as merely superimposed by man, as therefore an interference
with the normal order of nature, is still far too
dominant among us’’. Even earlier, Espinas 9 in
1877 had summarized much anecdotal evidence
for co-operative, if not “altruistic” behaviour
in animals. More recently Allee et al.! have

63

considered the fundamental opposition of
“‘co-operation”’ or “proto-co-operation”’ (“‘helpful interactions between organisms’) and
*““disoperation” (“harmful interactions’’). Competition may itself, for example, be said to
be co-operative when the presence together of
numerous individuals sustains a high growth
rate, and disoperative when crowded individuals
compete for limited food supplies. These terms
may be applied equally well to either intra- or
inter-specific conditions. Many of the effects
treated by these authors can, however, only be
considered “co-operative” in the loosest sense.
An allocation of problems to their appropriate
fields would do much to clarify the haze
surrounding the subject. Briefly we may attempt
some solutions.

(i) Many examples of “helpful” interactions
between organisms (whether intra- or interspecific) result quite simply from the synergistic
effects of processes best analysed at the
physiological or physico-chemical level and in
terms appropriate to these fields. This applies
particularly to the effects of contrasting population conditions on the behaviour and fecundity
of lower organisms.

(ii) The complex control and maintenance of
social organizations results from the evolutionary
co-adaptation of many morphological features
and physiological and behavioural processes in
relation to multifactorial selection in the
environment and within the social structure
itself. The end product is an open system geared
to reproductive efficiency and maintained by
processes of socialization. Adaptability may be
built into a society genetically (as in social
insects) or may result primarily from learning
capacity, as in primates. Signals releasing group
hunting, mating, or aggressive social control
yield “‘co-operation” only in the sense that they
integrate behaviour of group members in a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1966, 58, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

manner having a clear survival value for
individual and group. Clearly these systems are
not what human beings mean when they talk of
“co-operation”. As systems of communication
such processes are, however, basic to the development of co-operation at more advanced levels,
but they are best analysed in an ethological
manner or in terms of some kind of communication theory.

(iii) Groups of howler monkeys may “‘cooperate”’ in dropping sticks in the direction of
intruding observers4 and chimpanzees may act
together in waving clubs or throwing stones at a
leopard.22 Even though such group behaviour
may have an effect on a predator which the
behaviour of an individual acting alone would
not have, it often seems doubtful whether this
should be described as “‘co-operation”. Many
examples may represent no more than the
response of separate individuals to a common
stimulus. Where, however, social facilitation of
response can be demonstrated we have the
beginnings of a simple co-operation.

(iv) ““True’’ co-operation requires the joint
action by two or more individuals in the
performance of a defined task, or in contribution
to a joint effect (see Shorter Oxford Dictionary).
Co-operation may be often in some imprecise
sense “‘rewarding”’ to the animals concerned—as
in the maternal behaviour shown by rhesus
“aunts” to babies28 or it may occur in the
presence of contrary tendencies—i.e. to flee, pay
no attention or to have a cup of tea—in which
case the behaviour is perhaps “altruistic’’.
Human co-operation is performed with conscious
intent: it is truly teleological behaviour. Primate
behaviour often appears both deliberate and
purposive but to infer “purpose’”’ is generally
suspect among biologists unused to such high
grade performances.

We have in fact a range of cases on a continuum—at one end social facilitation of
behaviour producing a common effect functional
in relation to survival, and, at the other, the
control by role-playing individuals of social
situations in the field and acts of co-operative
manipulation of apparatus by task-oriented
captive animals. The advanced co-operative acts
require a delay in response!9 such that an
individual relates another to a “‘task’’ prior to

64

responding and integrates its own actions in
relation to those of the companion. A strict
definition of co-operation in human terms would
require the presence of such delay but the
adoption of so strict a meaning here would
exclude much primate social behaviour clearly
relevant to the present discussion.

The examples to be discussed are heterogeneous and no attempt is made to construct from
them linear derivational arguments to the human
condition. Co-operation occurs in diverse
behavioural situations and expresses a certain
level of social integration sometimes attained in
a variety of contexts by non-human primates. It
cannot be derived from simple examples in the
way the evolution of behaviour patterns, such
as facial expression, for example, is usually
discussed.2

Co-operative Behaviour in Non-human Primates
FIELD STUDIES
(a) Defensive Behaviour

There are numerous cases of supposed cooperative action in the face of predators or
intruders recorded in the primate literature but
relatively few are well described. Thus although
howler monkeys become agitated and cast down
twigs and other objects in the presence of human
observers4 it remains unclear how far the
displays are oriented or co-ordinated. Likewise,
agitated geladas may turn over large stones or
leap into bushes making a loud noise both in the
presence of an intruder and during their own
quarrels, but recent observations? have failed
to reveal the co-ordinated stone rolling assaults
on travellers suggested in older literature. The
throwing observed was usually performed by
single animals and was in no case directed.
Under certain circumstances, however, social
facilitation of the behaviour could well develop
and function in the distraction of a potential
predator.

Certain open-country ground-dwelling primates have a marked group organization that is
clearly protective and which gives rise to
co-operative aggression in relation to predators.
Baboon troops!© on the move have a screen of
young males around the periphery. These may
initiate defensive behaviour which through social
CO-OPERATION

facilitation may spread to other members of
the group. Loveridge (quoted by Hall!4) has
described four old baboons surrounding aleopard
and striking it with their hands. Dogs, too, may
receive rough treatment from these animals.
Gelada herds move in close proximity to a
precipice, the females and infants always being
nearest to this protective feature. Males line the
outer edge of the herd. On attack by dogs the
animals run down the cliff but a male, sometimes
several males, will engage the dog in a loose
series of manoeuvres on the cliff edge. Villagers
claim to have lost dogs in the abyss on these
occasions.

Macaques and baboons live in “home ranges”
and intra-specific fights are limited by a studied
avoidance of one group by another. In unusually
structured habitats such as the temple area
studied by Southwick et al.,29 rhesus groups
may, however, begin fighting. The sounds of
young males battling soon attract most troop
members who co-operate against a common
adversary. Yerkes31 has reported a similar
build-up of aggression among chimpanzees.

(b) Agonistic Behaviour within Groups

Within groups of baboons and macaques a
marked differentiation of roles develops among
the males as a consequence of differential access
to commodities, particularly females in oestrus.
Normally this results in some kind of an unstable
“dominance hierarchy” the control of which is
as yet inadequately analysed. These relationships
are not, however, of the “peck order’ type
recorded in birds for they depend not only on
individual characteristics but on the interindividual relations between several animals.
Thus Hall and DeVore!6 describe how certain
adult baboons constantly associate with one
another and tend to support one another in
aggressive encounters with other males. Some
males associate so closely as hardly ever to act
independently. A group of powerful males can
thus establish a central hierarchy to which all
other animals are naturally peripheral. An
individual’s status is thus not only due to his
fighting ability or the effectiveness of his threat
posturing, but also to his ability to elicit the
co-operation of other males. Complex shifts in

IN PRIMATES

status occur with changes in relationship consequent upon the disappearance of one animal
or the addition of another to the group.

Threatening behaviour within groups often
reveals the alliances within them. Thus individuals of low status may enlist support of a
“friend” by gestures such as jerking the head
from side to side roughly in the direction of the
adversary. Likewise two animals may together
threaten a third to which each individually is
subordinate. Again Kummer 24 has described as
“‘protected threat” encounters in which a subordinate hamadryas baboon escapes the attack
or threat of another animal by running toward
or standing in front of an animal yet more
dominant. Similar behaviour occurred between
females, who may occasionally combine against
a large male and force his withdrawal.

Japanese studies on macaques!9 suggest that
some at least of these complex relationships may
be based on kinship. Thus a juvenile male of
dominant parents is more likely to become a
member of a central hierarchy than juveniles
born of peripheral animals. Patterns of “‘friendship”’ relations in agonistic encounters in groups
are likely therefore to reflect, to some extent at
least, these important blood relationships.
Friendship, support and co-operation are thus
not likely to be arbitrary or purely temporal
phenomena but to be linked to a whole complex
of social and kinship relations.

(c) Social structure, food sharing and protection of
infants

The social structure of baboon, hamadryas
and gelada herds implies a degree of co-operation
between the members. Failure to act according
to the established norms or behavioural conventions of the group is apt to receive summary
punishment. This is especially marked in
hamadryas groups when a female wandering
more than a few metres from her male “‘overlord’’ is at once severely attacked and bitten by
him.25 Female geladas, like hamadryas baboons,
live in “‘one-male groups” with their overlord
male. They may, however, wander more or less
at random within a large herd and may at times
be some 200 metres from their male. At regular
intervals they gather around him and feed near

65
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

him before spreading out again. Should he move
off his group congregate around him and move
both in space and time independently from the
movement of the rest of the herd and in a
direction set by the male. Male geladas do,
however, have means of coercing wandering
females; the latter may be pursued until they
turn screaming to the male. He then sits
down and the offender comes and grooms
him.7

Although chimpanzee groups are far less stable
a male or female of high social status may
become a temporary leader; other members of
the group following and allowing the speed and
direction of their movement to be determined by
it.12 Chimpanzees have also been seen to
co-operate in the capture of a red colobus
monkey which was then eaten. Meat eating
chimps have been seen to acquire pieces of food
from the meat possessor by means of begging
gestures such as those reported from laboratory
studies (see below).

Field observations, particularly with baboons,
by Hall and DeVore!® amplify the work of
Rowell et a/.28 on the behaviour of non-parental
animals towards the mother-infant combination
in a captive rhesus group. In baboon troops a
mother with an infant attracts much “friendly”
attention from other animals of both sexes. In
particular, males behave protectively towards
mothers for many weeks after the birth. Older
males approach and touch infants frequently and
may carry them on their bellies—once for as long
as twenty minutes. In the hamadryas baboon
males relate sexually as well as protectively to
very young juvenile females but this is not
recorded in the gelada, a species with similar
social structure. Gelada males and non-maternal
females may, however, pay close attention
to infants. During an alarm infants, which
commonly wander about a herd far from their
mothers, may leap on the back of any animal
fleeing towards the nearby cliffs. Even large
males may carry a baby clinging on his back
within the fur of his mane to safety in this way.
Not all primates show protective behaviour of
this kind, however. Thus while some female
langurs other than the mother may assist a
squealing infant, males have never been seen to
do so.20

66

OBSERVATIONAL AND EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES ON
CAPTIVE ANIMALS

Studies of inter-individual relations in captive
primate groups reveal an elaborate texture of
social responsiveness based on innate and learnt
behaviour within social situations. Harlow and
Harlow !7 classify these relations under categories
of contrasted “‘affectional systems’’. Much of the
behaviour described in the infant-mother and
maternal affectional systems clearly involves
such a close interplay of co-ordinated behaviour
that mother and child may include ‘‘co-operation” in the satisfaction of their respective needs.
The same may be said of the complex play
shown within the Age-Mate system.

Rowell, Hinde and Spencer-Booth28 have
described behaviour in a captive rhesus colony
in which maternal behaviour is regularly shown
not only by lactating females but by other
females as well. At birth a childless female may
attend the mother and continue to approach
newborn infants for several weeks thereafter.
The authors refer to such females as “‘aunts’’.
Their behaviour is tentative as mothers are apt
to be aggressive towards them. When babies
moved away from their mothers, aunts would
approach them, pick them up or attempt to
groom them. Aunts would also “protect’”’ newly
parturient females from approaches by other
animals and act with caution in relation to
infants—for example, holding open a heavy
swing door to allow an infant to pass through.
A baby neglected by its mother was sometimes
cuddled by an aunt and some mothers came to
use aunts as “baby sitters’’ leaving their baby
with them while they fed elsewhere. The
behaviour of aunts to the infants changed as the
latter grew merging. eventually into grooming
relations typical of adult “friendly” behaviour.
Aunt behaviour varies with the animal’s age and
social status. Mothers tended to allow their
infants to approach subordinate rather than
dominant aunts. Nearly all mothers finally
accepted one aunt and this was usually her chief
sitting and grooming companion. In one case a
mother died and the aunt adopted the baby
(eight months old) with little disturbance. The
behavioural interactions in rhesus groups are
thus extremely complex. Any attempt to define
CO-OPERATION

precisely what is ““co-operative” and what is not
is doomed to confusion. It is clear, however, that
advanced social interactions of this kind are the
matrix within which co-operative acts between
individuals can occur and show progressive
development.

Experiments by Crawford > have shown that
captive chimpanzees can learn to co-operate in
solving a learning problem while similar tests
with monkeys failed.39 The chimpanzees were
trained individually to pull a box containing
food close to the bars of the cage by means of a
rope. Later the box was weighted so that two
animals pulling together were necessary to move
it. Paired chimpanzees given a rope each
eventually succeeded in this task. At first the
experimenter had to give commands and assist
but later the animals watched one another,
co-ordinating their movements without interference from the observer. Finally, one animal
solicited the aid of the other by means of gesture,
touching and gentle pushing in the direction of
the task and by vocalization. These communicative acts drew the attention of the second animal
to the task but in no sense “‘instructed”’ it what
to do. In another experiment Crawford © taught
his subjects to obtain food by operating in
correct sequence four devices indicated by
coloured tabs. When the subjects were separated
by bars two devices were placed with one animal
and two with the other. The correct sequence
now required the co-operation of the two
animals. When this was achieved food arrived in
both compartments. Four of the animals tested
observed their partner and two reached through
the bars and pushed or directed him to the
markers when he had madean improper response.
No actual pointing was observed, however.

Nissen and Crawford26 observed the food
sharing behaviour of young and well-fed chimpanzees. Food sharing was found to be a highly
variable and adaptable activity which could
occur either following the begging of one animal
to another or without solicitation. Tokens for
use in food vending machines were exchanged
more easily than actual pieces of food. In this
study the nature of relationships previously
established by the participants was crucial to the
responsiveness of the pair. Likewise in the boxpulling tests the animal of superior status tended

IN PRIMATES

to direct its companion and to monopolize the
reward of their joint efforts. Commenting on
these experiments Yerkes 31 remarked: “relatively
few instances of co-operative action have been
reported from field or laboratory. But such as
there are indicate that the dominant individual
is the one to profit most and the behaviour
described . . . suggests the use of one individual
for another’s advantage rather than anything
altruistic.” Perhaps here we find ourselves
examining the comparative psychology of
exploitation.

It is curious that these experiments of over
twenty years ago have not led observers to an
analysis of primate co-operation in relation to
the social roles of the participants. Clearly the
studies are of crucial significance in the contexts
of “‘observational’’ and “‘social’’ learning!5 and
one may predict replication during long-term
studies of captive groups. It also remains
problematical whether chimpanzees are the only
non-human primates capable of performing
co-operatively in laboratory tasks.

Sources of Co-operative Behaviour in Primitive
Man

It seems clear that higher primates are
extremely responsive to other conspecific individuals, live in structured societies with conventionalized behaviour norms and individual
role playing and, finally, form complex interpersonal relations with “friends”. All these
attributes appear essential for the development
of advanced co-operative behaviour and require
learning abilities of a high order. One may now
ask what aspects of primate behaviour were
basic to the immense flowering of co-operation
coincident with the rapid evolution of the
Hominidae.

In the absence of any living “‘proto-hominids”’
at a grade of social organization and communication superior to that of the chimpanzee it is
inevitable that any discussion of this phase of
human evolution cannot be more than speculative. However, the grounds for inference can be
greatly strengthened by comparative study, not
only of primate societies but also of those of
carnivores such as wolves and hunting dogs, in
which advanced co-operative hunting (Kiihme,
196423) occurs. In addition, further discoveries

67
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of fossil artefacts may allow inferences from
tools and structures to the behavioural requirements for their use. It is most unlikely,
however, that anything approaching a full story
can ever be known.

In a recent discussion of this problem Koortlandt21 pointed out a series of behavioural
attributes that must have been inherent in
hunting proto-hominids and which may have
formed the basis of advanced co-operation. We
may summarize some of his points briefly:

(i) Co-operative hunting requires an advanced
system of communication. Thus, group-hunting
carnivores have a more developed system of
expression than do non-hunting ones. In man,
freed from excessive fear of predators by weapon
carrying, and hence able to make sounds freely,
development occurred mainly through the extension of vocal communication.

(ii) However, signalling by gesture probably
preceded a developed symbolic language, implying that mental symbolization and _ its
expression in indicative instructions must have
been present prior to developed speech.

(iii) While the chimpanzees in learning
experiments show close attention to and knowledge of objects as such, in carnivores such as
dogs and cats the place or displacement of
objects appears more significant. Hunting
proto-hominids must have added this carnivore
characteristic to the basic primate interest in
order to form a subjective world picture adapted
to the needs of group hunting.

(iv) The development of “‘stealth’”—meaning
the inhibition of immediate responses in favour
of persistent and controlled motivation, would
allow integrated performance by groups of
individuals in the achievements of goals. Such
controlled behaviour is already apparent in
carnivores but is not an attribute of living
non-human primates. Nevertheless primates
show marked successes in delayed response
problems. 1°

An increase in the conventionalization of
social behaviour far beyond that of non-human
primates must have occurred. This implies the
development of rule-following and signal codes,
which have been of great diversity in different
cultures, and which required an elaborate socialization process for inheritance. It further implies

68

the ontogenetic development of some kind
of “super-ego” in the personality structure of
individuals. Koortlandt2! suggests that group
hunting carnivores show evidence of this
attribute.

Evidence from palaeoecology and palaeontology throws some light on the timing of these
changes. Thus, while Ramapithecus and Paranthropus have dentition indicating a primarily
vegetarian diet that of Australopithecines indicates omnivorous feeding including meat
eating.27 The development of co-operative
hunting and all that this implies is thus not likely
to have preceded the evolution of Australopithecus. Crook and Gartlan® have recently
analysed the “‘grades”’ 18 of social organization in
primates in terms of their functional significance
in contrasting environments. The development
of two types of society in ground-dwelling
monkeys is linked with the increasing aridity of
Africa in post-pliocene times and the spread of
savannah and semi-desert conditions. In both
these societies there is evidence of some carnivorous propensity. The pongids, and later the
proto-hominids, evolved under the same conditions as the cercopithicids studied and probably
showed some parallelism with their development.
In the open savannah of Africa in the Pleistocene
the biomass of grass eating mammals (ungulates,
etc.) was such as to encourage exploitation by
capable predators. Tool-using proto-hominids
at a chimpanzee grade of social organization,
forced to live in environments harsher than
fruit-bearing forests or open woodland, would
rapidly have acquired the taste for meat and the
weapons for obtaining it. The change may well
have been associated with the development of
“all-male groups” (known in chimpanzees and
gelada baboons, for example) into hunting
parties and the institution of settlements in
protective sleeping places formerly abandoned
during the day-ranging of the group. The new
means of co-operative aggression would have
easily found fresh expression in war with
neighbouring groups as soon as food shortage
and population expansion demanded it. As
Koortlandt’s discussion implies, the “‘grade”’ of
social organization necessary for a primate
evolving in this way is far in advance of those
apparent in living non-human primates, and
CO-OPERATION

combines with primate dexterity and tool-using
the formidable co-operative tendencies of grouphunting carnivores.

Conclusions

Co-operative behaviour in primates occurs in
various ways in a variety of contexts and in
relation to a wide range of goals or needs. Even
among humans a precise categorization of
classes of co-operative behaviour is not easily
achieved, mainly since it arises in so broad a
range of motivational situations. Compare, for
instance, a business man hurrying to work but
pausing to help an old lady pick up dropped
oranges; two workmen installing central heating;
the dance; and a game of football. For co-operation to occur anywhere along the continuum
between social facilitation and task completion
in common, a certain level of social life and
inter-individual responsiveness is required. It
may be suggested, therefore, that investigations
concerning the general field of co-operation
should avoid the use of this ““blanket”’ term and
break up the problem into component parts,
more accessible in analysis. The following
inquiries would be to the point:

(i) Comparison of mammal societies in
which advanced co-operative behaviour
occurs with those in which it does not.

(ii) Study of processes such as social facilitation and empathy which alter the level of
arousal and impel individual attention on
to the behaviour of companions.

(iii) Experimental study of primate performance in acts of mimesis, immediate
copying of instrumental acts, delayed
response problems and learning by
imitation.

(iv) A rigorous experimental study of “‘observational’? and “‘social’’ learning as
discussed by Hall.15

(v) Analysis of the conceptualization, symbolization and means of communication
apparent in the non-verbal pantomime
that constitutes a ‘“‘conversation” at
chimpanzee tea parties.

(vi) Analysis of socialization processes yielding ontogenetic development of cooperative acts in various social contexts.

IN PRIMATES

(vil) The study of social play in both higher
primate infants and human children.

Studies such as these will provide us with data
with which to analyse in more detail the conditions under which co-operation arises in both
non-human primates and in man.

Summary

The use of the term “co-operation” by
biologists is often confused. ““True’”’ co-operation
in primates requires the joint action of two or
more individuals in the performance of a defined
task or in contribution to a joint effect. A range
of cases, from simple social facilitation to the
engineering of social situations by role-playing
wild primates in groups, and to the co-operative
manipulation of laboratory apparatus by taskoriented animals, is described.

Co-operative behaviour in non-human primates arises only in the context of social systems
characterized by a high degree of mutual
responsiveness between conspecifics, elaborate
role playing and conventionalized social relations, and the formation of close inter-individual
bonds. The transition to a human grade of social
organization required that the subtle attributes
of behavioural control apparent in some group
hunting carnivores, as well as an elaborate
communication system allowing symbolization
of the external world, be superimposed upon the
basic primate characteristics. This development
probably did not start before the appearance of
Australopithecus.

In conclusion it is suggested that problems
involved in analysing “‘co-operation”’ be subdivided into more manageable units—in particular the comparison of mammalian social
systems; the analysis of empathy, copying and
social learning in primates; and the study of
socialization and non-verbal communication in
young primates and human beings.

-REFERENCES

1. Allee, W. C., Emerson, A. E., Park, O., Park T., and
Schmidt, K. P. 1950. Principles of Animal Ecology.
Philadelphia and London, W. B. Saunders.

2. Andrew, R. J. 1963. Evolution of Facial Expression.
Science, 142, 1034-41.

69
11.
12.

13.
14,

15.
16.
17.

70

THE EUGENICS

. Bourliére, F. 1963. Observations on the Ecology of

some large African Mammals. In African Ecology and
Human Evolution. Ed. F. C. Howell and F. Bouliére.
Chicago, Aldine.

. Carpenter, C. R. 1964. A Field Study of the Behavior

and Social Relations of Howling Monkeys (Alouatta
palliata). In Naturalistic Behavior of Non-human
Primates. Ed. C. R. Carpenter. Pennsylvania, State
University Press.

. Crawford, M. P. 1937. The Co-operative Solving of

Problems by young Chimpanzees. Comp. psychol.
Monog. 14, No. 2.

. Crawford, M. P. 1941. Co-operative Solution by

Chimpanzees of a Problem requiring Serial Responses
to Color Cues. J. soc. Psychol. 13, 259-80.

. Crook, J. H. (in press). Gelada Baboon Herd Structure

and Movement: A Comparative Report. Symp. zool.
Soc. Lond.

. Crook J. H., and Gartlan, J. S. (in press). On the

Evolution of Primate Societies. Nature.

. Espinas, A. V. 1877. Des sociétés animales. Paris,

10.

Bailliére.

Fletcher, H. J. 1965. The Delayed Response Problem.
In Behaviour of Non-human Primates. Ed. A. M.
Schrier, H. F. Harlow and F. Stolinitz. New York
and London, Academic Press.

Geddes, P., and Thompson, J. A. 1911. Evolution.
New York, Holt.

Goodall, J. 1965. Chimpanzees of the Gombé
Stream Reserve. In Primate Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore.
New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Hall, K. R. L. 1963. Observational Learning in
Monkeys and Apes. Brit. J. Psychol. 54, 201-26.
Hall, K. R. L. 1964. Aggression in Monkey and Ape
Societies. In The Natural History of Aggression.
London, Institute of Biology.

Hall, K. R. L., 1965. Social Learning in Monkeys.
J. Zool, 148, 15-87.

Hall, K. R. L. and DeVore, I. Baboon Social
Behavior. In Primate Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore op. cit.
Harlow, H. F., and M. K. 1965. The Affectional
Systems. In Behaviour of Non-human Primates. Ed.
Schrier et al. op. cit.

18

19

20.
21.

ads

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

REVIEW

. Huxley, J. S. 1959. Clades and Grades. Systematics
Ass. Publ. No. 3. Function and Taxonomic
Importance. 21-22.

. Imanishi, K. 1960. Social Organization of Subhuman

Primates in their Natural Habitat. Curr. Anthrop. 1,

393-407.

Jay, P. 1965. The Common Langur of North India.

In Primate Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore. op. cit.

Koortlandt, A. 1965. Discussion of Alan Lyle

Bryan’s paper: On the Essential Morphological

Basis of Human Culture. Curr. Anthrop. 6, 320-26.

Koortlandt, A., and Koij, M. 1963. Protohominid

Behaviour in Primates. Symp. zool. Soc. Lond. 10,
1-88.

Ktihme, W. 1965. Freilandstudien zur sociologie des

Hydnenhundes (Lycaon pictus lupinus Thomas 1902)

Z. Tierpsychol, 22, 495-541.

Kummer, H. 1957. Soziales Verhalten einer Mantel
Paviangruppe. Bern and Stuttgart, Verlag Hans

Huber.

Kummer, H., and Kurt. 1963. Social Units of a

Free-living Population of Hamadryas Baboons.

Folia Primat. 1, 4-19.

Nissen, A. W., and Crawford, M. P. 1936. A Prelim
inary Study of Food Sharing Behaviour in Young

Chimpanzees. J. comp. Psychol. 22, 383-419.

Robinson, J. T. 1963. Adaptive Radiation in the

Australopithecines and the Origin of Man. In

African Ecology and Human Evolution. Ed. F. C.

Howell et al. op. cit.

Rowell, T. E., Hinde, R. A., and Spencer-Booth, Y.

1964. ‘“Aunt’’-Infant Interaction in Captive Rhesus

Monkeys. Anim. Behav. 12, 219-26.

Southwick, C. H., Beg, M. A., and Siddiqi, M. F.

1965. Rhesus Monkeys in North India. In Primate

Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore. op. cit.

Warden, C. S., and Galt, W. 1943. A Study of Co
operation, Dominance, Grooming and other Social

Factors in Monkeys. J. Genet. Psychol. 63, 213-33.

Yerkes, R. M. 1943. Chimpanzees—A Laboratory

Colony (p. 49). New Haven, Yale University Press.
