THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND
MENTAL ILLNESS *
By LINFORD REES, M.D., BSc., M.R.G.P., D.P.M.

ENETIC factors are important in the
(5 determination of both physical con
stitution and mental illness. The

study of their inter-relationship is therefore
of intrinsic interest in the field of eugenics.
In this paper the term constitution is used in
its wider connotation and refers to the sum
total of an individual’s morphological, physiological, psychological and immunological
attributes determined mainly by hereditary
influences. |
The morphological component of human
constitution, which comprises the major part
of its external manifestations, has the
advantage of lending itself more readily to
measurement than any of the others, and in
fact the study of body-build in relation to
temperament and various diseases has the
respectable virtue of antiquity. Thus, over
two thousand years ago Hippocrates recognized two main types of body-build, a

‘slender type, the habitus phthisicus, and a.

broad type, the habitus apoplecticus, which
he associated with a tendency to tubereulosis and cardiovascular disease _ respectively.

The humoural theories of Galen which
dominated medical thought for many centuries, included body-build as an integral
part. Various types of body-build were
described, supposedly due to various
humoural admixtures associated with specific
temperamental traits and disease susceptibility. In more recent times four main
schools have contributed to our knowledge
of physical typology and disease.

Modern Views on Physical Types and Disease

Rostan (1828) and the French School
generally may be credited with the elaboration of a trichotomous division of bodily

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
April 15th, 1947.

habitus (digestive, muscular and respiratorycerebral) recently brought back into favour
by Kretschmer (1921) and Sheldon (1940).

The Italian School founded by Di Giovanni
(I919) introduced clinical anthropometry,
and Viola with his elaborate index classified
people into microsplanchnic, normosplanchnic and megalosplanchnic types. Subse-.
quent workers in the Italian school, particularly Boldrini, have not received the credit
they have deserved for their careful statistical
work in this field. The German school
founded mainly by Beneke (1879), who
correlated bodily measurements with various
organic diseases, was continued by the work
of Kretschmer and others into the field of
psychiatry. The Anglo-American School,
following the lead of Galton and Pearson,
used the statistical technique of correlation
in order to determine mote precisely the relationship of isolated bodily measurements
with mental traits. —

Work of Kretschmer

Kretschmer in 1921 published his theory
of a biological affinity between the pyknic
body-build and manic-depressive psychosis
on the one hand, and between leptosomatic,
athletic and certain dysplastic physiques
with schizophrenia on the other. Kretschmer’s work stimulated a vast amount of
constitutional research in psychiatry, but it
lacked anthrometric and statistical validation and his classification of body-build into
three discrete types, the leptosomatic, athletic
and pyknic, has now become obsolete.

The work that subsequently followed
Kretschmer’s publication was handicapped
because.

I. The variations of body-build in the
normal population had not been ascertained by satisfactory objective
methods.

50
THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND MENTAL ILLNESS

2. Knowledge on the factors underlying
such variations was lacking.

3. The indices devised of body-build were
not based on an inductive approach
designed to determine which measurements in fact were likely to differentiate

physical types.

Factorial Analysis of Physique

An inductive method suitable for dealing
with these problems was available in the
statistical technique of factor analyses which
had been useful in the study of intelligence.

Factor analysis was first applied in the
field of physical measurements in this
country by Sir Cyril Burt (1937) and his
students (Cohen, 1938, 1940, 1941; Hammond, 1942). Burt described two main
factors governing variations in body-build,
a general factor of size and a type factor
determining -bodily proportions.

Rees and Eysenck (1945) carried out a
factorial analysis of the intercorrelations of,
17 physical measurements in a group of
200 soldiers. Two main factors were isolated
similar to those of Burt. The first was a
general factor influencing all measurements
to some degree and determining size of the
body irrespective of physical type. Analysis
of the residual correlations after removal of
the general factor yielded a second factor
which was bipolar, having positive saturations with length measurements and negative
saturations with breadth, depth and circumferential measurements. This was clearly a
factor of physical type giving rise to two
polar types: a linear type with the breadth,
depth and circumferential measurements
small compared with the longitudinal ones,
and a broad type of which the converse: is
true. This dichotomy in bodily architecture
has a striking similarity to the Hippocratic
delineation of the habitus phithisicus and the
habitus apoplecticus.

The results of factorial analysis show also
which measurements correlate most highly
with the type factor and therefore are most
likely to be helpful in the discrimination of
physical types. There are a number of
possible ways of using anthropometric
measurements for this purpose. The best

51

measure of body-type would be given by a
regression equation using body measurements as terms and weighted according to
their saturation with the type factor. Such
an index would be complicated, cumbersome, difficult to calculate and therefore of
limited practical usefulness. But it so happened that two measurements were outstanding in their high correlation with the
type factor, namely, stature and transverse
chest diameter. These measurements had
similar saturations with the size factor, and
saturations of equal size but opposite sign
with the type factor. The combination of
these measurements in a ratio such as
Stature/Transverse Chest Diameter would be
free from the effect of the size factor and tell
us the individual’s position on the body-type
scale. In order to have a convenient figure
without decimals and a mean near 100,
stature was multiplied by 100 and transverse
chest diameter by 6. As these measurements
differ' as to variability, statisticians would
suggest using standard instead of absolute
measurements in this index. In order to
determine whether this was necessary in
practice, the ratio was calculated both in
standard and absolute measure in a group
of 1,100 soldiers and the correlation was
found to be +0.94. In view of this high
correlation the convenient use of absolute
measurement is justifiable. Thus in men,
the index of body build derived from the
factorial study is extremely simple. In
females, however, it was not possible to
produce a simple index and-a regression
equation had to be calculated.

Factorial analysis carried out by the
author on anthropometric measurements of
200 service women revealed two main factors
as in the male group. There were four
measurements highly correlated with the
type factor—namely, stature, symphysis
height, chest circumference and hip circumference ; and the regression equation calculated for measuring female body-build was
0.59 stature +0.47 symphysis height — 0.31
chest circumference —0.64 hip circumference.

Frequency distribution curves of the index
and regression equation were plotted for
52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

groups of 1,100 men and 400 women, and in
both groups body-build was found to be
distributed along a normal frequency curve.
These curves therefore afford no evidence
for the existence of discrete and independent
types as envisaged by Kretschmer and
others. We find instead a _ continuous
variation of body-build from a narror or
linear form (leptomorph) to its antithesis
(eurymorph).

For convenience of description and investigation of results the continuously graded
frequency distribution curve was divided
into three types of body-build :

1. Those with index values one standard
deviation above the mean (Leptomorphs).

2. Those with index values within one
standard deviation of the mean (Mesomorphs).

3. Those with index values one standard
deviation below the mean (Eurymorphs).

The Relationship of the Factors to Growth

There is evidence that the factors isolated
by factorial analysis are not merely phenotypical but are of genotypical significance.
Hall (1896) in a study of 2,000 school
children, found that growth in breadth alternated with growth in length. Similar
findings were reported by Duckworth (1929)
and Friend (1935). Disproportionate growth
at any of these phases may contribute to the
adult type of body-build. It is interesting
to note that Carter and Krause (1936) found
that a well-marked bipolar type factor was
present in newly born infants, and it seems
likely that this factor is manifested by
characteristic differences in growth rates of
various parts of the body giving rise to the
adult body type. The factors of general size
and body type elicited by factor analysis
appear to correspond to the isometric and
allometric forms of growth described by
Huxley (1932) in lower animals.

Further research is required to determine
the part played by physiological, biochemical, endocrine and other factors in differential
growth rates, all of which appear to be
ultimately determined by genetic influences:

Sheldon’s Classification of Physique

Of the other recent approaches to the
study of variation in body-build the chief
is that of Sheldon (1940) who, from an
examination of a series of standardized
photographs of 4,000 college students, concluded that there were three main divisions
of body-build determined by three distinct
components. The components were termed
endomorphy, mesophorphy and ectomorphy,
as they seemed to consist of structures
derived from the three primary germinal
layers, endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm.
Each component was graded on a sevenpoint scale and the individual classified
according to his rating on the three components. Thus 7~1-—1 would be an
extreme endomorph with large abdominal
and thoracic cavities and low development
of mesodermal (muscle and bone) and
ectodermal (skin, hair, etc.) structures.
With this method 67 somatotypes emerged
from his group of 4,000 students. The
somatotypes are not really independent of
each other but rather continuous variations
of physique artificially demarcated. Sheldon’s approach has been criticized on the
grounds of its subjectivity, and although
objective methods are available for somatotyping the 20-21 age group the basis of the
system remains subjective. The photographic method, however, has. the advantage
of being quicker and easier to carry out than
direct anthropometry. .

Body-Build and Temperament

There have always been popular notions |
on the relationship of physique to personality. Czesar’s dislike of Cassius’s “ lean
and hungry look” and his preference for
““men that are fat ; sleek-headed men, and
such as sleep o’ nights ” reflects this popular
view, which also finds expression in the old
English apothegm ‘‘ Fat and Merry, Lean
and Sad ”’ and in Shakespeare’s description
of the good-humoured jollity of the rotund
Falstaff.

Such notions have only been tested
scientifically in comparatively recent times,
partly owing to the difficulties of measuring
temperamental qualities and partly because
THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND MENTAL ILLNESS 53

of the inadequate methods of classifying
physique. In recent years two main linés
of approach have contributed to our knowledge of physique and temperament—
namely, factorial methods and Sheldon’s
approach. Using the factorial approach
Burt (1937) -found slight but significant
correlations between stoutness and cheerful
emotions on the one hand and between
thinness and inhibitivé and repressive tendencies on the other. Also using the factorial
approach Rees and Eysenck (1945) found a
tendency for leptomorphs to be more
schizoid than eurymorphs who were more
extraverted, thus supporting Kretschmer’s
extension of his theory from psychotic to
normal personality types. These findings,
though statistically significant, do not indicate a sufficiently high correlation for
diagnostic purposes. Sheldon (1942) determined correlations between a large number
of traits and found that they tended to form
three clusters in which traits showed positive
intracorrelations but negative correlations
with the traits of other groups. He regarded
these groupings as indicating the three main
components of personality, which he named
viscerotonia, somatotonia and cerebrotonia.

Viscerotonia is characterized by love of
comfort, pleasure in eating, greed for
affection and need of company when
troubled; Somatotonia by an assertive
posture, high energy output, need of exercise, directness of manner, unrestrained
voice, over maturity of appearance and need
of action when troubled; and Cerebrotomia
by restraint in posture, quick reaction,
sociophobia, vocal restraint, youthful intentness and the need of solitude when
troubled.

This threefold scheme of personality components resembles Sheldon’s _ tripartite
scheme of physique. He found that there
were correlations of approximately -++0.8
between ectomorphy and cerebrotonia, mesomorphy and somatotonia and between
endomorphy and viscerotonia.

These correlations of physique with personality traits are much higher than any
hitherto found by other workers. The
findings need independent verification and

the possibility of ‘ halo effect ’’ contributing
to the correlations will have to be excluded.

Physique and Neurosis

The question of possible correlations
between physique and neurosis has received
scant attention until recent years. Rees
and Eysenck (1945) using the Stature
x 100/Transverse Chest Diameter x 6 index
classified a group of 450 soldiers successively
admitted to Mill Hill Emergency Hospital
into Leptomorphs, Mesomorphs and Ectomorphs as described above. These divisions
of body-build were compared with each other
in respect to seme 200 items related to
psychiatric illness and the significance of
differences determined by the critical ratio.

It was found that leptomorphs showed a
tendency to anxiety depression and obsessional symptoms whereas eurymorphs showed
a tendency to hysterical symptoms. The
mesomorphs were intermediate to the
extreme types in the majority of traits.
The investigation was extended later to a
total of I,100 persons and these findings
were confirmed.

A similar investigation was carried out by
the author on a group of 450 women service
patients suffering from neurosis, using the
regression equation described above to
classify the group into eurymorph, mesomorph and leptomorph sub-groups, and it
was found that eurymorphic women too
tended to have hysterical symptoms.

Further interesting relationships between
physique and neurosis were found by the
author (1943b) in a study of physique and
effort syndrome in 200 soldiers. First, it
became evident that the effort-syndrome
group as a whole was significantly more
leptomorphic than comparable normal control groups. Second, eurymorphic and
leptomorphic  effort-syndrome __ patients
showed significant differences in the development of their illness and its form.

The leptomorphic effort-syndrome patients
tended to have life-long effort intolerance
with long-standing hypochondriasis and
general neuroticism, whereas the eurymorphic patients tended to have effort
syndrome of short duration, precipitated by
54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

exogenous factors such as febrile illness and
battle stress. Thus, in the leptomorphic
patients constitutional (endogenous) factors
are predominant, whereas in eurymorphic
effort-syndrome patients these are relatively
unimportant and exogenous etiological
factors predominate. These findings suggest
complex relationships between physical constitution and neurotic disorder and provide
further evidence of a constitutional basis for
neurosis.

Physique and Psychosis

A vast amount of research was stimulated
by Kretschmer’s theory. Some investigators
were unable to support it; others could
support it only in part; but there were
some who confirmed it completely. The
author in an anthrometric study of 42 manic
depressives and 49 schizophrenics (1943a)
found that there was considerable overlapping in the distribution of body-build in
the two groups, but that manic-depressives
were significantly more pyknic than the
schizophrenics. Depth of chest was the
measurement that showed the greatest
difference between the groups.

As both pyknic body-build and manicdepressive psychosis tend to be associated
with the middle-age period, it has been
suggested that their association is attributable to the age factor. When the manicdepressive group was subdivided into age
groups and compared with the schizophrenic
group, there were still significant differences.
Furthermore, it was found that though
there was a slight correlation of age with
the type factor it was too small to invalidate
Kretschmer’s hypothesis of a_ biological
affinity between pyknic body-build and
manic-depressive psychosis. Kretschmer’s
theory was therefore supported in the main
by this investigation, the chief points of
diverence being that the schizophrenic group
showed a higher incidence of pyknic bodybuild than suggested by the theory and that
the greatest difference in body measurements
was in the sagittal plane (i.e. in chest depth).

Clinical observations suggest further interesting relations between physique and the
various forms of schizophrenia, e.g. that

simple schizophrenia is associated with a
high degree of leptomorphic physique
whereas paranoid schizophrenics seem to be
more eurymorphic. These are clinical impressions which require validation by anthropometric and statistical methods. Bodybuild also appears to play a part both in the
form and the course of schizophrenia.
Schizophrenics of pyknic body-build tend
to show better rapport and less splitting of
intellectual functions .than leptosomatic
schizophrenics who tend to show a greater
degree of introversion and splitting of
intellectual functions (Betz, 1942 ; Kisselew,
1931). The course of the illness tends to be
shorter in pyknic schizophrenics, whereas
very leptosomatic schizophrenics tend to
show a chronic dementing course (Kisselew,
1931; Langfeldt, 1937; Mauz, 1930;
Vanelli, 1932). Similarly it has been found
that the response to deep insulin treatment
is more favourable in pyknic than in leptosomatic schizophrenics.

Thus we find not only that the physical
constitution has significant relationships
with temperament and with neurotic and
psychotic illness, but also that it seems to
influence the development, form and course
of the illness.

These findings are of great genetic interest
and point to the effect of the genotypic
milieu on the hereditary disposition to mental
illness. Thus in schizophrenia, for example,
it would appear that the various genes of
small effect which determine body-build act
as modifiers on the expression of the schizophrenic gene, determining the differences in
age of onset, type of development, mental
status and course of the illness between the
pyknic and leptosomatic schizophrenics.
The study of physical constitution as an
integral part of total personality should
prove an interesting field for further research
in human genetics and clinical psychiatry.

REFERENCES

Beneke, F. W. (1878), Die anatomischein
Grundlagen der Kostitutions—anomalien des Menschen, Manburg.

Betz, B. (1942), ‘“‘Somatology of the schizophrenic patient,” Hum Biol, 14, 192.

Burt, C. (1937), ‘‘ The analysis of temperament,”’
Brit. J. med. Psychol., 17, 158.
THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND MENTAL ILLNESS

Carter, H. D., and Krauze, R. H. (1936),
“Physical proportions of the human infant,’
Child. Develpm., 7, 60.

Cohen, J. I. (1938), ‘‘ Determinants of Physique,”’
J. ment. Sct., 84, 495.

(1940), ‘‘ Physical types and their relation
to psychotic typés,”’ J. ment. Sct., 86, 602.

(1941), “‘ Physique, size and proportions,”
Brit. J. med. Psychol, 18, 323. |

‘Di Giovanni (1919), Clinical commentaries
deduced from the morphology of the human body,
New York and London. Translated by J. J. Eyre.
_ Duckworth, W. L. H. (1929), ‘‘ Anthropometry,”’
Encyle, Britt., 14th Ed.

Friend, G. E. (1935), The schoolboy, a study of
his nutrition, physical development and health,
Cambridge.

Hall, W. S. (1896), ‘‘ The changes in the form
of the body during the period of growth.” /.
Anthrop. Inst., 25, 21.

Hammond, W. H. (1942), ‘‘ An application of
Burt’s General Factor Analysis to the delineation
of physical types.” Man, 42, 4.

Huxley, J. S. (1932), Problems of Relative
Growth, London.

Kisselew, M. W. (1931), Z. ges. neurol. Psychiat,
141, 277.

 

 

POPULATION

55

Kretschmer, E. (1921), Kérperbau und Charakter,
Berlin.

Langfeldt, G. (1937), The prognosis in schizophrenia and the factors influencing the course of the
disease, Copenhagen.

Mauz, F. (1930), Die Prognosttk der endogenen.
Psychosen, Leipzig.

Plattner-Heperlein, F. (1932), Z. ges. neurol
Psychiat, 141, 277.

Rees, W. L. (1943), M.D. Thesis. Univ. Wales,
‘Physical constitution in relation to effort,
syndrome, neurotic and psychotic types.

(1943), ‘‘ Physique and Effort syndrome,”’
J. ment. Sc., 91, 89.

and Eysenck, H. J. (1945), ‘“‘ A factorial
study of some morphological and psychological
aspects of human constitution,” J. Ment. Sc.,
91, 8. |

Rostan, L. (1828), Cours elémentaive d’hygeine,
Paris.

Sheldon, W. H. (1940),
Physique, New York.
(1942), Varieties of temperament, New

 

 

Varieties of Human

 

York.

Venelli, A. (1932), ‘‘ La constituzione somatica
degli schizophrenici,”’ Schizophrenie, 1, 3.

STUDIES

A QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF DEMOGRAPHY

* * * * _*

* * * * *

Editor: D. V. GLASS
Advisory Board :

R. G. D. ALLEN
T. H. MARSHALL

Subscription: 30s. net per volume.

M. GINSBERG

R. R. KUCZYNSKI
R. M. TITMUSS

Single Parts: 10s. net

Volume 1, Number 1, ready July 1947

* * * * * *

9

* * * * *

Published for the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
| by the CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
