The Eugenics Education Society.

President : Mayor Leonarp Darwin.
ecretaties; Mrs. A. C. Gotro. Dr. E. ScHusrEr. ‘Shon. Treasurer: Mr. von FLgIscHt.
‘fon. Members:

HE Rt. Hon. A. J. BALFour, P.C., F.R.S. Sik ARCHIBALD GRIKIE, K.C.B., F.R.S.
IER GRACE, THE DUCHESS OF MARLBOROUGH. PROFESSOR A. WEISMANN.
ViceePresidents:

Dr. RICHARD ARTHUR, M.L.A., President, New South Wales Branch.
Sir JAMES BARR, President, Liverpool Branch.
£ Dr. BENHAM, President, Dunedin Branch, New Zealand.
:; YaMr. H. W. BisHop, S.M., President, Christchurch Branch, New Zealand.
a f*“S1R JAMES CRICHTON-Browneg, F.R.S., Ex-President, 1908 to 1909.
“4 & BisHorp D’Arcy, President, Belfast Branch.
Pror. STARR JORDAN, Chairman, Education Committee, American Genetic Association.
PrRoFgEssor H. B. KiRK, M.A., President, Wellington Branch.
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL, M.A., President, Haslemere Branch.
THE RIGHT Hon. Lorp Mou ton, P.C., F.R.S., President, Birmingham Heredity Society.
Mr. f} L. Orter, J.P., President, Brighton Branch.
M. EpMOND PERRIER, President, Société Frangaise.d’Eugénique.
Dr. A. PLOETZ, President, Internationale Gesellschaft fiir Rassen Hygiene.
ProFressor E. B. PouLtTon, F.R.S., President, Oxford Branch.
Pror. SerGi, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi di Eugenica.
Pror. SEWARD, F.R.S., President, Cambridge Eugenics Society.
BISHOP WELLDON, President, Manchester Branch.

Members of Council:

CROFTON BLACK. ; Mrs. HENDERSON. Dr. ARCHDALL REID.
m E. -BRABROOK, C.B. Major HILts, F.R.S. Mr. JOHN RUSSELL.
Ss. THEODORE CHAMBERS. VeRY Rev. W. R. Ince, D.D., Mr. F. C. S. Scuituer, D.Sc.
N. SIR J. COCKBURN, K.C.M.G. | Dean of St. Paul’s. ProF. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.
. R. NEwWTON-CRANE. Miss KIRBY. . Mr. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc.
A. E. CRAWLEY. Mr. ERNEST LANE, F.R.C.S. Dr. C. G. SELIGMANN.
H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.IE. PrRor. MACBRIDE. ProF. C. SPEARMAN.
LANGDON Down. Lapy OWEN-MACKENZIE. Pror. J. A. THOMSON.
B.. HAVELOCK ELLIS. Mr. ROBERT MOND. Dr. A. F. TREDGOLD. ~
OF. J. FINDLAY. Dr. F. W. Mott, F.R.S. Mrs, ALEC TWEEDIE.
« E. G. WHELER GALTON. Mr. G. P. MUDGE. Mr. W. C. D. WueruHam, F.R.S.
x. M. GREENWOOD JUN. M.R.C.S. Mrs. G. POOLEy. Dr. DouGLas WHITE.
W. HADLEY. Mr. W. REA, M.P. Dr. FLORENCE WILLEY.
_ Branch Representatives on the General Council, 1914-15.
Birmingbam:
Mr. CAREY GILSON. ' Mr. HuMPHREY HUMPHREYS, MR. PERCIVAL MILLs.
x? Liverpool:
Mr. R..T. BopEy. Mr. R. D. LAURIE. ALD. T. R. BULLEY.
‘baslemere: Manchester : Belfast:
‘Mr. W. C. MARSHALL, . DR... MUMFORD. PROF. J. A. LINDSAY.
Rew Zealand: Oxford:
Tue Hon. T. A. MACKENZIE. - Dr. E. SCHUSTER.
Hew South Wales: . Brigbton: :
(70 be appointed. ) Mr. A. J. HALL.
Research Committee : _. Boducation Committee:
Mr. EpGar SCHUSTER, D.Sc., Chairman. Mrs. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary. .
Mr. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, Secretary. ProF. J. A. THOMSON.
Pror. MACBRIDE. PROF. FINDLAY.
PROF. SPEARMAN. Miss BULCRAIG.
Dr. TREDGOLD. Miss TRENCH.
Dr. GREENWOOD. . Mr. Dixon KINGHAM.
Mr. LIDBETTER. Mrs. GoTTo.

Mrs. GOTTO.
; Publication Conmittee :
This Committee consists of the Executive Officers of the Society, Chairmen and Secretaries of Sub-Committees and
Branch representatives. . . . . .
N.B.—-Other Committees are appointed from time to time for special purposes.

“ Fugenics ts the study of agencies under social control that may improve or smpatr
the vactal qualities of future generations either physically or mentally.”

OBJECTS.
1. —Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of Eugenic ideals.
* 3 i1—T> spread a knowledge of the Laws of Heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as that knowledge may affect the
improvemert of the race. _. .
IIl.—To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

SUBSCRIPTION.

- One Guinea per Annum.
= - - Five Shillings per Annum.
PRIVILEGES. |
Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.
Members on/y receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free. ;
Forms of Application for Membership and Associate Membership and full particulars of the Soctetv
; can be obtained of the Hon. Secretaries. .

Membership - Associate Membership 
CES: Kingsway Ho Kin ay, W.C.
urdaya

o | OFFI
OFFICE HOURS: 10.80 a.m. to 5 p.m., Sat # 10.80 a.m. to 1 p.m.
THE

EUGENICS
REVIEW

 

Vol. VII.

APRIL, 1915—JANUARY, 1916.

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY
BY THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY,
KINGSWAY HOUSE, W.C.
CONTENTS.

ARTICLES.

/Ciay, Sir A., Eugenics and the Poor Law
CRANE, R. NEWTON, Mr. Luther Burbank—His Methods and Dis
_ PAGE

107

coveries 193
¥ DaRWIN, Major L. , Eugenics during and after the War g!
FISHER, R. A., The Evolution of Sexual Preference 184
FISHER, R. A. and C. S. Stock, Cuénot on Preadaptation. A Criticism 46
Kirsy, Miss A. H. P., Notes on the Present Working of the Mental
Deficiency Act, 1913 133
LINDSAY, PROF. J. A., M.D., F.R.C.P., Eugenics ‘and the Doctrine of
the Super-man . 247
\/MACDONELL, SiR J., Law and Eugenics . ‘229
MyreEs, Pror. J. L., The Causes of Rise and Fall in the Population
of the Ancient World 15
RipGeway, Pror. W., The Problem of our Racial and National Safety 123
SMITH, PROF. G. ELLIOT, The Influence of Racial Admixture in Egypt 163
THOMSON, Pror. J. A., Eugenics and War . I
WaArRD, PROF. R. DE C., Some Aspects of Immigration in relation to
the Future American Race . . 263
NOTES AND COMMENTS.
Vv Alcoholism and Eugenics: Comments on Criticisms on his Paper on
this Topic, by Major L. Darwin 283-6
L Association, The, ‘for Moral and Social Hygiene : Origin and Objects of of 286
y Broken Soldiers 202
’ Compulsory Military Service 201
Ethnology and the War . 207
Eugenics and War 131
Galton Dinner, The 283
Galton Lecture, The 283
Racial Repair 204
\“ War Babies” and Eugenics 131
Work and Maternity . 203
NOTES AND NOTICES.
Papers, Read and Announced, Lectures, &c. . . . 160, 311, 312
Société d’Eugénique Francaise ‘ ‘ - 160
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS ‘ ‘ : ‘ ‘ 140, 215
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
English . . . I : ‘ - 69, 142, 217, 303
Foreign—
American . . . . ; . 78, 151, 221, 306
French ‘ ‘ é s ‘ . . Th 159, 220
German . . . : : ‘ 309
Italian : ‘ § ‘ 5 : . . I 59, 309

\D4 03%
iv CONTENTS.
PAGE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY (Quarterly Chronicle) 89, 161, 228, 312

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED . s : , gO, 228, 312
REVIEWS.
BOOKS AND PAPERS.
Bruce, A., Psychology and Parenthood . . : . 299
CHAMBERS, Mrs., Letters on Marriage . 300
CLayYTON, I. M., The Shadow on the Universe, or ‘The Physical
Results of the War. 210
CONKLIN, Pror. E. G. » Heredity and Environment in the Development of Men 138
DONCASTER, L., D.SC., F. R. 8., The Determination of Sex. 136
GaTES, R. RUGGLES, The Mutation Factor in Evolution: with
Particular Reference to Euothera . . . 297
GLASGOW, MAUD, M.D., Life and Law . 299
GODDARD, H. H., PH. D., Feeble- “oun eUess its Causes and Consequences. 293
GOULD, F. F., Parents’ Guide to the Sex Instruction of Sons and
Daughters. In two Parts 300
GROTJAHN, Pror. A., Geburten-Riickgang und Geburten-Regelung 65
HILDERSHEIM, O., M. D., The Health of the Child . 212
JEwETT, F. G., The Next Generation : A Study i in the Physiology of
Inheritance z 139
JORDAN, D. S., War and ‘the Breed. . s 4 . 287
Kapp, R. O., The Failure of Sociology 63
KELLER, A. G., Social Evolution: A Study ‘of the Evolutionary
Basis of the Science of Society . 296
KELYNACK, T. N., M.D. (Edited by), Defective ‘Children: A Collection of Essays . 213

Human Derelicts: A Collection of Medico- Sociological ‘Studies 66
LaMaRCK, J. B., Zoological Philosophy. Translated, with Introduc
tion, by T. Elliot 211
LITCHFIELD, HENRIETTA, Emma Darwin: A “Century of Family

Letters, 1702-1896 300
MACHEN, A., The Bowmen and other Legends of the War. 2nd Ed.,

with Introduction by Author . 295

MARCH, NorRAH H., B.SC., M.R.SAN.I., Towards Racial Health : A
Handbook for Parents, Teachers, and Social Workers on
the Training of Boys and Girls. With Foreword by J. A.

Thomson 137
MERCIER, C. A., M.D., A ‘Text-book of Insanity and other ‘Mental

Diseases 66
NASH, J. T. C., Evolution and Disease 214
PEARL, R., Studies in Inbreeding, Nos. IV. & V. American

Naturalist, XLVIII. 64

PEARL, R., F. M. SURFACE, and M. R. Curtis, Studies on the
Physiology of Reproduction in the Domestic Fowl, Part
VII. (Journal of Animal Behaviour, IV., 1914; p. 266).
Part VIII. (Journal of Experimental Zoology, XVII,
1914; p. 395). Part IX. (Journal of Biological Chemistry,

x. -» 19143 p. 263) 64
A Biometrical Study of Egg-Production in the Domestic Fowl.
Parts III. and IV., U.S. Dept. Agric. Bureau of Animal
Industry, Bull. 110, Part III., & Annual Report, Maine

Agric. Experiment Station, 1914; pp. 105-36 . ; 64
CONTENTS.

REVIEWS (continued).

REDFIELD, C. L., Dynamic Evolution: A Study of the Causes of

Evolution and Degeneracy
REINHEIMER, H., Symbiogenesis :
sive Evolution

The Universal Law of Progres
RIvers, W. H. R., M.D., F.R.S., ' Kinship and Social Organisation

SALEEBY, C. W., M.D., FR. C.S. ED., The Progress of Eugenics
WALLAS, G., The Great Society : A Psychological Analysis .

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.
Northampton County Council Education Committee.

Seventh

Annual Report on the Medical Inspection of Children in

Schools for the year 1914

Report to the Local Government Board upon the Prevalence of
Congenital Syphilis among the Newly-born of the East

End of London, by Paul Fildes, M.B., C.B.

Seventy-Sixth Annual Report of the Revistrar- General of ‘Births,

Deaths, and Marriages in England and Wales (1913)
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
English.

British Journal of Inebriety.
Jan., 1915 .
Oct., 1915 .
Charity Organisation Review.
Feb., 1915 ¥
Dec., 1915
Child Study.
Dec., 1914
Feb., 1915
Mar., 1915 ‘
Economic Review, Oct., 1914
Hibbert Journal, Jan., 1915 ;
International Journal of Ethics, Oct., 1914
Journal of Genetics.
Jan., 1915
April, 1915
July, 1915
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, May, IQI5
Journal of State Medicine, July, 1915
Man.
Dec., 1914
May, 1915
Nov., 1915 “
National Health, Nov., 1915
Nature.
Nov., 1914
Jan., 1915
Mar., 1915
Nineteenth Century and After.
Feb., 1915
Mar., 1915
April, 1915

146,

143,

PAGE

137

212
210
213

62

215

215

140

150
304

149
303

73

146
69
74

147

143
144
217

217
304

74
142

395
305
72
142
76

149
150
vi CONTENTS.

REVIEWS (continued ).

PERIODICAL LITERATURE (continued).
Parents’ Review, Nov., 1914
Review of Reviews, June, 1915
Science Progress.

Oct., 1914
Oct., 1915 .
United Empire, Sept., 1915
Foreign—
American.

Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, Feb., 1915
Bulletin of the American Academy of Medicine.

Oct., 1914

Dec., 1914 :
Bureau of American Ethnology.

1905-6 4

Journal of Heredity.

Dec., 1914 ;

Jan., 1915

Feb., 1915

Mar., 1915

April, IQis

June, 1915

July, 1915

Sept., 1915

Oct., 1915

Nov. -y IQI5

Journal of the Society of Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis.

Oct., 1914 .
April, IQI5

Journal of Sociologic Medicine, June, IQI5

Popular Science Monthly.
Dec., 1914 . ‘
Jan., 1915 .
Mar., IgI§ .
June, 1915 .
Scientific Monthly, Dec. -y IQIS
Smithsonian Institute.
Report for 1912-13 .

Report for 1914. Reprint of Dr. v. Luschan’s paper “ The
Early Inhabitants of Western Asia.” .

Training School Bulletin.
Dec., 1914
jan IQI5
une, 1915

French.

Bulletin de la Statistique Générale de la France, Juillet, 1914

Revue Anthropologique.
Juillet-Aéut, 1914
Sept., Oct., 1914
Mai, 1915.
Juillet-Aédut, 1915

27th Annual Report.

PAGE

71
218

70
395
219

308

81
84

306

220

77

159
220
CONTENTS. vii

REVIEWS (continued). PAGE
PERIODICAL LITERATURE (continued).
German.
Zeitschrift fiir Bekampfung der Geschlechtekrankheiten; May,
1915: 309
Italian.
Rivista Italiana di Sociologia.
May-Aug., 1914. . . . . - 159
March-April, 1915 . . . . . . - 310

Scientia, Feb., 1915. . . . . . . 159
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH.

THE ECONOMIC REVIEW, October 15th, 1914. Vol. xxiv., No. 4. The
Economic Position of Women. By Prof. Edith J. Morley. Pp. 389-397.
This is an account of some work carried out by the Fabian Women’s
Group (a branch of the Fabian Society), which came into being in 1908
as a result of the feeling among its promoters that there was need for
women themselves “to discover what exactly it was that they meant by
‘equality of opportunity irrespective of sex,’ and how far such equality
was attainable or desirable in the interests of the State and of humanity

at large . . . . to discover how far difference of sex function must
necessarily cause a difference of mental outlook and a differentiation of
work. . . . The subject first investigated, from a large variety of stand
points, as a necessary preliminary to all useful discussion of the position
of women, was that of their natural disabilities as workers. . .. The next
step was to investigate the position of women as workers and as consumers in this country in former ages. .. . Fifteen historical papers
dealing with various aspects of the subject have been read and discussed.” These papers, the titles of which are given, deal with women
before the Reformation, women in skilled industries, in agriculture, and
in mining before the Act of 1843-44. The committee has also published
the first volume of a series based on the papers and discussions at the
Group meetings, viz.. Women Workers in Seven Professions (Routledge).
The professions treated are “ Teaching,” “ Medicine,” “ Nursing,” “ Sanitary Inspection and Health Visiting,” “Civil Service,” “ Secretarial
Work,” “Acting.” A series of pamphlets has also been published by the
Fabian Society on (1) “ The Working Life of Women,” (2) “ Family Life
on £1 a week,” (3) “Women and Prisons,” (4) “ The Economic Foundations of the Woman Movement,” (5) “Women in Agriculture: Their
Work and Payment.” An inquiry has also been instituted to discover
the proportion of women working to support others besides themselves.
The papers and pamphlets named in the article constitute useful
bibliographies on the subjects indicated.

The Social Welfare Movement. By F.G. D’Aeth. Pp. 404-414. The
first Council of the Social Welfare movement was the Liverpool Council
of Voluntary Aid, formed in November, 1909, the essential object of the
movement being the organisation of institutions, while the Guild of Help
and the Charity Organisation Societies are essentially concerned with the
organisation of case work. The author remarks, however, that this
fundamental difference is only just emerging. “ There are some Councils
of Social Welfare which do case work and some Guilds of Help which
in some degree take part in the organisation of institutions. Indeed, in
a smaller town or suburb it may be quite fitting for the same body to
undertake both functions, provided that the two functions are kept quite
separate and not confused. . . . By the phrase ‘ organisation of case work’
is meant the adequate relief of need in any form by securing the cooperation of the various societies or institutions which are, between them,
concerned with the particular person or family involved. . .. The organisation of institutions may be said to aim not only at seeing that the
necessary institutions exist in a town, but also that the various institutions co-operate together so that between them the field of need is
adequately covered.”

The constitution of the Council of Social Welfare varies in different
towns, that in Liverpool being considered most typical of a large centre:
“It is a representative body formed of a number of constituent institutions
which embrace, with slight exceptions, all the standard charitable and
7O EUGENICS REVIEW.

social institutions in the town. In addition to these there are nominated
members representative of the committees of the various local public
authorities, and of several of the central Government departments. The
local public officials are ex officio members, and there are a few co-opted
members. The #ersonnel of the Council is thus probably the most
substantial of any body in the town. . . . The development oi district
organisation is a matter which follows rather than precedes central
organisation.”

SCIENCE PROGRESS, October, 1914. No. 34. Science and the State: A
Programme. Pp. 197-208. Following the action taken by the Editor of
Science Progress in calling attention to the sweating of science in this
country, the British Science Guild has appointed a committee to investigate the conditions prevailing. For the betterment of science in Britain
the following programme is suggested :—(1) Improved payment of
scientific workers in universities and other State-aided institutions. (2)
Special arrangements for stimulating research in these institutions.
(3) More careful regulation of selection for appointments and the placing
of professorships upon a State-regulated standing. (4) Payment by the
State for expert evidence. (5) Payment of compensation for proved
pecuniary losses to investigators whose researches have proved of benefit:
to the public or to Government departments. (6) Payments of special
rewards or pensions to investigators whose researches have proved of
pecuniary advantage to Government departments, or of general advantage
to the public. (7) A higher place for science in national education.
Regarding the pay of demonstrators, lecturers and _ professors, Dr.
Makower gives the average rate for 15 universities and university colleges in England and Wales as follows :—“ Average salary of professors,
‘£628; lecturers and demonstrators, £137.” It is pointed out that the
highest salaries and pensions in academical life are extremely small compared with those given in military service or the law—and the position
1s also comparatively lower. A scheme suggested by Professor Soddy
is considered well worthy of attention; it provides for stimulation of
research in university departments by increasing the grants for each
department #7o rata, according to the research work done.

Some Recent Additions to our Knowledge of the Germ-cell Cycle in
Animals. By Robert W. Hegner, Ph.D., University of Michigan, U.S.A.
Pp. 270-280. Certain stages in the history of the germ-cells have been
especially emphasised, for instance, the maturation of the ova and
spermatozoa. In this article the author discusses the early segregation
of the germ-cells in embryonic development. “ According to the idea
ef the morphological continuity of the germ-cells, as first expressed by
Jager and Nussbaum, and later elaborated by Weismann and
others, the germ-cells are separated from the somatic cells at an early
stage in the development of the egg, and they, and they only, are able
to produce eggs and spermatozoa. These germ-cells are protected,
nourished and transported by the body in which they lie; they later
separate from the body and take part in the formation of new individuals,
whereas the body dies. The origin of the germ-cells has recently been
definitely determined in a number of animals belonging to widely
separated phyla, and while there are still some groups which have been
carefully studied (such as the Coelenterata and the Porifera) in which an
early segregation of the germ-cells has not been demonstrated, there is
no doubt concerning this process in certain insects, crustaceans, nematodes, and in Sagitta. ... In 1906 the first account of Silvestri’s
researches on the development of hymenopterous parasites appeared.
This was followed two years later by additional studies by the same
investigator. The development of both monembryonic and polyembryonic
species was worked out. In all cases, both in parthenogenetic and
fertilised eggs, the ovum at the time of deposition contains near the
anterior end a nucleus, and near the posterior end a body called by
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 71

Silvestri the ‘nucleolo,’ and considered by him as a nucleolus (metanucleolus) which had escaped from the germinal vesicle. .. . The lastnamed problem has recently been solved by the writer. The ‘ nucleolo’
is not a nucleolus which has escaped from the germinal vesicle, but
consists of chromatin. Because of its constitution and fate I have called
it Keimbahn-chromatin. . . . The development of the pedogenetic larve
of Miastor furnishes us with the best example of the Keimbahn in any
animal. Kahle’s careful work on Mutastor metraloas has been confirmed by myself for M@. Americana. . . . An early segregation of the
germ-cells has been described in many other dipterous insects; of these
perhaps the best account is that of Hasper on Chironomus. ... The
origin of the germ-cells in certain chrysomelid beetles has been shown by
the writer to be similar in its main aspects. . . . Experiments
have shown that if the posterior end of a freshly-laid egg is killed with
a hot needle, thus destroying the pole disc and the substance in which it
is suspended, an embryo develops lacking sex-cells. . . . Two groups of
Crustacea are known to contain species which exhibit an early segregation
of germ-cells. Haecker’s investigations on Cyclops have recently been
repeated by Anuna and extended to include species from the genera
Diaptomus, Canthocamptus, and Heterocope. . . . Kuhn’s researches
on the summer egg of the Cladoceron, Polyphemus pediculus, show that
in this crustacean the stem-cell can be identified by the remains of one or
several nurse-cells. . . . The experimental results of Boveri and
Hogue are of much interest. Studies of dispermic and centrifuged
eggs have proved that the chromatin-diminution process in Ascaris eggs
is not controlled by the nucleus, but by the other egg contents. . .. In
the mature egg of the arrow worm, Sagitta, Elpatiewsky discovered a
peculiar body (the ‘besondere K6rper’) which becomes segregated in one
cell (the stem-cell) until the thirty-two-cell stage. . . . Stevens and
Bucheser have confirmed Elpatiewsky’s results. . . . Many recent
reports have been published upon the germ-cells of vertebrates, and for
a time it seemed from the researches of Rubaschkin and Tschaschkin
that the new methods devised for the purpose of staining the
mitochondria might aid us in solving the problem of the origin of the
germ-cells in this group; but later investigators, such as von BerenbergGossler and Swift have been unable to discover any distinction
between the mitochondria in the germ-cells and those in the somatic cells
of vertebrate embryos. Dodds has found in the teleost, Lophktus, an
inclusion in the cytoplasm of the germ-cells in young embryos which he
thinks may be of nucleolar origin. . . . The writer several years ago
suggested two views as to the probable significance of these inclusions;
first, they may actually represent the idioplasm, and second, they may
consist simply of nutritive materials. . . . One fact that seems more and
more certain as the results of investigations accumulate is that the
cytoplasm cannot be ignored when the physical basis of inheritance is
under consideration.”

THE PARENTS’ REVIEW, November, 1914. Vol. xxv., No. 11. The
Physical Basis of Education. By Benjamin Broadbent. Pp. 771-779. In
this lecture, delivered to the Huddersfield Branch of the P.N.E.U., the
lecturer remarks that there seems to be a general awakening to the unsatisfactory condition in which school children begin what is called
their educational course, and points out that the percentage of really
sound, healthy children at five years of age is appallingly small. The
greater number are lacking in one respect or another, and as the lecturer
points out, “ There is no part of the body that mind and soul can spare.
The body is one indivisible whole, just as the intellect is one, just as the
soul is one.” He gives the opinion of one of the most eminent physiologists, that in the development of the child from the time of its birth, the
process is so planned that the brain has first call on whatever food the
72 EUGENICS REVIEW.

child receives—the body suffers first and not the brain. “ The inference is
that before education, in any proper sense of the word at all, begins,
there should be provided, in a proper condition, the brain of the child,
the physical basis on which all the educational structure is to be reared.
At ge years of age this physical basis is about as complete as it ever
will be.”

School Clinics. By Leslie Kingsford, M.D., School Medical Officer,
Liverpool. Pp. 829-836. In this paper, read before the Liverpool Branch
of the Child Study Society and the Parents’ National Educational Union,
on January 16th, 1914, the lecturer recounts that medical inspection of
school children was unanimously instituted by Parliament in 1908, and
remarks that it has led to the discovery of a vast amount of child suffering
of a nature and to an extent previously unsuspected. “ Medical supervision ensures that the child shall have his physical defects discovered
and treated, that his home conditions shall be improved, that his educational environment shall be suited to his mental and physical capabilities,
and that the child shall have the best opportunity of reaching to his
highest possible attainment.” The lecturer points out that, generally
speaking, the agencies instituted to carry out the provisions of the Act
have proved themselves unable to cope with the problem, and suggests
that the solution is to be found in a new organisation, the “ School Treatment Clinic,” which should be instituted so as to be in close touch with
the local education department. (The powers with regard to the establishment of clinics are conferred under Section 13 of the Education
(Administrative Provisions) Act, 1907.) The lecturer points out that
the raison a’étre for a new organisation to deal successfully with children’s
ailments is “ Most of these defects are of a more or less chronic character,
and require, in many instances, daily careful attention, and, in some instances, as in the case of defective eyesight, special training and experience.” Many of the defects to be treated fall normally to the lot of the
specialist, and the fees for such treatment are prohibitive to most of the
parents of elementary school children.

NaTuRE, November 12th, 1914. Vol. 94, No. 2350. Recent Aspects of
Mutation. By Dr. R. Ruggles Gates. An interesting though far too
compressed summary of the most recent work on the mutations and
inheritance of Ginothera. It has been established that @. Lamarckiana
(Ser) is an endemic species of North America, and did not originate in
cultivation nor come from Texas in 1860. In order to show that
Lamarckiana does not differ in any respect from other species the author
gives the history of @. Biennis (L), &. Parviflora (L), @. Angustissima,
and others, concluding that attempts to produce Lamarckiana artificially
by crossing geographically contiguous species would be futile, since this
would have occurred naturally owing to the ease with which these species
Cross.

CE. Lamarckiana, in common with other species, shows two kinds of
polymorphism, that is to say, various racial differences as well as
mutations.

The author is of opinion that mutations cannot be explained on the
Mendelian assumption that they are combinations of hybrids, and moreover, that Mendelism itself is only the account of a mode of inheritance,
and not a theory of the origin of new characters. To show that mutation
is really a phenomenon of variation and not merely of inheritance, the
case of the mutation @. Rubricalyx is cited. When Rubricalyx is crossed
with @. Grandiflora, the red colour in the F, generation proves to be
dominant, and in the F. generation sharp segregation usually takes place,
but occasionally an intermediate paler type is produced; by selfing these
pale individuals it was found that the F; generation bred true, thus producing a new type, which, when crossed with the grandparent, Grandifiora,
produced further conditions of dilution and blending. Thus a unit character
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 73

originating from mutation may be modified by crossing with another
species. The fact that mutation is a phenomenon of variability is also
upheld by cytological changes which accompany mutation. It is found
that the chromosomes often become reduplicated, one of them passing
into the wrong germ-cell in mitosis.

In the majority of cases in which no alteration in the chromosomes
accompanies the mutation, the author supposes that the change is a
chemical one, affecting one or more chromosomes; he even prefers this
hypothesis when the inheritance shows a sharp Mendelian segregation.

NATURE, January 28th, 1915. Vol. 94, No. 2361. Mendelism in the
Seventeenth Century. By Clifford Dobell. Mr. Dobell communicates an
unpublished letter of Leeuwenhoek’s, written in 1683 to the Royal Society,
and addressed to Sir Christopher Wren. In it he describes the Mendelian
phenomenon of the dominance of agouti rabbits over blue, black, and the
other domestic varieties. The fact that the F, generation of these crosses
contained nothing but wild coloured animals was, he says, well-known
to the rabbit fanciers of Holland at that date.

CHILD Stupy, December, 1914. Vol. vii., No. 8. Jmutensive Child
Culture. III. By Sir James Crichton-Browne, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 133-138.
Continuing his remarks on electrification, the lecturer says—“ In the case
of babies and children, who have, it is to be hoped, a long and varied
existence before them, electrical experiments, even if it could be shown
that they stimulated growth and quickened the wits, would not, I think,
be justifiable. . . . Let us leave our nurseries and schoolrooms unwired,
but flooded as much as possible with that light about the beneficial
influence of which on growth there can be no question.” Dealing with the
subject of Heliotherapy, he says :—“ A sun-cure at an elevation of 6,000
feet has been inaugurated in Switzerland for the benefit of delicate and
diseased children. At that height a large proportion of the solar light
has not been intercepted or absorbed by our air-jacket, and the violet and
ultra-violet rays are in full force. By exposure to sunlight at that elevation it is found that living tissues do not undergo septic processes, and
that a markedly beneficial effect on general health is secured, where that
has been impaired. ... The boys and girls subjected to the sunlight
treatment who work and play in the snow in a state of nudity, or lie
naked in their beds fully exposed to the impact of the sun’s rays, show
promptly, Professor Roget says, a change in the colour of the skin toa
ruddy, healthy brown, with an increase of muscular energy and general
vivacity, while any tuberculous sores they may suffer from dry up, the
diseased tissues crumbling off and a new cell activity setting in.” As to
this the lecturer remarks :—“ It is to be remembered that other hygienic
agencies have been co-operating with the sunlight. The children have,
in many instances, been removed from bad homes and placed in sound
sanitary conditions. . . . While recognising the value of the blue-violet
and ultra-violet rays in certain morbid states, it is well that we should
guard ourselves against regarding them as a panacea.” Referring to the
introduction of blue glass windows in some American schools and the
tendency towards bareness and increased cutaneous exposure, the lecturer says :—“ With reference to the cult of nudity, I am inclined to
think that in a climate like ours, it can be but of narrow application, and
that without it the full nutritive value of light may be secured. . .. Light
operating through the eye, brain, spinal cord and nerves, appears to be a
universal tonic, promoting nutrition and therefore growth, and thus increasing the resistance to disease.” Under the head The Practice of Child
Forcing, he finally remarks :—“I have referred to electricity and light in
connection with child study because their proposed application in the
manner adverted to illustrates what I regard as one of the dangers of the
day, and that is, child forcing by whimsical methods.”
74 EUGENICS REVIEW.

MAN, December, 1914. . Vol. xiv., No. 12. Cross Cousin Marriage in
South India. By F. J. Richards. Pp. 194-198. In most of the castes of
Southern India the most suitable bride for a boy is considered to be his
maternal uncle’s daughter. Next in favour stands his paternal aunt’s
daughter, while in other castes he has a preferential right to marry the
daughter of his sister. A girl who is married by virtue of her relationship
to her husband is called an “ urzmaz girl”; one who is chosen to enhance
the husband’s position or wealth is called a “ perumas girl.” The rule
which is common among both Tamils and Telugus is known to the latter

as menaritkam. “The degree of rigour with which this rule is enforced
varies in different castes, and sometimes it is a mere matter of form to
offer the fortunate uncle or cousin the first refusal. Its rigorous application among the Komatis suggests that the practice of cross cousin marriage in South India should be explained on economic grounds. The
Komatis are the wealthiest caste of traders and moneylenders in South
India.” There is abundant evidence that inheritance through females was
at one time general through Southern India. The matrilineal system of
inheritance was a feature of the sub-culture of the South, on which the
Brahmanic super-culture was imposed. The latter lays vital stress on
inheritance through males. The author suggests that in Southern India
economic considerations, and in particular, the transmission of “ family
property,” exercise a very material influence on marriage relationships.
“ The rule which gives a man the first refusal of his sister’s, his maternal
uncle’s, or his paternal aunt’s daughter in marriage may be interpreted
as a sort of compromise between matrilineal succession and Brahmanic
law; it preserves inviolate the principles of matrilineal inheritance under
patrilineal forms.”

Descendants of Immigrants, Changes in Bodily Form. By Franz
Boas. (Columbia University Press, 1912, 7s. 6d.) In his review of this
book (pp. 206-208) Mr. H. J. Fleure says :—“ An enormous mass of figures
concerning immigrants into America is here collected and tabulated to
support views which, if accepted and developed, would make a considerable difference in our anthropological outlook. . . . Boas confirms other
workers’ observations in stating that, as regards cephalic index, children
do not usually form a blend between their parents, but show the one type
or the other; this view, however, he (again) bases on averages and on
calculations rather than on individual cases. In some of the tables
cephalic indices are reduced to adult equivalents, an average annual
reduction being allowed.”

HIBBERT JOURNAL, January, 1915. Vol. xiii, No. 1. The Scientific
Claims of Eugenics. By Louis Trenchard More. In an article, which is
clearly from a prejudiced standpoint, Mr. More denies the claim of
eugenics to the position of a science, because it is not so exact as his own
science, physics. After some further criticism, most of which is beside
the point, because it is directed against proposals which no sane eugenist
ever made, he concludes by admitting that eugenics has after all some
scope for useful work. This work, as defined by the author, seems to be
so extensive and so excellent that it would satisfy the most ambitious
eugenist. Mr. More forgets that there is as great a difference between the
immediate aims of the practical eugenist and his conception of the ultimate object of eugenics, as there is between Mr. More’s knowledge of
physics and his conception of the ultimate constitution of matter.

The Jews through Roman Spectacles. By Prof. Herbert A. Strong. Pp.
300-313. The author deals in this article more especially with the attitude of
the Roman people of the Empire towards the Jews and their religion. He
points out that those who followed the State religion of Rome naturally
felt resentment against a people who professed that its tribal deity was
supreme when they themselves had passed into subjection. Moreover,
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 75

the Roman deities were “clear-cut beings with definite functions ” whose
very personality was familiar to the nation, while Juvenal reproached
the Jews as mere cloud-worshippers. The very exclusiveness of the
Jewish religion also rendered it more offensive to the Romans, and the
author quotes Quintilianus to the effect that “those who are founding a
new city ought to be careful of admitting into it any race which may be
pernicious to others, as for instance, the Jews.” Notwithstanding the fact
that new objects of worship were readily admitted in Rome, the religions
of the Romans and the Jews differed so markedly in spirit that Judaism
was regarded as a hostile element. The keeping of the Sabbath also was a
great stumbling block to the Romans, who considered it a sheer waste of
time. Referring to personal characteristics, the author quotes Tacitus on
“the undoubted honesty and piety which characterised the dealings of
the Jewish community,” and continuing, remarks: “There were other
personal peculiarities attaching to the Jews which struck the Romans
unfavourably. One of these was, of course, the distinctive mark adopted
for health’s sake and cleanliness, which they shared with the old
Egyptians. Another was the unpleasant odour which the Romans
ascribed to the Jews. .. . It must be remembered that most of the Jews
resident in Rome exercised the trades of petty hawkers and lived in
crowded hovels.” The author remarks, however, that apart from trade
or occupation many races possess an odour which is obnoxious to other
races; in Europe, for instance, an Englishman newly arrived in Germany betrays himself by an odour, in no way offensive, but apparently
due to our smoky atmosphere.

A Physiologist’s View of Life and Mind. By Prof. D. Noel Paton.
Pp. 367-381. In the first place the author aims at explaining in terms of
ordinary physical and chemical processes the phenomena of living things,
proceeding from a consideration of such matter in its simplest and least
complicated form to that of the more complicated forms. As an example
of the former condition he instances the yeast torula, and remarks that
whereas in the case of a crystal the energy liberated by oxidation is lost,
in the case of yeast, some of the energy liberated under similar conditions
is used to build non-living matter into living matter. This, he points
out, is the essential distinction between living and dead things. “ The
reproduction of living matter and the phenomena of heredity have been
seized on by ultra-physicists as phenomena that cannot be explained by the
ordinary laws of physics and chemistry. In dealing with the problem
they have confined themselves to the consideration of reproduction in
higher forms of life, and have not tried to analyse the probable course of
evolution of the process.” He points out that while in unicellular organisms the unit is both the gametic and the somal entity—4.e., is both the
reproductive as well as the nutritive part—in all higher forms these are
separated, one set of cells forming the reproductive part, the gametics,
and the other the body or somal, through which it obtains its nourishment.
The author then proceeds to a consideration of the development of multicellular organism, and, applying Newton’s first law, says :—“ A mass of
protoplasm placed under the same conditions as that from which it
arose must undergo the same changes and develop on the same lines.”
This he calls the “ Hereditary inertia of living matter,” and adds “much
of the mystery that has been made of the phenomena of heredity is due
to the failure to recognise this kinetic aspect, to recognise that it is not
some representation of the whole structure of the parent, gametic and
somatic, that is transmitted to the offspring, as the doctrine of preformation postulates, but simply the special mode of chemical change. . .
Regarding heredity from this chemical or kinetic standpoint, and recognising the interaction between the organism, as the multicellular creature
may properly be called, and its surroundings, the possibilities of adaptation to these surroundings appear endless. . . . In man the adaptation to
76 EUGENICS REVIEW.

his surroundings has been evolved by the special development of a
nervous system, by which, in spite of his poorly-developed musculature,
he has been able to cope with the antagonistic agencies around him.”

So far, the author remarks, the phenomena of living matter require no
more for their explanation than do the phenomena of non-living matter.
Its origin, persistence and spread, reproduction and adaptation to its
surroundings can all be explained in terms of physical and chemical
changes. The author aptly remarks that all this would have gone on just
the same had no mind been present to perceive it, but the consideration
of how we have gained this information at once introduces something
quite new—-the phenomenon of consciousness. Discussing consciousness
he remarks :—“ Here is something about the relationship of which to
matter and energy we know nothing.” ‘Taking sensation as the simplest
manifestation of consciousness, as the basis of its more complex activities,
these more complex activities depend upon the association of
sensations, this association depending upon the activity of nerve fibres
connecting different parts of the brain, so that, “ when these are interfered
with, the change of consciousness as the result of any stimulus from
without may be quite different to that observed in the normal conditions.”
Of the true nature of consciousness no one so far has been able to discover
anything. There is no evidence that consciousness is an essential of
living matter. In conclusion, the author thinks that if we adopt the
kinetic view of heredity, there is no difficulty in extending the physical
and chemical laws which explain the phenomena of dead matter to the
explanation of the phenomena of life, but he thinks it must always be
impossible to apply them to the explanation of consciousness.

NINETEENTH CENTURY, February, 1915. No. 456. Nizetssche and
Darwinism. By the Right Rev. Bishop Mercer. The distortion by
Nietzsche of some of the famous pronouncements of Charles Darwin and
the influence which these distorted views have exerted on Treitschke is,
in the opinion of the author, largely responsible for the present moral
attitude of Germany and for much blame which has fallen on Darwin in
this country. Nietzsche has laid particular stress upon the well-known
terms, “struggle for life,” “survival of the fittest,” and “natural selection,” and is unsparing in his condemnation of everything that does not
accord with the processes they describe. Of “strength” he says “that it
should not be athirst for enemies, resistance and triumph is as absurd as
to demand of weakness that it should manifest itself as strength”; of
“sympathy” that “it stands in antithesis to the tonic passions which elevate
the energy of the feeling of life.” A nation inoculated with such teaching
is likely to adopt a policy of “ frightfulness ” in dealing with those who
offer opposition to her wishes. The author remarks :—“ Nietzsche's
excesses would not have been wholly unfruitful if they served to arouse
in us a sense of our danger from an oversentimental interference with
Nature’s selection of the fit. It is possible to look too much to the
temporary whim or impulse of an unfit individual and lose sight of the
permanent benefit of the race. True, the methods of a humanitarian
eugenics would be indefinitely removed from those which Nietzsche contemplates. They would call for the finest strain of human sympathy,
and be guided by the most prescient and enlightened regard for the
complex issues involved; they would aim at the development, not of
superior despots, but of a superior race. Nevertheless, they would keep
in view, on the plane of reason and moral action, the principle of elimination so arrestingly manifested in the process of natural selection.” Continuing, the author says with regard to Nietzsche’s impassioned plea for
the self-assertive factor in the cosmic process, “I desire to secure full
recognition for the existence and function of a co-ordinate and correlative
factor, present in germ from the very first, and destined to continued
increase in dominance and significance . .. . the factor of self-sacrifice,
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 77

using the term ‘self-sacrifice’ in its fullest connotation as including all
forms of social co-operation, sympathy and love. I call it ‘co-ordinate
and correlative’ not merely on the ground of historical fact, but because
without it there could have been no ‘struggle’ at all. Unadulterated
self-assertion would have wrecked its own existence, and have rendered
the whole course of biological evolution impossible.” Commenting on
the enormously complex system of interdependences which prevail
throughout the whole realm of living organisms, the author remarks :—
“There is in nature no such thing as a self-contained individual.” Referring to the relation between parents and their offspring, he points out
that, far from ignoring it, as Nietzsche has done, Darwin, in his Descent
of Man, devotes a whole chapter to the origin and development of this
impulse. And again, referring to the impulses which prompt to social
service, he quotes one of several passages which prove how fully alive
Darwin was to their significance and function, viz. :—“A tribe rich in
social qualities would spread and be victorious over other tribes; but in
the course of time, it would, judging from all history, be in its turn overcome by some other tribe still more highly endowed. Thus the social
and moral qualities would tend slowly to advance and be diffused throughout the world. ... A tribe including many members who, from possessing
in a high degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and
sympathy, were always ready to aid each other and to sacrifice themselves for the common good, would be victorious over other tribes; and
this would be natural selection.” These quotations express with absolute
clearness Darwin’s views, and prove the extent to which Nietzsche has
distorted the facts and the spirit of Darwinism.
“For Darwin’s world there is the power of an expanding hope.
“For Nietzsche’s world there is nought but ruin and ravin.”

FOREIGN.

REVUE ANTHROPOLOGIQUE, Juillet-Aout, 1914. Cours dWhistoire
naturelle de Vhomme: Peuples de UAsie orientale (Onziéme legon). By
L. F. Jauffret. Pp. 261-276. This article deals specifically with the
Chinese. The author points out that this people differs from the Mongols
rather in manners and customs than in appearance, the altered conditions
of climate and environment being responsible for the higher culture of
the Chinese. The appearance, manners, domestic customs and dress of
the people are described in considerable detail, also their religion, language and buildings. The article affords a good general survey, sympathetically written. ,

Métis de Cochinchine. By Dr. Holbé, correspondant de l’Ecole
d’Anthropologie. Pp. 281-293. The author opens his article by remarking
that the Annamites, especially those of the South, are of extremely mixed
blood; and that there is no longer an Annamite race, except in so far as
language and manners are concerned. He considers that the means of
identifying a race lies in the eyes and the expression. As regards appearance and constitution, he considers that French-Annamite half-breeds, like
all other half-breeds whom he has examined, generally speaking, stand
half-way between the races from which they spring. Occasionally the
Franco-Annamite offspring is of distinctly European type; and in the case
of “quarterons” this is almost invariably so, the opposite holding good
in the case of half-breeds having three parts indigenous blood. The
author supplies some particulars on fecundity, viz., as to half-breeds
married to Annamite women; half-breeds married to French women; halfbreeds married to half-breeds. The author proceeds to give details of
individuals with some illustrations.

REVUE ANTHROPOLOGIQUE, Septembre-Octobre, 1914. Essai anthro
pologique sur les négres et les muldtres du Congo. Par le Dr. Gaston
Daniel, Médecin des écoles de la ville de Bruxelles. Pp. 356-372. The
78 EUGENICS REVIEW.

author prefaces his remarks on different kinds of black people whom he
met in the district of the Belgian Congo by claiming the need of personal
and direct observation at a time when the subjects observed are not
suspecting it. Psycho-physics, he maintains, cannot replace this method
of observation. Immediately the native black suspects that he is being
observed he poses. Information must be gathered “by surprise” to be of
actual value. The author considers many of the measurements laid down
by different authorities as so much waste of time. He remarks that in
parturition, cases of dystocia are rare, being more frequent in the birth of
a Mulatto. Children usually walk at nine months and begin to talk at
an earlier age than in “ White” countries. Dealing with the disposition
of these races, he mentions particularly the great affection and consideration shown to children. Orphans are at once adopted by another family;
the disposition of the tribe is invariably communistic. Particulars are
given of the Mongo type (from near Basoko), of a Sango boy (a race from
near Ubangi), and a Manyanga boy.

Half-breeds: Under the head “ Black Half-breeds” he remarks that
the fusion of the black races is of great importance as a means of suppressing the rivalry of the different races. Particulars are given of a
native of Lagos (a Haussa) and his children by a woman from the neighbourhood of Stanleyville.

Mulattos. The mulattos, with whom he deals first, are offspring of
the European population located at St. Paul de Loanda and in Angola
generally. The men become clerks and shopkeepers, perfectly skilled in
their business. The women become housekeepers and are well known in
the Belgian Congo. The mulattos of the Belgian Congo apparently have
no definite place in the social scale. The offspring of an Italian and a
Basongo mother; and of a Belgian and of a Baluba (Kasai) woman are
described.

BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE, July, 1914. Vol.
ili., Fascicule 4. Population (Mouvement, Etat Sanitaire, Assistance).
Pp. 348-352. The movement of population is for the year 1913, and the two
preceding years. Births in 1913 were 41,901 (in 1912, 57,911); number of
children living, 745,539. A comparative table is appended, giving details
for European countries for 1910-12.

Etat Sanitaire: The causes of death in towns of 5,000 inhabitants and
upwards for the years 1910-12 is given in tabular form. The most marked
regular decrease is under pulmonary consumption, which in 1g10 was
26.3 per 10,000 inhabitants, and for 1912 is 25.8.

Assistance: The different forms of relief are given in tabular form,
comparison being made with England.

Criminalité: Etude statistique sur Vanthropometrie criminelle en
Angleterre. Pp. 369-378. This is a statistical review of the information
contained in Charles Goring’s The English Convict. The tables should
prove of value.

JOURNAL OF HEREDITY, January, 1915. Vol. vi., No. 1. Sexuality s#
Plants. By Duncan S. Johnson, Professor of Botany, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore. Pp. 1-16. This address, delivered at the meeting
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in December, 1913, was published in complete form in Sctence, N.S., Vol. xxxix.,
1914, and reviews the important discoveries which have resulted in
building up our knowledge of the reproductive process in plants. The
illustrations in this present article were selected as being more readily
intelligible than the detailed technical drawings of the early investigators
whose works are referred to. The author aims particularly at indicating
the sequence of discovery of the different phases of the sexual process.
He deals with the knowledge of the Assyrians, Babylonians, Greeks and
Romans, and with early guesses and experiments; with Koelreuter’s
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 79

hybrids, the discovery of the pollen tube, the origin of embryo, and the
discovery of protoplasmic fusion. Dealing with the study of alge, he
refers to the advantage that alge offered for the study of fertilisation
since the development and behaviour of the reproductive organs and cells
could be readily observed under the microscope. The author sums up by
remarking that observations warrant the general application of Strasburger’s conclusion that a nuclear union is the characteristic feature of
every sexual process.

Prepotency. By Edward N. Wentworth, Professor of Animal Breeding, Kansas State Agricultural College, Manhattan. Pp. 17-20. In this
article the author gives his views for differing from the ideas of prepotency commonly held by animal husbandmen and breeders. He considers that prepotency is a quality belonging to characters rather than
individuals. e quotes Dean Eugene Davenport, as follows, for the
popular idea on the subject: “ Prepotency, of course, is a corollary of
the law of ancestral heredity. That parent that has behind him the
largest mass of back ancestry selected to the same characters, will, of
course, be prepotent. If you take the series of fractions, }, }, }, etc., and
divide them by 2, representing the contribution of the sire and the dam,
you will obtain the possibilities of each expressed in the fractional form
so far as prepotency is concerned. .. .If, now, all the individuals represented by these fractions have been selected to the same standard, then,
of course, the sire, backed by his ancestors, will control one-half of the
possibilities of the offspring, regardless of what the female will be. Of
course, the same would be true for the female under like conditions.
This, it seems to me, is the essence of prepotency, and it is all there is
of it.” The author remarks with regard to the foregoing pronouncement
that those who have conducted genetic experiments and watched the
segregation of individual factors feel that the conception is manifestl
outside of the facts. The behaviour of hereditary characters as dhongh
controlled by unit factors in the germ-plasm leaves no room for a cumulative effect of ancestry... . “Even the parent himself has no effect on
his progeny in an hereditary way, as inheritance does not really consist
in the passing on of characters from one generation to the next. The
similar characters of parent and progeny develop because both parent and
progeny arise from qualitatively the same germ-plasm (as far as the
particular characters are concerned). . . . Prepotency is never a property
of the individual, but belongs to a certain few characters that are part
of the hereditary make-up of the individual, and their condition of
homozygosis or heterozygosis is the entire determining factor.” In the
author’s opinion the linkage or coupling of separate factors in heredity
explains observed prepotency and the difference between “breeders of
breeders ” and “breeders of performers.”

Live-Stock Genetics. Pp. 21-31. This is a review of the work in
Experimental Animal Breeding now being carried out at the various
agricultural experiment stations in the United States by the Research
Committee on Animal Breeding. Referring to the investigation being
carried on regarding /nheritance of Fecundity in Poultry, the committee
report two definite results, viz. :—1. That the record of egg production or
fecundity of a hen is not of itself a criterion of any value whatsoever from
which to predict the probable egg-production of her female progeny. 2.
That notwithstanding this fact, fecundity is, in some manner or other,
inherited in the domestic fowl, one reason being that it is possible to
isolate and propagate from a mixed flock “pedigree lines” or strains of
birds which breed true, generation after generation, to definite degrees of
fecundity. “As to the real solution, Pearl thinks the capacity for high
egg-production is inherited through the sire rather than the dam, experiments having shown that high egg-producing hens and low ones produced daughters having the same grade of egg-productivity when mated
to the same cock.” IJnbreeding: Referring to the degree to which in80 EUGENICS REVIEW.

breeding may be carried advantageously, the general opinion among
genetists seems to be that the question of degree is zm ttself of secondary
importance, the real question being the quality of the animals inbred.
Studies of Cattle. At the Massachusetts station an attempt is being made
to work out a comprehensive correlation between dairy form of cattle
and butter-fat and milk production. actal Potsons: The supposed
existence of racial poisons, ¢.g., alcohol and lead, is being closely tested
at Wisconsin, and what appear to be decisive results have already been
obtained. Poultry: At Rhode Island station a new breed of fowls has
been produced as a result of crossing pure-bred white with pure-bred
black fowls, the result being a barred race. Pvepotency: The Kansas
station is just starting an experiment to determine the relation of ancestry
to prepotency. IJnfluence of Age of Parents upon Offspring: A series of
experiments is being carried out at Missouri as to the effect of mating
young animals continuously.

Feeble-mindedness. By the Editor. Pp. 32-36. In this review first
consideration is given to the research work of Dr. Goddard, of the Vineland Training School, in whose opinion two-thirds of the cases of feeblemindedness are due to heredity. He considers that the so-called “ criminal
type is merely a type of feeble-mindedness. A large proportion of the
chronic alcoholics and prostitutes are found to be feeble-minded; in fact,
the Binet tests have rarely failed to show that the number of social
problems whose solution lies with genetics rather than with ordinary
sociology is very great.” Referring to the unit character question, the
Editor remarks that Goddard “confesses to being one of those psychologists who find it hard to accept the idea that the intelligence even acts
like a unit character.” The need for more research is urgently advocated.
Society is responsible for protecting itself. There is no safeguard in a
dependence on some mystical help from Nature; it must protect itself
by deliberate intervention. There is general agreement that effective
segregation should be extended. Dr. Goddard thinks that we must
colonise as many of the feeble-minded as we possibly can, that we must
sterilise some, and the rest, representing the higher grades, should be
educated. There remains a question of first importance to the eugenist :
the relation to marriage selection of the woman who is left at liberty.

Supertority of the Eldest. By Corrado Gini, Professor of Statistics,
University of Padua. Pp. 37-39. The author has on several occasions
directed attention to the importance of studying the characteristics of
children with relation to their order of birth in a family, one of the
objects being to ascertain what consequences the habit, widely gaining
ground, of limiting the size of a family, will have on the quality of future
generations. According to the investigations of the author among Professors in Italian universities, the result shows that a large proportion are
first-born children; children born late in the generation most rarely
occupy such positions. Of 445 replies received from professors 416
related to families containing at least two children. The number of
“first-born ” professors coming from these 416 families is 141; in addition,
29 were “only child.” Nevertheless, the author concludes that until
further data is procured the supposition that the first-born are superior to
their juniors, at least so far as concerns scientific attainment, must be
accepted with reserve.

Prepotence in Plant Breeding. By John Belling, Florida Agricultural
Experiment Station. P. 45. The author remarks that the work of
breeding flowers, fruit and vegetables from natural or artificial crosses
can be carried out excellently with a minimum of Mendelian theory, the
most important idea in his opinion being prepotence, or strength of
heredity, as it is sometimes called. To show in how loose a manner this
term is used, the author quotes instances where it has been employed to
embrace at least eight different Mendelian cases. He thinks that if the
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 81

breeder of improved plants uses pedigreed lines, instead of mixed
cultures, and selects in each generation the plants which are most
prepotent for the particular characters he needs, he can, usually,
leave Mendelian formulz to those who are working to discover new facts.

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE, October, 1914. Vol.
xv., No. 5. The Determination of Sex and Experimental Control. By
Oscar Riddle, Ph.D., Carnegie Institution. Pp. 265-284. In this paper,
read at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Medicine, in
Atlantic City, June roth, 1914, the author deals first with the nature of
sex and remarks :—‘ New evidence is at hand to indicate that Geddes and
Thompson were right, when, from many kinds of data collected from the
animal and plant kingdoms, they concluded that males and females
broadly diverge on the basis of their metabolism—the males being the
active, katabolic forms; the female the more passive, anabolic ones. By
their work the problem of sex was freed from purely anatomic moorings,
and, we believe, a true element of sex. distinction pointed out.” The
author refers also to the pronouncements of Weininger and Montgomery,
and then proceeds to “a consideration of recent and important experimental information concerning the control of sex,” and claims that the
sex of offspring has been actually and successfully controlled in doves
and pigeons; probably also in rotifers, daphnids, frogs and cattle, instancing the Hertwig-Kuschekéwitch experiment with frogs’ eggs whereby
100 per cent. of males was obtained by allowing the eggs to over-ripen.
He also refers to the results obtained by Miss King at the Wistar Institute, where by first dessicating toads’ eggs, and then fertilising them, 90
per cent. of females were obtained, thus effecting the converse of the
Hertwig-Kuschekéwitch experiment. “The cases of sex-control in cattle
and sheep are, basically, probably quite parallel to the conditions in frogs
and doves, where we now mow that greater and lesser water content
accompanies the production of male and female respectively.” The author
enters at some length into the investigations of Professor Whitman in
sex-control in pigeons, and the nature and biological basis of sex in these
birds. He remarks :—“ The sum of these results, together with the initial
fact of sex-control, practically prove that the basis of sex is a fluid,
reversible process; that the basis of adult sexual difference is a guantitive
rather than a qualitative thing.” Dealing with “ Some phyletic and social
aspects of sex,” he says :—“ Not only may individuals exhibit more or less
of masculinity or of femininity; species may do the same.” In the forme:
category he places the European cuckoo, the sexes of which are indistinguishable externally, while there are from 5 to 25 male individuals
for each female in the species. As a type of feminine species he instances
the white ringdove. The males of this species display maternal instincts
often and easily. In conclusion the author remarks :—“ Through our
knowledge of sex we are obtaining the key to a knowledge of how all
characteristics exist in the germ. This bears well the grounded hope
that experimental science can confidently undertake to modify and control
the whole range of hereditary and developmental phenomena.”

The Economic Importance of Lead Poisoning. By Alice Hamilton,
M.A., M.D., Chicago. Pp. 299-304. This paper, read at the annual
meeting of the American Academy of Medicine, Atlantic City, 2oth June,
1914, is based on investigations made for the Bureau of Labour Statistics
of the following lead trades :—Smelting and refining lead; making white
lead and red lead; storage batteries; glazing and decorating pottery and
tiles; enamelling sanitary ironware; painting. The author remarks that
one of the most dangerous of the lead industries is the making of white
lead. “In a white lead plant with a regular pay-roll of 58 there were
250 men on the books in six months’ time, and a storage battery plant was
found which had recently changed practically the whole of the pasting
82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

force, so that where there had been exclusively Russian Jews there were
only Slavs to be found. . . . Legge finds a much larger proportion of
plumbism among the casual workers in the white lead industry in England
than among those steadily employed, the figures being 39 per cent. for
the former and only 6 per cent. for the latter.” Continuing, the author
gives the following account of lead industries in the United States generally :—“ Among the 7,500 men in our smelters and refineries, no less than
1,769 cases were discovered during 1912, a rate of 23 per hundred. The
makers of white and red lead, some 1,600, had 388 cases in 16 months’
time, or a rate of 18 per cent. in a year. 930 storage battery makers
had a rate of 17.4 per cent. during 1913. The 1,100 pottery workers had
8 per cent. for the men and 14 per cent. for the women, rates which were
almost double those for the men and women in the British potteries.
Enamellers of bath tubs and sinks suffer more than potters.” The author
also deals in some detail with the painting trade, and concludes with the
following remark :—“ Tuberculosis is the great foe of the working classes,
but next to tuberculosis comes lead poisoning, and according to our
present knowledge, the two go hand in hand, for lead favours the development of tuberculosis by lowering the resistance of the body to infection.”

THE POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, December, 1914. Vol. lxxxv., No. 6.
The Normal Child: Its Physical Growth and Mental Development. By
Professor Bird T. Baldwin, Swarthmore College. Pp. 559-567. This
paper presents the result of a study of the physical growth (physiological
age) and the pedagogical age (school standing) of a group of boys and
girls from 6 to 18 years of age when observed consecutively, #.¢., in their
course through the elementary and high schools. The data comprise
43,840 measurements obtained from about 1,000 boys and the same number of girls. The author records the following results among others :—
“Boys have a greater lung capacity than girls, on an average, for all
periods except at about 13 and 134 years of age. Diseases seem to inhibit
growth more during the late period of childhood than earlier. Accelerated
growth and resistance to disease go hand in hand. Girls maintain a

igher school standing than boys. . .. In the fourth and fifth grades the
boys and girls are approximately the same, but in the last year in high
school the boys are older on the average. The main educational corollaries which logically follow from this study would require that our school
systems, public and private, be graded on the physiological age and the
accompanying stage of mental maturity of boys and girls in place of the
chronological age, as is now done. This would require that tall, health
children of accelerated physiological age be encouraged to proceed throug

school as rapidly as possible within the limits of thoroughness, and that
the small light children of retarded physiological development be kept
below or in the normal grade doing supplementary work, since these
short light pupils are immature in mental development, although in many
instances precoctous in brightness. It also follows from the study that
rapid healthy growth favours good mental development, and therefore
the healthy growing child should have plenty of physical and mental
exercise.” .

Common Factors in Mental Health and Illness. By Dr. F. Lyman
Wells, Maclean Hospital. Pp. 568-580. In this article the author deals
with variations in different human traits which are produced by patho
logical conditions. The most important determinations, he considers, are
those of Diefendorf and Dodge, on the reaction time of the eye-movements. “ They found lengthened time in all the psychoses tested, slightest
in the manic-depressive excitements and in dementia precox, most
marked, as would be expected, in mantc-depresstve depression. The
angular velocity of eye-movements was found by these authors to be
somewhat more rapid than normal in dementia precox, general paralysis,
and slightly also in manic-depressive excitement, while the slowest movePERIODICAL LITERATURE. $3

ments were seen in the depressions and in epilepsy. The generally quick
movements of manic cases and the slowness of depressed ones are a
clinical commonplace.”

The author remarks “Although it is far from the most difficult of
psycopathological questions, but little knowledge exists on the subject of
the speed of the higher mental processes beyond that afforded by clinical
observation. Many of its basic problems are scarcely touched. . .. There
is no clinical entity among the psychoses in which memory is improved,
though the hysterical hyperamnesias furnish particular instances of it,
as the corresponding amnesias do of memory gaps. ... The most pro
digious memory defects are seen in a psychosis of usually alcoholic
origin, the Korsakoff syndrome, where, in spite of good understanding, all
impressions are immediately lost; indefinite practise does not suffice to
learn what a normal person gets with one or two repetitions. Memory
seems essentially unaffected in dementia precox and in the manic-depressive psychoses, though it may be marked by confusion, apathy or stupor.
These factors are mainly responsible for the poorer performance in
memory tests that most other pathological cases show. . . . Hallucinations
are reported in all the major psychoses, but for the understanding of
the clinical picture, they, and the delusional ideas which supplement
them, play the most important réle in those types of mental disorder
which have been termed Jtogenetic; that is where the personality as such
fails to meet the normal mental demands of the environment, and reacts
to it along certain fairly definite pathological lines. These types of
reaction may be for us summed up in the manic depressive and dementia
precox groups.” In his summary the author remarks :—“ The mental
criterion of psychoses is essentially one of mental maladjustment to the
surroundings, and often it is the only criterion, mental or physical. The
individual differences that distinguish psychotic and normal personalities
are not so much difference in motor power, sensory acuity, affectivity or
intellect, but depend on the way in which this complex enables the
individual to make appropriate reactions to his environment. An individual becomes psychotic when he fails to behave with a certain more or
less arbitrary degree of appropriateness. Where the mental malfunctioning follows a sufficiently definite line, we may formulate a definite
psychotic entity, as the manic depressive or the hysterical states. The
experimental side of the dynamic psycopathology is therefore distinct
from the academic psychology in that it is essentially grounded in the
measurement of the reaction’s adequacy or fitness. It involves a fundamental recasting of psychological methods, more along the lines of comparative psychology, whose details have only begun to be worked out.”

THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN, December, 1914. Vol. xi., No. 8.
Sensory Discrimination in Normal and Feeble-minded Children. By Miss
Anna M. Petersen and E. A. Doll. This second and final instalment of
the exhaustive study of sensory discrimination has led the investigators
to the conclusion that discrimination of lifted weights is a function of
intellectual rather than sensory capacity. The discrimination of defectives is slightly below that of normals of the same mental age. Sex
Differences: In the case of normal children, the total averages for ages
below 13 show a superiority of 5.5 per cent. in favour of boys. In the
case of defectives the differences, though slight, are in favour of the girls.
The results from the experiments indicate that nothing is to be gained
from the training of the muscle-sense. The authors conclude with the
remark that “At the present time experiments in sensory capacity are of
considerable import for the pedagogy of normal and defective children.
Much time and energy are being expended in meeting the feverish demand
for ‘ Sense training.’ - . -Most of the Montessori system has its basis, if
not its ends, in the training of the senses to almost hyper-acuity, and to
the Montessori movement may be ascribed much of the existing demand
84 EUGENICS REVIEW.

for sense-training in general.” A bibliography bearing on the experiments
is attached.

THE JOURNAL OF THE SOCIETY OF SANITARY AND MORAL PROPHYLAXIS,
October, 1914. Vol. v., No. 4. This number contains an account of
papers read and discussions held at a joint conference of the American

ocial Hygiene Association and the Society of Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis on October oth, 1914. The subjects dealt with were as follows :—
(1) Departments of Correction and the Social Hygiene Movement. By
Miss Katherine Bement Davis, Commissioner of Correction, New York.
This paper deals with present and future methods of the State for preventing the spread of the sexual diseases by criminals and paupers. (2)
The Interest of Life Insurance Companies in Social Hygiene. By Lee K.
Frankel, Ph.D. The lecturer considers the subject along two lines—(a)
The utilitarian or practical; (4) the social. (3) The Sunday School and
Social Hygiene. By Frank L. Brown, Joint General Secretary, World’s
Sunday School Association. The lecturer gives in some detail plans for
impartiny sex education to Sunday school classes. (4) Boys’ and Girls’
Organisations and Social Hygiene. By Luther H. Gulick, M.D. The
lecture deals with the efforts to establish social relations among young
people outside and apart from home influence. (5) Social Hygiene Activities in 1914. By Edward L. Keyes, Jnr., M.D., President, The Society of
Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis. The lecturer refers to various organisations co-operating in the promotion of social hygiene, and briefly reviews
methods, under lecture work; medical work, social organisation, social
organisations; religious organisations; educational organisations; vice.
In his summary he points out that the real strength of the social hygiene
movement lies in the co-operation of the great religious, social and educational bodies. What they aim at is the prevention of social evil. (6)
Medicine and the Social Hygienic Movement. By Archibald McNeil,
M.D., Chief of the Venereal Clinic, New York City Department of Health.
The lecturer explains the steps taken by the Board of Health of the City
of New York to control and combat the spread of venereal diseases, by
enactments which came into force on May ist, 1912. This requires the
superintendents of all public institutions (and physicians) to furnish particulars of every patient under observation suffering from sexual disease,
and provides for free examination and therapeutic facilities. (7) Education and the Social Hygiene Movement. By G. Stanley Hall, Ph.D.,
President, Clark University, Worcester, Mass. (8) Legal and Administrative Phases of the Social Hygiene Problem. By Abraham Flexner,
Assistant Secretary, General Education Board, New York City.

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE, December, 1914.
Vol. xv., No. 6. Measuring the Cost of Child Labour. By Alexander J.
McKelway, D.D., and Owen J. Lovejoy, LL.D., General Secretary,
National Child Labour Committee, New York City. Pp. 320-328. This
paper, prepared by Dr. Lovejoy, was read by Dr. McKelway at the 39th
annual meeting of the American Academy of Medicine, Atlantic City, on
June 2oth, 1914. It opens with an extract from the report of the physicians constituting the Board of Health for Manchester in 1796, in which
they pointed out the injury done to young children through confinement
and too long-continued labour, particularly in cotton mills, and strongly
advocated legal measures for the abatement of these conditions. The
impossibility of measuring the full cost of child labour is manifest, owing
to the numerous elements invisible to the eye, but the author points out
that it is believed to be one important cause of low wages and unemployment among adults, and leads to under-nourishment and overcrowding.
To the children themselves there are costs in ignorance and inefficiency.
The physical costs to the children are obvious and well understood. In
the case of outdoor work and with older children, i.e., above 14 years of
age, the question is more debatable. In the case of children entering
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 85

industrial life the author thinks 16 years of age is young enough. In the
majority of the States permits or physical examinations are necessary in
the case of every child applying for work. The Medical Officer, Maryland
Bureau of Statistics and Information, which issues the permits for Baltimore City, supplied the author with results of examination for height,
weight and pubic age of 100 boys, averaging 15 years of age, who had
been employed in factories for an average of two years each. He found
their average height nearly one half inch lower than the standard for
fifteen years, which he reckoned at 5 ft. 1 in.; and their weight 924 Ibs.,
as against a normal average of 1063 lbs. Only 58 per cent. were of
pubic age.

Causes of Morbidity and Mortality tn the Industrial Parturient
Woman and Measures for Improvement. By E. T. Montgomery, M.D.,
LL.D., Philadelphia. Pp. 329-332. The author refers to the importance
of the influence exercised by the wife and mother on the future welfare of
her progeny, and remarks that in many cases, when all her energies are
needed to supply her existing children with food, she is handicapped by
limited means, child-bearing and the responsibilities associated with the
training of her children. During child-bearing, the author points out the
necessity of women being in good health, mentally and physically. The
consequences of neglect of any kind are likely to prove serious. The
production of healthy children is of such overwhelming importance to
the State that when the environment is unfitted to secure a woman from
disease during gestation the author suggests that the State should provide
for her and for the necessities of her children, so that it may be saved the
care of weaklings.

JOURNAL OF HEREDITY, December, 1914. Vol. v., No. 12. Studies in
Human Heredity. Report by the Committee on Research in Eugenics,
American Genetic Association :—

Longevity. Dr. Alexander Graham Bell has just completed an exhaustive analysis of data contained in published genealogies of the Hyde
Family with a view to discover the degree of inheritance of longevity.
His material embraced nearly 3,o00 individuals, and the result indicates
that long life is largely dependent on heredity. His investigation has
also provided important information on the results of early marriage.
His statistics appear to show “that the younger the parents at birth of an
individual, the greater that individual’s chance of long life. This correlation extends almost to the physiological limit at which reproduction
becomes possible.” In order to continue the investigation of inheritance
of longevity, Dr. Bell has founded the Genealogical Record Office at 1601,
Thirty-fifth Street, North-West, Washington, D.C.

Hare-lip. Mr. William F. Blades, of the Eugenics Record Office, is
making a special study of hare-lip in man, and is also carrying on breeding experiments with several hare-lip strains of Boston terriers. “In the
dogs, as in man, hare-lip and cleft palate are found to be highly hereditary in character, but up to the present Mr. Blades has been unable to
determine in what way they are inherited.”

The Families of American Men of Science. Prof. J. McKeen
Cattell, of Columbia University, has been engaged for several years in a
study of the families of 1,000 American men of science, and some of the
results are given below. “The completed family of contemporary
scientific men is about 2, the surviving family about 1.8, and the number
of surviving children from each scientific man about 1.6. Twenty-two per
cent. of the families are childless; only one family in 75 is larger than
six. The same conditions obtain for other college graduates. Answers
have been received from 461 leading scientific men giving the causes
which led to the limitation in size of their families. One hundred and
seventy-six were not voluntarily limited, while 285 were so limited, the
cause of the voluntary limitation being health in 133 cases, expense in 98
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

cases, and various other reasons in 54 cases. Childlessness was involuntary in two-thirds of the cases. In the standardised family of two the
condition is desired in six cases out of seven.

Huntington's Chorea. Dr. Elizabeth B. Muncey has traced this
condition, which behaves as a definitely dominant trait, back as far as the
Witches of Salem. The documents collected and the contents of some
printed genealogical and historical works are being indexed by name,
place and trait in the Eugenics Record Office.

Mortality Studies. A gigantic collection of data is being analysed
for purposes which interest this association in the medico-actuarial mortality investigation under the direction of Mr. Arthur Hunter, of the
New York Life Insurance Company. Details have been furnished regarding 2,000,000 deaths. Four volumes of statistics have been published and
a fifth is to follow.

The Human Eye. Investigations have been made during the past
year in two peculiar traits—very round eyes, and eyes closing in laughter.
Professor Roswell H. Johnson, of Pittsburgh University, says that both
these traits show segregation, but apparently not on Mendelian proportions.

Great Personalities. Dr. Frederick Adams Woods, of Brookline,
Mass., states:—“I have found in Great Britain the material welfare
of the nation during the last two centuries has been greatly dependent on
the presence of a few very exceptional statesmen, chiefly Prime Ministers.
At least it may be said there is a strong correlation between politicoeconomic conditions and the character of English political leaders, and
that under weak and incompetent Premiers the country has been visited
by relative stagnation or decline. It is already statistically known that
the able statesmen for which England is famous have been born in the
upper classes. Therefore, the greater these influences are proved to be,
the greater is the importance of positive eugenics. . . . Some results will
very shortly be ready for publication, based upon a tentative objective
list of about 3,500 of the most eminent Americans divided into several
grades, showing occupation, birth-place by States, and the different
degrees of relationship to others within the list. .. . The research as a
whole strongly indicates the influence of heredity over environment.”

Left-handedness. Dr. H. E. Jordan, Department of Anatomy, University of Virginia, states :—“ Left-handedness or right-handedness may
be considered alternative or unit characters in a Mendelian sense. In
terms of presence and absence, to which scheme the majority of Mendelian
characters appears to conform, right-handedness may be conceived as
dependent on the presence of the determiner in the germ-plasm, lefthandedness and ambidexterity as the result of its absence. But righthanded individuals are of two sorts—those both of whose parents were
right-handed, and those with only one parent right-handed. The former
are said to be of duplex, the latter of simplex, condition. Those with
both parents left-handed, #.e., lacking the determiner of right-handedness, are said to be nulliplex. The right-handed condition dominates or
masks the left-handed condition in the hybrid generation. When lefthanded mate with left-handed, all the children will be left-handed.
When the determiner for a character is absent from the germ-plasm of
the parent, that character cannot appear in the body of the offspring.
When simplex mate with simplex, one in every four will be left-handed.
This is the well-known 1 to 3 Mendelian ratio for hybrid crosses with
respect to a particular pair of unit characters. When simplex mate with
nulliplex one-half of the offspring will lack the determiner for righthandedness and be left-handed.”

Skin Colour of Mulattoes, by Charles B. Davenport. Pp. 556-558. In
order to test the theory that hybridisation of skin colour really does show
a typical blending and failure to segregate, the author, with the assistance of a trained field agent, made measurements upon the skin colour of
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 87

between 600 and 700 individuals, the children of 200 pairs of parents,
chiefly in the islands of Bermuda and Jamaica. The measurements of the
skin colour was made by means of a colour top. The author says :—“ The
result of this investigation is clear-cut, namely, skin colour does segregate, and the offspring of two strict mulatto parents may have skin colour
ranging from that of a pure white to quite dark in colour, like that of a
West Coast African negro. . . . The study shows, moreover, that the
apparent blending is due to the complicated nature of the factors upon
which negro skin colour depends. After careful analysis of all the
results of all the varied matings that were studied the conclusion was
drawn that in the full-blooded negro there are four factors that make for
skin pigmentation, and that correspondingly there are five conditions of
these factors possible in the skin of the descendants of mulattoes, viz.,
no factor for black, one factor, two factors, three factors, or four
factors for black. It follows from the fact of segregation also that
the offspring of two mulattoes are much more variable than mulatto
‘parents themselves. . . . One of the interesting facts brought out in the
investigation was the fact that the negro skin colour undergoes a clear
development from birth onward during the first two years or more of
life. . . . Our studies, also, furnish no support for the view that hybrids
are less fertile than pure races in man.”

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, January, 1915. Vol. Ixxxvi., No. 1. The
Indian's Health Problem. By Charles A. Eastman, M.D. Pp. 49-54.
In 1890 the writer was appointed physician to 10,000 Ogallalla Sioux and
Northern Cheyenne Indians at Pine Ridge agency and found his predecessor practising his profession through a small hole in the wall between
his office and the general assembly room of the Indians. He remarks
that the health situation in the 1eservations was undoubtedly worse 20
years ago than it is to-day. The Indians suffered from the abrupt changes
in their mode of life: too much artificial heat, too much clothing, impure
air, indigestible food, the meat being often diseased. With the exception
of the Navajoes and a few other tribes who retained their native vigour
and independence the typical “agency Indian” of the North-West lived a
squalid life, apathetic physically, mentally and spiritually. His domicile
consisted of a one-roomed log cabin about 12 by 20 feet. Families of
four to ten lived in these huts. The author remarks :—“ These people
were accustomed to the purest of air and water. The tepee was little
more than a canopy to shelter them from the elements; it was pitched
every few days upon new, clean ground. Clothing was loose and simple,
and frequent air and sun-baths, as well as baths of water and steam,
together with the use of emollient oils, kept the skin in perfect condition.
Their food was fresh and wholesome; largely wild meat and fish, with a
variety of wild fruits, roots and grain, and some cultivated ones.”

As the result of an inquiry into health conditions among the tribes
made in accordance with an Act of Congress in 1912, the report presented
in January, 1913, was, in brief, as follows :—“ (1) Trachoma is exceedingly prevalent among Indians. (2) Tuberculosis among Indians is
greatly in excess of that estimated for the white population. (3) The
sanitary conditions upon reservations are, on the whole, bad. (4) The
primitive Indian requires instruction in personal hygiene and habits of
living in stationary dwellings. (5) The sanitary conditions in most
Indian schools are unsatisfactory. (6) There is danger of the spread of
tuberculosis and trachoma from the Indian to other races. (7) Due care
is not taken in the collection and preservation of vital statistics. (8) The
medical department of the Indian Bureau is hampered by insufficient
authority and inadequate compensation.” As a result of this report conditions have improved. The writer thinks that the race has reached and
passed the lowest point of its decline and is beginning slowly but surely
to recuperate. The last censuses show a slight but continuous increase
88 EUGENICS REVIEW.

in the total number of Indians, both mixed-blood and full-bloods. “It
is too late, however, to save his colour; for the Indian young men themselves have entirely abandoned their old purpose to keep aloof from the
racial melting-pot. They now inter-marry extensively with Americans
and are rearing a healthy and promising class of children. The tendency
of the mixed-bloods is towards increased fertility and beauty as well as
good mentality. This cultivation and infusion of new blood has relieved
and revived the depressed spirit of the first American to a noticeable
degree, and his health problem will be successfully met if those who are
entrusted with it will do their duty.”

What Animal Experimentation has done for Children. By Henry
Dwight Chapin, M.D., New York. Pp. 55-62. The author remarks that
the victims of microbic diseases are chiefly the young, and that it is a
question of morals as well as medicine to obtain a complete understanding
of such diseases and their treatment. This has only been possible through
experimentations with the lower animals. The author gives the results
achieved in diphtheria, cerebro-spinal meningitis and tuberculosis through
scientific investigation, and refers to the successful treatment of bone and
gland tuberculosis in children at seaside and mountain sanatoria, due to
Trudeau’s experimentation with rabbits; to the rehabilitation of a whole
class of mental defectives by means of thyroid extract obtained from an
animal. He also gives the results which have been achieved in smallpox,
hydrophobia and malaria; and referring to surgical conditions, mentions
the results expected from the successful experiments in bone grafting
which has been carried out on animals, and to the saving of infant life in
cases of hemorrhages by transfusion, which was first studied and the
technique perfected by vessel suturing in the lower animals.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY.

March 4th.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Sir Arthur Clay on
“ Eugenics and the Poor Law.” Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin.

COMMITTEES.
Jan. 26th.—Executive Council Meeting.
Feb. 23rd.— 9 ” ws
March 23rd.—General a5 35
MEETINGS.

January 31st.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham before the Men’s Meeting of
the Anerley Congregational Church, on “ Will the Fit Survive? ”

March 6th.—Mr. H. Rand before the Stepney Jewish Literary and
Debating Society, on “The State and Eugenics.”

LIVERPOOL BRANCH.

The fourth annual meeting was held in the Medical Institution on
January 2oth; in the unavoidable absence of Sir James Barr, the chair
was taken by Rev. James Hamilton. The report and accounts of the
Branch for the calendar year 1914 were read and explained, and unanimously adopted on motion from the chair. It was agreed, in view of
the exceptional circumstances of the time, to simply re-appoint the same
officers and Council en bloc for 1915. A paper on “Ability and Life,”
illustrated with charts and diagrams, was then read by the Hon. Secretary and discussed by the members.

On February 24th Dr. W. B. Warrington gave a most interesting
address, entitled “Some Views on the Nature of Heredity.” By the aid
of lantern slides and diagrams he explained cell structure, the appearance of chromosomes, and the essential physical continuity of the germplasm, while the proportions observed in Mendelian inheritance were
shown experimentally to accord with the laws of chance. An interesting
discussion followed.

Resulting from the efforts of the Council of the Branch, a Professional Classes War Relief Committee has now been formed and launched
upon an independent career; it has put itself in touch with the committee
administering the Liverpool Branch of the Prince of Wales’s Fund, and
with the Professional Classes War Relief Council in London.

The deepest sympathy of the Branch is tendered to our President,
whose son, Lieutenant S. T. Barr, 3rd Hussars, was killed in action

February 25th.
R. T. Boney, Hon. Sec.
PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Sex Teaching: A Statement of the Problem. (Printed for the Moral
Education League, and privately circulated.)

Improving Egg-Production by Breeding, by RAYMOND PEARL. (Reprinted
from the Annual Report of the Maine Agricultural Experiment
Station for 1914.)

Studies on Oat Breeding: Variety Tests, by F. M. SURFACE and CLARENCE
W. BARBER. (Reprinted from the Annual Report of the Maine Agnicultural Experiment Station for 1914.)

Biometrics. (Reprinted from The American Naturalist.)

The Service and Importance of Statistics to Biology, by RAYMOND PEARL.
(Reprinted from the Quarterly Publications of the American Statistical Association, 1914.)

The Problems of Heredity, by DR. E. Apert. (Reprinted from the
Smithsonian Report for 1913.)

On Means for the Prolongation of Life, by SIR HERMANN WEBER, M.D.,
F.R.C.P. (Publishers: John Bale, Sons and Danielsson, Ltd., rgr4.
Price 4s. 6d. net. Pp. 235.)

The Next Generation, by FRANCIS GULICK JEWETT. (Publishers : Ginn and
Co., 9, St. Martin’s Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. Price
3s. 6d. Pp. 235.) Supplement supplied to above. Pp. 9.

Dynamic Evolution: A Study of the Causes of Evolution and Degeneracy,
by CasPER L. REDFIELD. (Publishers: G. P. Putnam and Sons, The
Knickerbocker Press, New York and London. Price 6s. net. Pp. 210.)

The Shadow on the Universe, or the Physical Results of the War, by
J. M. Crayton. (Publishers: Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent
and Co., Ltd., 4, Stationers’ Hall Court, London, E.C. Price 2s. 6d.
net. Pp. 142.)

Defective Children, by T. N. Ketynacx. (Publishers: John Bale, Sons
and Danielsson, Ltd., Medical Publishers, Oxford House, Great
Titchfield Street, London. Price 7s. 6d. net. Pp. 462.)
