GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL

EUGENICS"

By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.D., D.Se., M.R.C.P.,
and ELIOT SLATER, M.D., E.R.C.P., D.P.M.

Two Types of Inheritance

NHERITED differences between human
| bene tend to fall sharply into two

groups. First we have definite abnormalities and defects. Sometimes these are wholly
determined by heredity. Sometimes there is
a genetic basis, though the co-operation of
other factors, often environmental, is needed
if that genetic basis is to express itself as
recognizable abnormality. These definite
inherited departures from normality are
practically always due to single genes. In the
second place, however, when we turn to the
hereditary differences which distinguish
normal people it is rarely indeed that we find
these to be due to the action of single genes.
Multifactorial inheritance is the rule; that
is, the effect we see is due to the combined
action of many genes, each making a small
contribution which is not individually
distinguishable. So we get the familiar
picture of continuous variation, the normal
curve and certain average measures of
resemblance between relatives.

The distinction between these two modes
of inheritance is a radical one, but it has not
always been clearly drawn. In physical
characters there was from the beginning no
real confusion, but this was largely the result
of accidental circumstances. Physical abnormalities were investigated by medical
men, by the pedigree method, and were found
reconcilable with a single-gene heredity.
Quantitative variables, such as stature,
were investigated by statistical methods by
Karl Pearson and his school, and the
apparently non-Mendelian type of inheritance for which they were looking was found
to apply.

The inheritance of intelligence could not

*A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
December 16th, 1947.

62

be adequately investigated until after the
appearance of reliable quantitative tests. Up
till that time it had to be judged on the
basis of educational assessment or of social
behaviour; thus some authorities of the
early days thought in terms of qualitative
distinctions between the mental defective
and the normal, and of single-factor inheritance. It is only fairly recently that we have
been able to estimate the relative parts
played by single genes and by total genetic
equipment, and to separate clinically those
forms of mental deficiency or backwardness
attributable to the one and to the other. We
now know that the hereditary component
in the determination of the majority of instances of mental deficiency is multifactorial.

When we come to the inheritance of
temperamental qualities we are on less
certain ground. We have no precise and
reliable tests of temperament as we have of
intelligence. Nevertheless, here too it seems
probable that we have to look for single
genes as the explanation of pathological
events, and for a multiplicity of genes as the
explanation of individual differences in the
physiological range. Let us look first
at the mental disorders of what is commonly called a ‘psychotic’ kind, that
is to say manic-depressive illnesses, schizophrenia and paranoia, involutional melancholia, and the endogenous presenile dementias. In some of them a single-factor
inheritance has been demonstrated. This is
so in Huntington’s chorea and Pick’s disease.
Inheritance of the manic-depressive psychoses is compatible with a theory of a single
dominant factor, with the environment too
playing a considerable role, although objections can be raised to this view. The findings
with schizophrenia are even more difficult to
interpret. But no serious worker has wished
GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS 63

to depart from a single-factor theory,
although that single factor may be either
dominant or recessive, or, most probably,
schizophrenia may be not one but many
diseases with different single genes responsible from case to case. Generally speaking,
the evidence suggests that specific single
genes are essential for the appearance of the
endogenous psychoses; but that multifactorial inheritance also plays a part in
determining constitutional resistance or susceptibility, just as it does in environmentally
caused diseases such as tuberculosis.
Neurosis and psychopathy have probably
to be looked at in quite a different way.
Almost certainly they depend on qualities of
temperament and personality, which are
determined by multifactorial inheritance.
In clinical practice we are unable to find any
sharp dividing line between abnormal and
normal personalities ; the differences which
exist must be of a graded and quantitative
nature, whatever the particular temperamental trait we consider. Although our
tests of temperament are nothing like as good
as tests of intelligence, where they can be
applied they show that the population is
distributed in the normal curve. The work
of Eysenck (1947) and his collaborators is
particularly convincing on this point. From
investigations on twins, we know that
qualities of temperament and personality
have a hereditary basis, and the sort of
inheritance of those traits that are found
running in families is readily compatible with
a multifactorial theory, but very difficult to
reconcile with any single-factor hypothesis.
In temperament and character, therefore,
multifactorial inheritance holds, as it does in
intelligence ; but we must rate the importance of the environment considerably
higher. Newman, Freeman and Holzinger
(1937), in their classic study of uniovular
twins who had been brought up apart from
one another from the earliest years, showed
that there were larger differences between
the twins in their response to tests of temperament than to tests of intelligence.
Different environments had also imposed
different patterns of development, and different life stories, on personalities of the same

constitutional and hereditary make-up. In
his balanced study of a large series of
criminal twins, Kranz (1936) concluded that
the fundamental structure of the personality
was largely determined by heredity, but that
environment often exercised a _ decisive
influence on behaviour. As pragmatists we
are really more concerned with behaviour
than with abstracted notions of the underlying personality ; so we must make a larger
allowance for environment in the problems
raised by temperament, neurosis and psychopathy than we need do with those raised by
intelligence and mental defect.

Their Eugenic Significance

From the point of view of practical
eugenics, the kind of hereditary difference
which is determined by multifactorial inheritance is far more important than that
caused by single genes. Here are some of the
reasons. First, those things determined, or
partly determined, by multifactorial inheritance are more important socially. Intelligence, good physique, resistance to disease
are more important to the community than
rare hereditary diseases, even including some
of the low-grade mental deficiencies, or those
diseases which though rather commoner
appear to have a definite and maybe simple
genetic basis. In the same way, temperamental differences are more important than
the insanities. All the hereditary mental
illnesses together give a risk of only about
2 per cent in the general population, whereas
the disabilities caused by neurosis and
psychopathy are of fateful significance to us
all

Secondly, and this is even more important,
simply inherited abnormalities are individually rare or very rare. Seldom indeed does a
hereditary defect attain a frequency of one
in 5,000 in the population ; it is usually much
less than this. The sole exception is colourblindness, but this condition should perhaps
be regarded as a more or less physiological
variation rather than as an abnormality.
Selection then, either natural selection based
on natural differing rates of reproduction, or
any conscious selection that it might be decided to apply, operates on a few human
64 , THE EUGENICS REVIEW

beings only. With recessive genes it is only
very occasionally that we can identify genetically the outwardly normal carriers, so our
general conclusion is little affected. Contrast
with this multifactorial inheritance, determining in part some human quality such as
general intelligence. Every human being
exhibits the result of the action of many
genes, some good, some bad. With the birth
of every single human child the balance tips
a little, up or down. Selection is operating,
not on one person in five thousand, or fifty
thousand, or five hundred thousand, but on
every child born to every couple ; for upon
the sum total of their good and bad genes and
the relative rates at which these are increasing or diminishing depends the future of the
species, whether it is advancing, whether it is
holding its own or whether it is retrogressing.
Here is something about which the individual
can have his say. Here is something not
merely about which the State can legislate
effectively if it wishes, but something which
is automatically affected, for better or for
worse, by social and economic measures of
many kinds. We cannot confine our debate
to the merits of action or inaction, for the
actions of individuals, of groups and of
governments are already exercising a continuous influence.

There is a third reason why multifactorial
inheritance is the more important practically.
If the mute inglorious Milton and the village
Hampden may be denied their opportunity
by external circumstance, it is no less true
that the potential genius, rich in good genes
of many kinds, may be stultified by having
the misfortune to possess just one single
grossly deleterious gene. Too rigorous an
attempt to eliminate such genes may prove
harmful on occasion. To some extent this is
so today, for it is the highly intelligent and
conscientious who tend to limit the number
of their children because of some harmful
gene known to be present in the family
group. Contrast with this the person whose
unfortunate heredity is multifactorial and
due to an accumulation of many bad genes.
Selection in this instance is on balance
practically devoid of risk.

Finally, eugenic measures are much more

hopeful in qualities caused by multifactorial
inheritance than they are with single genes.
Even the strictest eugenic laws, such as the
Draconian laws of Nazi Germany, would
have remarkably little effect in reducing the
incidence of recessive abnormalities below a
certain level. But even a slight selective
advantage will cause a growth in frequency
of multifactorial genes. If we were conquered
by an alien race from Mars, it would be quite
a feasible project for our overlords to breed
up humanity to the intellectual level of a
world of first-class honours men, or down to
a world of morons, and in quite a few generations. For the ease with which it lends itself
to modification by almost invisible trends,
multifactorial inheritance is of paramount
significance in eugenics.

Eugenic Measures with Single Genes

In stressing the greater importance of
multifactorial inheritance and the things
with which it is concerned we are not trying
to say that a consideration of inherited
abnormalities is of no value, or, necessarily,
that nothing can be done about them. But
the field is limited and the useful application
of our knowledge will often lie outside the
field of eugenics. We must dismiss simple
dominant and sex-linked harmful genes as of
minor practical importance. In the former
every possessor is marked by the abnormality
and so is fully exposed to the blast of natural
selection. If the effect is at all serious the
rate of elimination is so high that such genes
cannot be other than very rare. Recessive
sex-linked genes are exposed to one-third of
this exceedingly severe selective force.

Simple recessive genes present a much
more intricate problem. We know that for
every person we see with retinitis pigmentosa
there are more than a hundred unsuspected
heterozygous carriers; for every albino,
two hundred and fifty; for every sufferer
from alkaptonuria, two thousand outwardly
normal people who carry the gene. Looking
at it the other way round, while only one
person in every five hundred carries the
gene for such a rare condition as alkaptonuria
one person in every 70 carries the gene for
albinism, and no less than one in every thirty
GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS 65

or forty amongst us is a carrier of retinitis
pigmentosa. Thus our population contains
great numbers of these recessive genes ;
in all probability there are few of us who
do not carry at least one. In this mankind corresponds to the rest of the animal
and plant world, for wild populations too
carry large numbers of harmful recessive
genes, with little ill effect apparently on the
race.

The first lesson is a negative one. There is
no eugenic reason why a sufferer from a
recessive abnormality, or a known carrier,
should not marry and have children, though,
of course, he will be wise to avoid marrying
a blood relative or anyone with a family
history of the same defect. It is true that
harmful genes are being handed on to future
generations, but we are all of us doing the
same thing, the only difference being that
sufferers and their relatives know it and we
do not. Here we must state our disagreement
with the views of Professor Ruggles Gates as
expressed in his Human Genetics (1946) and
again in THE EUGENICS REVIEW (1947). The
eugenic effect of abstinence is negligible and
if everyone adopted so conscientious an
attitude towards posterity no one would feel
justified in raising a family.

Perhaps it is natural that in the past
eugenic thought has concentrated on one
particular line, namely influencing the next
generation positively or negatively by increasing or decreasing the number of children
of certain individuals. But the consideration
of recessive defects leads us to another
possibility, based on the fact that sometimes
an individual can safely marry certain
individuals but not others. Recessive defects
crop up particularly when blood relatives
marry because they tend to share the same
genes in common, having received them from
the same source. The incidence is greatly
affected by changes even in the limited
degrees of inbreeding allowed and practised
in our community. The decline in the amount
of inbreeding during, say, the past century
must, as Haldane (1939) has shown, have
greatly lowered the frequency of recessive
defects. But of course mutation has been
going on at its usual rate, and, as the rate of

elimination has been reduced, the harmful:
recessive genes are slowly multiplying.
Ultimately after many generations the old
high incidence will once more be reached, but
the proportion of carriers will be much
higher, A sudden reversion to smaller, closed
communities once again and relatively close
inbreeding would result in a marked outbreak
of recessive defects of all kinds.

In the absence of a family history of a
recessive abnormality the increased absolute
risk of a consanguineous marriage is small.
But the relative risk, which is what matters
to the whole community, is greatly increased.
Would the community be wise to discourage
cousin marriage ? If it were prohibited the
immediate effect would be to lessen appreciably the amount of recessively determined
abnormality, but in the long run this would
be at the price of a greater accumulation of
the genes in the population. The case for
interference does not seem a strong one.

Conscious control of recessive defects
would be enormously easier if the heterozygous carriers could be identified. There is
the promise of this in some current work.
Provided that the heterozygotes could be
identified with certainty the defect itself
need never appear provided that marriage
between the carriers were avoided. This is
not merely a theoretical impossibility. It
could be realized at the present time in
erythroblastosis foetalis, a condition which
is common compared with ordinary inherited
defects, occurring say once in every 200
births. Confining ourselves to what is
practically important, the abnormality need
not arise if Rh negative women do not marry
Rh positive men. But is it likely that 15
per cent of women will accept the proposition
that they can only marry their like and that
85 per cent of the male population is barred
to them ? If such an attitude were, however,
to become general we should see an interesting social development, for our population
would split into two diverging strains,
between which marriage rarely took place.

Some reference has been made to an
apparently simple genetic basis, or something
that looks like it, for certain not very uncommon conditions such as thyrotoxicosis,
66

essential hypertension, or schizophrenia.
But in all such instances the hereditary basis
is only part of the story; the co-operation
of other factors, probably environmental, is
necessary if genetic potentiality is to become
transformed into the disease itself. If these
single genes exist they must be relatively
common and widely spread. Their elimination, or even substantial reduction, is probably impossible and in schizophrenia, for
example, the tendency to self-limitation is
very strong. It would seem much more
hopeful to concentrate on the environmental
component and discover how to prevent the
disease appearing in those whose genetic
constitution renders them susceptible.

We are not going to claim that in all the
foregoing instances there is no scope for
eugenic action. The importance of such
deformities and defects to the sufferers and
their families may be very great. Much
relief can be given by wise advice and by
suitable legislation. The recent informative
paper read to this Soczety by Professor Tage
Kemp (1947) on fifteen years’ experience in
Denmark of eugenic legislation shows the
importance of these humanitarian measures.
But that experience also illustrates the
limited scope and effect of such measures
when we think of the community as a whole.
In our country a few thousands of individual
cases a year would be the utmost number
affected, and even of those many would have,
as we have seen, little eugenic significance.
In those things determined by multifactorial
inheritance lies the true and overwhelming
importance of the application of genetics to
practical eugenics.

Eugenic Aspects of Physique and Temperament

There is a large genetic component in
human differences in certain physical traits,
for example stature. This is also true of
certain mental qualities, in particular intelligence. And there is doubtless a genetic
component, also multifactorial, in much that
goes to determine a sound physique and also
degrees of resistance to certain diseases. As
we saw earlier, variation is continuous, and
selection is operating over the whole range

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the human population. Either the good
genes are multiplying at the expense of the
bad, or vice versa; or, it may be, the
population in regard to some of these things
is in a state more or less of equilibrium. Now
we have great sympathy with those who
would claim that as environmental factors
are also concerned we should concentrate on
these first. Let us, it might be contended,
exhaust the possibilities of reducing inefficiency and disease by improvements in
environment before thinking too much of the
less tractable hereditary differences. And
even when heredity is clearly important,
the most useful practical applications may
well lie not in attempting to influence
relative birth-rates but in taking special
precautions to safeguard those who are
known to be genetically susceptible. Let us
take pulmonary tuberculosis as an example.
The fine twin study of Kallmann and
Reisner (1943) has shown most clearly that
in the present state of our community
heredity is of great moment in determining
whether or not a person will develop the
adult form of the disease. But is the lesson
of this that those with a bad family history
should not marry? In our opinion, no.
There are so many unfavourable things that
can be inherited and this is only one. It
might well be that other good qualities would
more than outweigh this particular weakness.
The lesson is rather to protect those likely
for genetic reasons to be highly susceptible :
by periodical mass-fluorography for example,
by supplements to the diet, by seeing that
such pecple do not enter the tuberculosis
service, by discouraging the nursing of a
tuberculosis patient by a sister.

When we turn to temperament we come
up against objections of another kind. Few
would deny the advantage of good build,
fast and accurate neuromuscular co-ordination, strength, physical health and a high
natural resistance to disease. We can surely
encourage those endowed with such qualities
to regard themselves as proper parents for
the next generation. But in the field of
temperament, our aims are much less clear.
There is no such thing as a good and desirable
type of temperament, and a bad and unGENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS 67

desirable one. It takes all sorts to make a
world. There is room for the quiet, the docile
and the stable ; but there is room also for the
man of strong passions, for the natural born
rebel, for the man whose moods take him
from phases of elation and enhanced activity
into troughs of depression. It is true, indeed,
that a man like Hitler can cause much
greater harm to humanity than even a
million mental defectives; but we cannot
say, if Hitler had had children, that they
would have been any more likely to have
been bad citizens than anyone else’s. It is
particular combinations of temperamental
qualities which are productive of large effects,
good or bad. Recombined in another way,
the effect of the genes responsible would have
been different. In fact we are too uncertain of
where we want to go, and too ignorant of the
foundations on which we stand, for there to
be at present a practical eugenic approach
to the betterment of human personality.

Eugenics and Intelligence

We come at last to intelligence. Even
here, perhaps, the nature of our aims is not
beyond all controversy. There are many
jobs in society which do not demand a high
level of intelligence ; and we know that when
people are set to jobs which provide no
adequate outlet for their intelligence they
are often unhappy and difficulties are likely
to arise. But there would be general agreement that we are short of men and women of
high intelligence, that the number of skilled
jobs is increasing and that with the advent
of mechanization unskilled jobs are becoming
more and more skilled. The world in which
we live is becoming more and more complex.
If the average citizen is to understand it, and
play his part in a democratic society, better
education and better intelligence are both
required. And a rise in the average level of
intelligence would permit a fuller and richer
mental life in the community.

The attitude of concentrating on environmental improvement and of doubting the
great urgency of positive eugenic measures
seems to us to be justified only if one
important condition is satisfied. This is that
we have no reason to suppose that those of

poorer genetic endowment are reproducing
appreciably faster than those who are
superior. Thus we can be philosophical about
heredity and pulmonary _ tuberculosis.
Hygienic measures are proving efficacious in
lessening its incidence and there is no clear
evidence that those who happen to carry an
excess of genes making for poor resistance
are reproducing any faster than the rest of
the population. In all probability we should
be justified in assuming that owing to some
elimination at a relatively early age the
reverse is true. But suppose that we were
told that those with the strongest hereditary
predisposition to pulmonary tuberculosis
were reproducing twice as fast as those who
were most resistant, could we afford to take
so detached an attitude? Surely not. And
yet this is what is happening in regard to one
quality—general intelligence—a quality of
the highest social importance and one
determined in large measure by heredity.

We do not propose to discuss the nature of
what is measured by intelligence tests or to
review the evidence which points to a large
hereditary component. This has been done
very recently by Burt (1947) with whose
views we are in entire agreement. Whether
we accept the estimate that three-quarters of
the variance in intelligence as measured is
due to heredity or whether we are ultracautious and simply say at least one-half, it
is evident that the problem is urgent. For
here is no question of speculating on the
composition of a more or less stable population and debating at leisure whether some
change is desirable, whether it could be made,
and if so how. We are confronted with what
appears to us a ruinous rate of loss of good
genes and so a corresponding rate of increase
of bad ones. This is the eugenic problem that
far outweighs all others. We are confronted
with a relatively enormous dysgenic trend,
one moreover which is readily amenable to
selection, should selection be attempted
either directly or, better and more practicable, indirectly through those things that
affect our lives and are to greater or lesser
degree within our control.

There is no reason to suppose that the
unfavourable differential birth-rate in regard
68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to intelligence exists in anything like the
same measure in regard to anything else. Not
only is it known solely with respect to
intelligence, but is only likely to exist with
respect to intelligence. Nevertheless we must
not forget that good qualities tend in general
to be positively correlated and similarly for
bad qualities. This means that improvement
in regard to the differential birth-rate as it
affects intelligence should automatically
secure improvement in other directions also.
But this in all probability would be small,
important though it is to recognize that it
would be in the right direction.

If the average level of intelligence of the
community continues to decline, we can
expect to see the effect not only on the
average but much more markedly at the two
extremes. The average citizen will become
less fitted by natural aptitudes to understand
and exercise an effective voice in the society
in which he lives. But the proportion of
mental defectives will rise sharply. Most
critically of all, the loss of good genes will be
shown in a decrease in the number of the
really talented. Civilization owes disproportionally much to men of the very highest
intellectual powers, to such figures as Shaw
and Einstein in the present age, Pasteur and
Descartes in a past one. Even a relatively
small fall in average intelligence implies a
catastrophic fall in the number of such men.
These are the men whose intellects place
them in the one-in-a-million class. With an
average drop of half a dozen points on the
Binet scale we can expect them to appear,
not with a frequency of one in a million, but
of less than one in ten million ; for every ten
such men today, tomorrow we should have
but one.

Eugenics in the past has had too much of
an aristocratic air. Perhaps the brilliant
pedigree of its founder has had too much
fascination. Perhaps there has been a
failure to distinguish between fruitful
methods of investigation and the use that can
be made of them. Studies of the extremes,
on men, of genius on the one hand, on mental
defectives on the other, are both fascinating
and illuminating, but the lessons that they
teach apply to the whole community.

Galton himself pointed out the significance
of changes in the average for changes at the
extremes, just as he pointed out that among
the relatives of men of outstanding ability
there are a remarkable number of the outstandingly able. These are two complementary aspects of the same phenomena, but we
have tended to neglect the more important
one. Galton’s views about distinguished
families were right enough ; but we need to
supplement them with the observation that,
all the same, the great majority of intellectual giants come from families of moderate
ability as the result of an exceptionally
favourable chance. Taking them by and
large, the children of university professors
are no doubt more intelligent than the
children of clerks. But there are so many
more clerks in the world than university
professors that any collection of brilliant
men will include more clerks’ sons than
professors’ sons.

We need to look for a moment, not at the
distribution of men of ability in the community, but at the distribution of the genes.
No doubt the genes of hereditary ability are
spread more thinly among those of average
and slightly better than average intelligence

‘than in the very able. But there are many

more such genes in the former group than
in the latter. Regarded as treasuries of
potential ability, there is no comparison
between the two. The principles of genetics
inform us that our concern must be with the
community as a whole, and not with a small
and special section. The facts as we see them
give rise to grave disquiet. Our task is to
reverse the present trends, to change the sign
of differential fertility, to encourage the more
intelligent half of the community to have
more, not fewer, children than the less
intelligent.

Summary
Inherited human differences tend to fall
into two groups. First, there are definite

departures from the normal, these being

commonly due to the action of single genes.
Secondly, there are the inherited differences
that distinguish normal people, which tend
strongly to show continuous variation.
GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS 69

These are due to multifactorial inheritance.
While there is some scope for eugenic action
in differences of the first kind, this is small
compared with the effect of even moderate
degrees of selection, operating on all human
beings, on differences of the second type.
The outstanding eugenic problem, far outweighing all others in importance, is the
present differential birth-rate with respect
to intelligence, for of this human quality
only do we know that the less desirable genes
are multiplying rapidly at the expense of the
good.
REFERENCES

Burt, C. (1947), Intelligence and Ferttlty, London,
Hamish Hamilton.

Eysenck, H. J. (1947), Dimensions of Personality
London, Kegan Paul.

Gates, R. R. (1946), Human Genetics, New York,
Macmillan.

(1947), EuGENiIcs REVIEw, 39, 124.

Haldane, J. B. S. (1939), “‘ The Spread of Harmful
Autosomal Recessive Genes in Human Populations,”
Ann. Eugen., Lond., 9, 232.

Kallmann, F. J., and Reisner, D. (1943), “‘ Twin
Studies on the Significance of Genetic Factors in
Tuberculosis,’’ Amer. Rev. Tuber., 47, 549.

Kemp, T. (1947), ‘“ Danish Experiences in Negative
Eugenics,’” EUGENICS REVIEW, 38, 181.

Kranz, H. (1936), Lebensschicksale Krimineller
Zuillinge, Berlin, Springer.

Newman, H. H., Freeman, F. N., and Holzinger,
K. J. (1937), Twins : A Study of Heredity and Environment, University of Chicago Press and Cambridge
University Press.

 

The Life, Letters, and Labours of

FRANCIS

GALTON

by

KARL PEARSON

Votume I: Birth 1822 to Marriage 1853.
VotumeE II: Letters and Labours of Middle Life.

frontispiece, and 2 text figures.

With 5 pedigree plates, 72 photographs,

With 50 plates and many text figures. Vo Lume IIIA: Letters and Labours of Later

Life.

With 44 plates (3 in colour) and many text figures. Vo Lume IIIB: Character
isation of Galton, especially by his Family Letters. With 18 plates, many sketches,

and an Index.

CAMBRIDGE

UNIVERSITY

 

Complete, £3 3s. net

PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, Mo. 2
