METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON
LABORATORY FOR NATIONAL EUGENICS!

By EpaGar Scuuster, M.A., D.Sc.

THE title adopted for this paper is ‘‘ The Methods and Results of the Galton Research Laboratory for National Eugenics.”’
It is not, however, my intention to deal with the technical processes employed, but rather to describe the spirit in which the
problems are approached. The strategical principles governing
the campaign are easily understood, but the tactical details
cannot be learnt but by apprenticeship. The leading principle
is briefly this: To appeal directly to individual facts and
not to the generalisations of common knowledge which are
sometimes described as facts. Records are either collected
specially for the purpose or are taken from original published
sources and are subjected to that statistical logic which compels
them to give forth some at any rate of their meaning. The conclusions arrived at are printed with the full evidence on which
they are based and every step necessary to enable a critic to
follow the reasoning of the process by which they are obtained
from the evidence.

Curiously enough this method of publication, which appears
to me to merit approval, has been the subject of attack even by
sympathetic critics. For example, a leader writer in the Times
complains that the memoirs of the Galton Laboratory are
couched in technical language. Well, it would be easy enough
to write the conclusions so that they could be partly understood
by all the readers of the Times and those of the Datly Mail,
but that in order that any one may understand not only the
broad conclusions, but may be able to form an opinion as
to how far they are justified by the evidence and how far

1A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Education Society in December,
1QI0.
METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON LABORATORY It

they must be qualified it is necessary to present the evidence
fully, and this could not be done in non-technical language without an enormous sacrifice of time and space. A slender pamphlet
of thirty or forty pages, in which the technical shorthand of a
particular science is employed, would swell to the bulk of the
evidence given before a Royal Commission if it were not
employed. Unlike the latter it would find no stationery office to
pay for printing it, and if by chance the necessary thousands of
pounds were spent it is doubtful whether its expansion would
gain it additional readers.

In the contemptuous reports of the proceedings of the
British Association at Sheffield given by the Datly Matl a whole
batch of papers were condemned because the terms coefficients
and correlation were used in them. In this paper I shall have to
use the expression coefficient of correlation a good deal. As I
am not likely to be reported in the Datly Mail I can do so with
a brave heart, but I shall first endeavour to give an intelligible
but necessarily somewhat inaccurate account of the meaning of
the words.

Consider any two lines of variable length, Aand B. Now
suppose that when A increases to its utmost length B also invariably increases to its utmost length, and that when A decreases
to its shortest length then B also decreases to its shortest length.
In fact, generally that any increase or decrease in A is invariably
associated with a corresponding increase or decrease in B.
Then the length of A is said to be correlated with the length of
B and the correlation is perfect and positive. Such perfect and
positive correlation is expressed numerically by a correlation
coefficient +1. If however, any increase in the length of A is
invariably associated with a corresponding decrease in the length
of B the correlation is perfect but negative and is represented
numerically by the correlation coefficient —1. A third condition
is found when A varies and B varies, but when the variations of
A are never associated in any definite way with the variations of
B, that is to say when the two lines are quite independent. The
correlation coefficient in this case iso. Now there are various
other intermediate conditions: for instance, if an increase in
size of A is associated not with an invariable definite increase in
“12 | E. Schuster:

B which corresponds to that of A, but with an increase of varying extent, sometimes larger, sometimes smaller, averaging about
one half the corresponding increase which is found in perfect
correlation. In this case the correlation coefficient would be
+¢or+°5. Similarly the correlation may be + +or + $3, —}, —}
or -+ or —any other fraction lying between 0 and I.

Now it is reasonable to suppose that when one thing varies
absolutely with another, t.c., when the correlation is perfect,
that this is brought about by the variations in each case being
due to an identical set of causes. Similarly when the correlation
is $ it may be concluded that one half of the complex of causes
on which the length of A depends, is identical with one half of
those which determine the length of B. So that if the degree
of correlation between two phenomena is measured, a measure is
obtained of the degree of causal connection between them.

The correlation coefficient can be found not only between
two measurable variables such as the length of two lines, but
also between two things of which no exact measure can be
obtained, such as the mental capacity of two brothers, vaccination
and the chances of death from smallpox, and so on.

 

Having defined my technical terms, I hope intelligibly, I
will proceed to the actual memoirs.

 

SCHUSTER and ELDERTON: I*heritance of Abtlity—Of the
papers dealing with the measurement of resemblances between
relations, and published as one of the Eugenics Laboratory
Memoirs first in order ef publication comes one written by Miss
Elderton and myself on the Inheritance of Ability, based on a
statistical study of the Oxford Class lists and of the school
lists of Harrow and Charterhouse. From Foster’s Alumns
Oxontenses and the continuation, Oxford Men and they Colleges,
we were able to obtain, with the aid of the Oxford Historical
Register, records of the degree taken by several thousand pairs of
father and son, and brother and brother. This material was
divided into three groups according to the date of the degree
taken.
METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON LABORATORY 13

Let us take, for an example the correlation between the
examination success of the father and that of the son that group
of pairs in which the son took his degree or failed to take it
between the years of 1830and 1860. Out of 1,531 sons eighty-six
took first class honours, 145, II.; 111, III.; 103, 1V.; 700 pass
degrees and 386 no degrees at all. Thus the sons are placed in
six divisions according to a descending scale of merit. Inthe
original table given in the paper the fathers of each division are
also subdivided in a similar way, but this makes so many divisions as to be confusing if the numbers are read aloud, so I will
instead give the percentage of fathers who took honours either in
the first or the second class:

I. 42 per cent. of fathers in first or second class.

II. 41 » y ys
III. 33 a + in
IV. 28 ” ” »

P. 20 ” ” »

Plough. 13 9

Thus we see that associated with the descending scale of
merit of sons, is a descending percentage of fathers who had
obtained more than a certain degree of success. It may be noted
that these results show a considerable degree of regularity.

Expressed in the form of a correlation coefficient, we may
say that the resemblance between father and son with regard to
the degree taken is about 4. In a group of people of more recent
date the coefficient of correlation was found to be slightly less.

Similar tables were made to determine the correlation
between brother and brother and the resemblance in this case
worked out at about °4 or 2.

In using the public school material the character investigated was the position in the school at certain definite periods ;
in the case of Harrow, at one, two and three years after entering
the school, and of Charterhouse at the ages of 15, 16 and 17.
The results obtained in this way shew a fair agreement among
themselves and with those derived from a consideration of the
Oxford degrees.

In a note appended to our paper Prof. Karl Pearson explains
certain factors which tend to reduce our correlation coefficients,
14 E. Schuster :

and concludes that if these factors were taken into account, the
correlation between father and son would probably lie between
"4 and °5, and between brother and brother between °5 and °6,
values which agree well with the results obtained from easily
measured physical characters such as stature.

Now these statistical results are merely more or less accurate
and intelligible descriptions of masses of facts; they merely
state the resemblances between father and son and brother and
brother. If one attributes them either to inheritance or to the
similarity of education of the different members of each family,
one is making an hypothesis to account for the facts. That
they are due either to the one cause or to the other, or to both
acting together, will hardly be disputed, but to decide between
the two is not an easy matter though one of great importance.
In this case the material does not lend itself to an analysis of
this kind, but in some other work of the Eugenics laboratory
which I shall come to later the question of the relative weight of
heredity and environment has been dealt with, with results which
emphasise the importance of the former.

Promise of Youth and the Performance of Manhood.—-A second
research published by myself in this series of memoirs may
perhaps be suitably referred to here, since it is based partly on
Oxford degrees. It does not form so integral a part of the
general scheme of research of the laboratory, but as it has some
bearing on practical eugenics and attacks, though somewhat
feebly, a problem of great interest to educationalists, it is perhaps
worthy of a passing mention. The problem is defined in the
title of the paper ‘‘ The Promise of Youth and the Performance
of Manhood.” Its bearing on practical eugenics is as follows:
part of Sir Francis Galton’s scheme consisted of the encouragement of early marriages of persons above the average ability.
There is no known test of ability which is quite satisfactory, but
the best is probably success in a profession or occupation. Now
this test has little usefulness in selecting candidates for early
marriage since the candidate is usually too old for an early
marriage at the time when the results are published. On the
other hand, the results of examinations for scholarships and
degrees are published early enough, but are they valuable as an
METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON LABORATORY T5

indication of ability? My work endeavours to answer the
question, how far is success in the Oxford degree examinations
correlated with success in two professions, namely, the Church
and the Bar? The answer is that there is a very considerable
degree of correlation, in the case of the Bar it amounts to °4.
The limitation of the scope of the inquiry to these two callings
is not due to choice but the fact that satisfactory material was
not forthcoming with regard to other vocations.

 

Heron: Inheritance of Insanity.—To turn from the study of
Ability to that of less desirable qualities we will consider Mr.
David Heron’s work, ‘“‘ A First Study of the Statistics of Insanity
and the Inheritance of the Insane Diathesis.” The material on
which this work is based was provided by Dr. A. R. Urquhart,
Physician Superintendent of the James Murray’s Royal Asylum,
Perth. This is an asylum for paying patients belonging to the
lower middle classes. The records collected by Dr. Urquhart
personally are probably very reliable ; they consist of 331 family
trees. Each gives the total number of brothers and sisters of
the patient, stating the order of birth and classifying each as
insane, neurotic, alcoholic, epileptic, eccentric or normal.
Similar facts are in every case given about the parents of the
patient, the age of first attack is also nearly always given.

On analysing the data Mr. Heron gets results, of which the
following is a specimen. There are 205 male patients and each
of these is twice entered in the table, once for each parent, with
the effect that in 49 cases a parent was insane, in 361 a parent
was not insane. In addition to the 49 insane offspring of the
insane parents there were 149 sane sons and daughters of the
same set of parents. This is seen more clearly in tabular form.

Parents
Offspring Insane Not insane
Insane 49 361
Not insane 149
In order to arrive at the parental correlation it is necessary
to fill in the fourth space, that is to say to find out how many
sane brothers and sisters 361 insane children of sane parents
16 E. Schuster :

should have if they were drawn at random from the general
population.

Dr. Urquhart’s records give of course no clue to this, nor
can the number be arrived at directly from any data hitherto
collected. The Scottish Census report of 1go0r gives the
number of lunatics in Scotland over the age of 20 years as
13,457, and the total population of persons over this age as
2,520,866.

The Scottish Lunacy Commissioners’ Report of 1901 gives
a higher figure, but from the two it may be said between five and
six per thousand of the population are actually insane.

Now in the table under consideration the forty-nine insane
parents include not only those insane at the time, but also those
who were insane and had recovered; it is necessary therefore to
arrive at an estimate not of the percentage of actual lunatics
among the general population but of all these together with those
who have recovered—a considerably greater number. Reasons
are given that in order to arrive at this number, the insane
population must be multiplied by from two to four.

Taking all these things into consideration it is probable that
the number to be placed in the fourth square lies between 19,000
and 40,000.

Limiting values of the parental correlation coefficient are
thus obtained. The upper limit being °61 and the lower limit
*52. Similar tables were made for the female patients and gave
closely concordant results, namely °62—°53

The fraternal correlation obtained in this way lies between
"44 and °55.

Mr. Heron’s paper deals with two other interesting points.
Firstly he shows that the size of the family from insane stock is
somewhat larger than from normal, a fact of considerable importance if considered from the eugenic point of view. Secondly,
he demonstrates that the first born have among their numbers
more than their proper share of the insane. The excess of the
actual first born among the insane above what might have been
expected on the assumption that each member of the family has
an equal chance of insanity, appears to be about 35 per cent.
Prof. Pearson has shewn that the first born are also more liable
METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON LABORATORY 17

to pulmonary tuberculosis and criminality. Thus among a given
number of people there would be a larger proportion of insane,
tuberculous or criminal individuals, if they were members of
small families than if they were members of large families.

Since the question of the inheritance of insanity is a particularly interesting one I may perhaps be permitted at this point
a short digression. Mr. Heron has made, as far as I can see,
the fullest possible use of his data, but many limitations are
imposed on him. Among the latter is the impossibility of classifying the types of insanity and dealing with each separately so
as to determine whether the different types run in families or
show differences in their method of inheritance.

In order that such a classification may be possible an
enormous mass of data is necessary and such a mass is being
collected from the London County Asylums through the energy
of Dr. Mott. There are at present in these asylums about 20,000
patients and of these 20,000 one in every ten is known to have
had a near relative in one or other of the London County Asylums.
The relative is in most cases a brother or sister, a parent, or a
child, and in many cases there are several members of the same
family. An analysis shows that certain types of insanity have
a very strong tendency to run in families, for instance, periodic
insanity, delusional insanity, and adolescent dementia. General
paralysis is not inherited, as indeed might be expected, since it
is now regarded as being invariably the result of an acquired
disease.

The different types of inheritable insanity, though they may
be inheritable to an equal extent, are not necessarily inherited to
an equal extent. For in some cases the patient is attacked early
in life and spends the rest of his life in an asylum and so is
precluded from marriage, in other cases such as periodic insanity
he pays a number of short visits to the asylums and in the
intervals may beget a large family. There are instances in the
asylum records of a father thus afflicted having a family of five
or six children similarly afflicted.

Miss ELtperton: The Measure of the Resemblance between
First Cousins.—Miss Elderton’s paper on ‘‘ The Measure of the

Resemblance between First Cousins,’ deals with a number of
2
18 E. Schuster :

characters both physical and psychical. The physical characters
include health, hair colour, and eye colour, width of hand, width
of wrist, length of the first joint of the index finger and of the
little finger—the psychical characters considered are intelligence,
temperament, 7.¢e., whether reserved or expressive ; sympathetic
or callous; calm or excitable, and temper. The records on
which the work was based were specially collected for the
Laboratory. It is not easy to describe the results of this work
in any detail without going into it very fully indeed, but it may
be said generally that the average value of the correlation
coefficient for the psychical characters is about °27 and for the
more easily estimated physical characters it is about °33.

PEARSON and BARRINGTON: Inheritance of Viston.—Prof.

Karl Pearson and Miss Barrington’s paper entitled ‘‘A first
Study of the Inheritance of Vision and of the relative Influence
of Heredity and Environment on Sight,’ is of particular importance as it attempts, and in so far as it goes succeeds, in
assigning their respective shares to nature and to nurture with
regard to this particular quality. Itis probably the first attempt
in this direction. It is based on a considerable quantity of
material collected in Germany, in England and in Scotland.
The authors give particular praise to the ‘‘ Report on the physical
condition of fourteen hundred school children in the City, together
with some account of their homes and surroundings,” published
by the City of Edinburgh Charity Organisation Society.

From this publication it was possible to test the correlation

of the eyesight of the children with the following home conditions :

(a) Number of people per room in the house—a measure of
overcrowding.

(6) Economic conditions, wages earned by parents—whether
the home is well kept or not, and so on.

(c) Health of parents, whether good or bad. Suffering from
tuberculosis, persistent alcoholism, etc.

(4) Moral condition of parents. Presence of illegitimate
children—loose living of husband or wife and the
known nature of their house—frequent appearance
before the police magistrate, or conviction for crimes
are taken as evidence of bad moral condition.
METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON LABORATORY IQ

The results shew as clearly as it can be shown that bad
home conditions in any of the four categories just mentioned have
no effect in causing the eyesight of the children to deteriorate.

Another environmental condition on which much blame has
been laid as the cause of short-sightedness is attendance at school.
The evidence on which this view rests is apparently that of the
German oculist Cohn, who finds an increasing percentage of myopia
among children associated with increasing years of attendance at
school. The authors have investigated Cohn’s data and find
actually that the correlation between short-sightedness and age is
considerably higher than that between short-sightedness and
number of years of school attendance. It therefore seems
probable that the last-named factor only affects the eyesight in so
far as it is itself dependent on theage ofthe child. In other words,
the short-sightedness comes with age, and it is only because
children who have been long at school are on the whole older
than those who have been only a short time there, that they
contain among them a greater proportion of the myopic.

It thus seems from all the data available that the environment does not appear to be an important factor in the causation
of bad eyesight, but in order to compare it with heredity it is
necessary to measure the correlation coefficient between parents
and children, brother and brother, and so on, in order that they
may be compared with similar measures of the inheritance of
other characters.

This is not at all a simple matter since various factors such
as age have to be taken into account, in addition the material
available is not always very suitable. It is therefore quite impossible for me to go into the details of the evidence ; for this you
must refer to the original paper. It may, however, be safely
asserted that it is ample to justify the conclusion of the authors
‘that refraction and keenness of vision are inherited characters,
and that the degree of correlation between the eyesight of pairs of
relatives is of a wholly different order to the correlation of eyesight
with home environment.”

Davip HERON: The influence of Defective Physique and Unfavourable Home Environment on the Intelligence of School Children.—
This memoir is based on the London County Council Pioneer
20 E. Schuster :

School Survey, in which fourteen schools containing 4,286 boys
and 4,474 girls are dealt with. For every child is given a statement of the age, standard, height, and weight, an estimate by
the teacher of the child’s mental capacity, and by the medical
officer of the condition of the teeth. The medical officer also
provides an estimate of the condition of nutrition in each child
for eight boys’ schools and nine girls’ schools and of the degree
of cleanliness in seven boys’ schools and six girls’ schools, while
the condition of hearing and of the cervical glands and tonsils and
adenoids is recorded in three boys’ schools and three girls’
schools. In addition the state of the clothing is noted in about
half the schools.

' In estimating the degrees of such characters as cannot be
directly measured five grades are adopted. For example, the
ehildren are divided with regard to their mental capacity into
(1) brilliant ; (2) above the average ; (3) average; (4) under the
average ; (5) very dull and backward. Here one of the greatest
difficulties in analysing'*the data was met with, namely, the very
different personal equation of the different teachers. In the first
school in the list 33 per cent. of the boys and the same percentage
of girls were classed as brilliant, while in the second school 4 per
cent. and x per cent. only. In one school out of a class of
ninety-five in Standard III., eighty-three were described as
brilliant. Although no doubt the schools vary among themselves
as to the mental capacity of the pupils, it can hardly be supposed
that there are real differences of this magnitude, nor that in any
case one-third of the whole number of the children could be
classed as brilliant, if the term be used in any ordinary sense.
In consequence, although the estimates by one teacher could be
safely compared one with another, they could not be compared
with those of different teachers, and it was therefore necessary
to work out all results separately for each school.

Mental capacity is correlated with each of the other
characters, and where the other character is partly dependent on
age the age is allowed for. The correlation coefficients found are
very low and vary considerably from school to school. Height,
weight, clothing, cleanliness, nutrition, condition of the glands,
tonsils, teeth and hearing are all to a certain extent correlated
METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON LABORATORY 3&1

with mental capacity, but the correlation is very low indeed.
The average co-efficient from all the schools is seldom as much as
‘1, There is however one interesting exception, namely, the
clothing. There appears to be very little connection between
this and mental capacity in the boys, but in the girls it is very
much higher (+ °24) and shows some regularity from school to
school.

Miss ELDERTON and Pror. PEARSON: A Furst Study of the
influence of Parental Alcoholism on the Physique and A bility of the
Offspring.—It is conceivable that parental alcoholism may affect
the offspring in many different ways :

(1) It may be due to an innate craving for drink which like
other innate qualities is directly inherited, with the
result that as the parents and children are probably in
a position to gratify the desire, excessive indulgence in
the one is succeeded by successive indulgence in the
other. 2

(2) It may be due to a defect in the germ plasm which takes
different forms in different individuals, thus parental
alcoholism may be associated with imbecility, epilepsy
or tuberculosis in the offspring without being the
cause of them; the cause being the inheritance of an
inborn bad quality which expresses itself in the one
case in drunkenness and in the other case in disease
or deformity of mind or of body.

(3) The drinking of the parent may be the direct cause of
defects in the children. The alcohol circulating in
the veins of the parents before the birth of the child
may poison or damage the germ cells, or in the case
of the mother the embryo, and thus lead eventually to
physical or mental deterioration of the offspring.

(4) The drinking of the parents may be the cause of an
unhealthy or immoral home environment, which may
in its turn have a deleterious influence on the
development of the children.

With the direct inheritance of the drink craving the authors

have not dealt in the papers under consideration, since they are
dealing only with children not yet of an age to exhibit definite
22 E. Schuster :

alcoholic tendencies. The material at their disposal did not
enable them to distinguish between the other three suggested
connections between parental alcoholism and deterioration of the
offspring. They say in this connection:

‘‘The necessity for differentiation will only arise, if we demonstrate a substantial correlation between alcoholism in the parent
and defectiveness in the child. Should such a correlation exist,
then for a permanent and valuable scheme of social reform it is
needful above all things to ascertain whether it is the cross
heredity (a defective germ plasm mauifesting itself in different
ways in different individuals of the tainted stock), the toxic
influence or the environmental influence which is the source or
chief source of the resulting harm to the child. Complete
prohibition would not remedy the cross-hereditary influence, it
could only be met by the prohibition of parentage for members
of affected stocks. Complete prohibition would put a stop at
once to the toxic influence; either complete prohibition or the
removal of the offspring would meet the environmental influence.
Surely it is worth while to get some light on these points, before
we tackle this great problem of alcoholism. And if it should be
that more extensive data confirm the results of this preliminary
study would it not be of considerable importance to realise that
we must look to other factors besides drink as potent sources of
our social difficulties.”’

The material on which the paper is based comes from two
sources, the Edinburgh C.O.S. Report which has already been
referred to in describing a previous "paper, and a manuscript
account of the children in the special schools for the mentally defective in Manchester which was furnished by Miss
Dendy.

In the Manchester data the parents were divided into
‘*temperate’’ and “intemperate,” and information was given
about the health and in most cases about the intelligence of
the brothers and sisters of the mentally defective child. From
the Edinburgh report the authors were able to divide the parents
into five classes: (1) teetotaller; (2) sober; (3) suspected to
drink; (4) drinks; (5) has bouts of drinking. Classes (1) and (3)
were too small to be treated separately, and so the teetotallers
METHODS AND RESULTS OF THE GALTON LABORATORY 323

were included with the sober people and those suspected to drink
with the drinkers.

Correlations were determined between the drinking of the
parents and the actual height and weight of the children, their
health, intelligence, diseases and eyesight, and with the infant
death rate.

Correlation between Drinking of Parents and Height and Wetght
of Children. Corrected for Age of Child.

Drink and height Drink and waght
for constant age for constant age

Father and Son 704 +°03 04 +°03
Mother and Son "08 §=+°03 708 §=+°03
Father and Daughter 03 -+°03 704. +°03
Mother and Daughter 13) +°13 "14 +°03

This table, which is based on the Edinburgh data, shows
practically no correlation between the father’s alcoholism and the
child’s physique, but some between the mother’s alcoholism and
the child’s physique, and this is greater for daughters than for
sons. The authors attribute these differences to the fact that
drinking habits in the mother must be more productive of an
unfavourable home environment than these habits in the father,
and they suggest that lessened care on the part of the mother
affects the girls more than the boys since more home duties
would be thrown on them.

They do not consider that there is evidence of toxic effects
ef alcoho! on the children, but it appears to me that the greater
harm caused by the mother’s alcoholism might be due to this;
since during the pregnancy of the mother the embryo is brought
under the direct influence of alcohol.

Correlation between Parental Alcoholism and general Health
ef Offspring.

The results obtained were low and conflicting, but it may be
safely asserted that no evidence of any such correlation was
obtained, although the material was analysed with great care and
various statistical methods were employed.

Parental Alcoholism and Intelligence of Children.

The material obtained from the Manchester special
schools is of course selected, one child from every family being
a4 E. Schuster :

mentally defective, so it cannot form a satisfactory basis for any
general conclusions. It was found that the percentage of
children so afflicted was actually greater among the offspring of
temperate parents than of intemperate, the difference is however
not a very well-marked one.

From the Edinburgh school no indication was obtained that
the children of non-alcoholic parents tended to be more intelligent
than those of alcoholic, so that on the whole it may be said that
no relation has been shown to exist between parental alcoholism
and intelligence of the children.

The relation between parental alcoholism and the eyesight of
the children has been treated at some length in the paper. It
has been shown that children with normal keenness of vision and
normal refraction are rather in a preponderance in the families of
drinking parents, those suffering from dull or defective eyesight
being more commonly the progeny of sober parents. The relationship is not, however, a very substantial one. To sum up in
the words of the authors:

‘‘No marked relation has been found between the intelligence, physique or disease of the offspring and parental alcoholism
in any of the categories investigated. On the whole the balance
turns as often in favour of the alcoholic as of the non-alcoholic
parentage. It is needless to say that we do not attribute this to
the alcohol (that the children of drinkers appear in some respects
to be better than those of sober parents) but to certain physical
and possibly mental characters which appear to be associated
with a tendency to alcohol.”

With regard to the criticism directed against this paper I
will not speak, since I understand that it is going to be dealt
with by the authors in a second edition.

I have endeavoured above to give some indication of a part
of the work produced by the Galton Laboratory for National
Eugenics, but a great deal has not been even mentioned. I
cannot, however, conclude without referring to ‘‘ The Treasury of
Human Inheritance.” This is a work of the utmost importance
and one which should receive the financial support of everybody
interested in the study of heredity. It consists of a collection of
classified pedigrees dealing with the inheritance of diseases and
abnormalities. The pedigrees are clearly reproduced and fully
annotated and where necessary illustrated by drawings and
photographs. References to the source from which they are
obtained are always given so as to make the path easy for the
Inquirer. |
