HISTORY IN YOUR BLOOD"
By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.C.P.

VER since man first came to Britain
there has been a continual influx
./of new arrivals. In fact, to quote
those memorable historians Sellar and
Yeatman, in 1066 And All That, the British
Isles have been subjected to “... that long
succession of Waves of which History is
chiefly composed.”” But it is not only the
waves that make the racial history of
Britain complicated. There have been
intricate movements between different parts
of the country. In 1066 And All That we
find this “‘ Important Note”:

“The Scots (originally Irish, but by
now Scotch) were at this time inhabiting Ireland, having driven the Irish
(Picts) out of Scotland; while the Picts
(originally Scots) were now Irish (living in
brackets) and vice versa. It is essential to
keep these distinctions clearly in mind.”
But anyway, complicated though all this

may be, a great deal has been found out. In
addition to the later written records, there is
the evidence of archeology—from monuments and the like; or from physical anthropology—that is, measurements made on
ourselves and on the remains of our remote
ancestors.

_ During recent years there has been a very
important addition to the methods of
physical anthropology. This is the discovery
of the blood-groups. The blood-groups do
not replace older methods, but though it is
early days as yet, they have already provided
valuable additional information.

The chief reason why the blood-groups are
so valuable is that they are entirely determined by heredity. If then two populations
differ in the proportions of their blood-groups
it follows there is a difference in their
ancestry.

So far, nine different blood-group systems
have been discovered and all show variations
from place to place. But in this talk I am

* The text of a talk broadcast in the ‘’ Science
Survey ” series of the B.B.C.’s Home Service on
October 18th, 1951.

28

going to deal with one system only—the
familiar ABO grouping, which is so important
in blood transfusion. Some of the others
may help later . . . but most of them are too
new and we do not yet know how much
variation there may be within the relatively
small area of the British Isles.

The units of heredity in the cells of our
bodies, the genes, work in pairs, and we get
one of each pair from each of our parents.
If we get two O genes we belong to bloodgroup O; if we get two A genes, or an A
and an O, we belong to blood-group A ; if we
get two B genes, or a B gene and an O, we
belong to blood-group B; if we get one A
and one B we belong to blood-group AB.

Now if we know the proportions of people
belonging to the different blood-groups it is
easy to work out the underlying proportions
of the genes. And it is these figures—which
are simpler to remember anyway—that I am
going to give you. Taking the British Isles
as a whole, sixty-eight per cent of our
blood-group genes are O; twenty-six per
cent are A; and only six per cent are B.
This is the average, but there are variations
from place to place ; and it is the variations
that are interesting.

In Southern England there is less gene O
than the average and more A: the actual
figures are sixty-six per cent for O and
twenty-eight for A. As we go northwards O
becomes commoner and A rarer. By the
time we have reached the northern counties,
say Cumberland or Durham, O has risen to
sixty-nine.

The interesting thing is that the rise in
O as we go northwards is not regular and
gradual. It tends to occur in steps and it is

interesting to see where the first big step

occurs. It is close to the line of the River Aire
in Yorkshire. Now this ties up well with
what was known before. The prehistorians
talk about the River Aire. In historical times
the Aire was the most important military line
in England. This is because it bridges the
narrow gap between the mountains and the
HISTORY IN YOUR BLOOD 29

marshes lining the estuary of the Humber.
Together with the corresponding and equally
narrow Stockport gap on the opposite side
of the Pennines, it is the natural boundary
between north and south.

We also know, in considerable detail, where
the next step comes. This is because a big
count has just been made in the northern
counties of England, thanks to the help of
the officers of the National Blood Transfusion
Service at Newcastle upon Tyne—Dr. Boon,
Dr. Murray and Mr. Holland. At the eastern
end the line of division follows the River Tyne
pretty closely. But in its western part the
line drifts rather south, so that Hexham,
Carlisle and the industrial coast of Cumberland lie to the north of it. As I mentioned
a moment ago, the figure for O south of this
line is sixty-nine; north of it O rises to
seventy-two. I suppose that if: we drew
boundaries according to the blood-groups,
Northumberland and North Cumberland
would have to be given to Scotland.

I shall be surprised if the next step is not
the line of the River Forth, though we have
not yet enough information to be sure about
this. Farther north, however, we have some
very interesting figures for the Highlands of
Scotland. They are not published yet and I
am indebted to Dr. Kirkpatrick, of Inverness,
for allowing me to quote them. His figure for
his area as a whole is seventy-four per cent
for O; but in some places it is a good deal
higher. In Easter Ross, it is no less than
eighty-one per cent. This is much the
highest O yet reported in the whole of
Europe; just as the corresponding figure
for A, only thirteen, is the lowest.

Genes O and A, then, show very clearly
indeed a northward movement of peoples
to the periphery—a movement of high O
peoples, followed by high A peoples—with
the steps at just the sort of places where we
might have expected to find them.

Now let us turn to Wales. It is here our
knowledge is most complete, thanks to the
work of Dr. Morgan Watkin, who is allowing
me to quote some more unpublished results
obtained with the help of Dr. Drummond
and. his colleagues at Cardiff. Actually,
the blood-group evidence shows that the

Welsh people are rather a mixed lot—
considerably more mixed than either the
Scots or the Irish. I am not referring to
recent movements of population. What
I am referring to is Wales before the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, at least. In general,
North Wales shows the same very high O as
Scotland and Ireland. But in South Wales
very high O is confined to one or two remote
mountain regions. It seems clear that South
Wales—long before the Industrial Revolution—was much affected by migrations

that left the northern half of the country

untouched. By the way, Cornwall and
Brittany are like South Wales. Cornwall is
no higher in O than the rest of Southern
England ; nor is Brittany higher than other
parts of France. :

Now here is another point. Watkin finds
clear evidence of Viking settlement. In a
well-known area of Viking settlement in
Pembrokeshire, O is very low and A very
high, just as in most of modern Scandinavia.
Anglesey is lower in O than the rest of North
Wales and there are areas of lower O round
the mouths of estuaries, like those of the
rivers Clwyd and Conway. We are told that
there was an important Viking settlement
around Chester, and O is indeed particularly
low in this region. The difference from
neighbouring parts of Flintshire is very great.
While it is no longer true that the city
ordinances of Chester forbid the marriage
of English women and Welsh men, the effects
of such things are still faithfully reflected
in the blood-groups of the peoples of today. —

Another example of the persistence of
ancient barriers is seen in the upper valley
of the Severn. This was once an impenetrable
swamp. The peoples of the hills to right and
left, who were separated by the river, were
very different. When they moved into the
valley, they tended to keep separate so that
today, in that valley, there are particularly
big variations from place to place.

I have not mentioned gene B yet, but
I must not leave out the most striking
B story of all. Thirty years ago the distinguished anthropologist Professor Fleure
showed that in the Black Mountain of Carmarthenshire and in Plynlimmon there was
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

evidence of the survival of a palzolithic
physical type. To a lesser extent this is also
true of the Denbighshire moors. He pointed
out that these are the kinds of areas to which
earlier arrivals tend to be driven by later
invaders. Now in just these three areas
Watkin finds very high B ; in the Denbighshire moors nine per cent; in Plynlimmon
twelve ; in the Black Mountain no less than
seventeen. This figure of seventeen per cent
is an astonishing one; it is higher than
anything yet found in Europe west of Poland.
One cannot believe that it is all a coincidence. In these areas the blood-groups point
to the survival of something going nght back
to the Old Stone Age.

Now just a word about the relation of the
British Isles to Europe as a whole. Scotland,
Ireland and North Wales have the highest O
and the lowest A in Europe. If we look for
other populations with similar blood-group
proportions, as Mourant and Watkin have
done, we find them clustered round the
Mediterranean : in Sardinia, Crete, parts of
Greece and the Greek islands, in one or two
places in Italy, and, most striking of all,
perhaps, in some of the Berber tribes of
North Africa. We are told that some Berbers
could easily pass for Scotsmen or Irishmen.
There are affinities in language too. The
association doubtless goes back to megalithic
times—the era of the great stone tombs
and of Stonehenge, when there was much
coming and going between the Mediterranean
and Britain. So there survives round the
Continent and in North Africa, on the fringes,
something of the peoples who once occupied
most of Europe.

I do not want anyone to think that
because I have only talked about ABO,
the other eight blood-group systems are not
going to be useful too. So I will give just one
example from abroad. In Negroes there is
no less than sixty per cent of a Rhesus gene
of a particular kind, whereas no other people
not affected by Negro influence has more than
three or four. This enables us to estimate the
Negro contribution in modern Egypt as
rather more than twenty per cent and to
follow the steadily increasing proportion of
Negro blood as we proceed up the Nile
valley.

It is perhaps surprising that the British
population today still shows so many differences in spite of all the movements that must
have taken place. But no doubt the differences are becoming less clear with every
year that passes. So we must hurry up. And
now we shall be able to do this. The Nuffield
Foundation has just made a. grant of
fourteen thousand pounds to establish a
blood-group centre at the Royal Anthropological Institute. One of the tasks of the
new centre will be to map thoroughly the
blood-group variations throughout the whole
of Britain. The material is there, because
eleven or twelve thousand new blood donors
are being registered every month by the
National Blood Transfusion Service, who
have promised their help. So I think we
can conclude that what we know now is only
the beginning of the story, and that the
history in your blood today will enable
historians to work out a fuller story of
“the Waves of which History is chiefly
composed.”

Society for Constructive Birth Control
and RACIAL PROGRESS

The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

THE MOTHERS’ CLINIC
Founded by DR. MARIE STOPES, March r7th, 1921.

From the beginning dealing with all aspects of birth control and Demonstrations to
marriage problems.

OPEN DAILY (not Sats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. FREE are regularly given.
avon By

There is also a
Reference Library
which may be consulted and Lending
Library for Mem
Special Lectures
and Instructional

Members of the
Medical Profession

bers of the Society. Address : 106/108, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W.1 Apt ae

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 1
