THE EUGENICS REVIEW

somewhat discursive and diffuse, but on the
other hand it does not suffer from the split
between the two cultures and does not—as do
some of our own popularizations—produce a
detailed and elegant picture of a limited speciality—only to leave the reader to draw his own
wrong-headed conclusions.

Covering a vast field of knowledge and a
great span of time, and not working at a
university, the author mostly had to draw on
secondary sources. However, by submitting the
manuscript to expert friends, he has avoided
any glaring mistakes although there occur some
errors and misconceptions. To the reviewer the
most interesting parts of the book are those
dealing with the contemporary efforts of
racialists and with the speculations concerning
the future of our species.

H. KALMUS

FINGER PRINTS

Galton, Francis. Finger Prints. Unabridged
republication of the 1892 edition. New preface
by Harold Cummins. New York, 1965. Da Capo
Press. Pp. XXIII-+xvi+216. Price $6.95.

IT IS, OF course, an accepted fact of life that
identity of finger prints establishes without
doubt the identity of their makers. One wonders
how many people realize that Galton, among his
many contributions to knowledge, enunciated
and ratified in this book, first published in 1892,
the principle: “‘complete or nearly complete
accordance between two prints of a single
finger .. . affords evidence requiring no corroboration, that the persons from whom they are
made are the same’’. If for no other reason
than that it is a major pioneer work in criminology this late nineteenth-century book, now
re-edited so beautifully, is well worth reading.
But there are other reasons.

This reviewer had on a former occasion been
delighted by the vivid precision of Galton’s
writing in his slightly earlier book, Inquiry into
Human Faculty. This book shows equally well
Galton’s superb yet simple command of language,
his aptness of simile and his ingenuity and
persuasiveness of illustration. He is a master of
clear expression. Would that there were more of
them nowadays.

162

It is most fitting that this new edition of
Galton’s book should have been produced at
this time under the guidance of Professor
Cummins of Tulane University. Whereas in the
past dermal ridge patterns have chiefly concerned the criminal detective, within the last
few years they have become of great interest to
those who study human disease, especially the

chromosome disorders. In these disorders the

dermal ridge patterns depart from normal to
the extent that they can be used for clinical
diagnosis. The first recognition of this fact was
made by Professor Cummins thirty years ago.

In scientific work much is ephemeral. Methods
are developed, are used for a time and are
discarded. This book shows how good work may
stand the test of time. The arch, loop, whorl
system of classification and the recognition of
triradii set forth by Galton are the foundations
on which the new science of clinical dermatoglyphics rests.

The type in which this book is set and the
paper used are most pleasing. It is a fascinating
little book.

G. H. VALENTINE

ZOOLOGY

Morris, Ramona and Desmond. Men and Apes.
London, 1966. Hutchinson. Pp. vili+271.
Price 50s.

THIS Is A delightful book, a classic of its kind,
which is calculated to appeal both to the
professional zoologist and to the general reader.
It concerns what may be termed the ideology
of man in relation to the apes, apes here being
read as including monkeys as well as man-like
apes. This is the effort of a happy man and wife
combination. Dr. Morris is a zoologist, specializing in animal behaviour research, who 1s also
a painter and his wife Ramona is a historian
who has spent a number of years scripting and
researching on animal programmes for television.
Here is displayed great erudition, combined with
qualities of readability and liveliness, which passes
in review man’s ideas, more often illusions,
about the nature of his nearer relatives in the
animal world from the earliest times down to
the present. The mythology of the apes is highly
entertaining and often bizarre and it is salutary
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to be reminded just how wrong intelligent
people can be in reading their preconceptions
into the behaviour of these animals. Even the
discovery of evolution by the agency of natural
selection has contributed sometimes to obscure
the picture. People in search of biological analogies and missing links have over-simplified the
distinctive and idiosyncratic qualities of the primates, both in a specific and an individual sense.
In helping to correct the picture, this book may
be regarded as a valuable introduction to the
study of ethology in relation to the non-human
primates. The really scientific study of the
behaviour of these animals may be considered
as dating from Sir Solly Zuckerman’s study of
baboons, The Social Life of Apes and Monkeys,
published in 1932. This work evoked a great
interest, but tended in some respects to distort
the true image of the non-human primate, in
that the characteristics of the baboon were
sometimes extrapolated to other primates whose
closer study revealed them to exhibit different
patterns. The phenomena of dominance, for
example, so markedly shown in the baboon are
relatively weak or even absent in some other
primates. The picture of the gorilla conjured
up by the script writers of Hollywood was
perhaps partly built on the basis of such
unwarranted extrapolation. In real life, the
gorilla, far from being a brutal and pugnacious
aggressor, whose diabolical nature might lead
him to ravish beautiful women, is a creature
who would rather flee than fight and who is
quite disappointing from a Hollywood point of
view, when placed in a potentially piquant
situation. It seems that once a gorilla did by
accident get shut up all night with an attractive
young woman, but it displayed no attempt to
do the things which provide headlines for the
more popular Sunday newspapers. In fact it
showed itself to be a little frightened, a little
lonely and snuggled up to the young lady, not
for any unbecoming purpose, but merely for
warmth and comfort. Clearly it is much safer
for a young woman to pass the night in the cage
of a gorilla than in Central Park, New York.
There is an informative account here of the
studies being prosecuted in primate life and
behaviour and from the fact of it being unmentioned it may be assumed that experimental

work in breeding apes and monkeys in order to
elucidate problems of genetics has yet to be
embarked upon. Surely this is a field where
there are immensely instructive lessons to be
learned. The idea of a selective grading up of
human beings in respect of intelligence and other
qualities of positive biological value, suggested
by Professor H. J. Muller and the present writer
as being feasible through the employment of
artificial insemination, might be carried out in
apes without encountering many of the objections which have been raised regarding donor
insemination in the human subject. Breeding
apes by AID need excite no more moral
objections than breeding cattle in the same way.
But it might throw immense light on what might
be accomplished in the genetic ennoblement of
the human species by voluntary choice of
germinal material, whose general image and
acceptability is likely to be very different in
AD2000 from what it is to-day. The same idea
might be applied to canines and breeding them
for intelligence, longevity and other qualities
combining benefits for the dog with instruction
for its master should be far more rewarding than
the senseless sort of genetic debasement which
now goes on in selecting for arbitrary show points
of negative biological value. One cannot help
thinking that a chimpanzee with a pongid IQ of
160 plus might bea quite entertainingcompanion.

The authors of this work have happily
summarized its spirit and content in these words:
‘The real lives of monkeys and apes are quite as
odd, and in many respects are still as mystifying
as the fanciful tales of yesterday. The truth may
not be stranger than fiction, but it is just as
exciting’. This indeed merits the verdict of an
exciting book.

HERBERT BREWER

WORLD RESOURCES
Smith, G. H. (Editor). Conservation and Natural

Resources. New York and London, 1965. Wiley.
Pp. xi+533. Price 75s.

Fisher, Joseph L. and Potter, Neal. World
Prospects for Natural Resources. Baltimore,
1964. Johns Hopkins Press (London, 1965.
Oxford University Press). Pp. vi-+-73. Price 12s.

163
