DISCUSSION

STERILISING THE INSANE

For some time past I have advocated the sterilisation of
the insane; my voice has been like a voice in the wilderness.
On January Ist, 1909, there were, in England and Wales, no
fewer than 128,787 officially certified insane ; with an increase of
2,703 in the year. But there are a great many at large who are
not “officially” reported. In 1859 there were only 36,762
certified insane.

The insane rate since then has increased by 250 per cent.,
while the population has increased by 81 per cent., and evidently
—judging by our “ do-nothing”’ policy—we are quite content
to go on marrying and breeding more and more degenerates ; and
to expend yearly millions of pounds sterling upon these—an
expenditure which gives us no results.

In 1903 I proposed (among other points) that we should make
it illegal for anyone to join in marriage, idiots, imbeciles, feebleminded, epileptics, habitual criminals, and vagrants. 1 also
suggested that these poor products of our civilisation and
Christianity should be so surgically operated upon—sterilised—
that they would neither become fathers nor mothers.

It may be that new proposals in an old country are always
the product of an ill-balanced mind, or to be labelled heretical.
But on February roth, 1907, the legislature of the State of
Indiana passed the following Act:

“An Act entitled an Act to prevent procreation of confirmed criminals,
idiots, imbeciles, and rapists—providing that superintendents or boards of
managers of institutions where such persons are confined shall have the
authority, and are empowered to appoint a committee of experts, consisting
of two physicians, to examine into the mental condition of such inmates.

‘Whereas heredity plays an important part in the transmission of crime,
idiocy, and imbecility, therefore, be it enacted by the General Assembly
of the State of Indiana, that on and after the passage of this Act, it shall be
compulsory for each and every institution in the State entrusted with the
care of confirmed criminals, idiots, rapists, and imbeciles, to appoint upon
its staff, in addition to the regular institution physician, two skilled surgeons
of recognised ability, whose duty it shall be, in conjunction with the chief
physician of the institution, to examine the mental and physical condition of
such inmates as are recommended by the institutional physician and board
of managers.

‘“Ifin the judgment of this committee procreation is inadvisable and
there is no probability of improvement of the mental condition of the inmate, it
shall be lawful for the surgeons to perform such operation for the prevention
of procreation as shall be decided satest and most effective. But this
DISCUSSION 75

operation shall not be performed except in cases that have been pronounced
unimprovable.”’

Again on August 12th, 1909, the State Legislature of
Connecticut enacted :

‘An Act concerning operations for the Prevention of Procreation.—Be
it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assemble
convened :

‘‘Section 1.—The directors of the State prison and the superintendents of
State hospitals for the insane at Middletown and Norwich are hereby
authorised and directed to appoint for each of said institutions, respectively,
two skilled surgeons, who, in conjunction with the physician or surgeon in
eharge at each of said institutions, shall examine such persons as are reported
to them by the warden, superintendent, or the physician or surgeon in
charge, to be persons by whom procreation would be inadvisable.

‘Such board shall examine the physical and mental condition of such
persons, and their record and family history so far as the same can be
ascertained, and if in the judgment of the majority of said board, procreation by any such person would produce children with an inherited
‘tendency to crime, insanity, feeble-mindedness, idiocy, or imbecility, and
‘there is no probability that the condition of any such person so examined
-will improve to such an extent as to render procreation by such person
-advisable, or, if the physical or mental condition of any such person will be
. substantially improved thereby, then the said board shall appoint one of its
‘members to perform the operation of vasectomy or oophorectomy, as the
“ease may be, upon such person. Such operation shall be performed in a safe
-and humane manner, and the board making such examination, and the
‘surgeon performing such operation, shall receive from the State such
compensation, for services rendered, as the warden of the State prison or
* the superintendent of either of such hospitals shall deem reasonable.

“Section 2.—Except as authorised by this Act, every person who shall

: perform, encourage, assist in or otherwise promote the performance of
- @ither of the operations described in Section 1 of this Act, for the purpose
- of destroying the power to procreate the human species: or any person who
_ shall knowingly permit either of such operations to be performed upon such
~ person—unless the same be a medical necessity—shall be fined not more
. than one thousand dollars, or imprisoned in the State prison not more than
" five years, or both.”

There need be no objection to such an operation as is here
; suggested. It is very simple, practically painless, makes no
. difference at all to the bodily functions, and has no ill-effects of
Eany kind. It prevents nothing but the power to procreate. It
Fis the outcome of modern scientific knowledge, and must not be
-confounded with older and much more drastic methods.

3 In this country the cry is often—‘‘ Let me alone ”’; ‘‘ Don’t
Eworry me ”’; ‘‘ Wrongs will right themselves”; or, ‘‘ I needn’t
Eworry; things will last my time.” Such a mixed policy of
Fhypocrisy and slavish desire to tread the beaten track will not
swork for good.

E. We howl about the increase of paupers. Yet we allow the
Fpauper to leave the workhouse to get married. We howl about
sthe increase of criminals. Yet we allow criminals to marry and
Mto beget more criminals. And we howl about the increase of
sansanity and the feeble-minded. Yet we allow these to marry
Band to beget offspring fully qualified to perpetuate the weak
    
  
 
 
  
 

b
76 DISCUSSION

mindedness of their progenitors. Surely a noble and worthy
national policy ! "

Some time ago I called attention tc the fact that five feebleminded women had given birth to fifteen feeble-minded infants.
Later still, Dr. Potts stated that in one workhouse 16 feebleminded women had given birth to 116 idiot children. Dr.
Branthwaite in his annual report (for 1905) on Inebriate Homes,
states that 92 habitual inebriate women had had 850 babies.

What can these children become ? More inebriates; more
degenerates; because of women admitted 200 were found to be
suffering from mental defect.

If we can, by sterilising a large number of mental degenerates, people classified as habitual criminals, and vagrants, lessen
the total of this world’s suffering ; lessen the number of children
so cursed and weighted down by parental defects that they can
never become useful citizens ; and if we can lessen the unwise
sum of money now expended upon the upkeep of our motley
civilisation—using it for better purposes—then let us give up the
useless policy of breeding and cultivating a species of British
subjects who will not only be a heavy millstone round our necks,
but will go on breeding more degenerates to require more
asylums and far greater expenditure.

I may add, that the State Legislatures of Pennsylvania and
Oregon have passed Bills authorising Sterilisation, but, so far,
the Governors of these States have not yet agreed to sign them.
These Bills will be again presented, and if passed by a majority
of each House, the Governor’s Veto will be passed over, and so
they will become law.

R. R. RENTOUL, M.D.
Liverpool.

To the Edttor of the EUGENICS REVIEW
INFANT MORTALITY

SIR,

Permit me as an outsider to bring to the notice of the
members of the Society one or two points in connection with the
problem of Infant Mortality. Social workers often lose sight of
the fact that this mortality, which is excessive, does not imply
the destruction of the physically unfit and the preservation of
the fit. One wishes that it did. What it does mean is that not
only do a number of healthy babies perish from quite preventible
diseases but a large number of promising infants are also permanently injured for life by the same diseases from which their
brethren succumb.

It is sometimes contended that expenditure on Health
Visitors, on the feeding and care of pregnant and nursing
DISCUSSION 77

mothers, and on the infants themselves, is not only a drain on the
resources of the nation, but also wrong from the Eugenic point
of view in that it tends to keeps alive the unfit by taxing the fit
for their maintenance. But at the present time individuals,
however “unfit” they may be, are bound to be kept alive under
our existing Poor Law. That system, however, makes no provision for preventive expenditure before destitution sets in.

If it is alleged that preventive expenditure, though wellmeaning, is useless because practically all social ills come from
racial defects, z.e., from faults in “ nature’’ rather than in
*‘ nurture’’—from hereditary causes rather than from environment and circumstances,—the answer is that experts assure us
that go to 95 per cent. of infants are born healthy (see Report of
Commission on Physical Deterioration), and that statistics prove
that a large number of the diseases from which infants succumb
are not only preventible but curable. The way in which the
infant death-rate has decreased in certain towns after the
appointment of Health Visitors and the improvement of sanitation has been remarkable (see Reports of Medical Officers for
such towns as Liverpool, Halifax, Huddersfield, etc.). The effect
on the health of the surviving infants cannot yet be proved by
statistics, but it probably will be in the course of another twenty
or thirty years.

A glance at the tables of infant mortality shows that the
death-rate is always higher in urban than in rural districts, and
in those where the mothers go out to work. This is scarcely due
to racial defects, but it calls aloud for improved social conditions,
and legislation tending to check the employment,—not necessarily
of all married women,—but of all married women of child-bearing
age, and especially of those who are actually pregnant. It is
easy to make light of the effects of legislation, but though ‘‘everything cannot be done by Act of Parliament,’”’ a certain number
of evils can really be lessened by sensible measures. In addition
to improved factory laws, we ought certainly to have stricter rules
against the advertisement and sale of abortifacients, which usually
contain lead, and against all harmful preparations availed of for
a similar or analogous purpose. Legislation on the subject of
the sale of milk, and of infants’ patent foods, drugs, and soothing
powders is also needed.

The principal diseases, ranged in order of gravity, to which
infants succumb fall under the following heads: (1) Wasting
diseases (including prematurity, debility, congenital defects,
etc.) ; (2) Bronchitis, laryngitis and pneumonia; (3) Diarrhceal
diseases ; (4) Convulsions, which may arise from several different
causes; (5) Common infectious diseases ; (6) Tuberculosis; (7)
Suffocation (usually the result of overlaying) ; (8) Meningitis (not
tubercular) ; (9) Syphilis: (10) Erysipelas, rickets, and other
minor ills.

A large number of the diseases just named are preventible,
78 DISCUSSION

being caused indirectly by: (1) bad sanitary surroundings,
including dirty houses, foul drainage, or none at all, bad air,
over-crowding, filthy and unsuitable clothing, milk contaminated
by being kept in open or dirty vessels, long-tubed and germcollecting feeding bottles and ‘‘ comforters,” etc., etc.; (2) bad
feeding (artificial instead of breast), unsuitable, 7.¢., starchy, patent
foods and condenscd milk without cream, solid food at too early
an age, etc.; (3) exposure to cold and damp—ainfants being left
in rooms without a fire, insufficiently clothed, taken long distances night and morning to neighbours or créches, or on shopping
or public-hcuse expeditions.

At the back of these main indirect causes there are again
three still more indirect, viz.: (1) ignorance and neglect of the
parents; (2) ignorance and neglect of the local authorities ;
(3) poverty of the home. We must fight against these last
three evils frst. We must educate, work, and feed, for the more
we educate now and the more we feed judiciously (not indiscriminately) now, the less we shall have to do so in the future.

At the same time we want to collect more and more facts
on the subject. It would, for example be very useful to investigate the family history in cases where there is a large mortality in
one family. The personal factor does count for much, and there
is of course ‘‘a great dealin heredity.”” The Education of public
opinion on the subject of the marriage of the unfit is very
important. Alcoholic, feeble-minded, syphilitic, epileptic and
phthisical subjects would be far better if cared for in public
institutions, by means of which they would be prevented from
propagating their kind.

At present not only can the epileptic, the drunkard or the
consumptive propagate to an unlimited extent, but the allgenerous State allows him and his family to go in and out of
the free hotel, the workhouse, at his own sweet will. The
syphilitic, the immoral, the feeble-minded woman too, can come
into these free maternity Homes to be confined, no questions being
asked, nor is anything done to teach her to earn her living or
to bring up her children properly. The lessons of moral responsibility and economic independence are never even attempted
to be enforced.

On the amount of infant mortality which occurs inside the
workhouse, I prefer to say nothing. It is sufficiently significant
that the Local Government Board refuses to publish any
statistics on the subject.

Yours, etc., HELEN M. Brace.

N.B.—The tables of statistics on which the above remarks
are based are set forth in my pamphlet entitled ‘‘ A statistical
Analysis of Infant Mortality.” Copies can be obtained
at the office of the Eugenics Education Society. Price Is.
DISCUSSION 79

To the Editor of the EUGENICS REVIEW

SIR,

As a member of your Society I send you a report of
work recently done, on educational lines, in the United States.
Many persons feel very strongly that any sound eugenic ideals
placed before the rising generation must be based on a pure
knowledge of Sexual Hygiene, such as is not to be had under
our present educational system. The majority of parents are
both unable and unwilling to discuss this subject with their
children, who on their part are certain to procure information
upon it from undesirable sources, if such information is not given
to them authoritatively. The objections usually raised by educationalists who sympathise with the general principle are these:
Wrong ideas might be put into the heads of the children and the
expense of providing competent teachers would be disproportionate to the result. In my opinion the danger of right teaching
could not be so great as the present system of perverted knowledge, while the expense entailed in training the necessary
teachers would be amply compensated for by the improved
general health of the community.

A scheme to the following effect was put forward at the
recent Conference of the Federation of Women’s Clubs, held in
the U.S. and accepted by the delegates present :

All high schools to provide specially appointed instructors in physical
hygiene, preferably physicians with experience in dealing with boys and
irls.
e The instructors to give at the school:
(a) A general course in physical hygiene, including briefly the effects of
alcohol, the cause and transmission of tuberculosis, typhoid, diphtheria, etc.
(b) Private personal instruction in sexual hygiene, imparted by means
of “informal talks” to the pupils in small groups, or to each pupil individually, the boys being taught by a man, the girls, when possible, by a woman.
The parents to be present at these talks if they so desire.
(c) The following subjects to be dealt with:
General priuciples of reproduction in vegetable and animal
kingdoms.
Anatomy (with carefully selected diagrams). Physiology.
Disease, its dangers; results (with suitable illustrations); consequences to others, etc.
(d) False arguments which the pupil is likely to hear or read to be
discussed and refuted.
(¢) The principles and duty of sexual morality to be expounded and
enforced.

Before these lessons are given the following precautions are
recommended to be taken in order to avoid misunderstanding.

To the Parents or Guardian of each pupil who, in the
opinion of the Instructors, has reached a proper age to receive
their instruction, a printed letter in the name of the school to be
sent, stating:

1. That a knowledge of Sexual Hygiene is a necessary and
80 DISCUSSION

essential part of a boy’s or girl’s education, because it serves to
protect the honour, character, health, mental ability, and
happiness, not only of the boy but of his future wife and
children, etc.

2. That if young people are not instructed upon sexual
matters by competent teachers in the right way, they are likely
to obtain their ideas upon these subjects in a dangerous way—
from the false statements of their companions, from suggestive
literature, or from experience. That the price of experience due
to ignorance is a terrible injustice to the boy or girl, etc.

3. That the School is prepared to give this instruction to the
pupils in small groups, or to each pupil individually, by experts
specially trained in this work.

4. That meetings for Parents will be held at the School
from time to time, at which the instructors will explain the
purpose of the work, the proper methods of dealing with these
subjects among young people, the value and protection of this
knowledge, the importance of co-operation at home, etc.

5. That if any parents object, or think that sufficient information is being given at home, no personal talks upon these
subjects will be given to their children at the school.

_ The School may at times prefer to have the instruction
given :

1. By the parents themselves at home. This is the ideal
method, but is advised only when the parents are exceptionally
well informed. The School will supply, if desired, an outline of
their talk, list of dangers, arguments, books, etc.

2. By the Family Physician or other Physicians—advised
only in occasional cases. Such personal talks by Physicians
are frequently given at the present time, but without system
and without co-operation.

Instruction of this kind calls for public attention, and no
time should be lost, for many innocent persons might be saved
from a life of suffering by a friendly and judicious warning. It is
largely to the inertia of those who have the knowledge of hygienic
facts but who will not spread this knowledge that we owe much
of the terrible misery we see around us to-day. :

EsTHER LOUNDES NEWBOLD.

To the Editor of the EUGENICS REVIEW

SIR,

I should like to suggest that it would be most useful at
the present time if you could publish in the Review an article
on the duties of school Care-Committees, by someone who can
write with authority.

The Education authority under which I live, is urging on
DISCUSSION 8x

School Managers the importance of appointing Care-Committees,
and I suppose similar action is being taken all over the country.
The work of the medical inspector is of little avail unless it is
followed up by treatment, and one of the duties of Care-Committees should be to impress on all parents the necessity of
availing themselves of the treatment provided.

Schemes for treatment are being sanctioned by the Board
of Education and their cost put on the rates. But though it is
understood that the Board require that any scheme receiving
their consent should not pauperise the parents or relieve them
of their proper responsibility I cannot see that any effective
method of attaining this end is adopted. |

Where, however, treatment is organised and assisted by
private enterprise, there should be some opportunity for exerting
an influence in the right direction.

This is, I think, certainly the case in the important branch
of Dental Treatment, about which I would venture to offer a few
suggestions. |

The Board of Education has not at present sanctioned any
schemes for dental treatment, though the Borough of Cambridge
has applied for permission to take over the important dental
clinic established in that town by private generosity, and it may
be assumed that this will shortly be arranged. |

At present the means of dental treatment are almost totally
lacking and it seems clear that any scheme must be organised
and supported by private enterprise before the Board will consider the desirability of allowing it to be taken over.

It rests therefore with those starting dental clinics, to
dictate the conditions under which they shall be worked.

I would suggest that one object they should keep before
them is to make their scheme as nearly as may be selfsupporting.

Inspection must be free, but the charges for treatment
while being kept at the lowest figure that good organisation can
attain, should practically cover the cost.

This would provide for those able to pay, economical treatment without in any way pauperising the parents or relieving
them of their proper responsibilities.

There would, however, remain a large number unable to
pay these small fees, and school Care-Committees should be
prepared to help those unable to pay.

Here is an opportunity for a wise discrimination.

It is most unlikely that it will be possible to provide, at
any rate at first, for treating all the children who require it.

A selection must be made, and I think those whose parents
can pay the fees should come first.

The fact that they can pay is an indication either of
superiority in industry and intelligence or that the children’s

6
82 DISCUSSION

teeth are in good condition, either naturally or through care, and
the fees consequently small.

The same consideration would lead me to give a preference
to those who can pay part of the fees over those who can not. And
in preservative treatment, at any rate, to those requiring little
over those requiring much treatment.

In other words I would give the preference to those who are
apparently the most worthy.

This course would fall in with the recommendations of
experts to concentrate preservative treatment on children under
g years of age who have comparatively few unsound teeth, and
whose mouths can be made “ artificially sound.” It is, however,
opposed to that course which would probably be dictated by
thoughtless philanthropy, namely, to help first the worst and
most necessitous cases.

Far more good would be done by treating thoroughly several
slight cases than one very bad one which would involve as much
time and expense. This I think is the true Eugenic plan,
encouraging the most fit and those who help themselves.

Of course there are other considerations which must guide
the Care Committees in allotting their assistance, such as whether
the parents’ inability to provide proper treatment for their
children is due to their own fault, drink, or idleness, or whether
to accident or unmerited misfortune. A proper decision on these
points would have a Eugenic tendency.

What I wish specially to point out is that in privately
organised dental treatment for children there is an opportunity
for selection which may be given a Eugenic direction.

A more difficult question arises when the treatment of
children is taken over by the Education Authority with the
sanction of the Board of Education and the cost put on the
rates, especially if such treatment is made compulsory and
gratuitous, namely—how to penalise the parents who are able
but neglect to provide for the treatment of their children.

Unless this can be arrived at, it must be doubtful whether
the damage done to the race by the encouragement given to the
unworthy parent will not outweigh the direct advantages
secured.

Yours faithfully,
Hindhead. Wm. C. MARSHALL.
