THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS |

A History of their Development
By C. P. BLACKER, M.C., M.A., M.B., M.R.C.P.

S far as can be seen at present, it is
through its advocacy of sterilization
that the Eugenics Society is most

likely to come before the public eye in the
near future. It may therefore be of interest
for readers of the REVIEW to know the inner
history of how this subject came to be raised
and adopted by the Soctety.

A policy of limited and safeguarded sterilization has always been advocated by Major
Darwin, and in the year 1928, he devoted
much time and attention to the preparation
of a Sterilization Bill. A draft of this
appeared in the October number of the
Eucenics Review for the year 1928. The
matter, however, was not then pursued
through lack of opportunity.

In June 1929 Professor J. S. Huxley and
I were spending a week-end on the yacht of
Mr. C. F. Chance, who organized the World
Population Conference at Geneva in September 1927. One evening the conversation
turned to the difficulties of getting sterilizing operations performed on poor people,
such, for example, as the over-burdened
mother who has had a number of miscarriages and whose health would be endangered by additional pregnancies, and
such as the poor man who wishes to remain
childless because he suffers from, or carries,
some hereditary disease. The difficulties of
getting sterilizing operations performed
upon such people in voluntary hospitals
arise partly because those who direct the
policy of these hospitals do not want to risk
alienating the sympathies of potential subscribers, and partly because sterilizing
operations have little educative interest for
students. The training of the student in the
teaching hospitals is, for the most part,
divided into a number of periods of three
months. It is obviously desirable, in the
course of the short surgical and gynzcologi
cal appointments, that the student should
see as wide an assortment of pathological
conditions as possible. Cases for sterilization exhibit nothing of interest in this way.
For these and other reasons it has been
found by all the birth-control clinics in this
country that it is far from easy to get either
therapeutic or eugenic sterilizations performed on poor people.

A STERILIZATION HOSPITAL

It occurred to Professor Huxley and myself that here would be a useful practical
activity for the Eugenics Society. ‘The
Society is sometimes criticized for being too
much concerned with theory and too little
with practice. Could it not meet this criticism by starting a hospital for voluntary
sterilization ?

In the course of the winter of 1929, Professor Huxley went to Africa, and in his
absence I raised this question at a Council
meeting. I was asked to state the proposal more precisely, particularly in relation to
the legal position and to the approximate
cost of building a hospital. At the next
Council meeting, the question of the legality
of eugenic sterilization was forcefully raised
by Dr. R. A. Gibbons who, quoting Sir
Travers Humphreys, expressed the view
that the legal position was so fraught with
contradictions and ambiguities that it would
be quite impossible to raise the considerable
sum of money that would be necessary to
finance this enterprise. People would not
subscribe to a scheme, the legality of which
was open to question. Before we build hospitals for eugenic sterilization, we should
establish that eugenic sterilization is not
illegal. Dr. Gibbon’s arguments carried
weight with the Council, and the proposal
for starting a hospital was dropped.

239
240

THE BOARD OF CONTROL’S ATTITUDE
The idea that the Society might then resume its interest in legalizing eugenic sterilization had always been present in the mind
of Sir Bernard Mallet. ‘The moment for
doing this seemed to him opportune, and an
ad hoc committee meeting was called to consider the question. The Committee met at

the Society’s Rooms on December 6th, 1929, |

and had the benefit of the advice of a wellknown legal authority whose public position
had familiarized him with the administrative
problems of mental deficiency and insanity.
This authority fully confirmed Dr. Gibbon’s
view that the legal position was at present
such that it would be folly to think of starting
a hospital for sterilization. He further stated
that within his knowledge an application by
the superintendent of a mental hospital had
been made to the Board of Control for sanction to sterilize a mental defective prior to
discharge from the hospital. The sanction
was refused on the grounds of the obscurity
of the law. To those present at this meeting
it therefore appeared that the Society would
be much better advised to devote its energies
to legalizing sterilization than to starting a
hospital. A memorandum was accordingly
circulated to the Council signed by Dr.
R. A. Fisher, Professor Huxley, Dr. J. A.
Ryle, Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, and myself, asking for authorization to form a sub-committee, the aim of which would be to secure
the legalization of eugenic sterilization. The
memorandum was unanimously approved by
the Council, and in this way the nucleus of
the existing Committee for Legalizing
Eugenic Sterilization was formed.

It was subsequently expanded to its present size so as to include about sixteen persons.

From the start, the need was acutely
felt for a simple statement of the Society’s
position which would easily be understood
by the general public. Professor Huxley
and I were deputed to write the statement.
He being at the time very busy, I wrote the
body of the statement, which he subsequently criticized, emended, and greatly
improved. ‘Thus came into existence the
buff pamphlet, of which between July 1st

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and December Ist, 1930, some 10,000 copies
have been sent out.

THE SOCIETY’S POSITION

A few comments on the position taken up
in this pamphlet may be of interest. It
seemed to us that three points required
special emphasis. The first was that the
modern methods of sterilization were entirely distinct from castration or emasculation ; the second, that the Society had never
suggested, as many people at this time supposed, that sterilization should be indiscriminate; the third, that sterilization was
advocated, not as an alternative to segregation, but as an accessory to it.

BIOLOGICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE VIEWS

In the course of the previous five years, I
had attended a number of discussions and
debates on sterilization. From this it was
clear to me that a wide gulf separated the
attitudes to this subject usually adopted by
the biologist and by the administrator. The
biologist sees the problem of the unfit in
panoramic simplicity. His vision is cast in
the perspective of the race, in which the
fate of the individual counts for little. He
notices that civilization keeps alive the defective-producing classes and enables them
to breed more abundantly than any other
class in the community. Of the various
methods of preventing this biologically
disastrous process, sterilization commends
itself as being simple, logical, medically
feasible, humanitarian, and financially economical. He may hold this view without
having ever seen a defective.

Unlike the biologist, however, the administrator is concerned not with racial, but
with personal issues. He is responsible for
a number of individual defectives of whom
he has to dispose to the best advantage of
the defectives themselves and of the community. He well knows that the defective
is not converted into a normal person by
sterilization, and that he is not thus rendered immune from the many corrupting
influences to which he is exposed by virtue
of his suggestibility and lack of critical
faculty. For the administrator, the outTHE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

standing problem of the moment is the
shortage of institutional accommodation for
defectives. To one for whom this shortage
is an urgent and unavoidable problem, nothing can be more irritating than the argument that by sterilization drastic economies
could immediately be made in the expenditure of public funds on institutional accommodation for defectives. Public meetings
devoted to discussing sterilization used frequently to break up without anyone having
changed his opinion. A few neutral and
uninformed people who had come to the
meeting for information, would go away
with their minds confused.

The sterilizationist would go away thinking that his adversary was wilfully blind to
obvious biological facts, that his mind had
become ankylosed and his vision blinkered
by living with defectives. It is to his advantage to have larger institutions. He has
a vested interest in perpetuating mental
defect. He does not care what happens to
the race as long as he gets larger grants and
feathers his nest. His stupidity is one of
the leading factors in retarding the progress
of the race. The segregationist-administrator, his controversial opponent, goes away
wishing to heaven that the other would get
some experience of living with defectives
and be responsible for them for a few
months before he gets up at meetings and
gratuitously puts spokes in the wheels of
the people who are doing the dirty work and
know its problems. The gulf is widened and
mutual irritation is caused.

Having begun my scientific training as a
biologist, and later gone on to study medicine, these two points of view, the racial
and the personal, were both familiar to me.
I considered that the misunderstanding
could be removed if stress were laid upon
a fact with regard to which much misconception existed, namely that the Eugenics
Society has never advocated sterilization as
an alternative to segregation, as many
people seemed to think, but as an adjunct
to it. Many wild statements have indubitably been made about sterilization by people
outside the Society and not improbably by a
few in it. The person, however, who is best

241

qualified to speak for the Society is its
former President, Major Darwin, who in his
Need for Eugenic Reform has written as
follows: ‘‘ Segregation should be regarded
as the normal method of dealing with all
aments, and segregation, if properly conducted, does meet all the racial requirements.’’ It was considered that the
Society’s statement should be based upon
this point of view.

FOR AMENTS UNDER GUARDIANSHIP

Two documents published about this time
provided an indication as to how such a view
could be given practical effect. The first
was the Report of the Mental Deficiency
Committee (usually known as the Wood
Report). In this, it was estimated that there
were some 300,000 mental deficients in England and Wales, for 100,000 of whom it was
recommended that institutional provision
under the Mental Deficiency Acts be made.
The remaining 200,000 it was proposed to
leave in the community under various forms
of guardianship and supervision. The
second document was the Report for 1928
of the Board of Control. In its brief discussion on sterilization, the following passage
occurs : “‘ Roughly speaking, out of 300,000
mental defectives in England and Wales,
one-third will require institutional provision,
and two-thirds some form of community
care—that is, care outside an institution.
It is in the case of the latter that the risk
of procreation arises and the case for sterilization, if such a case exists at all, is
strongest.”’

These two documents, therefore, provided
an indication of how the case for sterilization could be put forward without interfering with the requirements of the administrator, and they were made the basis of the
introductory section of the buff pamphlet
and of section 8, in which the Committee’s
proposals are set forth. In fact the whole
pamphlet was written with the aim of reconciling the standpoints of the biologist
and the administrator, and it is in this
respect that it differs most conspicuously
from most previous statements of the case
for sterilization.
242

At the beginning of its deliberations, the
Committee for Legalizing Eugenic Sterilization was uncertain as to whether it
should constitute itself as a sub-committee
of the Council of the Eugenics Soetety,
or whether it should form itself into an
independent and autonomous body. ‘The
former course was eventually decided upon.
It therefore became necessary to obtain,
the sanction of the Council for the Committee’s statement of policy. Proofs of the
buff pamphlet were accordingly circulated
to every member of the Council, and suggestions and criticisms invited. A number
of these were submitted. In not one of
them, however, was the general argument
of the pamphlet attacked. All the submitted
criticisms were verbal in nature, with here
and there a suggested addition, emendation
or omission. A small sub-committee was
appointed to consider these criticisms, some
of which were incompatible with others, and
the pamphlet eventually appeared in its
final form in the middle of June 1930.

Of the various arguments set forth in the
different sections of the pamphlet, the one
about which most uncertainty was felt was
the legal. Statements of a contradictory
kind have been made about the legality of
sterilizing operations. Compulsory sterilization of mental defectives had been held
by Sir Travers Humphreys to be definitely
illegal on several grounds. ‘The question of
voluntary sterilization with the consent of
the spouse was clearly on a different footing.
Hence it was thought desirable that the
Committee should take steps to produce a
detailed account of the present state of the
law towards this subject. The Committee
was fortunate in securing the services of
Mr. Cecil Binney who wrote the green
pamphiet The Law as to Sterilization,
which is obtainable from the Soctety’s office,
price 6d.

Copies of the buff pamphlet were sent to
local authorities and to their various committees. In acknowledging these, many
asked for further copies, which were supplied. Of those bodies who have hitherto
considered the Society’s proposals, a considerable majority have given their support.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Of those that did not give support, not one
expressed opposition to or condemnation of
the proposals. ‘These replied to the effect
that they wished to take no action in the
matter. One authority submitted a resolution that the Government should be requested to institute a full inquiry on the
question.

THREE HEREDITARY GROUPS

In the autumn of 1930, a Sterilization
Bill was drafted for the Committee by a
parliamentary draftsman. In giving its instructions for the drafting of the Bill, the
Committee was guided by what it held to be
desirable on eugenic rather than on tactical
grounds. Thus, three groups of people are
referred to in the Bill as candidates for
voluntary sterilization. The first group
comprises mental defectives. The second
comprises persons who have recovered from
an attack of insanity, for whom Dr. Langdon-Down has suggested the name ‘‘ mental
convalescents.’? The third group comprises
persons suffering from hereditary disease
or defect (other than mental deficiency or
insanity) impairing mental or physical
health or efficiency. On tactical grounds it
may be thought expedient by those who will
introduce the Bill to limit its application to
the first group, namely mental defectives
alone.* Similar considerations apply to the
safeguards proposed by the Committee. It
may be deemed wisest on tactical grounds
to modify these in certain ways. In its Bill,

 

* A further reason for taking this course has
been vigorously expressed by a member of this
Society in a recent correspondence. It is argued
that the legal position with regard to voluntary
sterilization undertaken by persons in full possession of their faculties is wholly different from that
in regard to the sterilization of mental defectives
under the jurisdiction of the Board of Control. A
good case was made out for the illegality of the
last procedure by Sir Travers Humphreys in 1925
(British Medical Journal, June 1925, page 286). It
is, however, extremely improbable that the first
procedure would be condemned by the courts provided that the consent of the spouse had been
obtained. It can thus be argued that by attempting to constitute the legality of voluntary sterilization we should create a widespread and mistaken
impression to the effect that voluntary sterilization is now illegal, and progress in this direction
might be indefinitely postponed.
THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

the Committee has confined itself to putting
forward what it considers on eugenic
grounds the most satisfactory Bill, safeguarded in the simplest and most practical
manner. It wishes to leave those who introduce the Bill entirely free to modify it in
any way they think is called for by ‘* strategical ’’ demands.

OTHER INTERESTED BODIES

In the autumn of 1930, the topic of sterilization was discussed by a number of
learned and expert bodies. A session was
devoted to it in a course of lectures on
** Contraception and Allied Questions,”’
under the auspices of the Royal Institute
of Public Health; it was discussed at a
meeting of the Mental Hospitals Association on September 30th; it was the subject
of a series of speeches at a Public Health
Congress held at the Royal Agricultural
Hall on November 21st, and it was the
main topic of discussion at one of the
sessions of the recent conference of the
Central Association for Mental Welfare.
On Tuesday, November 25th, two delegates from the Committee, Dr. LangdonDown and myself, were received by the
Medical Committee of the House of Commons, to which we explained our proposals.
As a result of this meeting Major A. G.
Church, Member for Wandsworth Central,
said he would introduce our Bill when a
favourable opportunity presented, under the
ten-minutes rule.

On Wednesday, November 26th, a meeting was held by kind permission of Lady
Cory in her drawing-room, at which the
Press was well represented. Mr. J. C.
Pringle, Lady Askwith, and I were the
speakers, and we put different aspects of
our proposals before a full audience of some
150 people. At the end the following resolution, moved by Lady Shaftesbury, was carried with only two dissentients: ‘‘ That
voluntary sterilization, if legalized and
carefully safeguarded to prevent abuses,
could be usefully employed to reduce the
incidence of grave hereditary defects
seriously impairing physical and mental
heredity and efficiency.’’

243

THE PROPOSED ROYAL COMMISSION

‘There are three chief features of the
second edition of the buff pamphlet to which
attention might be drawn. ‘The first is that
it contains the text of the Sterilization Bill,
instead of the summary which was included
in Section 9 of the first edition. The second
feature is that a postcript has been added
containing new matter, under the following
headings : Prohibition of Marriage of Defectives; Effects of Legalizing Sterilization ;
Proposed Royal Commission. ‘The last of
these deserves comment.

A large number of persons and organizations now favour the principle of sterilization in carefully selected cases. Nevertheless, they think that public opinion is still
too uneducated to make it feasible to introduce a Bill at present. They therefore demand that any legislation in this direction
be preceded by a careful inquiry or by a
Royal Commission appointed to investigate the causation and prevention of mental
deficiency. It is anticipated that this
inquiry would command such widespread
attention and respect that the legalization
of sterilization would be accomplished without difficulty on its recommendation. ‘This
is the view officially adopted by the Central
Association for Mental Welfare.

While clearly recognizing the need for
further knowledge of the inheritance of
mental disease and defect, and while therefore fully supporting the plea for an inquiry
into the subject, the Council does not think
it necessary to defer the legalizing of sterilization till the publication of the result of
such an investigation. This question of
policy was discussed at a recent Council
meeting, when it was unanimously decided
to recommend that efforts be made to get
sterilization legalized under the Society’s
proposed safeguards as soon as possible, and
also that the plea for an immediate investigation or Royal Commission be supported.
The reason which prompted the Council to
take this view was that both the questions
of causation and prevention of mental defect,
which are to be investigated in the inquiry,
are highly controversial questions. The
question of causation can be approached
244

with an environmentalist bias which leads
to the belief that secondary amentia preponderates over primary, or with a bias in
favour of heredity, in which case it is believed that primary amentia occurs more
frequently than secondary.

The question of the prevention of mental
deficiency is a still more thorny one, in that
it excites religious opposition to the preventive measure of sterilization. If the various
members of the Committee or Commission
that is appointed to conduct the investigation hold divergent views on these subjects
(as must necessarily happen unless this
body is carefully selected from people who
hold uniform views), it will follow that the
investigations will have to be very thorough,
detailed, and conclusive if the necessary
consensus of opinion is to be achieved.
Failure on the part of the members of this
body to reach unanimity would result in the
submission of minority reports which would
largely destroy the value of the investigation. For such a result would encourage
the view, sufficiently prevalent already, that
the scientific experts were still divided and
that it was therefore premature to take steps
in the direction of recommending such a
remedy as sterilization.

If, then, the investigation is to be sufficiently thorough to command the assent of all
responsible scientific persons, it will necessarily have to take a very considerable time.
The Royal Commission for the Care and
Control of the Feeble-minded was not asked
to pronounce upon questions as controversial as those that will have to be settled by
this investigation. Nevertheless, the Royal
Commission took nine years to produce a
report. Moreover, it does not at present
seem likely that the support of Roman
Catholics to any recommendation favouring
sterilization will be obtained even by the
most painstaking and convincing report.

Since the consent of the Board of Control,
which is one of the sanctions that the Committee suggests, will have to be obtained
before a mental defective or mental convalescent can be sterilized, the Council holds
that abuses of sterilization as applied to
these two categories will be virtually im
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

possible. The attitude of the Board of Control towards sterilization is, for excellent
reasons, so cautious and circumspect that
it can be counted upon to give its consent
to the sterilization of a mental defective or
mental convalescent only if there are excellent indications for this step being taken.
The Council therefore holds that the policy
which would bear most fruitful results in
the future would be that of legalizing eugenic sterilization as soon as possible under
the proposed safeguards, and then to include, in the scope of the proposed investigation, the limited and discriminating application of the principle of sterilization thus
made possible. If it is proposed to investigate methods of prevention, it is surely
desirable to have something definite to go on
in this sphere. If every obstacle be placed
in the way of practising sterilization until
the proposed investigation is completed,
there will clearly be nothing for it to investigate so far as the operation of this
important remedy is concerned.

THE RATE OF ELIMINATION

The third feature in which the second edition of the buff pamphlet differs from the
first, is this. In the first edition, an argument was put forward (on p. 21) that a considerable reduction in the incidence of mental
deficiency could be achieved by completely
preventing the parenthood of defectives,
whether by segregation or sterilization
or any other really effective measure.
This view was advanced in order to counteract an impression widely created by certain
genetical calculations of Punnett, which
seemed to point to the conclusion that it was
impossible materially to reduce the incidence of mental deficiency by preventing
defectives from reproducing. In the first
edition of the pamphlet, it was stated that on
the same genetic and social assumptions as
those made by Punnett, it would be possible
to reduce the incidence of mental deficiency
by a minimum of 17 per cent. in one generation. The calculation further assumed that
the fertility of defectives is the same as that
of the rest of the population.

Dr. Tredgold and others have frequently
THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

opposed this calculation on the ground that,
in fact, only 3 to 5 per cent. of defectives
have defective parents. Hence, the sterilization of all defectives in the community a
generation ago would only have reduced the
present incidence of mental deficiency by at
most 5 per cent. On these grounds severe
criticisms have been levelled at the position
the Society has taken up upon this subject.

THE PARENTAGE OF DEFECTIVES

The question clearly turns upon the
criteria by which defectiveness is judged
when it occurs in parents of defective children. If the criterion is that these parents
have been certified as defective, the incidence of defectiveness among them will
clearly be much smaller than if the criterion
is that they are certifiable as defective.
Only a small proportion of certifiable persons are at the present moment, in fact,
certified. Intelligence tests have not been
done on the parents of defectives; but if
intelligence tests be rejected as being an
invalid criterion of defectiveness in comparison with social inadequacy, it may be
pointed out that the Mental Deficiency Committee gave reasons for thinking that among
the parents of the feeble-minded who comprise three-fourths of all defectives, there
is an outstandingly large number of retarded and subnormal persons who are in
large measure socially incompetent. How
many of these are certifiable? If such
persons had been included in the inventories of defective parents of defective offspring, the incidence of defectiveness
among the parents would doubtless be found
to be considerably higher than it now
appears. The figure of 17 per cent. might
well under-estimate the reality.

This figure, moreover, is subject to
further misunderstanding. According to
the calculation by which it is reached, the
incidence of mental deficiency in a given
community whose defective population mates
and breeds as freely as other people, is
reducible by 17 per cent. by the expedient
of preventing its defective component from
breeding. But if, in this given community,
a certain proportion of defectives are already

245

prevented from having children (as they
are in this country) by segregation, the
reduction to be attained by preventing the
remaining defectives from breeding (say,
by sterilization) will be correspondingly
lowered.

The assumptions of this calculation by
no means justify the view that the complete
prevention of the parenthood of defectives
in England to-day would reduce the incidence of defectiveness from its present figure
by 17 per cent. in one generation; this for
the reason that many defectives are already
prevented from having children by segregation and by constitutional incapacity to procreate. Very far less do they justify the
view, apparently held in certain quarters,
that the mere legalizing of sterilization will
effect such a reduction. Jf these two considerations are borne in mind (viz., the
uncertainty of the criteria by which defectiveness is judged when it occurs among the
parents of defectives, and the fact that existing methods of segregation already reduce to
a certain extent the fertility of our defective
population) it may transpire that there is not
as wide a divergence as superficially appears
between the estimates of Dr. Tredgold, who,
from clinical experience, asserts that at most
5 per cent. of defectives have defective
parents, and that of Dr. Fisher, who calculates that defectiveness could be reduced by
17 per cent. in one generation if all defectives
were prevented from having children.

In view, however, of the uncertainty of
the quantitative effects of any social policy,
and of the undeniable fact of the heritable
nature of much mental defect, it was
thought by the Committee expedient to omit
this argument from the second edition of
the pamphlet. The argument is not an
essential one, and so long as it is included,
there is a risk of its being made the objective of attacks against this Society, calculated to persuade the public that this is the
central feature of the Society’s support of
sterilization. The essential consideration
upon which the whole argument for sterilization rests has nothing to do with this.
It is the very simple consideration that it is
contrary to public policy, both for genetic
246

and humanitarian reasons, that defectives
should have children. The Society has yet
to meet the person who dissents from this
view.

A word about the attitude of the Roman
Catholic Church towards sterilization may
not be out of place. The Church has not
definitely pronounced upon this subject.
Nevertheless in the last year in this country
a definite attitude towards it seems to be

emerging which is, that sterilization is a

grievous sin which shall in no circumstances
be condoned by Catholics. This view is held
no less when sterilization is performed with
a definite eugenic aim of preventing the
transmission of hereditary disease or defect
than when it is used as a substitute for birth
control. I will give three instances in support of this view. At the recent conference
of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, Father Bagshaw said that the Catholic
Church regarded sterilization as ‘‘ essentially evil and a gross crime in the sight of
God, the guilt of which must be shared by
the willing patient, the operator and by anybody who in any way co-operated in the
action.”’

An exactly similar view was expressed
by Father Henry Davis, S.J., at the Public
Health Congress held in the Royal Agricultural Hall above referred to. Lastly, the
Catholic Herald, in its issue of December
3rd, 1930, referring to the resolution passed
at the drawing-room meeting held at Lady
Cory’s house on November 26th, says:
““ As to those dames who, at a recent meeting, were advocating similar methods [i.e.
sterilization | to diminish the number of the
‘Unfit,’ we wonder what is their fitness to
advise this country on such matters. Pity,
perhaps, that they had not been treated as
unwanted puppies or kittens are, and they
would not now be here to poison the minds
and health of millions by their pestiferous
presence and propaganda.’’*

This view, despite its vigorous language,
is a perfectly feasible and logical one in the
light of the theological premisses adopted.

* Since this was written, the Pope himself has
pronounced against sterilization.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It should be contended against it, however,
that our proposals are for voluntary not
compulsory sterilization. There is not a
single member of the Council of the
Eugenics Society who desires a Roman
Catholic to undergo sterilization. Hence,
the Society would respectfully ask Roman
Catholic speakers upon this subject to remember that their view in regard to the
immorality of sterilization is not necessarily
shared by other people. The Society is
merely asking that it be made legally possible for people, especially poor people, to
get themselves sterilized when there are
good reasons for their so doing, and when
they do not think it to be wrong. Roman
Catholics have no more grounds for opposing non-Catholics being voluntarily sterilized than have anti-vaccinationists for
preventing persons from being vaccinated
who do not share their views on immunology. Roman Catholic ethics oppose divorce.
Yet Roman Catholics live happily in communities in which divorce is easy. ‘The
divorce laws obtaining in these communities
need not interfere with them.

A point of psychology, however, enters
into this question. It is the desire for a
scapegoat. If a person holds strong views
to the effect that a given action is morally
wrong, he will desire to fix the guilt upon
a typically miscreant individual or body.
By Roman Catholics the Eugenics Society
is being converted into such a scapegoat. It
is credited with the Machiavellian intention
of utilizing the plea for legalizing sterilization as the thin end of a wedge, the thick
end of which will be the compulsory sterilization of everybody who does not share its
views. Thus Mr. H. Robbins, in his
recently-published book, An Examination
of Eugenics, when discussing sterilization,
writes: ‘‘ Catholics, more than most citizens, may ponder their fate under such a
system.’’ It is only by attributing to eugenists such sinister motives as these that a
good case can be made out by Roman Catholics for opposing the legalization of voluntary sterilization. For by such opposition
they are, in their view, nipping in the bud
a movement which, in its full state of develTHE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

opment, would seriously involve themselves.

In these circumstances there can be no
harm in stating that there is not a single
member of the Council of the Eugenics
Society who wishes to push the measure of
sterilization beyond the point at which it
will be a useful instrument of negative
eugenics. Jt is only by experience that we
can learn how far it can be employed in this
direction. It may turn out to have a widespread applicability. On the other hand it
may be shown to create more difficulties

RECENTLY PUBLISHED.

Demy 8vo.

247

than it solves, and to be attended by dangers which make its extensive practice inadvisable. Why should it be supposed that
the Eugenics Society will refuse to form an
impartial opinion of this question? Why
should it be supposed that it desires compulsorily to sterilize half the community ?
What is the Society to gain from such a
measure? To the dispassionate critic, the
mere perusal of the names of the constituent
members of the Council should dispel misgivings on this point.

tos. 6d. net. Postage gd.

ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES: Sociological, Biological & Psychological

By C. J. BOND, C.M.G., F.R.C.S., Hon. Consulting Surgeon, Leicester Royal Infirmary;
Vice-President of the Eugenics Society; Member of the Industrial Health Research Board, etc.

“Valuable and authoritative . .. the general view of social activities, seen in relation

to biological truths, cannot fail to be illuminating.”

LONDON: H. K. LEWIS & CO. LTD.,

Telegrams: “Pusiicavit, Eusroap, Lonpon.”

 

—The Eugenics Review.

136 Gower Street and 24 Gower Place, W.C.1

Telephone: Musrum 7756-7-8.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 4.
