R. H. S. ROBERTSON
M.A., F.G.S.

The Output
in Scotland,

Introduction

RCHIE CLEMENT, fresh from Glasgow
University and then expatriate, and I met
on a war job in 1943 and wrylyasked “‘Is
your journey really necessary?’ We asked each
other many more questions but knew not the
answers. What proportion of jobs were available
to the scientist in Scotland? Is emigration of the
best brains of the country as serious to-day as it
seems to have been in the past? Or has Scotland
ever held a fair number of her savants? And,
perhaps most importantly, is Scotland still
producing people of exceptional brightness ?

These were clearly questions of moment, and
in respect of our own field, the scientific, they
exercised us so strongly that we set out to determine the answers in as objective and statistical a
study as we could make it, however long it would
take.

It soon became apparent that in a broad way,
from the Renascence to the present day, Scotland
had made powerful and original contributions to
the developing arts and sciences. We were
immediately faced with the problem of selecting
our savants without personal judgement. We
needed a sieve, albeit one with funny shaped
holes. We rejected the method of Havelock
Ellis who measured a man’s worth by the number
of inches describing him in the Dictionary of
National Biography, although this method has
the virtue of objectivity, because we soon found
that some most remarkable men are not to be
found in that great work. Yet Havelock Ellis in
his Study of British Genius is the forebear of our
studies; among other things he showed that, in
science and soldiering especially, Scotland’s

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on January 20th, 1960.

Ji

of Scientists
1600-1950

production of outstanding men had been very
much higher in relation to its population than
that of any other nation of the United Kingdom.
The time had come we felt for a much more
detailed study of the subject. | |

We had first to delimit the fields of activity
engaged in by our savants. These we listed as
follows: chemistry, pure and applied; physics,
pure and applied; mathematics; astronomy and
meteorology; biology, botany and zoology;
geology; medicine in any of its branches;
psychology, medical or otherwise (but not
sociology); engineering; and agriculture (in the
last two including prime inventors and those
responsible for especially significant developments). We decided to omit those whose contributions had been to geography, social anthropology and sociology, political economy and
economics (among whom was of course Adam
Smith).

The field delimited, we now had to decide how
to select our sample and how to judge their
Scottishness. It would have defeated our object
to have the lists of scientists, as we came to call
them all, swelled with scores of minor figures or
of dubiously Scottish ones. We wanted to obtain
a reliable picture of the emergence of really firstrate minds from Scottish stock in different fields,
at different places and at different times. As a
guide to social background, we noted the father’s
occupation and that of the mother’s father; and
the place of work and the place of death gave
information about centres of opportunity and
migration.

Method of Selection
The all-important sieve which we constructed
consisted of a series of criteria. As I cannot give

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1960, 52, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

you the names of the 229 characters who were
retained on the sieve I shall give a few examples
of those who were caught in each category. We
said that to each one of them at least one of the
following statements must be applicable:

that he discovered a significant theorem, law,
effect, function, coefficient, rule, equation,
formula or test, with which the discoverer’s
name is permanently associated, as with MacLaurin’s theorem, Ivory’s theorem, Watt’s law,
the Kelvin effect, Maxwell’s rule, Crum Brown
and Gibson’s rule, Rankine’s formula;
that his name was associated with a physical condition or a process, as with the Beilby layer, the
Brownian movement, the Clark process, or
Buchan’s cold spells;
that his name was borne by an important apparatus
or instrument, as with the Nicol prism, Gregorian telescope, the Liston splint, the Stevenson
screen or.the Dewar flask;
that he discovered an element: Rutherford, Hope,
Ramsay, Cranston;
that a unit or scale of measurement had been named
after him, as with Clark, Clerk Maxwell, Napier
~ (Neper), Twaddle and Watt;
that he was awarded a Nobel prize or a moeity
thereof; J. J. R. Macleod, C. T. R. Wilson, Sir
Alexander Fleming, Sir Alexander Todd;
that his name was immortalized in the language, as
in Macadam, Mackintosh, the Douglas fir;
that he contributed significantly and by general
“recognition to the development of an important
. Invention;
that while responsible for no major discovery or
‘invention he had been acknowledged by his contemporaries, or his later peers, as the most distinguished man in his branch of science in his
generation—a group we took to include also
those who were founders or fathers of sciences.

It is in selection only for the last two requirements that subjective judgement had of course to
‘play its part. For example, to the evolution of the
steamship a number of important inventors
contributed. If the contribution was a major one
we recognized it. If it did not lead to further
advance we discountenanced it.

Of the fathers or founders of sciences we have
John Milne—seismology; John Pringle—modern
military medicine; C. Wyville Thomson—
oceanography ; James Clark—veterinary hygiene;
James Hall—experimental geology; Thomas
Graham — colloid science; David Ferrier —
modern neurology; William Smellie—midwifery ;

72

William Fairbairn—one of the four founders of
mechanical engineering; John Leslie and Robert
Stirling—refrigeration.

Definition of a Scot

Most of the Scots recorded in our files were
born in Scotland of Scottish parents; a few have
a Scottish father only. Of the few born outside
Scotland of a Scottish father only, we have
rejected some and retained others, roughly in
equal proportions; thus Sir Ronald Ross was
accepted and Sir J. Ambrose Fleming was not.
This arrangement was made for statistical
reasons.

In dealing with those born outside Scotland
to Scottish families but with less recent connections with the homeland, we have erred, if anything, on the side of exclusion. We do not include
the ‘“Scots-Americans”: Henry (electricity),
Edison (electricity), Fulton (steamboat), and
McCormick (reaper); but do include Bell who
left Scotland only six years before inventing the
telephone. Nor do we include McLeod of the
vacuum gauge, nor Lord Rutherford, though
both were of Scots descent. And among English
men who claimed to be of Scottish descent we

have ruled out J. Russel Wallace, George
Stephenson, J. J. Thomson and Isaac Newton
himself.

We gathered our information. From: many
people and from many books; and in due time
wrote a history of the development of science,
technology and medicine in Scotland set in
relation to contemporary world science. Here the
fairness of the sampling can be judged, but to-day
we shall deal more particularly with the statistical examination of our findings.

Figure 1 shows the number of Scots inventors
and discoverers born in each decade since 1500;
where we did not know the birth date we have
subtracted 30 from the date of discovery. The
last of our sample was born in 1908 and we
recognize that some bright Scots have not yet
been recognized, but the general shape of this
diagram is only too obvious; there was a notable
peak in output of great scientists born between
1705. and 1850. The subsequent decline is as
remarkable as the earlier rise. The best decade
was 1810 to 1819.

Before attempting to analyse the causes of this
THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN

FIGURE 1

NUMBER OF SCOTS INVENTORS AND
DISCOVERERS BORN PER DECADE

20 e ®
e Known
e birthdate
os °
eee 68 Estimated
18 eee 0 birthdate
© e080
© ee ce
e ae oF
Se 406 66
10 & ceepeneose
@ eeseqeene
© ecccccccosese
© eecccccccecce
PleHbeee HHHES TED
5 eeeveseoooosorcs 00

a

1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000

rise and fall we shall consider where our characters were born and in what social circumstances.

Place of Birth

To show the changing pattern of birthplaces
we arranged our characters in order of birthdate
and then divided them into four almost equal
lots. Those whose birthplace is unknown or
abroad have been left out; they number 6, 1, 8
and 5 in the four quarters. For the purpose of
this study the country has been divided into
seven geographical regions, not of equal size.

TABLE 1

Second | Third | Fourth

Regions quarter | quarter | quarter

to 1754 4 754 to | 1800 to | 1837 to

1799 1837 1908
Highlands 3 4 2
Buchan & Mearns 11 5 7
Edinburgh 16 21 13
Central & Fife 6 3

Clydeside 9 10 18
Ayr & Galloway 8 4 5
Borders 3 z 2
Total .. 56 49 52

 

The trends which can be seen here are not very
sharply marked, but they do reflect the drifts of
population which have occurred in Scotland
over the centuries.

The figures show a gradual decline in output of
intellect in the once prolific districts of Buchan

SCOTLAND

and Mearns, where in the West of Scotland,
called Clydeside in our table, this has increased.

The Highlands have never been prominent as a
source of scientific genius and examination of
the list of those born in Highland counties shows
that nearly half of them came from places near
the boundary.

More detailed work would be needed to
compare the output of scientific genius in
different regions on a population basis, but it is
fairly clear that Buchan has had a high yield
quite apart from the famous Gregory family.
Dr. J. F. Tocher of Aberdeen, one of the pioneers
of statistical science in Great Britain, held that
this issued from Buchan being the meeting place
of Picts, Scots and Norsemen, this mixture
having in the course of centuries produced a
strain of exceptional ability. Even certain villages
and small towns in this district have produced a
remarkable number of famous men, if we include
soldiers and divines. Forcing-grounds of this
kind are of course not unknown in other
countries: Dr. John Plesch has called attention
to a district in Hungary which has produced an
abnormally high proportion of great men, and
breeding grounds of exceptional talent are
recognized in the United States. Such areas
require to be more closely studied.

Flinders Petrie in his remarkable essay on the
Revolutions of Civilization maintained that a
peak of civilization occurred some 800 years
after conquest and miscegenation. In Buchan
then we might expect the reaction to have been
completed by about A.D. 1640, 800 years after the
Picts and Scots united. Though many Aberdeen
graduates became professors on the Continent,
often in their early twenties, they often returned
home to rear a family and the breeding stock was
not depleted. In the exceedingly fertile parts of
Aberdeenshire, families would be careful to
preserve their heritage; it is not surprising that
successful farming and intelligence went together
for so long. Here there would have been a
distinct class differentiation for centuries, and the
production by selection of an exceptionally
virile and intelligent upper crust.

In the Highlands there resides a people who
belong to an ancient civilization which is different
from that of the rest of Western Europe. Traditionally all Highlanders tried to play the same

73
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

role in their society ; much was done in common;
it was unsocial to be exceptional in many respects.
For one to become much richer than his neighbours would have been to invite hostility. Only
in the Highlands has it been continuously possible
for any young man to marry any girl of his
choice; there has been no selection there for
intellectual pursuits; though physical prowess,
memory, humour, courage, will have influenced
the choice of a spouse. We believe that this lack
of specialization has resulted in the small number
of savants coming from the Highlands.

Homes

The second question we attempted to answer
was whether any class of society had provided a
greater number of scientific inventors or innovators than the others. Here the answer is quite
unequivocal. The number provided by the
middle classes, which we define as professional
men, business men and farmers, is certainly
higher than that provided either by the landed
gentry or by manual workers. Table 2 shows the
occupational groups of the fathers of our
characters arranged in the same way as Table 1,
in the same four equal lots.

TABLE 2
First | Second | Third | Fourth
Father’s Quarter | Quarter | Quarter | Quarter
occupation to 1754 | 1754 to | 1800 to | 1837 to
1799 1837 1908
Landed gentry 8 6 4 3
Professional men 15 13 25 22
(Ministers) (5) (6) (7) (5)
Business men,
farmers and
employers of
labour 12 18 10 19
iManual workers
and other
employed
persons 8 7 10 4
Total .. 43 44 49 48

 

_ It appears that it has become gradually less
fashionable for the landed gentry to engage in
scientific pursuits; and genuine instances of sons
of toil rising to scientific pre-eminence are rarer
to-day than formerly. It is of interest to note that
the ministry and clergy—the figures for which are

74

given in brackets—provide more inventors than
any other occupation; and it is a remarkable
tribute to a profession whose members have not
greatly exceeded 0-1 per cent of the population at
any one time that sons of the manse should form
an eighth of the country’s scientific genius.

The Golden Age

In Table 3 we give the number of Scottish
scientific discoverers who made their first
important contributions to knowledge in the
periods which we chose for our chapters. We
are not concerned here with their birth dates
because we are considering the historical changes
in the frequency of invention and discovery by
Scots. The first line of figures shows the actual
number of inventors and scientists recorded in
the time intervals given; the second line shows
these figures reduced to the number per decade
so that the true rate of production can be seen.
Here we can see that there is a peak of scientific
output in the period 1830 to 1870; a peak so
marked that we can justifiably speak of a Golden
Age.

The population of Scotland was rising throughthe period covered by our survey, as is shown in
line three. In line four, we have divided the
figures of line two by those of line three to obtain
the number of discoverers per million inhabitants
per decade. These results are probably of more
fundamental significance and should be of
interest to human geneticists. The true peak of
production is now seen to be in the period
1800 to 1850; the most prolific birth-period
would be some thirty years earlier—1770 to 1820.

The last two rows of figures have been plotted
on Figure 2. Here we see in a most dramatic way
what an extraordinary efflorescence of talent
occurred in Scotland in the century 1765 to 1865,
or roughly the period generally known as that of
the Industrial Revolution, 1750 to 1850.

From 1725 to 1900 the curve is roughly symmetrical; but since 1915 it has fallen below the
level of the seventeenth century. Indeed, the rate
of output of genius had fallen by 1925 to about a
sixth and is now at about a ninth of the maximum,
and about a half of what it was before the Golden
Age opened. Doubtless the rate of decline will
slow up and the historian of A.D. 2000 may be
able to revise the section 1900 to 1950 slightly,
THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND
TABLE 3

 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Period 1600
Dates of discovery to
1699

Number of Scottish scene ai
coverers ‘

Number per decade ..

Population of Scotland, millions .

Number of discoverers per million

inhabitants per decade ..

1-1
0-85

but that is a poor consolation for the glories that

have departed.

The Diaspora

In our early researches we were moved to
suspect that the emigration of the best Scottish
brains would turn out to be a major factor in
recent Scottish history and at the root of the
country’s present problems. But it was only
towards the end of our task that we realized,
having collected, tabulated and plotted the
relative figures, just how far this was actually the
case. The point is made clear beyond all question
in Figure 3, which shows the changing proportion
of scientifically gifted Scots who died in their own
country. Since one supposes, and indeed knows,

FIGURE 2
INVENTORS PER MILLION PER DECADE

~

    

Population

/nventors per Million per Decade
Millions

1700 }=—: 1800

1600
Dotes of Invention and Discovery

1900 2000

that many Scots of mark have returned home
only to retire and die, the real trend may well be
even more alarming.

FIGURE 3
RESIDENT IN SCOTLAND AT DEATH. PER CENT

100

90

80

70 a

Per Cent
wm a
So So

>
SoS

30

20

1500 1600 1700 2000

7§

1800 1900
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

There were so few of our characters in the
sixteenth century that one cannot accept as
statistically meaningful the fact that all of them
at least returned to Scotland to die. With the
Regnal Union came the beginning of the trek
south. Until then, England had no monopolistic
attraction for Scottish brains, but the canalization of Scottish genius began in 1603. At first the
migrants were a mere handful surrounding King
James VI and I, in search of preferment, honours
and grants of land.

The formation of the Royal Society in 1660
marks a revolution in thought: modern science
had begun. Many Scots went south to play their
part in this exhilarating period of new ideas.
Though the actual numbers who crossed the
border at that time were not large, proportionally
the rate of emigration was as great as in the
nineteenth century.

The Union of Parliaments did not have any
effect on the exodus for a long time. It was not
until 1750, the beginning of the Industrial
Revolution, that the trend of exodus reversed.
From then until 1825 more opportunities arose
or were created for Scots to remain in Scotland.
In 1750 about 48 per cent of our selected scientists
managed to die at home, but in 1825 about 71 per
cent, a most remarkable improvement.

We should define the “Golden Age’’ in this
respect, reading from the graph, as 1795 to 1850;
during these years 60 per cent of Scottish
inventors and discoverers died at home.

From 1815 until to-day the scattering has
proceeded at an alarming rate. The curve shows
a slight evening-off and perhaps even a recovery
in recent years.

The Rise and Fall

Before we try to explain the rise and fall of the
output of Scottish genius in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, we should say that we have
given much thought to the validity of our figures.
Although in choosing our characters it was, as
we have explained, impossible to rule out
entirely a subjective element, we ourselves are
satisfied that the method of selection by criteria
outlined at the beginning is in fact reasonably
objective.

The facts then would seem to be irrefutable.
But the causes require an explanation. What,

76

first of all, produced this Golden Age?

The latter half of the eighteenth century was a
period of great advance in scientific thought
throughout the Western world. In the beginning
of the century Newton had laid the foundations
of modern physics; in chemistry in mid-century
discovery was made of many elements and gases;
in medicine discoveries were numerous, and
these went hand-in-hand with and stimulated
further chemical advance; and theoretical advance had almost immediate practical effect on
industry.

In this general advance Scotland was vitally
involved. Men like the Hunter brothers played a
major part in the medical field, and other medical
men like Cullen and Black were among the
foremost developing chemistry and physics.
And Scots talent found particularly marked outlet in directing the new theoretical gains to
practical technological ends, as Watt, for
instance, so pertinently applied Black’s new
concept of specific heat. The Scottish universities
played a leading part in training the leaders of
what has been called the Chemical Revolution.

Not surprisingly, Scotland had now become
more prosperous than ever before, and there was
a great literary and artistic revival which earned
for Edinburgh the renowned cliché “‘the Athens
of the North.” (Did the originator of this phrase
foresee a decline similar to that of the ancient
city of Greece?) When B. Faujas de Saint Fond
came to Scotland in 1784 he called on John
Aitken, Joseph Black (‘‘as often as possible’),
William Cullen, James Hutton and James Watt;
and he mentions also in his book James Gregory,
Sir James Hall, Alexander Munro secundus,
John Playfair and John Hope. Whom would he
meet there to-day?

The period was one, too, of civil and religious
peace. Given latent technological genius in the
Scottish people, these would appear to be the
conditions to call it forth. Here at last were
tremendous opportunities for developing the
personal and natural resources of the country.
Coal and iron were the most important mineral
resources; to water-power was added steampower; salt pans gave way to acid works; kelp
provided much of the country’s alkali; the
chemical and engineering industries were born.
The activity was so great that Scotland attracted
THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND

many visitors from abroad in this period; and it
is no coincidence that the only two Englishmen
of the calibre of our subjects in this book ever to
settle in Scotland, namely Roebuck and Lister,
did so in the Golden Age.

The outward signs of all this burgeoning
activity carried well into the late Victorian era.
At the same time as science flourished, the
community enjoyed great material prosperity, so
much so that, as seems remarkable to-day, by the
end of the century the average income per head in
Scotland was greater than in England. Nevertheless the output of Scottish scientific genius began
steadily to decline. And this diminution was
paralleled too by a decline in literary and artistic
quality. The Scottish school of painting, for
instance, sustained by commercial well-being,
faded into relative obscurity.

Fellowship of the Royal Society

Much has been written about the Golden Age,
but few authors have addressed themselves to
the period of decline. We cannot therefore quote
from learned works to support our findings.
Instead we have attempted to measure the decline
numerically by studying other evidence. Some

FIGURE 4

SCOTTISH FELLOWS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY
AS A PERCENTAGE OF BRITISH FELLOWS

17 :
16 Q Q wecvece i a
NS i i ; ‘ : ——— Certain

14 py i i Scots
3 PAS Up \ --- em
12 i trend
i

~ 10

& 9

. 86

a7
6
5
4
5
2
|
0

 

1650 1700 1750 !800 1850 1900 1950 2000
Yeors

evidence is rather like a spot test of the chemist
and other evidence more in the nature of a
complete titration. Evidence of the second sort is
not easy to come by, and the nearest approach to
it seemed likely to be found in analysis of the
Fellowship of the Royal Society, the results of
which are shown in Figure 4.

To ascertain whether every “‘possible’’ Scottish Fellow was so or not would have taken
months of research, but our task was shortened
by the statistical methods used. We counted the
first hundred Fellows with British names from
1663 on and noted those whom we knew to be
Scots and those who we guessed were Scots. The
two percentages were then counted for 1675 and
every twenty-five years thereafter. As both curves
have the same general shape, our conclusions
drawn from them ought to be valid.

TABLE 4
SCOTTISH FELLOWS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY

Proportion of Scottish

 

 

 

 

Scottish F.R.S.’s divided by
Fellows proportion of Scots
Proportion in Britain
Cer- | Pos- | of Scots in —_—___——
tain | sible Britain Certain Possible

Y o ? o , o % 7 o
1663 6 6 14-4 0-42 0-42
1675 2 3 14-8 0-14 0:20
1700 6 9 15-4 0-39 0:58
1725 5 7 15-8 0-32 0:44
1750 5 7 15-9 0-32 0:44
1775| 10 16 15-4 0°65 1:04
1800 9 12 14-9 0-60 0°81
1825; 12 16 14-8 0:81 1:08
1850| 10 12 13-9 0°72 0:86
1875| 17 17 12-8 1-33 1-33
1900} 12 12 12:1 0:99 0-99
1925 8 8 11-1 0-72 0-72
1936 6 6 10-9 0-55 0-55
1944 8 8 10-7 0:76 0:76
1950 3 3 10-5 0-29 0:29
1955 6 6 10-4 0:56 0-56
Le

 

The story runs something like this.

The Founder of the Royal Society was Charles
II, and his brother James VII and II was a
Fellow. Through the influence of Sir Robert
Moray, a relatively high proportion of Scottish
Fellows, many of them of noble birth, were
elected in the Stuart period. When Dutch
William acceded in 1689, doubtless London had
temporarily lost some of its charm for Scots.

73
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

However, even before the parliamentary union
and the first of the Georges (1714), the proportion of Scots in the Royal Society grew fairly
steadily until about 1875. Thereafter the proportion fell at about twice the rate of the upward
climb.

These curves are consistent with our main
findings and reinforce them. They strongly
suggest a falling off in the proportion of Scots
capable of being elected to the Royal Society.

What lay behind the decline?

Causes of the Rise and of the Decline

Was it a fad, a fashion, for men of high intelligence to “‘go in for science’? This seems hardly
probable.

Was it the Scottish educational system? This
undoubtedly contributed to the rise, but it could
hardly equally be regarded as a cause of the
decline.

Was it easier at one time to make discoveries?
The fallacy in this argument is that each discoverer had far fewer well tested theories,
methods and experience to draw upon, and more
surviving prejudices to cut through.

Was it connected with the religious disputes of
the time, leading to the Disruption of 1843 and
the great religious disputations for the rest of the
century ? No, we should regard these experiences
in the life of the nation as minor causes of unsettlement, if indeed they did not act as a stimulant in the minds of creative people.

Our view is that the major cause in the decline of
Scottish genius has been excessive emigration.

From 1861 to 1951 about 1,586,000 people left
England to settle elsewhere. Over the same
period, Scotland, with only an eighth to a tenth
of the population, lost practically the same
number, namely 1,588,000. During the first fifty
years of this century the net loss by emigration in
England and Wales, with a population eight
times that of Scotland, amounted to approximately 550,000. Scotland’s net loss in the same
period was just over 1,100,000. The net emigration rate for Scotland over these fifty years is
thus sixteen times that of England and Wales.

We consider further that a high proportion of
those emigrating from Scotland has been made
up of her more gifted and highly trained citizens
(a conclusion figures already adduced strongly

78

support), and that the major cause of the emigration of these people has been an overwhelming
disparity of opportunity as between England, and
in particularly London, and Scotland.

Patents

In search of further evidence against which to
check our conclusions, we decided to see what
had been happening as regards patents taken out
over the period.

Our method here was to note the domicile of
the inventor in the first hundred patents after
April of the year stated. Foreign patentees were
excluded. If two inventors took out a patent
together, and only one had a Scottish address, he
was logged as a half. Figure 5 shows that Scots

FIGURE 5
PROPORTION OF ENGLISH (----- ) AND

 

BRITISH ( ) PATENTS TAKEN OUT BY
RESIDENTS IN SCOTLAND (FOREIGN PATENTEES
OMITTED)

8 ©? Sample 200

© Sample 100

7

% Resident in Scotland
wm

 

4
3 fo)

% 2 f °

2 rd

= | oe"

Q i
0 a ee a a a
1601 1701 180! 1901 2001

have never taken out patents as freely as the
English; and that they did so most frequently
about 1850 (when, even so, the top figure of
6-3 per cent is just about half what might have
been expected from the population statistics.)
Since then there has been a steady decline. And
this has taken place despite the fact that difficulties attending patenting from Scotland have
if anything lessened. Up to 1852, the year of
Patent Law Reform, a Scot wishing to protect his
invention in England and Scotland had to pay
£200 (then a large sum of money) as against the
THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN

£100 payable by an English inventor concerned
with protection in England alone. Figure 6 shows
that the number of chartered patent agents in
Scotland has also declined since 1901.

The rate of decline suggested by our study of
patents and patent agents is explainable not only
by a decline in Scottish inventive capacity, but

FIGURE 6

PROPORTION OF CHARTERED PATENT AGENTS
RESIDENT IN SCOTLAND

Per Cent

 

1880

1900 1920

Year

1940 1960

also by the fact that there are very much greater
facilities in London for financing and developing
invention itself. Many firms have their own patent
departments. It must be true that many Scots
inventors will already have emigrated to England
before they reach the stage of taking out a patent,
and will therefore have lost their Scottish
domicile.

Effects of this Emigration on the Scottish Stock

The question may now be asked whether the
continued emigration of Scottish men of science
has deprived Scotland of the strain of genius
genetically necessary to ensure that enough men
of scientific ability are born to maintain the
standard set by previous generations. Here we
are treading on delicate ground, for no one can
define the strain of genius which gives rise to men
of scientific ability, or even prove that the necessary genes exist. The occurrence of the Gregory
family and the Munros, the Hunters, the Hopes,

SCOTLAND

the Haldanes and others, however, make it seem
very probable that they do. We have a suspicion
that such pronounced family traits were produced
after a long period of assortative mating. From
this it would follow that depletion of the stock by
long-continued emigration of the most creative
Scots must lead to an absolute decline in the
number of them being born. And what has
happened to the remarkable men we have
selected has also happened to thousands of other
Scots of only slightly lesser (or differently
orientated) gifts who would have figured in it if
we had slightly reduced the mesh of our sieve. As
emigration has proceeded, the chances of intermarriage of the brightest citizens within this
group has become very much less than formerly.

Even if the hypothesis of a specially productive
stock is discounted, the emigration of the more
talented members of the community takes its toll
in the effects it has on the environment of the
next generation. Where inventive capacity is
not “ploughed back” there is economic impoverishment, and hence less favourable conditions for youthful intellectual development—ras
Sir William, later Lord, Beveridge put it in 1944
“This talk about want being necessary for
adventure is nonsense. Adventure comes not
through the half-starved but from those who are
full of beans.’’); the break-up of family ties to
some extent destroys the background of social
cohesion and stability; and the young who do not
possess the advantage of a creative background
now have fewer neighbours of a brighter sort
who might fire their imagination.

Either way there is loss to Scotland of potential
leaders of men or of thought or of action. It
becomes less easy to pioneer new projects in any
field, relying solely on native resources.

The Situation Now—Industry

Figures up to the end of 1957 show the high
rate of emigration continuing—the net loss from
Scotland running at about 24,000 a year, a high
proportion of all emigrants being from the more
intelligent classes.

How important it is to a country, from the
economic point of view alone, to retain a
sufficient proportion of just those classes has
recently been put very succinctly by Mr. Angus
Maude. There is a limited pool, he points out,

79
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from which to draw the brains which modern
industry requires. In his estimation it is the top
2 per cent of the intelligence range of population that is the mainspring of the social and
economic mechanism of the country. The next
10 or 12 per cent in intelligence will provide
the bulk of management, administration and the
professions, and a further 20 per cent of the
population will provide the supervisors, the most
skilled operatives and the lower administrative
and clerical workers. Less than one in three of
the population, in other words, can be expected
to contribute very much to industrial “know
how’’, and this section will only prove capable of
assimilating the required knowledge if there are
teachers of the requisite quality.

Seeking information in “measurable” terms
about the present state of Scottish industry, we
were fortunate enough to light on a method of
comparing statistically the brightness of, as a
sample, industrial chemists and the enterprise of
the firms employing them.

When a firm is developing new uses for an
industrial raw material, it lets industry know the
possibilities by advertisement and articles in the
technical press. Enquiries are received, samples
and literature sent out and eventually orders are
received. We examined the fate of samples of a
raw material which has been on the market for
sixteen centuries but was still rapidly finding new
uses in many industries in the early nineteen
forties. The number of samples which went to
Scotland was only slightly less than 10 per cent,
but the number of orders which followed was
only about 3-5 per cent. We found that the
Scottish membership of the Institute of Chemistry
at that time was 10-1 per cent. We concluded that
Scotland possessed the right number of chemists
but that their work was not being made such
good use of as in England. Managements were
roughly a third as enterprising as those in
England.

When we made a similar survey of the samples
sent and orders received for a versatile chemical
which had been marketed for only about sixteen years, we found that under 4 per cent of the
samples were demanded by Scottish firms and
subsequent orders amounted to a little over 1 per
cent. Here again the managements appeared to
be about a third as enterprising as their southern

80

counterparts, but the chemists too were not so
quick to investigate a new raw material, the
properties of which were rather difficult to
understand and make good use of. The chemists
appeared to be only a third as bright as chemists
in England.

Membership of Scientific Societies

Membership of scientific societies afforded
another clue. Here again Scottish participation in
a new Society was found to be much less pronounced than in a long-established Society.

Mineralogy seemed a good field to examine,
since it is one Scots have made a very great
contribution to in the past. To that the number of
minerals named after Scottish mineralogists
testifies. We have only to mention aikinite,
allanite, crichtonite, davidsonite, grahamite,
hutchinsonite, jamesonite, thomsonite and many
others. It is reassuring therefore to find that in
1953 the Mineralogical Society had thirty-one
members resident in Scotland, representing
10-3 per cent of the United Kingdom members;
of these 7 per cent only were born in Scotland. In
Scotland, mineralogy is evidently holding its own.

When we came to examine the membership of
a comparatively new scientific society—the
British Society of Rheologists—we found that
residents in Scotland amounted to only 5-4 per
cent of the U.K. membership in 1955, and only
1-5 per cent of the total membership were Scots
working in their own country. We are inclined to
think that these low figures indicate that the
industrial chemists and physicists employed in
Scotland are in some way discouraged, except at
the National Engineering Laboratory, from
assisting in the development of a new branch of
science. Two possibilities suggest themselves;
either many Scottish firms employ second-grade
scientists or they give their work less backing than
the managements of English firms are wont to do.

These—with the equally damaging ones from
the survey of industrial chemical activity—are
the conclusions evidently to be drawn about a
country that led the Industrial Revolution, and
that is still—and here is the real anomaly to-day—
turning out from its universities and colleges of
higher technology one fifth—twice the British
average—of all the graduates in the sciences and
higher technologies in Britain.
THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND

Occupational Opportunities

It had long been plain to us, of course, that
opportunity for these trained men and women in
Scotland was limited. Just how little scope they
could look for there was brought home forcibly
as we began to collect further statistics.

A survey promoted by the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research of the resources
devoted by the British manufacturing industry to
scientific and engineering research and development during 1955 showed that of all the research
and development workers in private industry in
that year Scotland had 2-7 per cent.

A count of the posts advertised in the journal
Chemistry and Industry in 1956 (to lighten the
task we took the first issue in each month) gave
results as follows: In the first six months of 1956,
the number of Scottish jobs advertised was only
1-3 per cent of the British total. In the second half
of that same year, the relative number rose to
3°84 percent. Forthe whole, it was only 2:38 per
cent. (This is less than half the 5-49 per cent of
Scottish-based jobs published as open in 1951).

A count through the “appointments vacant”’
columns of Nature, to find out what the situation
was in respect of posts on the whole senior to
those advertised in Chemistry and Industry
showed that in the last half of 1956 only 1-7 per
cent of the jobs advertised were stated to be in
Scotland.

Earlier enquiries in the late forties had revealed
that the rates of pay for comparable jobs were
frequently less and sometimes much less in
Scotland than in England. We understand that
the difference has been reduced over the last ten
years. Even so, careful search through Nature
and Chemistry and Industry during 1956 failed to
show any industrial scientific post open in the
over £2,000 per annum class in Scotland whereas
several have been available in England.

The situation as regards the universities is
probably quite comparable with the rest of the
United Kingdom, but industry, clearly, is giving
the trained Scot less and less opportunity north
of the border. So—and this we conceive to be the
root of the matter—is the Government.

The major factor in the decline in the number
of Scottish posts is in our view the unequal
distribution in Britain of research institutions.
And in mid-twentieth century this is where the

Government bears a responsibility. To-day it is
Government money that provides for the research
needs of a larger and larger slice of national
activity. It directly supports the D.S.I.R. and the
research stations of the various ministries. And
though Government-supported research stations
do exist in Scotland, they are conspicuous by their
rarity. And unfortunately though naturally there
is a marked tendency for private or ordinary
industrial research to settle near the official
stations.

It is not possible at present to say how much
Government money is spent on research and
development in Scotland. The figures we should
like to see are the numbers employed, their total
salaries, and the total expenditure on research
and development in Scotland as well as in
England and Wales of the Ministry of Supply,
the Air Ministry, the Ministry of Power and
other Government departments. The D.S.I.R. at
present shows the greatest sense of responsibility
towards Scotland since it employs 8-5 per cent of
its higher grade staff in Scotland; without the
National Engineering Laboratory the figure
would be 3-8 per cent. The balance as far as the
Atomic Energy Authority is concerned has been
very appreciably redressed with the location of
power stations at Dounreay and Annan. But it
is most improbable that any other departments
at present spend more than 3 per cent of their
funds for research in Scotland, and some of them
spend nearer 1 per cent.

Economics of Emigration

The economics of scientific emigration provoke
some interesting reflections. Various estimates
have been made of the cost of providing the
education, health service, and training of those
who emigrate, and it seems that the average
figure is about £2,500 for each person. With a
migration from Scotland of, say, 20,000 a year—
and this is a low figure—the capital loss would be
about £50,000,000 a year, apart altogether from
the future potential loss incurred by the departure of a trained citizen. We are concerned with
the highly trained. It is not at all unlikely that if
two-thirds of the science graduates emigrating
remained in Scotland the new industry which
they could help to create would be sufficient to
give employment to the remaining men and

81

ER—3
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

women who would have emigrated. There seems
to be no reason why the income per head in
Scotland should be lower than in England; at the
turn of the century it was higher.

It needs no excursion into mathematics, how
ever, to see that with Scotland producing 20 per
cent of the British output of scientists and highly
qualified technologists and only some 3 per cent
of the British total of scientific posts available
for them within her boundaries, Scotland is
paying too heavily to rear highly trained men
and women for export, in entirely disproportionate numbers.
_ Moreover, since the funds the Government has
at its disposal for sponsoring research and
development are contributed to by the Scottish
taxpayer as any other, Scotland is in addition
actually paying for these, its brightest citizens,
to be attracted elsewhere.

Just as rapacious hunters once raided the
breeding grounds of the Southern fur seal in the
Antarctic and brought these animals down an
asymptote of extinction, so do representatives of
government and industry on their annual raids
to the universities heedlessly cull the most
mentally vigorous of Scots.

If it is accepted that the provision of so overwhelming a proportion of research opportunities
in southern England is resulting in the rather
rapid destruction of a fine stock of people in
Scotland, then the continuation of such policies
and practices would amount to genocide.

The Cure

To prevent further disaster, research institutes
and posts in Scotland would have to be brought
up to about 10 per cent of the British total.
Government assistance would undoubtedly be

82

required to redress the balance. It would not be
wise to bud off a tenth of each existing research
station; though a number of regional industrial
research stations in Scotland might do research
work, some of which would at present be done in
England. But the difference would be that ideas
born of research or in other ways would be
developed up to the pilot-scale far more commonly than is customary in Government
laboratories to-day. Inthis way Scottish industry
could be revitalized and new industries created.

At present, the emigration of the best brains
from Scotland has led to the situation where very
few new industries are pioneered there. Indeed,
of the major post-war industrial undertakings in
Scotland, less than 1 per cent have been
pioneered by Scots—66 per cent were English,
23 per cent American, 4 per cent Canadian and
3 per cent Dutch.

The Scottish Council (Development and
Industry) has been forced to adopt the humane
but in some other ways depressing policy of
attraction of industry in order to provide
employment; but the wonderful range of goods
so manufactured has been designed and created
elsewhere—commonly in America. Not a due
proportion of scientists and development engineers will be thus employed.

It cannot be certain that the provision of 10
per cent of research jobs in Scotland will heal the
genetic damage wholly; it probably will not, but
the life of Scotland, now sadly depleted of
leadership and creative ability, will be greatly
improved. We cannot expect another Golden
Age, but we can expect to live in a country where
there is a reasonable chance for most of our
brightest sons to shine, and irradiate the
community.
