REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 251

Galton, Sir Francis. Hereditary Genius. London. Macmillan and Co.;
19145 price §s. net; pp. 379. .

THE Eugenics Education Society ought to be especially grateful to Messrs.
Macmillan and Co. for reprinting and bringing out a cheap edition of
this classical work, a step taken, we believe, mainly owing to a suggestion made to them from this office. The first edition appeared in 1869,
and we are told in the preface of the 1go2 edition, from which this is a
reprint, that Sir Francis Galton felt that the labour involved in a thorough
reconstruction necessary to bring it up to date was more than he could
undertake. In reading these pages we must therefore remember that
they were written not very far short of half a century ago.

Perhaps the greatest service which Galton rendered to the cause
of eugenics was the proof he gave that mental qualities are inherited in
the same way as bodily characteristics; for, previously to the publication
of “ Hereditary Genius,” even Darwin was of opinion that “men did not
differ much in intellect, only in zeal and hard work.” As far as the
ordinary public were concerned, Galton was breaking up entirely new
ground and we ought not, therefore, to be surprised when he tells us
that this work was, when it was published, “subjected to much criticism,
no small part of which was captious or shallow.” It is not necessary
here to describe in outline what is contained in this storehouse of information, for anyone working at this subject is certain to have to refer to the
book itself. Like all Galton’s works, it is rich in observations made by
the way, and certainly a second reading will amply repay the render.

Michels, Robert. Sexual Ethics: A Study of Borderland Questions.
Contemporary Science Series. London. Walter Scott Publishing
Co. ; 1914; price 6s.; pp. xv. +296.
A PRIMARY aim of this study, as the author quaintly says, is to wage war
upon fig-leaves, and many will sympathise with his desire for frank
scientific discussion and for judicious sex-education. It may be doubted,
however, whether details in regard to the imperiousness of sexual desire,
or man’s unnatural offences, or the tragedy of prostitution make for
edification in a popular book of this sort. It is required of all of us
that we should try to love out of a pure heart fervently; but is there
any profit for us in pathological information which has not some very
definite moral or piece of scientific advice attached to it? We shall
briefly indicate some of the author’s positions.

“The primary ethical foundation of every sexual relationship must be
the deliberate consent of both participants in the sexual act”; but there
are surely other ethical considerations not less primary! The author is
not pleading for “ free love,” which he condemns, but for tolerance of the
Don Juan type of man if he exhibits “the primary attributes of sexual
morality ... . loyalty and truth.” If he has these, and if the successive
women give themselves to him with a free spirit and full awareness, then
“the basic principles of ethics” are not infringed. We do not share this
view of ethics or this tolerance of social pests of the domesticated canine
type.

The prostitute is regarded as the “old maid” of the proletariat, and
the author rightly says that what we need is “ the collective prophylaxis of
prostitution through an evolution of all our methods of production, and in
addition of our ideas of education and of general social hygiene.” We
do not think that the details given as to the various types of prostitution
were at all necessary in order to substantiate the sad truth that there
is an economic factor in its maintenance.

The author discusses the dangers of playing with the fire of sexual
impulses, and of ignorance on the woman’s part. He points out, on the
other hand, what is sometimes overlooked, that a wanton girl may tempt
a man beyond endurance, and that there may be great injustice in legislation which is protective of the girl only.
252 EUGENICS REVIEW.

While the moral ideal of a man’s sexual life is regarded by the
author as strict monogamy—chastity before marriage and faithfulness
after—he is doubtful whether this corresponds to the inherent tendencies
and feelings of the average man, and thinks that, generally speaking,
the men who remain chaste are men of little worth. He hopes that we
may develop towards a state in which “the number of instances may be
diminished in which the first love and the first lover are not coincident,”
but he does not think that this desirability will be postponed by a greater
toleration of lack of control. Our own judgment is that the way out is
by heightening not lowering the standard, and we regard his depreciation
of the continent as untrue and unwholesome. We believe also that he
exaggerates what may be called the normal imperiousness of sexual
desire. This varies, of course, with race and other variables, but there
is much reason to believe that man often allows himself to drift into
hyper-eroticism and then supposes or tries to suppose that this is
“natural.”

The author is so much impressed with the evils of “ honeymoons ”
that he discusses, in a hesitating sort of way, a change, for the elect at
least, in the existing morality of the betrothal period. He seems to us on
sounder lines when he protests against the general loss of the woman’s
family name when she marries, and against the impertinent distinction
between Mrs. and Miss. We agree also with his plea for making more,
not less, of the organic factor in love, and with his argument for the
ethical justification of consciously regulated sexual intercourse within
the bonds of matrimony. We differ from the author mainly in rejecting
as ethically unsound his apolog. for the Don Juan and his compromise
in regard to chastity. We think, too, that there are many details in the
book that are unnecessary and unwholesome, and that there is much which
he would not have written if he had enjoyed some acquaintance with
“puritan England.” J. ARTHUR THOMSON.

 

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.

STATISTIQUE INTERNATIONALE DU MOUVEMENT DE LA POPULATION. Vol. IL.,
Années 1gor 4 1910. (Ministére du travail et de la prévoyance
sociale : Statistique générale de la France). Paris, Imprimerie
Nationale, 1913. Pp. xxxviii. + 163* + 298; 8vo.

In 1907 the Statistzque Générale de la France published a first volume
of international vital statistics, which included data for all available
countries from the origin of registration up to the year 1905. The present
volume continues the work up to the year 1910, but for convenience of
reference the data are given for an entire decade, and not only for the
five years 1906-1910. The first part of the volume consists of an introduction by M. Lucien March (pp. I.-xxxviili.). This is followed by a
general discussion of the data for the decade (pp. 1*-163*), and finally,
in the last part (pp. 1-298), the detailed tables are given with the absolute
figures for each year. Any data that came to hand too late for inclusion
in the earlier volume, though referring to years prior to 1901, are also
published in the present volume. These include, for example, several
life-tables for the decade 1891-1900.

During the decade 1:go1-10 the birth-rate and death-rate have alike
continued to fall in the vast majority of the countries for which we have
data, but the fall in the former has been in general the greater so that
the rate of natural increase has dropped. In England the birth-rate fell
between 1901 and 1g1o from 28'5 per thousand of the population to 25'8;
in Denmark from 29'7 to 28'2; in Austria from 37°3 to 32°6; in Hungary
from 389 to 35°7; in Holland from 31'8 to 286; in France from 22'o0 to
195; in the German Empire from 35'0 to 298. The fall in the case of
some of the component States of the German Empire is remarkable; thus
in Saxony the rate dropped from 359 to 27'2 or by practically 25 per
