DISCUSSION

CRETINISM IN AOSTA

TuE following extracts from Whymper’s well-known book
are of eugenic interest :

‘‘Even the lowest type of cretins may be procreative, and
it is said that the unlimited liberty which is allowed to them has
caused infinite mischief. A large proportion of the cretins who
will be born in the next generation will undoubtedly be the offspring of cretin parents. It is strange that self-interest does not
lead the natives of Aosta to place their cretins under such restrictions as would prevent their illicit intercourse; and it is still
more surprising to find the Catholic Church actually legalizing
their marriage. There is something horribly grotesque in the
idea of solemnizing the union of a brace of idiots; and since it is
well-known that the disease is hereditary, and develops in
successive generations, the fact that such marriages are sanctioned
is scandalous and infamous.!

‘‘The supply, therefore, is kept up from two sources. The
first contingent is derived from apparently healthy parents; the
second, by inheritance from diseased persons. The origin of the
first is obscure, and before its quota can be cut off, or even
diminished, the mystery which envelopes it must be dissipated.
The remedy for the second is obvious, and is in the hands of
the authorities—particularly in those of the clergy. Marriage
must be prohibited to all who are affected; the most extreme
cases must be placed under restraint ; and cretins whose origin
is illegitimate must be subject to disabilities. Nothing short of
the adoption of these measures will meet the case. Useless it
will be, so long as the primary sources of the disease are untouched, to build hospitals, to cleanse dwellings, to widen streets,
or to attempt small ameliorations of the social circumstances of

1 «*1t should be stated that some of the clergy, at least, refuse to unite the
worst kinds of cretins. I have heard it said, however, that all are not so particular;
and again, others have told me that cretins are never legally married in the Valley
of Aosta. I imagine the truth to be that some of the priests are scrupulous, and
that others are not. The evidence of the natives upon this subject was so conflicting that I applied to the late Canon Carrel (of Aosta) for information. His answer
was sufficiently explicit as to the general custom :—' I] y a des crétins qui parlent
avec une certaine intelligence, et qui sont capables d'apprendre quelques vérités
et quelques notions nécessaires aux devoirs sociaux. Ceux-cicontractent quelque fois
mariage. Quant a4 ceux qui ont Il'intelligence trés obtuse, on ne leur permet pas le
mariage, quoiqu'’ils puissent encore engendrer, ce qui tient plus de la loi naturelle
que de la loi civile.’ °’
DISCUSSION 143

the natives. All of these things are good enough in themselves,
‘but they are wholly impotent to effect a radical change.

‘No satisfactory conclusion will be arrived at regarding the
‘origin of cretinism until the pedigrees of a large number of
-examples have been traced. The numerical test is the only one
‘which is likely to discover the reality. The necessary inquiries
.are beyond the powers of private persons, and their pursuit will
-be found sufficiently difficult by official investigators. Great
‘reluctance will be exhibited to disclose the information which
should be sought, and the common cry will certainly be raised that
‘such scrutiny is without general advantage, and is painful to
‘private feelings. But in matters which affect mankind in general
‘individual feeling must always be subordinated to the public
‘interest ; and if the truth is to be arrived at in regard to cretinism,
‘the protests of the ignorant will have to be over-ridden. ”’

From ‘* Scrambles amongst the Alps,” by Epw. WHYMPER,
Chap. xv1. ‘* The Valley of Aosta,”’ etc.

INFANT MORTALITY

Sir,

At the end of a letter on this important matter in your
April issue, I see Miss H. M. Blagg states that in respect
ot the ‘‘infant mortality which occurs inside the workhouse .. .
the Local Government Board refuses to publish any statistics.”’
May I ask what is the authority for such a statement ?

It so happens that I have been lately going over with some
minuteness certain Reports of the Medical Officers of Health, as
‘well as those of the Board criticised. And though I am not
exactly qualified or disposed to act as a champion for the defendant, I would venture to say I think there must be some misunderstanding here. What is it that actually happens in such
cases, in Miss Blagg’s view ?

Personally, I have gathered that, while the central Board
recommends five Tables of Statistics for the use of the Medical
Officers, they are left a very considerable degree of freedom as to
what they publish or omit. What is there to prevent full
details being given as to the mortality in workhouses if any
M.O.H. so desire ?

Meanwhile, it should be borne in mind that—as Miss
Blagg acknowledges—much is being done in many localities.
After all, though one who has made a special study of these
details might desire fuller information, it will be found that
infant mortality is, statistically speaking, only a very small
proportion or percentage of the total mortality. This is not
meant as any disparagement of the efforts that have of late
years been made.

A useful table showing the rapid diminution, from 1904 to
144 DISCUSSION

1g0g, in infant mortality in England and Wales, as well as in
certain specified sub-divisions thereof, may be found at p. 28
of the Report for 1909 of the M.O.H. for Bath.
Yours faithfully,
STATIST.

SEX-TEACHING IN GIRLS’ SCHOOLS

WiTH the increased attention which is being given at the
present day to the problems of Heredity, we are coming to realise
the enormous importance to the race of the bodily functions of
reproduction. It is strange that hitherto all certain knowledge
of these functions should in many cases have been denied to the
growing members of the race, who are themselves to become the
fathers and mothers of future generations. Infant mortality,
and the formation of vicious habits, are among the lesser evils of
concealing from our children that knowledge of themselves which
it is our duty and privilege to give them.

How then can we best prepare the growing generation
for its bodily work in life, for it is with the growing generation
that our hope lies? Asateacher of Science, I should like to
suggest one or two points where it seems possible to do something
in this direction in the curriculum of our Secondary Schools, and
in our Training Colleges for Teachers.

It is recognised that we take girls away from home for so
many hours daily that we must in some measure try to supply in
school the teaching in house management and kindred subjects
that they would otherwise learn from their mothers.

It would be quite consistent to take upon ourselves also their
instruction in thé fundamental facts of existence.

This involves two kinds of teaching, firstly in schools, and
secondly in Training Colleges.

With reference first to the teaching of biology in schools.
In the majority of Girls’ Secondary Schools a considerable
amount of functional botany, involving processes of plant
reproduction is taught.

Children from 10-12 can easily be made to understand the
outlines of the process of fertilisation. They can be taught
naturally the reproductive processes on which the formation of a
new individual depends. Even the most elementary school
course on Botany includes a knowledge of the union of the cell
from the pollen grain with the cell in the ovule and the resulting
spore which grows into the embryonic plant. |

These facts should be taught with the broadest application.
As it is in this plant we study, so it is with every living thing.
The terms male and female, sexual organs, sexes, need not be
introduced with young children before the period of adolescence.
No meaning is then attached tothem. The children are yet too
young to be enquiring as to the nature of their own bodies, but
DISCUSSION I45

if questions arise in the lessons as to these matters, they should
be fully answered. After some familiarity with the processes of
reproduction in flowering plants has been attained, the study of
some types of plants, such as mosses and ferns, should be undertaken. This is easily within the scope of girls of 16, or even 15,
and is found to be most interesting to them. At the same time,
or in the following school year, a course should follow on the
dissection of some simple animal, such as frog or rabbit.

The aim, from our present point of view, should be to
accustom the child to see, draw, and talk about, in a perfectly
natural and open manner, the sexual organs of the animals
studied, as an important part of that animal’s structure. It
would be quiet easy to make the child understand that the
laws governing reproduction in the animals, are the same as
those governing reproduction in man, that new individuals
cannot be produced without the essential process of fertilisation,
in the higher forms of life.

This natural teaching in the class-room or laboratory would
put the whole subject on a higher and more healthy footing than
it is at present, and would make it far easier for parents, and
‘others, who try to teach their children the facts of human life.

A great deal can be done from Botany teaching alone, and
with a teacher who realised and cared about these things for her
children, still more could be done in a course of Biology or
Zoology.

It has been suggested that the keeping of pets, and the
informal teaching of Nature Study helps in this direction. It
may do so to a certain extent, but the definite and quite convincing knowledge gained from actual dissection is of far more use to
the enquiring mind of the growing boy or girl.

It follows from what has been said already that the quality
of the instruction given in these matters depends entirely on the
knowledge and attitude of the teacher. This depends largely on
her previous education, and something definite might be done,
and in some cases is done, in the Training Colleges.

Students in both Elementary and Secondary Training
Colleges at the present time have lectures or practical lessons in
hygiene or domestic work of various kinds. In this course of
instruction they should be given to understand the enormous
importance of a correct knowledge of the facts of reproduction
to the growing boy or girl.

If they are ignorant they will thus be made to feel the necessity of finding out. Suitable books should be provided for them
to refer to, but these are difficult to find. More especially in the
case of students who are qualified to teach Biological Science
should stress be laid upon their responsibilities with regard to
sex teaching.

A knowledge of life itself, in the widest physical meaning of
the term is what we should give our children. It is their due.
146 DISCUSSION

If the imparting of this knowledge is approached from the standpoint of biology, there should be no shock or feeling of repulsion
on the part of the learner. It should be considered, as it is, the
most natural thing in the world. It should be felt to form one
of the missing squares needed for piecing together the puzzle of
existence.
E. M. HuaGues, M.A.,
(Scrence Lecturer of the Training College, Cambridge).

To the Editor of the EUGENIcS REVIEW

DEAR SIR,

I had the pleasure of hearing a valuable lecture by
Dr. Slaughter at the Caxton Hall on June 2nd, also I heard the
descriptions and saw the diagrams prepared by Mr. Lidbetter.

I have been busied in trying to help disseminate useful truths
among my own sex for many years, and, long before I heard of
such a word as “‘ Eugenics,” I, a country-bred woman, quietly
insisted on parental qualifications and pre-natal influences, to the
holy horror, be it said, of some who would give largely to asylums
and hospitals; my desire and watchword is, and has long been,
‘¢ Prevent preventable evils.”

Could you induce ordinary persons like myself to send in
statements of any cases bearing on the need for Segregation,
etc., of the feeble-minded which come under their notice in the
everyday course of their life? I imagine that, over and above the
cases which have tabulated by experts, much valuable information could be gained from such sources; and it might, too, be a
means of making many persons think. I wish you could send a
printed request for this information to everyone of our Mothers’
Union Branch Secretaries. 1 hold it an eminently Christ-like
work to endeavour to minimise the hideous amount of suffering,
cost and pain to persons in particular and the community in
general.

As two typical cases immediately under my own notice, one
country, one London:

_ 1. Young girl, mother normal, indeed rather clever. Father
slightly below average intellectual powers, both sober, steady
persons.

Girl never quite bright, but nice, pretty, amiable, took
service about 16. ‘‘ Got into trouble ’”’—either so ignorant or so
innocent that she could not give definite information about the
infant’s father. Baby born, soon showed signs of defect, left
with grandmother.

Girl goes out again, returns soon in same condition as before.
This time the father of coming infant married her. He was
absolutely below average intellect, had no power of continuous
work, never did more than two or two-and-a-half days’ work per
week. Soon ran away and left his wife. She again went to
DISCUSSION 147

work, but her husband found her, got her to make a home again,
and they lived together again for a time. Presently she became
enceinte again, and before the infant’s birth the man again ran
off and could not be traced. The girl, for she is still a young
woman, sold and pawned all she could, until at last she was
found to be absolutely without raiment, sheets, blankets, etc.,
and was in that state with a new-born child; so she and her
three children—four persons (three of whom, if they live, will
not be able to work for themselves) were conveyed to the workhouse. The grandmother, long a widow, could not keep them or
any of them out of her own resources. When the wife recovers
very likely she will go out, her husband will find her, and more
poor creatures will be flung into a country where the rates are
gently, like the old torture weights, pressing life out of the really
worthy citizens. This case was in a charming village in N.
Wales; time, November last.

2. Little old-young looking woman with baby at a Tea
Party, an invited guest by one of the members of our Union.

‘*]’m so glad as Mrs. got me to come, I’d much to do
to get away 'cause of the children.”

_ SELF: ‘‘ You’ve left some at home, then, I suppose, one or
two?”

SHE: ‘‘ Bless you, lydy, I’ve had ten, I have.”’

SELF:-‘ Ten! Why, you are very young yet, whenever did
you get married ?”

SHE: ‘“‘‘Nonesoyoung! I’m 30anda bit! I were married
at 18, and he were 19. An’ we hadn’t (with pride!) a spune
between us. We got a room, but we got no bed nor nothink.”

' SELF (wise by experience): ‘‘ But they are not all alive, are
they?”

SHE: ‘‘No, thank the Lord, sx is dead. I got married
cause I got to look after lots o’ children, and no room for ’em at
home, so, thinks him and me, we’m as well get a room of our
own—and I may as well see after my own children as brothers an’
sisters.”

This 1n E. London.

A sadder thing than this is a case of a girl of aconsumptive,
utterly unhealthy family, who has had two poor children, one by
her father, the other undoubtedly by her brother. All below
normal brain power, all sickly and without moral force in any
right direction. This in Yorkshire.

If strenuous measures can be taken to help such poor
creatures against themselves, either by altering the causes which
produce such, or hindering other new lives from suffering, it will
surely be a blessing in every sense.

I am, Sir, Yours faithfully,
H. M. HALcLipay.

 
