REPORTS OF MEETINGS.

A Conference on Eugenie Questions.

AS the cessation of hostilities has brought to mind the possibility of th

resumption of the series of international congresses on eugenics, so successfully inaugurated in the year 1912, the proposal has been made that a
preparatory meeting of the international committee should be held,
possibly in Rome, at an early date. It has further been suggested that this
committee should consider the lines along which international action may
be most profitably taken for the furtherance of the aims of eugenics and
for the collection of statistical and other records designed for the advancement of the science of eugenics. In order that the British members of this
committee might be provided with some general instructions from the
society as to the part which they should take in the discussions of the
international committee, a preliminary conference was called on Saturday,
January 4th, at the offices of the London Society of Medicine, 11, Chandosstreet, W. Major Darwin took the chair, and other members of the council
of the Eugenics Education Society were present. Sir Bernard Mallet,
Dr. Stevenson, and Professor Keith were also good enough to attend the
meeting, and Denmark was represented by Dr. Vincent Naeser.

(1) The first item on the agenda was the consideration of the best
methods of conserving the eugenic value of disabled soldiers in all
countries for the benefit of their respective races. The majority of those
present were of opinion that the pension paid to each of these men should
be augmented by an allowance dependent on the number of his children,
not only those born before, but also those born after his disablement.
This view was objected to on the grounds that it would be putting a
premium on large families, and that as all the money for such pensions
has to be drawn from the middle classes, it would be in consequence
more difficult for them to rear families. The first objection was met by
the suggestion that the number of children in respect of whom the allowance was payable might be limited. After some discussion a resolution
was proposed and put to the meeting that “disabled soldiers should
receive pensions for children born after the war, on the same scale as for
children born before the war up to a total of four children, and no more.”
This. was agreed to, with three dissentients.

(11) The conference then passed on to the consideration as to whether
the material obtained through the Ministry of National Service could be
profitably analysed from the eugenic standpoint.

Professor Keith inaugurated the discussion on this question by makin
a brief statement as to the nature of this material and its good and bad
points. He thought that at any rate it would be possible to analyse the
causes of rejection from the army and to make a map of the country
showing their geographical distribution. Such an analysis was at present
in progress. Although the statistics at the Ministry could hardly be used
as an anthropometric survey of the country, they were capable of throwing
light on questions of interest other than that referred to. For example,
they showed that our estimates of the average stature of the population
22 EUGENICS REVIEW.

were seriously incorrect. It had previously been assumed that the average
height of working-class men was 5 ft. 7 ins., but in going over the statistics
for Yorkshire they had found it to be only 5 ft. 6 ins.

(111) The advisability of advocating an anthropometric survey of the
British Isles was next debated, the first point to be considered beang the
scope of such a survey. Professor Keith said the question of a health
survey and anthropometric survey must go together. The expense of the
elaborate machinery that would be necessary could scarcely be justified
unless a full statement could be made concerning such points as the
condition of the heart and lungs of the population. The chairman raised
the question as to whether the inquiry should be extended to psychological
characters, and this led to a discussion on the feasibility of psychological
wMquiries, both with regard to children and to adults. It was further suggested that the survey might include a study of racial types and their
distribution, to which Professor Keith replied that this was part of the
programme, though it was not being put in the forefront.

Dr. Naeser said that the Anthropological Society of Denmark had been
carrying on a survey of the same nature, though not so extensive as that
under discussion. They had before the war been in receipt of a grant
from, the State for this purpose, and this grant had now been renewed.
The registration system employed for purposes of conscription was the basis
on which they worked, and the characters studied included bodily measurements, head form, hair and eye colour. The school clinics have also been
useful, and the distribution of mental defect, epilepsy, and deaf-mutism
had been studied.

It was agreed that proposals for an anthropometric survey should be
brought before the international conference, with a view to discussing the
possibility of a uniform international system, in order that the data obtained
in different countries might be comparable.

(iv) The chairman then introduced the next subject, namely, the
advantages of international agreement as to the methods of obtaining and
tabulating vital statistics. He thought that it was a matter which might
be usefully considered by the international meeting, and wanted to make
sure beforehand that the proposals brought forward there by the British
delegates had the approval of the authorities in England. Sir Bernard
Mallet said that the International Statistical Institute had done good work
in showing what gaps there were in the vital statistics of different
countries. For instance, there was no precise definition of still-birth; no
country had a legal definition of still-birth, and an international legal
definition was much to be desired. Dr. Stevenson added that the lack of
uniformity of practice in different countries in this respect leads to their
Statistics not being comparable. For example, in several countries all
infants dying before registration were counted as still-births, which introduces a serious discrepancy, because the deaths during the first three or
four days of life are very numerous. The lack of uniformity in the
methods of registering deaths had similar results. Probably the best
method was that employed in Switzerland, in which the doctor’s certificate
1s confidential, and is enclosed in a sealed envelope which is not opened
till it reaches the central statistical office. There is thus every reason for
the certifying physician to feel that he can speak his mind freely. Here
anyone by paying a shilling can inspect the death register, which means
that many relevant facts are not stated. Insurance companies can equally
inspect these registers, and some of these companies raise difficulties in
regard to certain diseases, such as tuberculosis and cancer. If then death
is from a cause of that nature, insurance considerations may very considerably modify the certification.
REPORTS OF MEETINGS. 23

There is one important matter in which a large degree of international
uniformity has already been obtained, and that is in regard to classification of causes of illness and causes of death. There is an international
committee which deals with this matter. It held its last session in Paris
in 1909, and revised the list which is now in use in most civilised countries.
We began to conform to its usage in 1911. There are other matters which
require to be dealt with in the same way, though the difficulties may be
greater. Occupation is one; the conditions of occupation, however, vary
so much more in different countries than the conditions or diseases from
which people die, that the difficulties involved by an international scheme
of classification are greater for occupations than for causes of death.

Sir Bernard Mallet stated that at the Imperial Conference which was
held last summer it had been decided to ask the various colonies and
dependencies to send representatives to the statistical congress which it
is proposed to hold without avoidable delay to deal with the statistics of
the British Empire.

(v) A discussion as to the way in which the registration system in
Great Britain might be extended in order to provide information in points
of eugenic importance was opened by Dr. Stevenson, who described a
scheme which has been proposed for co-ordinating the various schemes of
registration at present employed. He said that much of the information
required was already recorded. There was, for example, the Parliamentary franchise register, the school attendance register, each of which
had separate organisations for canvassing; there was also at the present
time the Food Controller's register, which did not need canvassing for
in the same way, as it was so much in accordance with the interest of each
householder that his household should be fully entered on it. According
to this scheme local registers would be maintained, and would be rendered
complete and accurate by local canvassing, but there would be, im addition, a central card index by which the information obtained locally would
be checked and co-ordinated, and which would supply information to the
local registers in cases of change of address. Dr. Stevenson gave details
as to what entries were to be made in the local registers, and what on the
central. The central index would in course of time provide a genealogical
record, in which the ancestry of any individual could be traced, and so
far as the records were preserved, the facts recorded of this ancestry.
Material of this kind should provide a wide field for eugenic research.

Professor Thomson said that this scheme would be useful in providing
secure evidence as to the differential reduction of the birth-rate. It was
often stated, for instance, that the reduction was greatest where it was
least wanted—an important statement, if true. But there was a good deal
of hearsay in these matters, and conclusions so based were not satisfactory.

Sir Bernard Mallet said that the population had been so much troubled
with compulsory registrations for various purposes that he thought some
such scheme might commend itself as a simplification. Professor MacBride
thought that the scheme would also be helped by the recent working up
of public opinion in favour of a Ministry of Health.

Major Darwin concluded that the meeting was in favour of the scheme
if thoroughly carried out, and asked Sir Bernard Mallet to keep them
informed as to how they could be of most use towards securing its acceptance.

(vi) The conference concluded with a discussion on the efficiency of
the field-worker system, which has been used in America for the study of
family histories of mental defect, as, for example, in the Vineland
Institution. It was agreed to urge on the Board of Control the establishment of the field-worker system on an experimental scale.
24 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Educational Conference Meeting.

The annual meeting of Educational Associations was held as usual
at the University College of London, and meetings organised by us took
place at 2.30 p.m. on January 4th, 1919, and also on January 7th at
5.30 p.m.

Professor J. Arthur Thomson came from Aberdeen to give an address
on the first date on “The Eugenic Ideal in Education.”

Professor Thomson defined the eugenic ideal as the organic improvement of the human breed, but one which, though primarily a biological
ideal, had an horizon far wider than the poultry yard or the breeder’s
pen. It recognised that it was dealing with a very complex organism,
which was at least as much mind-body as body-mind—that the thinkingfeeling-willing side of man’s constitution was just as real as the throbbing
muscle and thrilling nerve. It believed that character was as vital an
organismal quality as stature or weight, length of life, or fecundity, and
they must rid their minds for ever of the prejudice that the eugenic ideal
smacked of the farmyard in any objectionable way.

How could modern education be improved from the eugenic point of
view? There was need of a wider and deeper recognition of the commonplace that young people are organisms—growing, developing, varying, too,
if we would let them—serving what should be a joyous apprenticeship to the
serious business of life. So far this had been recognised only in a fainthearted, mole-eyed sort of way. So few would take the plunge. These
children were not only little men and women in the making, they were
young mammals—really and truly young mammals. Their health was
not incidental; it was well-nigh everything; their motor system was not
irrepressible without serious risks; their play was not a luxury, but an
essential ; their adolescence in the novel, artificial conditions of civilisation
needed to be guided sympathetically ; their adult functions and environment
must be looked forward to and prepared for.

NEED OF STIMULI.

Theoretically, everyone admitted the unity of the organism—the fact
that every child was at once a mind-body and a body-mind, and that the
ideal was the development of a healthy mind in a healthy body. But, practically, how far short we fell of realising this unity! How far we were
from facing up to the physiological fact that the child is a motor organism,
surging to move and do things, eager to translate thought into action, to
relieve emotion by motion. As physiologists they wondered how they ever
survived the long school hour—too long by 20 minutes or so—the frequent
repression of even vocal cord movements, the straining of attention beyond
the limit when fatigue becomes stultifying. Besides motor capacities,
there were others whose rights had to be championed, as well as the
intellectual. There were the senses, the feelings, the imagination, the
capacity for control and for initiative. It was a very important fact that
the pupil’s finding himself or herself along any one line of activity—swimming or singing, drawing or planing, even Greek verse and conics—reached
through the whole being with encouragement and stimulus.

_ The child was not merely a growing, but a developing creature; and
It required, in addition to fundamentals like food and air, a succession of
liberating stimuli. To supply an appropriate succession of such stimuli
was part of the business of education. How far short we came of our duty.
In some schools they did read the daily newspaper, but how seldom was
even the big news of the day discussed! Another set of stimuli was to be
found in art, and so on. Meals of information were well enough in their
way, but the child needed thrills of delight, voyages of discovery that
opened up new worlds, adventures that evoked new powers, contacts with
the rapid march of events amid which it was going to live. For untold
ages man evolved in direct contact with nature. Long after his arboreal
REPORTS OF MEETINGS. 25

apprenticeship was over he sojourned with nature, receiving certain direct,
fundamental impressions—of immensity, power, intricacy, order, and of
wonder above wonder. These fundamental impressions must have meant
much to the evolving human spirit. Was it likely that they could be
safely dispensed with now? So it did not seem very intelligent for school
managers, or schoolmasters, or parents to discuss whether children were
to have “nature study ” or not; the question was how much they could
have of this indispensable culture, and how they could get it in big towns.
Development, especially after the earliest stages, was an active process
and not a passive unfolding; and the best learning was that in which the
pupil had an active share and was not merely a passive recipient. By
living we learned to use body and mind, sense and soul, aright.

THE VALUE OF PLAY.

Play was of fundamental importance in after life; and playing was
vitally justified, not only as a safety-valve for overflowing energy and
exuberant spirits, not only as the motor expression of emotions, not only
as affording elbow-room for idiosyncrasies and originality before criticism
was too stringent, but most of all as a not too responsible prentice-time for
educating aptitudes essential in after life, and for replacing or modifying
instructive promptings by the registered results of experiment. In play,
if it were not over-codified or formalised, there was a chance for independent
proving and testing, roving and adventuring, before the consequences
became too serious. Play was the young form of work, and the play period
ought to give elbow-room for self-expression. Generally those who played
best would afterwards work best, live best, and love best. Of course, its
biological and physiological utility must remain in the background, for
the essence of play was that it had no conscious end beyond itself. Apart
from any question of ulterior utility, it was very important that the joy
of pleasurable activity should possess young minds and become a need, so
that in grown-up life they might more and more clamantly insist that their
life should be a good thing in itself. (Cheers.)

Dealing with sex instruction, Professor Thomson said that things often
went sadly wrong in adolescence, and tragedy resulted, often without there
being any terrible wickedness. The tragedy was in forming, sometimes
quite dully, bad habits of thought and indulgence. The frequency of
adolescent deterioration was giving a belated insistence to the call for more
definite, graduated, and differentiated sex instruction. Mr. Wells had written
in one of his books: “The cardinal thing in life sneaks into us darkly and
shamefully like a thief in the night.” This, said the lecturer, should not
continue. We must let in more daylight, more sunlight—both of them
strong antiseptics. We must try to see sex in its biological and evolutionary
setting, and its racial or eugenic setting. We must be done for ever with
sniggering over the roots of the finest flower in our garden. The facts are
clean, if you get enough of them and see them whole. There are many
difficulties, but steps in the right direction are practicable. Muddle is
largely our enemy, and there has been too much reserve. Samuel Butler
said: “Get at the best opinion of our best medical men, and let us have it
out.” But we need more—we need the best opinion of our best biologists,
psychologists, and moralists—and we must take more pains to understand
and remember the adolescents’ point of view. (Cheers.)

HEALTH AND HISTORY.

An enthusiasm for health should be fostered in the schools. In some
schools the ideal of physical fitness and keeping in good form was already
high—one wished to see it diffused. Of course, scouting intelligence, as
well as scouting endurance, must be part of the ideal of health, and brainstretching must accompany muscle-hardening.

Another lever, too little used, was the historical appeal. Only slack
‘education was to blame for the dullness of our pride in our British heritage,
for our lukewarm gratitude. How rich our history had been in glowing
26 EUGENICS REVIEW.

personalities, with whom to be even indirectly affiliated was high honour.
Every school should have its calendar of great men, whose personalities
had become real to the scholars, and there should always be a regional roll
of honour. The historical appeal, to be effective, must not be made in
cold blood. It must be artistically, through poem and picture, through
song and story, that ideal types were presented. In many cases the young
mind was hereditarily open to the thrill of the undying voices of the past.
Writing in the Educational Supplement, Mr. F. S. Marvin justly said:
“We are as a nation singularly destitute of heroes enshrined in the national
consciousness.” There was certainly too little material for hero-worship in
the schools. Men and women of genius and sympathy with youth should
be employed to write short biographical sketches of our 500 greatest men
and women whose lives had sufficient picturesqueness, and shorter notices,
like those in the Positivist Calendar, of those who did great things in
quietness. What should begin for our own country would naturally broaden
out to include the great men and women of other nations. Without spoiling
facts by appending morals, something should be made of the story of
historical moments when good breeding, in the eugenic sense, and clean
living saved a critical situation, and at another time of the story of great
families—like that of the Darwins, for instance—in which he who runs may
read part of the eugenic lesson. What they were after was encouraging the
settled habit of thinking racially. The evolution idea was large and deep,
but up to a certain point it was also clear—it just meant that the present
was the child of the past and the parent of the future, and it was a preparation for the eugenic ideal. There was not much use in cramming in the
evolution idea as a dogma, but it could be made gloriously real.

Youth was not the time for assuming social or civic responsibilities,
but rather for preparing for them by facing minor responsibilities and by
cultivating vigour and alertness, sympathy, and the scientific mood.
Speaking of sex instruction, Stanley Hall said: “Whatever you do, don’t
lecture”; and one could picture the borrow of eugenic “jaws.” But
teachers were not stupid people, and they were learning something about the
child’s psychology. They knew that children saw a lot of the seamy side
of civilisation, and that it did harm to their sense of honour to think that
we were all acquiescing. So we must take them into our confidence sometimes, when we and they are in the mood, and tell them something about
these shadows, and how dismally they beset us, and what is being done to
clear them away, and what hopes are ours. (Cheers.) Premature anticipation of or share in social responsibilities would be very regrettable, but it
was not beyond the wit of man to think out a novitiate in minor, though
real responsibilities. We must cultivate the outlook in young people, so
that it would gradually become intolerable to be handicapped by what was
remediable. There would always be sturdy sins to grapple with, but let
us get rid of fungoid thoughts fed on ignorance, of bad habits acquired
because no one spoke frankly, and of fatalism, which history proved to be
a lie. (Cheers.)

The chairman, on whose proposition Professor Thomson was heartily
thanked, said that one of the generalised human instincts to which the
lecturer had referred was the desire for information. It was one of the
strongest instincts in any child, and nothing was more fatal than any
repression of that instinct. ‘Teachers knew that very well, but he did not
think that parents understood how definitely harmful it was. Boys were
usually more interested in things outside the house, and girls in things
inside it. He had seen little girls snubbed for taking pleasure in their dolls
at an age when they were supposed to be too old for dolls. He believed
that was a stupid thing. Let the girl love her dolls as long as she wished
to, and not be ashamed of it. It would help to develop in her the maternal
instinct which was one of the noblest assets of a woman. Almost all that
the lecturer had suggested about the eugenic ideal could be implanted in
the minds of the young without any knowledge of sex questions, and thereREPORTS OF MEETINGS. 27

fore the eugenic ideal was one that teachers ought not to be afraid to give
to children, however young. It was easy to get into the child’s mind the
idea that children resemble their parents. From that beginning they could
build up the general idea of parental responsibility, and from that they
could pass to the nobler ideals and the pride we ought to have in the
great men of our country. He believed all those eugenic ideals could be
implanted very early in the minds of the young. Such an implanting of the
eugenic ideal as Professor Thomson had suggested would make if ‘all the
easier to give sex instruction when the time came for it.

Professor E. W. MacBride on January 7th took as his subject “ Sexinstruction in Elementary Schools.”

He said there was an increasing body of public opinion in favour of
such instruction. The opinion was based on the assumptions that the abuse
of the sex function was productive of a large proportion of the vice and
misery existing in the world, and that it began in ignorance of the nature
and purpose of sex at a time when sex capacity was ripening, and could be
largely prevented by the removal of ignorance at the critical time. The
truth of these assumptions was taken for granted, but the biologist who
took a wide outlook on the history of the human race must be assailed
by grave doubts when they were presented to him for unqualified acceptance. The idea that more knowledge was sufficient to restrain one of the
most powerful instincts of our nature was based on the fundamental fallacy
that man was a reasonable being. Like the animals, man was largely
governed by powerful instincts, which were only to a very moderate extent
controlled by reason.

The sexual instincts could be primarily awakened by means of stimuli
at a time when the child could have no conception of the risks involved in
indulgence. One of the stimuli which led to such unfortunate results was
prurient curiosity. The result of prohibition was to arouse an intense
desire to know more about these secrets. The object of sex-instruction
in school should be to bring about such a gradual enlightenment on the
subjects of sex as would make it appear natural and ordinary, and remove
the nimbus of mystery by which it was surrounded. The only way in
which this end could be accomplished was by the teaching of comparative
biology. It was important that the course of study should bear no sex
label ; it must have some such title as nature study or natural history. The
sex function should occur among other functions studied, such as digestion,
excretion, and respiration. He outlined a programme of instruction in
which use was made of the natural history of the amceba, the paramecium,
the hydra, the frog, and the toad. He said he saw no reason against teaching about venereal disease being given to school children. It was no use
telling children they would go to hell if they misconducted themselves; but
the risk of venereal disease was a danger which there was no gainsaying,
and might frighten them from the beginnings of vice.

Major Darwin suggested that in addition to the instruction proposed
teachers should also at some period have confidential talks with their pupils
for the purpose of going further and deeper into the question than was possible in class. Such talks, however, should be rare. Teachers had a natural
distaste to such conversations, and a general feeling of that sort he believed
had a true meaning. Pupils at training colleges ought to know a great deal
more than they did. It was a most dangerous thing for teachers not to
have a thorough knowledge of sex. Without it things might go on in the
school which they did not understand, and which therefore they could not
put right.

ee MacBride, replying to questions, said the specimens which he
had referred to were few and simple. Even in a class of 60 two microscopes
would serve with a little management. The children could go up one by
one. The text-book which would be necessary would only be a very simple
one, such as before the war was brought out, with illustrations, at about ts.

At both meetings the chair was taken by Major Leonard Darwin.
28 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Deputation to the Board of Control.

A meeting was held at the Board of Control, 66, Victoria-street, at
2.45 p.m. on Wednesday, January 29th, 1919.

Present from the Eugenics Education Society: Major Leonard Darwin,
Mrs. A. C. Gotto, Professor MacBride, and Sir Robert Armstrong-Jones.

The chairman (Sir Frederic Needham) apologised for the absence
of the ordinary chairman, Sir William Byrne.

Major Darwin introduced the deputation. He emphasised the fact
that the principles of heredity were not sufficiently considered in social
questions, also that if facts in connection with the effects of heredity with
regard to mental deficiency were made available much good work could
be done by the Eugenics Education Society. He referred to the work
done in America by the field-workers. He stated that the process there
adopted seemed to work well, and he emphasised the point that the Fieldworker System should be given a trial in England. He also referred to
the necessity for the field-workers to be well trained, and suggested that
if the Board of Control did not consider itself the right body to undertake
this work, it might, perhaps, suggest some other.

Professor MacBride spoke next. He referred in detail to the Vineland
System, and to the work done by Professor Goddard in following up the
hereditary history of the inmates of that institution. These researches he
referred to at length, showing how the marriage of persons manifesting
certain individual characteristic defects would result in a generation being
borr which would reproduce these particular defects. Professor MacBride
further dealt with the distinction between feeble-mindedness and insanity,
and referred to the results attained by the application of the Binet-Simon
tests. He stated that his opinion was that much good would result from
the work that several sympathetic, trained field-workers could achieve in
the way of visiting and becoming friendly with the relations of children
who were feeble-minded. The results obtained by these field-workers visiting a certain specified number of cases in an area or an institution could
be collected, tabulated, and used by the Eugenics Education Society. The
value of this research would be enormous from the heredity point of view.
He also referred to the fact that feeble-mindedness manifests itself in many
ways, and that the use of the Bimet-Simon tests showed that a large proportion of those in the lowest strata of society were feeble-minded. He
said that, of course, all drunkards were not feeble-minded, but that feebleminded drunkards were incurable. In conclusion, he stated that in his
estimation the work done experimentally by the Vineland System of
field-workers made a clear prima facie case for its adoption in this
country.

Mrs. Gotto spoke next. She said that, in view of the work that would
be done during the next few years in the way of social reconstruction,
everything that such a society as the Eugenics Education Society and such
a body as the Board of Control could do in the way of research was worth
doing, from the point of view of bettering the conditions of people generally. She hoped that the Field-worker System would be given a trial in
order that actual results and data could be quoted in support of opinions
expounded and actions taken by societies interested in heredity. She felt
sure that an excellent educational propaganda could be made from such
data. She suggested, if an experiment of field-workers was tried in an
area, that the work done should be explained to the electorate.

Sir Robert Armstrong-Jones hoped that the Board of Control. would
see its way to adopting the suggestion made by this deputation that the
Field-worker System should be given a trial by it, because there was no
other public body quite so closely in touch with family distress as itself.
As the Board had such ready access to the right information which would
help in determining the relation between heredity and mental deficiency,
It was the right body to put it at the disposal of trained field-workers, who
REPORTS OF MEETINGS. 29

could act in the course of their work as teachers of the general public,
which, he felt, was badly in need of being educated up to an appreciation
of the work taken up by such a body as the Board of Control. He pointed
out that a field-worker.would have a very limited sphere in an institution,
though the results of work done even there would be invaluable. He urged
that an experiment be tried in an institution, if the Board for any reason
considered that procedure more advisable than attempting an experiment
im an area. He referred to the work done by Miss Kelly and Mr. Lidbetter in Bethnal Green. He also referred to the differences between
A. (mildly incompetent), B. (mentally deficient), and C. (insane), and
suggested that the experiment of the Field-worker System be applied to
research amongst the two first-named classes. He mentioned that those
people who were socially at the bottom of the ladder were mainly recruits
from classes A. and B., and that it was not desirable from a national
standpoint that these people at the bottom of the ladder should be a
source of propagation of the race. He felt that all that research could do
to lessen the numbers at the foot of the ladder was work of national
importance. He also mentioned the close connection between criminals
repeatedly seen in the magistrate’s courts and mental deficiency, also the
connection between mental deficiency and the neglect of infant life. He
referred to the inter-relationship of epilepsy, hysteria, nervous diseases,.
etc., with mental deficiency. His reason for supporting this deputation
was that, although all reform must come from within, yet suggestions for
reform were invaluable coming from outside. Therefore, he urged the
Board of Control to accept with consideration this effort on the part of
the Eugenics Education Society. He agreed with what Major Darwin had
said when he suggested that if the Board of Control would prefer this
experiment to be undertaken by some other body than itself, the choice
lay before it. He, personally, would suggest the Medical Research: Committee as a suitable body for the work.

Sir Frederic Needham asked at this stage what practical steps it was
suggested by the deputation that the Board should take.

Major Darwin suggested that a few field-workers should be sent to a
selected institution and the family histories of all inmates collected.

Professor MacBride said that in his opinion some ex-teachers would
make splendid field-workers.

Sir Robert Armstrong-Jones suggested that an institution be chosen,
either in London or in the country, the choice of the institution and area
to be left to the Board of Control.

Mrs. Gotto urged that the field-workers should, if possible, work
under the direction of a scientist.

Sir Frederic asked what was meant by the term “ field-workers.”

Mrs. Gotto replied that they were men and women who were trained
to observe facts, to discriminate between them, and to tabulate them, and
who possessed sympathy, tact, and commonsense sufficient to overcome
obstacles and become friendly with the cases they were visiting.

The chairman asked whether the Eugenic Education Society would
be prepared to nominate any suitable individuals as field-workers. The
deputation mentioned Miss Kelly’s work, and referred also to that done
by Mr. Lidbetter.

Sir William Byrne (who had now taken his seat on the Board) stated
that the Board of Control had already done considerable work which
seemed to him similar to that suggested.

Mrs. Gotto replied that the deputation knew this, and it urged,
because of it, that this further research should be undertaken.

Sir William said he foresaw difficulties in the way of investigating th
histories of those amongst the insane who had relations, and who were
very reserved about this form of illness in the family.

Professor MacBride thereupon referred to the distinction drawn ly
those serving on the deputation between mental deficiency and insanity.
30 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Dr. Bond here stated his concurrence with the view expressed by
Professor MacBride, and intimated his opinion that the cases of an area
be investigated in preference to those in an institution, also urging that
some system equivalent to that adopted at Vineland should be pursued.

Professor MacBride said that he felt from a close-reading study of the
Vineland System that its policy was both good and easy, because it aimed
at getting into sympathetic communication with the parents of the mentally-deficient children.

General discussion ensued, and the following took part: The chairman,
Mrs. Pinsent, Sir William Byrne, Dr. Bond, Dr. Coupland, the members
of the deputation answering questions put to them by the above.

Emphasis was laid on the desirability of mcluding normal cases, for
the sake of comparison, in the researches of the field-workers.

In conclusion, Sir William Byrne suggested that the Board of Control
should consider the proposition brought forward by the deputation, and
stated that the Board of Control had in its possession a sum of money that
it could use at discretion for research-work. He asked whether the deputation would suggest that the expenses of such an experiment as they were
urging might be financed from the fund.

The answer was in the affirmative.

Major Darwin here thanked the chairman for so kindly receiving the
deputation, and the latter withdrew.
