THE DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE
A Study of the Biological Effects of Emancipation of the Peasants

By Dr. med. WILLY WAGNER-MANSLAU
(Danzig-Langfuhr)

by an examination of the following
table, modified from Woytinsky’s
Welt in Zahlen.

p ‘HIS study may begin appropriately

diminish. It is not surprising that the
statistics for France do not show these conditions with equal clarity. During the French
revolution, and the subsequent Napoleonic

TABLE I
INCREASE OF POPULATION PER 1,000 INHABITANTS

   

 

 

 

Peasants | 1810- | 1820- | 1830- |1840- | 1850- | 1860- | 1870- | 1880- | 1890- | Ig00State Emanci- | 1820 | 1830 | 1840 1860 | 1870 | 1880 | 1890 | Ig00 | I9I0
pation
Russia ... 1861 — 70 72 105 130
Germany 1807 148 112 III 78 137
Great Britain ... — I7I 150 113 88 108
France .. 1789 47 69 51 2 II

Had the figures in this table increased
after 1810, they could not have been used
for the present purpose, because the increase
might have been due to advances in sanitation and general hygiene. Since, however,
they decrease rapidly, they can only represent a considerable decline in the birth-rate.
This fact is of extraordinary importance.
For the environmental influences now generally recognized by scientists as dominating
factors in producing the decline in the birthrate certainly did not exist in the first half
of the nineteenth century. So we see that
environmental influences are not the essential
cause of the fall in the birth-rate; they are
only of secondary importance.

Table I shows that to account for this
phenomenon we must look for hereditary
factors and link them up with the emancipation of the peasants. We see that, in
Germany and Russia, this emancipation
was followed by an exceptionally large
increase in population, which gradually
diminished again during the following five
or six decades. From that time the record
fertility of the Russian people begins to

193

 

 

wars, France undoubtedly suffered much
greater losses of life than all her enemies.
These losses of marriageable men were bound
to lower the birth-rate in France more than
in the enemy countries. Besides, in Table I
the figures for France only begin with the
third decade after the peasants’ emancipation. Thus, the biological consequence of
the liberation of the peasants—namely, an
increase in population—is not shown to the
same extent in France as in Germany ;
the table, however, indicates quite clearly
the second stage of the gradual decrease in
population up to the year 1870.

CONDITIONS IN ENGLAND

It seems contradictory to this principle
that at this period England had by far the
largest increase in population, though there
was no actual emancipation of her peasants.
The explanation is that the important factor
in the course of the above-mentioned events
is not peasant emancipation itself, but the
fact that this new freedom means a sudden
abolition of century-old restrictions, and
opens to the masses of the people new
194

possibilities for educational development
and thus brings about many readjustments
in social strata. The biological benefits
accruing from the emancipation of the
peasants are a result of these social changes.
Of course, similar biological consequences
may ensue if a race is submitted to analogous
social changes of the same importance, but
arising from different causes. As a matter of
fact, changes of the same kind have occurred
in England. In 1769, Watt invented the
steam-engine, Arkwright the spinning-jenny
and the power-loom; Adam Smith expounded his new economic theory on the free
development and movement of men as the
main source of wealth in a State. During
this period of industrialization, the majority
of independent craftsmen, small traders and
manufacturers were economically ruined.
Thus England, too, at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, experienced widespread
social changes. Besides which, during the
Napoleonic wars, the losses of life suffered by
England were by far the smallest of all the
nations concerned. Hence it is not surprising
that we find, as a biological result of all these
happenings, that after the Napoleonic wars
it was in England that the greatest increase
in fertility and in population took place.

RUSSIA

In Russia, similar though less widespread
changes occurred as a result of the Napoleonic
wars, and especially of the Continental blockade. These led to economic ruin and the
social decline of numerous families; and
inevitably the families so affected were
mainly those with many children. This
brought about an increase in fertility. But
as Russia was an agricultural country, only
smaller sections of the Russian people (those
employed in trade and industry) were involved in these changes. Thus Table I shows
us that the increase in the birth-rate after
the Napoleonic wars in Russia was not
nearly so large as in England or as in Russia
itself after the peasants’ emancipation, which,
occurring in an agricultural country, affected
a greater number of people.

At the same time, the same economic and
biological forces were at work. In Russia,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as in Germany, freedom was only granted to
the peasants in consideration of large monetary payments. When the head of a household died, his children generally decided to
sell the estate in order to avoid a forced sale.
Much of the estate was mortgaged, and the
necessity to sell put the vendors at a serious
disadvantage. The descendants of these
families, being thus left without any means,
had either to become agricultural labourers
or to migrate to the towns. As the towns
were not in a position to absorb all the newcomers, wages were consequently lowered.
This social upheaval had the effect of bringing together the urban proletariat and the
bulk of the descendants of families with many
children. In this way the industrial
proletariat was enriched with highly fertile
elements, and consequently proletarian
couples were liable to have more children
than before the peasants’ emancipation. Of
necessity these changes meant an increase in
fertility over the whole nation.

FLUCTUATIONS IN JAPANESE FERTILITY
It is interesting to note the fluctuations in
fertility amongst the Japanese people. In
a paper on Haushofer’s Japan, Kara Lenz
writes*: ‘‘ For centuries her population remained between 26 and 33 millions.” Since
the restoration of 1871, however, her population has doubled and now amounts to 65
millions. The exact figures are shown in
Table II, also taken from Welt in Zahlen.

TABLE II
BIRTH-RATES PER I,000 INHABITANTS IN JAPAN

Period

1870-1880
1881-1890
1891-1900
IQOI-I9IO
IQII-I9I6
I9g16....

 

It seems that the fluctuations in fertility
were altogether different from ours ; in fact,
they took the reverse course. If the theory

* Archiv fir Rassenhygiene, Vol. XXVII, p. 4.
THE DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE

that the decrease in the birth-rate depends
on environmental influences is right, the
greater increase in population in Japan
should be due to more favourable conditions.
As a matter of fact, many writers have
strongly maintained that the conditions were
more favourable. They have stated that it
is the right spiritual attitude of the people,
industrialization, adherence to religion and
ancestor worship that are the causes of the
rise in the birth-rate in Japan. It is not,
however, a sufficient explanation to talk of
a right or wrong spiritual attitude. Actually,
this explanation implies, in other words, a
favourable or unfavourable set of conditions.
As far as industrialization is concerned, it
undoubtedly exists to-day, but it did not
exist at the time of the sudden increase in
fertility in Japan. Woytinsky states that in
1922 private enterprises of a factory type
(counting only those with at least five employees) gave employment to 2,225,760 persons. But, as in 1922, Japan already had
over 50 million inhabitants, it is inconceivable that such a relatively small portion of
the population could have brought about
such important changes in the birth-rate of
the whole people. Moreover, the sharp rise
had taken place thirty years before, at a time
when the industrial population was considerably smaller.

The adherence to religion, morals and
ancestor-worship, on the other hand, might
be quite a plausible explanation. In Our
Fatherland Japan, Inazo Nitobe writes that
the spiritual attitude of the Japanese did
not change for centuries. Undoubtedly this
attitude is more conducive to having large
families than the German. But if one considered it the main reason for the sudden
increase in fertility after 1871, the question
arises at once: why, with the same spiritual
attitude prevailing for centuries, was the
fertility of the Japanese people in past
centuries so low that the population hardly
increased at all? Thus, religion alone cannot
suffice to explain satisfactorily the sudden
increase in fertility. On the other hand, the
assumption that this increase was due to
hereditary factors at once leads to a thorongh
understanding of the process.

195

FERTILITY AND ECONOMIC STATUS

The Tokugawas had gained supreme power
as Shoguns. The Mikado thus held only a
secondary position. In 1868, the Shoguns
were overthrown and the power of the Mikado
was restored. From the reign of the Tokugawas originated a class of approximately
two million noblemen, called Samurai, who
began to dominate the cultural life of Japan.
In the restoration of 1871, the privileges of
the aristocracy were abolished. “‘ The large
number of minor Samurai lost their privileged
position. In order to avoid disturbances,
pensions had to be paid to many among their
number, and the State had to support
400,000 families.” (Krause.) The same
author states: ‘‘ All class differences as well
as slavery were abolished, and marriage restrictions for the lower and upper classes were
rescinded. A complete and general equality
of individuals was established in Japan.”’

Naturally, for the social ascendancy of the
nobility a certain amount of initial working
capital was required. At all times this could
be accumulated most easily in families with
few children. It follows that, mainly from
the start, the descendants of such families—
namely, not very fertile elements—were able
to rise in the social scale. On the other hand,
noble families with many children were
losing chances of accumulating the necessary
initial capital. Their descendants were often
forced into a lower social class. The aristocracy was incessantly losing descendants of
large families, that means highly fertile
elements.

That this really happened in Japanese
history cannot be shown directly in figures,
but can be seen in the Japanese Laws. In
Our Fatherland Japan, Nobuschige Hozumi
reports that by 1615 many noble families had
already died out in consequence of the strict
administration of the Adoption Laws. These
Laws caused so much disaffection that they
were frequently revised till the end of the
rule of the Tokugawa Shoguns. That shows
that the extinction of noble families was not
an infrequent, but, on the contrary, a very
common, event. According to Yamamoto
Genshichiro: ‘‘ Sons of rich families were
only adopted by leading Hatamoto families
196

because of their money.’”’ At the time of the
Tokugawa the Japanese aristocracy, because
of its low fertility, was continually filling the
gaps in its ranks with sons of rich families
who, themselves, were generally not very
fertile. From all this we can conclude that
there has been a very low fertility among the
Japanese aristocracy, at least since 1600.

THE ARGUMENT APPLIED TO GERMANY

Needless to say, the existence of such a
numerous but not fertile aristocracy must
affect the qualities of a nation. Take, again,
for a moment, the case of Germany. All
over the country the houses of the nobility
were close to the dwellings of the serfs.
Inevitably this led to extra-marital sexual
relations between the noblemen and the
daughters of the serfs (jus prime noctis)
which resulted in numerous pregnancies.
The descendants of such relationships inherited half of their qualities from the
fathers; and as these fathers usually combined more than the average intelligence
with a disinclination to have many children,
these irregular relationships resulted in an
improvement of the whole race, but at the
same time in damping down the fertility of
the lower classes. The illegitimate children
joined the ranks of the lower classes and
passed on the qualities of their fathers.
Generally speaking, persons with a high
fertility are born only if both parents are
highly fertile. Therefore, not only must the
children of the less fertile nobility have been
relatively infertile, but also the descendants
of these illegitimate children. The outcome
of all these separate factors must again have
been a decline in the fertility of the lower
classes. The more frequently tendencies towards low fertility were in this way introduced into the lower classes, the more would
their fertility be decreased. If, in a peasant
society with a primitive non-capitalistic
economic system, these sexual relations with
a relatively infertile noble class did not exist,
the highly fertile elements, because of their
quicker increase, would very soon outnumber
those less fertile in the rural population.
The consequences would be an excessive
growth of fertility, as has been observed

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

among the Boers, the French-Canadians, and
the American and Russian Mennonites up
till about 1870.

The irregular sexual relations of the less
fertile nobility with the lower classes of the
population had made themselves felt very
considerably in former centuries in Germany.
The German population had just about
doubled during the nineteenth century. Had
the increase been the same during former
centuries, the German population about
1300 would have amounted to only 800,000,
which is certainly wrong. Thus, the increase
of the German population after 1800 was
far higher than before and occurred, as shown
in Table I, mainly after the peasants’
emancipation. As the standard of general
hygiene was not much higher at the beginning
of the last century than it was before 1800,
all attempts to explain this change in fertility
about 1800 with the change in infant
mortality and deaths from epidemics must
fail. Furthermore, all the environmental
influences nowadays regarded as an explanation did not exist at that time; so there
remains only one explanation, that is,
hereditary influences, and more specifically,
the decrease of fertility caused by the illicit
relationships between the less fertile nobility
and the lower classes.

THE ANALOGY WITH JAPAN

This factor has operated still more powerfully in Japan. The Japanese population
was practically the same size as that of
Germany, but the Japanese nobility was
much more numerous than the German.
There were two million Samurai, and
certainly the sexual desires of Japanese men
were not different from those of Germans.
This is borne out by the existence of the
geishas, and further by complaints about the
brutality and immorality during the time of
the Samurai, and the abolition of marriage
restrictions between higher and lower classes
during the restoration. Baron Suyematsu
admits all this frankly when writing in Our
Fatherland Japan about matrimonial fidelity.
Now the increase in population in Japan was
very slow before the restoration. The average number of children per family reaching
THE DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE

adult age must have amounted to just over
three. Thus, the Japanese population of
thirty million must have consisted of about
six million families. Of these six million
fathers, two million were Samurai; in other
words, every third Japanese man was an
aristocrat. In view of these figures it has to
be admitted that the existence of such a
powerful aristocracy, selected from among the
people because of its low fertility, was really
the fundamental factor in decreasing the
fertility of the whole Japanese people. Even
if only a proportion of the Samurai in every
generation had illegitimate children, there
would pass into the lower classes the disinclination to produce a large family. By
making all citizens equal in the eyes of the
law, these relations were stopped at once and
almost entirely. At the same time two classes
developed amongst the agricultural population of Japan: (1) the landowners, and (2) the
landless tenants (see Tables III and IV below).

Before the restoration nearly all the land
was owned by the nobility, but worked by
peasants who rented it. By 1911—according
to Table III—the land was almost exclusively
owned by small proprietors who farmed it
themselves, or rented it to tenants. These

 

197

farms were very small and were worked by
hand, so that the descendants of families
with many children were still able to compete and thus to marry. Naturally, the possessing classes were now marrying in their own
class, and in consequence the landless people
had to do the same. These marriage relationships, however, were more favourable to the
fertility of the country as a whole. The same
social forces were at work as in Germany,
and had made the possessing classes a selection of relatively infertile elements, and the
landless classes a selection of highly fertile
elements. Partly as a consequence of these
changes, and partly because the effect of the
Samurai in decreasing fertility had also disappeared, a remarkable increase in general
fertility was due to take place after the
restoration.

SUMMARY

The reason of the decrease in the birth-rate
is the following: After the peasants’ emancipation a few outstanding persons formed the
advance guard in raising the status of the
intelligent sections of the lower classes. In
this struggle for superiority naturally all
weapons were employed which seemed at all

 

 

TABLE III
THE DISTRIBUTION OF LANDED PROPERTY IN JAPAN
Number of
Less than More than
Year landed -5-1 Tsch -3 Tsch -5 Isch -10 Tsch -50 Tsch
e propeistors 0-5 Tscho* 05-1 Tscho| 1-3 Tscho} 3-5 Tscho | 5-10 Tscho |10-50 Tscho 50 Tscho
IQIt eee} 4,903,866 | 2,322,938 1,258,649 883,775 267,173 126,912 41,500 2,919
1916 ...| 4,858,829 | 2,362,114 | 1,192,103 884,943 254,460 120,346 41,382 3,481
1921 ...| 4,852,692 | 2,395,984 | 1,174,276 879,785 228,748 121,695 47,927 4,277
TABLE IV
THE NUMBER OF PRIVATELY OWNED AND RENTED FARMS IN JAPAN
In thousands In per cent.
Year Number af Partly pri- Partly priPrivately Rented |Vately owned) Privately Rented vately owned
owned and partly owned and partly
rented rented
IQIl 5,420 I,502 2,156 32°5 27°7 39°8
1916 5,458 1,525 2,237 3I°1 27°9 41‘Oo
1921 5,450 1,555 2,232 30°6 28°5 40°9

 

* 1 Tscho = 0o-gg Hektare.
198

suitable for the desired purpose: not only
intelligence, diligence and thrift, but also—
which proved to be very successful—restriction of the number of children. This last
factor increased in importance with the increasing need for capital as well as intelligence as an aid to rising in the social scale.
In the first generations, of course, there were
still a number of very large families in the
higher classes. But as the cost of education
increased, these families were economically
ruined, and these fertile elements were
gradually eliminated from the higher classes.
In consequence, the lowest social class contained the greatest number of highly fertile
elements, while, on the other hand, the upper
classes became less fertile as the gulf between
them and the lower classes widened. From a
biological point of view, the highest stratum
of the former bourgeoisie is the newly created
nobility. And I mentioned in the beginning
that I found the lowest fertility of all in this
section of society.

An entirely different and in fact opposite
development was in the fertility of the old
nobility. This consisted of six strictly defined social strata. In its ranks, as in the
other classes, the process of selection took
place. Here also daughters of families with
many children were moving down the social
scale. The lowest stratum of the old nobility
is not the lowest stratum in the upper classes.
Below it comes the new nobility and the
bourgeoisie. Thus, the daughters of large
families, in their uninterrupted social decline,
became members of the new nobility and the
bourgeoisie. As there was no barrier to keep
them in the lowest stratum of the old nobility,
there could not be such an accumulation of
very fertile persons in this section as in the
lowest section of the bourgeoisie. Altogether
there were many reasons which were lable
to prevent social decline of members of the
nobility. A member of the bourgeoisie had
to rely nearly exclusively on his personal
ability for the maintenance of his social
position. But the social position of the
nobility was dependent on inherited social
prestige and frequently on wealth (consisting
of land) as well as on intelligence. It is well
known that, solely through the growth of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

population, these estates increased continually in value, without any effort on the part
of the owner. Besides, impoverished noblemen were always in a position to marry rich
women from the bourgeoisie. It is well known
that in this way large fortunes were continually transferred from the bourgeoisie to the
nobility. All these considerations made the
social decline of the daughters of noblemen
extremely difficult, particularly if they were
of the richer and more powerful families.
The wealthier the family and the higher it
was in the social scale, the more able it was
to resist social decline. The ruling houses
and the nobility even expressly prohibited
intermarriage by means of laws concerning
equality of birth. Thus the higher the
stratum within the nobility, the smaller the
loss of very fertile elements suffered, and in
consequence we find the strange fact that the
course of fertility in the old nobility was
exactly the opposite of that in the bourgeoisie. For the highest stratum of the old
nobility has the highest fertility, and. the
lowest stratum has the lowest fertility.

This whole process of change was in the
main completed by the end of the War..
Even if the War had not interfered, public
opinion would gradually have changed in
favour of the “ two children system ”’ ; as it
is, it became easy to convert the mass of
people to this system in view of the starvation period that followedthe War. Biological
were thus strengthened by environmental
factors. In fact, with the elimination of
biological influences the forces of environment have a clear field. Towards the end of
these racial changes, the more the various
strata approach a stage of relative infertility,
the more will their fertility be determined
exclusively by environmental factors.

If the inherited desire for children is
equally strong among rich and poor, or,
more correctly, after these racial changes, is
equally weak, then the rich may follow their inclination, while the poor of necessity must
deny themselves even this modest desire.
This situation is becoming apparent nowadays in Germany, where the well-to-do indeed have very few children, but nevertheless
more than the poor.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 3.
