REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 245

system is entirely sexual. As regards kinship, the view that the Central
Australians ignore the part played by the father in procreation is accepted
too readily by the author. Mr. Walter Heape’s criticism of this view
seems to be final, viz., that for certain reasons (analogous to those which
produced the idea of the Immaculate Conception) the Australians have
intentionally ignored what they really knew very well. An excellent
feature of the author’s study is that he takes into account the facts of
daily life, the emotional side of family relations, and the magico-religious
ideas about kinship and so forth. He quotes his documents at full length,
an excellent practice. The fascinating subject of Australian family organisation, so difficult to follow in the multifarious literature, is here
presented in a most readable and well-digested form, and this one volume
gives the student the whole of the subject. It is indispensable to sociclo
gists. Eugenists will find its data and inferences very valuable for a
study of the connexion between the morphology of the family and the
welfare of the race. A. E. CRAWLEY.

Greenwood, ARTHUR. The Health and Physique of School Children.
London. P. S. King and Son, 1913 (for the Ratan Tata Foundation); price 1s. net; pp. xv. + 96.
THIS volume contains an account of an investigation commenced in the
Economics Department of Huddersfield Technical College by Mr. George
H. Woods, F.S.S., and completed by Mr. Greenwood, the head of the
department. It is based on the records contained in the annual reports of
school medical officers who give averages of the height and weight of
the children under their supervision, arranged according to age. These
records have been accumulating since the passage of the Education (Administrative Provisions) Act of 1907, and a statistical summary of a considerable proportion of them, such as is contained in the volume under
review, should receive a hearty welcome, particularly from those who are
in a position to realise the large amount of labour involved in its preparation. The number of children dealt with exceeds 800,000, so that
it may be concluded that the general results obtained are based on
sufficient data to be reliable. A system of index numbers is employed
for the purpose of making comparisons between different districts with
fegard to the physical development of their children. | These numbers
are arranged in four series. Boys’ height, boys’ weight, girls’ height,
and girls’ weight are calculated for each age by dividing the average
measurement at that age for the group dealt with by the corresponding
average for the whole of England and Wales and multiplying by 100.
To make this process clearer we will take a particular case. Suppose
the average weight of seven-year-old girls in Berkshire is 47'9 Ibs.; in
the whole of England and Wales it is 466 lbs. Therefore the index
number for the weight of seven-year-old girls in Berkshire is
100 x 47'9 Ibs. + 466 lbs., or 102°8. Having calculated the index
number for each age the general index number for the group or district
can be obtained by taking the average of all ages. This process facilitates comparison between different districts.
Applying the method just described to the task of comparing the
effects of town or country life we obtain the following table :—
Index Numbers.
Boys’ Boys’ Girls’ Girls’
Height. Weight. Height. Weight.

County council (rural areas) ... 1014 ... 1033... rOK'6 ... 103°!
County council (urban areas),

.é., small towns... .. 4002 ... 1005 ... 1006 ... 1008
Manufacturing towns .... -. 987 .. 9779 .. Q82 ... 97'0

This table shows that elementary school children are on the whole
better developed physically in the country than in small towns, and ip
246 EUGENICS REVIEW.

small towns than in large, and leads one to question whether the agricultural labourer is so badly off as he is sometimes represented.

Another interesting application of the method is to the study of
the effects of child labour on the development of the child. In Bradford
children of the age of twelve are allowed to spend half the day in school
and the other half-day earning wages. This is known as the half-time
system. Mr. Greenwood shows that the average of the height and weight
indices (the combined index number) is low in Bradford for children
of twelve years old. Its value is actually 95°7, whereas for children of
eleven in Bradford it is 99'2, and for children of twelve in Leeds, Sheffield,
and Wakefield, where the half-time system is not in use to so great an
extent, it is 97°4, 97°8, and 96°8 respectively. He argues from these
figures that the half-day’s labour has a deleterious effect on the physique
of the child, a result which seems natural enough and is supported by
evidence of another kind brought forward in another section of the work.
But he makes no mention of the fact that at thirteen years the combined
index number goes up again in Bradford to 987, which is considerably
higher than the corresponding index in Leeds, Sheffield, or Wakefield.
In presenting the figures without mentioning this Mr. Greenwood shows
a certain bias, at any rate a strong desire to arrive at his conclusion
rather than let the statistics lead him where they will. In Oldham the
material allowed a direct comparison between the half-time children
and those who spend the whole day at school. But the half-timers are
throughout larger and heavier than the full-timers. The explanation
of this unexpected result is given by the medical officer for Oldham as
follows : “ (1) That those working half-time are on the average older than
those not working; (2) that the tendency would be for the stronger and
better developed children to go to work, while the weaker and delicate
children would be kept at school; (3) that the worker, as he is bringing
in a wage, is better fed than those who are not wage earners.” Possibilities which might have an opposite tendency, as for example, that the
children of the poorer parents were more likely to be sent to work, are
not considered. The question is thus seen to be a complicated one,
which will not be solved without the collection and reduction of better
data. This should present no particular difficulty, as the exact age of the
children in the two groups, their physique, and home conditions might
without difficulty be removed from the realms of conjecture and properly
allowed for. But though the simple comparison made in the work under
review cannot be said to have led to a definite conclusion, it is not for that
reason without value as it serves to point the way for future work.

We will conclude by tempering the wind of general commendation
which issues naturally from us, by the question, “ Why are the diagrams
so very sketchy ? ” EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Pearl, R. A Contribution towards an Analysis of the Problem of Inbreeding. Amer. Nat. XLVII.; 1913; pp. 577-614. Genetics and
Breeding. Science XXXVII.; 1913; pp. 539-546; and Parshley,
H. M. Data on Sex-Determination in Cattle. Biological
Bulletin XXIV. ; 1913; pp. 205-225.

In the first of these papers Dr. Pearl presents a method for determining

the intensity of inbreeding. He points out that it is important to start

from the individual and work backwards into the ancestry, rather than to
start from the ancestry and work downwards. The method adopted consists in finding a coefficient which shall represent the ratio of actual
ancestors in any generation to the total possible number of ancestors.

For example, if brother is mated with sister for three successive genera
tions, the offspring will have only two great-grandparents instead of the

eight which they would have if there were no inbreeding. Three-quarters
of the ancestors in that generation have thus been eliminated, and the coefficient of inbreeding for the three generations is therefore 75 per cent.
