EILEEN M. BROOKE
M.Sc., D.P.A.

Mental Health and the Population

The Problem of Mental Health

OST PEOPLE would agree that at the
Meee time mental health is one of the

most important aspects of health as a
whole. They would also agree that health is a
very difficult thing to measure positively. What
criterion can be used to say this man is healthy
and that man is not? It is easier to use ill health
as a measure and say that a man is not healthy
because his sputum is T.B. positive or he is
answering voices which to us are non-existent.
The promotion of health is so often a by-product
of the prevention of disease. Where mental
health is concerned we may ask ourselves how
far we have moved along the road which leads
from curative medicine through preventive
medicine to the establishment of a disease-free
community.

When people see that there is a need, they are
quick to respond. The tuberculous, the victims
of cancer, spastics, as well as the mentally sick
are groups which have inspired the population
generally to voluntary efforts on their behalf. But
before any health measure can be taken, the
size of the problem must be known. The
incidence of notifiable diseases is relatively easy
to assess; the same applies to many of the
disabling diseases. When we come to mental
disease, however, we are faced with a vast
number of problems of definition and differential
diagnosis. Where does oddness end and mental
sickness begin? The symptoms of diphtheria are
the same in patients of different ages, but in
mental illness we are presented with a galaxy
of conditions, ranging from the temper tantrums
of childhood, through the emotional immaturity
of adolescence, the schizophrenia of the young
adult, and the depression of the middle-aged, to
the confusional state of the aged arteriosclerotic.
Some patients seem to present a witches’ brew of
symptoms culled from various diagnoses. Un
* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on October 21st, 1959.

fortunately there is no distinctive rash in
schizophrenia, no X-ray which can photograph
the broken mind.

Nor, if we would assess the magnitude of the
problem, is all the information to be found in one
place. To obtain any idea of the state of the
nation’s mental health or ill health, we have to
fit together a jigsaw puzzle, many of the pieces
of which have not yet been cut out. We have at
present three main sources of information about
the mentally sick in the population of England
and Wales, namely, reports from the Ministry of
Health and the General Register Office, dealing
with hospital admissions; the reports of the
Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance,
covering illness resulting in claims for sickness
benefit, and the studies of sickness in 106 general
practices, made by Dr. Logan of the General
Register Office.!

MENTAL DEFICIENCY

MENTAL ILLNESS

Hospitals
(2,644)

Statfed Beds §
(483,582)

Nursing Stoff

Whole time
(150,411)

Part time
(40,130)

 

foe eee
35 30 25 20 (iS {Oo
Percentage

FIGURE 1
MENTAL HOSPITAL SERVICES AS PERCENTAGES OF
ALL HOSPITAL SERVICES

Hospital Care of the Mentally Sick
First let us consider the amount of hospital

209

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 51, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

care devoted to the mentally sick (Figure 1).
The Ministry of Health’s Statistical Digest (1958)
shows that, of 2,644 hospitals, 124 (5 per cent)
were mental disorder hospitals and 192 (7 per
cent) were for the mentally deficient. There may
also have been some mental patients in the 125
hospitals devoted almost entirely to long stay
patients, or the 302 chronic hospitals. Owing to
the relatively large size of many mental hospitals,
however, 31 per cent of the staffed beds were in
mental hospitals and another 12 per cent in
mental deficiency hospitals. If we include mental
patients occupying beds in general hospitals,
between 44 and 45 per cent of all staffed beds
were allocated to the mentally sick. There was,
however, a waiting list of about 9,400 patients,
8,000 of whom were mentally deficient. There
were more than 150,000 whole-time nurses in
1958; 14 per cent (21,655) were in mental
hospitals and 5 per cent (7,314) in mental
deficiency hospitals. In addition 18 per cent and
7 per cent respectively of the 40,000 part-time
nurses were in the two types of hospital.

In 1956, about 73 per cent of statutory patients
going into mental hospitals for the first time were
diagnosed as psychotic, and 80 per cent of readmitted patients were in this category. In
general practice the majority of mentally sick
patients present with psychoneurosis.

Mental Illness in General Practice

A statistical study of the clinical records of 106
representative general practices was carried out
for the twelve months May 1955 to April 1956,
by collaboration between the College of General
Practitioners and the Gencral Register Office,
and the sickness experience of roughly 383,000
persons on the National Health Service lists of
171 doctors was analysed. Two measures are
particularly interesting; the consultation rate, or
number of consultations during the year per
1,000 practice population, which shows the
amount of medical care and advice given by the
family doctor, and secondly the rate of persons
consulting, which shows the proportion of
patients who consulted their doctor at least once
during the survey year and thus provides a
reasonably accurate picture of the prevalence of
any illness.

210

    

Other mental
disorders

  

iS-44

 

 

 

FIGURE 2
CONSULTATION RATES PER 1,000 POPULATION IN
106 PRACTICES. PSYCHONEUROSES AND OTHER
MENTAL DISORDERS

The number of consultations for mental illness per 1,000 practice population was 118 for
males and 249 for females (see Figure 2).
Psychoneurosis contributed 100 to the male and
224 to the female rate. In each of the four age
groups shown, the consultation rates were
higher for females than for males. Consultations
were most frequent at ages forty-five to sixty-four
averaging 190 per 1,000 males and 373 per 1,000
females. The proportion of consultations for
mental illness other than psychoneurosis was
highest in people aged sixty-five and over, due to
the high incidence of senile and presenile psychoses in this group. About 5 per cent of all consultations made were for mental illness, whether
psychosis, neurosis or a disorder of behaviour,
character or intelligence.

The proportion of people consulting their
doctor for psychoneurosis at least once during
the year was twenty-eight per 1,000 for males and
sixty-one for females. At ages fifteen and over,
the prevalence among women was more than
double that among men. One in every twenty-two
males and one in every eleven females who consulted their doctor were recorded as suffering
from psychoneurosis. In addition to those
demanding general practitioners’ services for
diagnosed mental illness there was a smaller
MENTAL HEALTH AND THE POPULATION

FEMALES

   

   

 

 

32 66
ea
All eges |
—
3 2 Psychoncuroses be |

0-14 Other mental

disorders

39 78
15-44
45-64
65 and over
80 60 40 20 ° 20 40 60 80

Patient consulting rates

FIGURE 3
PATIENT CONSULTING RATES PER 1,000 POPULATION IN 106 PRACTICES. PSYCHONEUROSES AND
OTHER MENTAL DISORDERS

number who suffered from nervousness, sleeplessness, depression and similar symptoms.

It is clear, therefore, that mental illness,
especially psychoneurosis, affects many people
who consult their family doctors and the care
given to them claims an appreciable part of the
doctor’s services. Moreover it is the latter who
are principally responsible for the treatment of
psychoneurotics, as out of about 17,500 such
patients, less than 260 were sent to hospital.

How does mental disease compare with other
sickness in claims for the doctor’s attention?
An earlier study in nine general practices showed
that psychoneurosis is not among the five
diseases requiring the highest number of consultations for males, but among females it is the
third highest at ages fifteen to forty-four and
forty-five to sixty-four, and second among
elderly women of sixty-five and over. Although
the mine practices were widely distributed
geographically, a high consultation rate for
psychoneurosis was found in each of them. The
prevalence of psychoneurosis, as measured by
the proportion of patients who consulted their
doctor at least once during the year, was highest
in urban practices (51-5 per 1,000), lower in semi
urban (38-2) and lowest in rural practices (36°7.)
One in thirteen of patients who consulted their
doctors in urban practices were diagnosed as
psychoneurotic, compared with one in seventeen
of those consulting in the semi-urban and rural
practices.’

Mental Illness and Sickness Benefit

It is to be expected that the prevalence of mental
illness will show up in claims for sickness benefit
under the National Insurance Acts. This is
paid to people who are working, those unemployed but seeking work and those who have
lapsed from the working population due to
continuous sickness. Certain contribution conditions must be satisfied. A spell, as referred to
here, is a period of incapacity for work. Relapse
after return to work counts as a second spell.
Short spells of incapacity of less than four days
do not normally attract benefit and therefore
are commonly not reported to the Ministry. Age
limits are from fifteen to sixty-four for men and
fifteen to fifty-nine for women; they are extended
to sixty-nine for men and sixty-four for women,
who, because they are still working, are not
entitled to retirement pension.

MALES FEMALES

Total days

Spetis of
Sickness

ih incapacitated

  

 

|
40 20
Proportion
Psychoses Fanaa Psychoneuroses
FIGURE 4
SICKNESS BENEFIT, 1955-56. PROPORTIONS PER

1,000 DUE TO PSYCHOSES AND PSYCHONEUROSES

For the year June 1955-June 1956, the following claims were attributed to psychoses or
psychoneuroses. Of every 1,000 days of incapacity, for men, psychoses accounted for

211
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

forty-three and psychoneuroses for thirty-eight;
for women these proportions were forty-five and
sixty-nine. Six out of every 1,000 spells of
incapacity among men were due to psychosis,
and seven for women; for psychoneurosis the
women’s rate was double the men’s. The
proportion of claimants for psychoneurosis
followed the same pattern. The proportion of
persons incapacitiated on June 2nd, 1956, was
forty-seven per 1,000 for both sexes for psychosis,
compared with forty-one and seventy-two per
1,000 respectively for psychoneurosis. This means
that about one in twenty of all men and women
incapacitated on a particular day were recorded
as psychotic; one in twenty-five men and seven
in one hundred women were described as
psychoneurotic.

AGE GROUPS

 

| 65 and
15-34 | 35-49 50-64 over
\Claimants incapacitated |
Psychoses 6 10 9 3
Psychoneuroses 26 33 25: 17
Days of incapacity
Psychoses 46 65 33 6 |
Psychoneuroses 50 46 31 22 |
TABLE I

PROPORTION OF CLAIMANTS AND DAYS OF INCAPACITY DUE TO PSYCHOSES AND PSYCHONEUROSES,
PER 1,000 FOR ALL SICKNESS, 1955-56,
MALES AGED 15 AND OVER

The proportion of male claimants was highest
at ages thirty-five to forty-nine, for both
psychoses and psychoneuroses. For psychoses,
the proportion of days of incapacity was also
highest in this age group, but for psychoneuroses,
the age group fifteen to tltirty-five had the
highest proportion of days of incapacity, and
the proportions declined in the higher age groups.

Mental Patients in General Hospitals

The majority of hospitalized mental patients go
into mental hospitals; nevertheless, the other
hospitals also carry part of this burden. From a
one in ten sample of patients leaving general
hospitals in England and Wales in 1956, we
may deduce that nearly 38,000 mental patients
had received care in these institutions. Of these,
the psychotics comprised a little more than half
(20,000), the psychoneurotics rather more than

212

one-third (13,124) and those with disorders of
behaviour, character or intelligence, about oneeighth. Compared with discharges from mental
hospitals, these were the shorter-term patients,
many of them observation cases who were
transferred to other hospitals.

MOSPITALS (excluding Mental Hospitals) MENTAL HOSPITALS

Up to I week Under I week

{ Week a under

Over (week ¢ :
i month

up to 4weeks §

tMonth eunder f=

Over 4weeks a §
: 2months

up to 9weeks

 

eee Srey Trtesaetacarieeeeeeeteniere

Over 9weeks
6 months

 

232 .S208
6Months 6 under Foo
12 months

 

Percentage transferred to another hospital

oe
Psychoses $2.

 

SE |

rh r tol ;
Other ental 1/0
; ;

disorders S Years 6 over es

FIGURE 5

DURATION OF STAY IN HOSPITAL OF PATIENTS
DISCHARGED IN 1956

‘ ‘
Ricetcaniedn dD

Thus 80 per cent were in non-mental hospitals
for periods of up to one month, compared with
about 31 per cent of mental hospital patients. The
latter retained 44 per cent of their patients for
two months or more, compared with only 8 per
cent in the general hospitals. However, 52 per
cent of psychotics and 11 per cent of those with
other mental disorders were transferred to other
hospitals and we may surmise that most of these
went to mental hospitals.

Mental Hospitals
It is about the population of mental hospitals
that we know most. Since 1949 the General
Register Office has been compiling statistical
information about all statutory patients. We
may therefore ask, “who goes into mental
hospitals and what are their chances of coming
out? How long do they have to stay in? What is
the likelihood of a relapse?”

In 1957, nearly 90,000 people were admitted to
mental hospitals, as statutory patients, 48,000
of them for the first time, and at the end of the
MENTAL HEALTH AND THE POPULATION

year there were 143,000 on the books of mental
hospitals. From 1951 onwards first admissions
have been distinguished from other admissions
in our statistics, and the increase in the number
of first admissions since then has been 25 per
cent while the numbers of readmissions, that is
people who had been in a mental hospital at
some time during their lives, nearly doubled.
Departures and discharges have increased by
70 per cent, whereas deaths in hospital increased
by only 1 per cent. The population on the books
at the end of each year reached a maximum in
1954 and by 1957 was almost back at the 1951
total. The effect of new hospital policies and new
methods of treatment has been to increase the
numbers of people who are admitted for a short
time and then returned to the community. Some
of them may and, in fact, do have to be readmitted, but the trend is away from long,
unbroken periods of custodial care, in which the
patient may be forgotten by friends and relatives.
By 1956, nearly 80 per cent of patients were
coming into hospital on a voluntary basis and
the new category of informal admissions should
accelerate the trend.

So far as first admission rates are concerned,
in general those for single persons exceed those
for people who have been married at some time,
whatever their status on admission to hospital.
Whether this means that single people are the
more prone to mental illness, or that those likely
to develop mental disorder do not get married,
or whether it reflects the fact that people who
have ever married are more likely to have someone to look after them at home, we do not know.
It may be, that if we had statistics for people
treated in Out Patient Clinics we should find an
excess of married people there, which would
compensate for the lower numbers here.

Except in the case of single males, there is a
very striking increase in the admission rates with
increasing age. In 1956 the first admission rate
at all ages was about 100 per 100,000, but at
ages seventy-five and over it was three times as
much. It is estimated that on December 31st,
1956, of people aged sixty-five and over, one in
109 was resident in a mental hospital.

Mental Iliness and Social Class
The difference in first admission rates between

single males and those who have ever married
is not confined to a particular social class; this
shows up strikingly in the case of schizophrenics.
The Registrar General’s social classes are based
on occupation and despite the well-known
difficulties in recording this, social class rates
are fairly reliable for men. For the five years
1949-53, around the last Census of Population,
first admission rates for single men aged twenty
and over ranged from 16-4 per 10,000 in Class I
to 68°0 in Class V, and for ever-married
men from 2-32 to 7:99. The ratio of rates for
Class V to Class I was 4-1 for single and 3-4
for ever-married males. The high rates for Class
V were not evenly distributed over the occupation groups which make up Social Class V.
Two groups. in particular had admission rates
much above the average, kitchen hands and
labourers; these are occupational groups whose
ranks might well be temporarily swollen by
casual workers whose mental instability prevented them from following their usual occupation. Admission rates among dock labourers
were lower than average, but here we have a
different occupational pattern, since these
workers must be registered with the Dock
Labour Board, and in some parts, at least, it is
customary for sons to follow their fathers into
this work.

The social class gradient for schizophrenia
does not apply to first admission rates for manic
depressive reaction, the other large diagnostic
group in mental hospital admissions. In 1956, for
example, the first admission rate was highest in
Class V, 523 per million, Class I came next with
315, then Class III, 307, Class IV, 292, with the
lowest rate, 264, in social class II. These results
raise some interesting problems. First, as regard
the social class gradients, do they signify that
there is more mental illness in Class V, or that
more mentally sick people have collected in that
group? Do they show that people in Class V
are more likely to be sent to hospital than those
in the other social classes, without telling us
anything about the relative frequency of mental
disorder? Then as regards diagnosis, are there
really more manic-depressives than schizophrenics in Social Class I, or is there a tendency
for Social Class I males to be diagnosed manic
depressive rather than schizophrenic? We shall

213
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

need a great deal more knowledge before we
can hope to interpret the statistical findings, but
at least they show what may be some fruitful
topics for research.

Another diagnostic group in which Social
Class I males have admission rates second only
to those in Social Class V are the disorders of
behaviour, character and intelligence.

FIRST

OTHER

  

wD
°
0

Admission rates per milllon home population
uorjyojndod awoy vojjjw Jad 82301 vo;ssiwpy

 

Social class

FIGURE 6
MENTAL HOSPITALS. FIRST AND OTHER ADMISSION
RATES PER MILLION HOME POPULATION FOR DISORDERS OF BEHAVIOUR, CHARACTER AND INTELLIGENCE. MALES AGED 20 AND OVER, 1956

This group of disorders includes alcoholism,
acute, chronic and unspecified, but not alcoholic
psychosis. It is their rate of admission for
alcoholism which largely accounts for the excess
in Social Class I. It must, however, be
remembered, that we are dealing with hospital
admissions, and these represent the number of
people seeking treatment, not the number who
have the disease. It is possible that among the
professional groups who compose Social Class I,
treatment is essential if employment and professional status are to be retained.

Cohort Studies of First Admissions

There is one question about mental illness and
the population which is of paramount interest.
What is the fate of people who go into mental
hospitals? To answer this question we must
forsake the traditional method of collecting
hospital statistics of admissions and discharges,
and concern ourselves with the hospital history
of individuals. This is an involved but profitable

214

task. For patients first admitted to designated
mental hospitals in 1954 to 1956, an alphabetical
index by surname has been established at the
General Register Office. When a patient whose
card is in the Index is discharged or readmitted,
the new card is paired with the index card and the
data it contains are transferred to the index card.
Even if the patient enters a designated hospital
other than the one where he was first treated,
the data for his two visits will be brought
together. It is thus possible to follow up the
hospital history of any patient and so to estimate
the rate at which patients are discharged from
first admission, their relapse rates, and the total
time they spend in hospital during a given period,
irrespective of the number of hospital visits paid
in the time.

The 1954 cohort consisted of about 44,000
first admissions, and the record of each individual
was surveyed for two calendar years from the
date of his first admission. It was found that
56 per cent of the patients were discharged in the
first three months. Altogether 12 per cent died in
the two years following first admission, most of
the deaths occurring among patients with senile
psychosis or cerebral arteriosclerosis. By the
end of the first year only 15 per cent were left
in hospital on their first visit, and by the end of
two years the proportion had fallen to 10 per
cent. The chances of discharge were higher
among patients who had ever been married;
60 per cent of this group were discharged in the
first three months compared with 47 per cent
of the single people. These results cover all
diagnoses, but there is considerable variation in
the patterns of discharge and retention within
diagnostic groups. Thus schizophrenics were
discharged at a slower rate, and higher proportions remained in hospital continuously for
two years, about one in five of single and one in
eight of ever-married patients. There were,
however, very few deaths in this group, which
was a comparatively young one, 67 per cent of
the males and 52 per cent of the females being
between the ages of fifteen and thirty-five. On
the other hand, the manic-depressive group were
discharged more speedily, and only 9 per cent
of the single and 3 to 4 per cent of the evermarried were in hospital throughout the two
years.
MENTAL HEALTH AND THE POPULATION

Speedy discharge can hardly fail to produce
some readmissions, and in fact about one-fifth
of those who were discharged returned for a
second visit in the course of the two years;
only 5 per cent, however, had a second relapse
in the time covered. General statistics of this
kind do not entitle us to predict the future of any
individual patient, and to say that Brown or
Smith will be discharged within three months.
They do, however, enable us to state the probability of discharge. A very encouraging fact is,
that of the original 44,000 in the cohort, 34,000
were discharged or departed from their first
visit; allowing for normal death rates, we can
say that nearly three-quarters of those who were
discharged from their first visit could be expected
to complete the two years from date of first
admission without returning to hospital. Further
studies of the cohort at intervals of five years
from first admission may show a higher proportion of relapses, but the apparent trend is
for readmissions to take place fairly soon after
discharge. The relationship between time before
relapse and length of previous stay in hospital is
something which is being studied, with a view
to seeing whether there is an optimum period of
treatment, which would result in minimum
relapse rates.

The Cost of Mental Illness

The repercussions of mental illness are bound to
affect the whole population. Most people have
some experience of the effect of a mentally sick
person on those around him, whether in the
family, among friends or at work. Even those
people—if there are any—who would disclaim
interest in the question on humanitarian grounds
must take account of the financial burden which
mental illness places on the community. This
burden must be expressed, not only in terms of
direct costs of treatment and of ancillary services,
but in indirect costs due to actual working days
lost and to tasks being inefficiently performed.
This kind of sum is not an easy one. In England
and Wales in 1958 it cost on the average £6 8s. 9d.
per week to maintain a patient in a mental
hospital and £6 2s. 3d. per week in a mental
deficiency hospital but we know little of the
total cost. In America, a recent report sponsored
by the Joint Committee on Mental Illness of the

Cc*

United States? has assessed the cost at 3,000
million dollars a year. This is nearly 6 guineas
per head per annum of the whole home population of the U.S.A. What can be done to lighten
this load? Few authorities are ever in favour of
increasing direct costs; nevertheless such increases may lower indirect costs, with a consequent saving on the total. We cannot estimate the
probable savings which might accrue from
increasing our expenditure on mental health
research. And, as the report points out, an
economy can afford to spend whatever it likes
on mental health, since all that is necessary is to
spend less on something else.

Conclusion

In this paper an attempt has been made to show
some of the questions and even fewer of the
answers about mental health and the population,
and these only from the statistical angle. Nevertheless, we are living in times of great significance,
when many efforts are being made to tackle the
problem of mental disease in all its aspects.
One of the most important findings is of the
effect on mental patients of the attitude of those
around them; an atmosphere in which the
patients are aware that those in charge of them
are confident of their improved behaviour, and
capability for rehabilitation has been shown to
work wonders. Many hospitals are changing
their institutional appearance completely; the
drab wards of yesterday are giving place to gay
and cheerful surroundings, which can hardly
fail to have a good effect. New drugs are enabling
many to maintain themselves in the community,
who would previously have had to go into
hospital. Mental illness is following the pattern
taken in the conquest of many other diseases;
first we find how to cure the disease, then how
to control it. The last step is so to modify the
environment that the disease is eradicated. To
assist in this task is the price we may all willingly
pay for mental health.

REFERENCES

1. Logan, W. P. D. and Cushion, A.A. 1958. Morbidity
Statistics from General Practice, Vol. I (General).
Studies on Medical and Population Subjects, No. 14.
London, H.M.S.O.

2. Logan, W. P. D. 1953. General Practitioners’ Records.
Ibid, No. 7. London, H.M.S.O.

3. Fein, R. Economics of Mental Illness. 1958. New York,
Basic Books Inc.

216
