J. F. DANIELLI
Ph.D., F.R.S., Professor of Zoology at King’s College, London

New Life in Old Bodies

how man may be changed, either socially or

genetically, to advantage. I ought to make it
clear I do not think I have any qualifications
whatever for speaking on this subject. If I may
paraphrase a remark of the Chairman, I think
I can undertake to produce some entirely new
prejudices which may or may not be regarded as
throwing light on this subject.

Social changes to date have always been a
triumph for prejudice, no matter how admirable
the social attitudes of the people concerned, and
this is so because all such changes have been
brought about largely as a result of a process of
introspection, of contemplation of what man
should be like. This inevitably leads us into
trouble, the sort of trouble we encounter nowadays in looking at the prevalence of crime, and
which is reflected in our ambivalent attitude
towards such things as gambling. The reason it
leads us into trouble is that we do not take into
account what man is actually like when we
propose a social change.

This does not mean I despise introspection and
idealism, or suggest they should be discarded; I
point out that they are not enough. We need to
know about man; in modern terms, to take a
long cool look at man and see what he is actually
like, in addition to thinking on what he should
be like. For this I suggest we might reasonably
employ the scientific method, and treat man as a
species of animal who should be observed as
objectively as possible. Use of the most elementary techniques produces rather surprising
results, or does in my hands at any rate.

As an example, one of the simplest techniques
we use is just to contemplate the distribution of a
particular phenomenon in nature. Like many
others of the Church of England, I have been
much concerned about the extraordinary out
|: THIS LECTURE I shall be concerned with

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on March 23rd, 1960.

break of anti-Semitism that has developed in the
last few months, and being stimulated to think
along slightly novel lines because I had to give
this lecture I wondered about the distribution of
this phenomenon. Leaving out the Arab world,
where there are some reasons why anti-Semitism
should be rather prevalent, you find antiSemitism in Christian countries. Why should this
be so? When one thinks back one can remember
(some of us at any rate) that as we were brought
up we associated the Jews with the massacre of
the innocents, the persecution of Christ, the
harrying of the early Christians, and that sort of
thing. I do not think in those circumstances,
when you think of it objectively, it is too surprising that the psychopathic elements in society
should fall back on this early indoctrination when
under some sort of stress. Most of us have
adopted a more realistic attitude; we are not so
much taken in by this early indoctrination, but
the relatively troubled minds of people who are
subject to violent stress tend to revert to these
patterns.

I would not suggest we should stop studying
the Scriptures, but I do think we might teach our
children a little more about the crimes of
Christians to put the matter into perspective; if,
for example, when we were dealing with these
matters we pointed out how relatively recently
the black Tasmanians were hounded down with
dogs and exterminated, or if we pointed out it is
not so long ago we were burning witches alive,
and only fifteen years ago that the whole population of Hiroshima was exterminated by people
who profess to be Christians. If we brought our
children up with a more balanced attitude
towards social crime we might find a more
balanced attitude towards the people responsible
for social crimes.

Man as a Population of Animals
Approaching the problems in the way I have
suggested, let us ask ourselves what are some of

139

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1960, 52, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the general characteristics of a population of
animals. I have drawn up a list of seven points
which seem to me to have some interest, though
of course there are many others we might
consider.

First of all, we regard behaviour as a function of
genetic structure and environmental action.

Secondly, any population arises as a result of
selection for fitness in a particular environment.

Thirdly, selection is continuously at work in all
environments.

Fourthly, populations vary with respect to all
measurable characters; i.e. the individuals in the
population differ.

Fifthly, it is rare for adaptation to compensate
completely for genetic defect.

Sixthly, where physiological or behavioural
adaptation enables a population to survive a sharp
change of environment, for example by change of
phenotype, the novel characters eventually become
part of the genotype.

Seventhly, populations are composed of individuals having largely similar life spans.

I do not expect you to have digested what I
have said; I shall take these points one by one
and consider some of their specific implications.
First of all, that behaviour is a function of
genetic structure and environmental action. We
are in difficulties here because we do not know
what the range of influence of genetic action is,
or of environmental action, in dealing with
human beings. The easiest approach is through
the study of identical twins, but nothing like
enough work has been done on that.

I have not read the most recent work in this
field, but in what I have read there was a strong
suggestion that the genetic factor in human
behaviour is vastly stronger than is implicit in
the way we think at the moment. I am not sure
whether this work is a little misleading. The
experimental material consisted of twins who
were separated at birth and brought up in
ostensibly different environments, and yet were
found to behave in a remarkably similar way.
What is ignored is that human beings of similar
genetic structure naturally tend to seek a similar
type of environment, so the experiences of life
expected by these identical twins are not as
dissimilar as we are led to believe. So I am not
sure that we can accept these studies in the way
they are put forward.

As much of this lecture will deal with changing
man by changing his environment, I want to draw

140

attention to the fact that we are by no means
necessarily prevented from changing the nature
of man by directed mutation. I think it is true
that until comparatively recently we have tended
to think directed mutation is impossible, but I
doubt whether we are near proving it is possible
or impossible at the moment. I am trying to get
a little more experimental information on this
subject now.

Insufficient attention in society is paid to the
genetic factor, even in such things as appreciation in food and wines, or such matters as homosexuality. At King’s College we regularly run
experiments in our classes, asking students to
taste a solution containing phenylthiourea. To
some members of the population this is an uncommonly bitter substance, but other people
cannot taste it at all. This ability to taste a
substance is a very clear cut case; there must be
many other such substances the ability to taste
which is inherited. If ability to taste a substance,
or the incidence of Mongolian idiocy, are controlled by genetic factors, it is reasonable to
think much else is affected in this way.

Populations Arise by Selection

The second point I mentioned is that populations
arise by selection for a particular environment.
On balance, I think it would be fair to say man
evolved by selection for living in small foodgathering communities. It is uncertain whether he
can survive in his present environment. If we were
taken back to the conditions of 20,000 years ago,
although many of us would die, the species would
survive. Recently our environment has been
changing too rapidly for compensating selection
to take place. The genetic nature of man has not
been given sufficient opportunity to change as the
environment has been changing, and this is
exposing us to a great many stresses and some
concrete dangers. There are three particular
menaces at the moment. First of all the very
considerable danger of the general dissemination
of radioactive substances; secondly, quite an
appreciable danger that medical ‘science may be
so successful in primitive communities that we
shall be overwhelmed by the increase in the
population of the world. (This would not result
in the eradication of the whole population.) The
third menace is something relatively new—we
NEW LIFE IN

may be subjected to the invasion of alternative
forms of life from space, e.g. by viruses or
bacteria brought back by rockets. This is more
likely to arise than the other two. An element of
commonsense may well penetrate into the first
two, but whether it will into space travel is
difficult to say.

Thirdly, selection is continuously at work, for
example by road accidents. Is it or is it not a good
thing to cut off the selective factors in the
population? At the moment we do not know
who are the people who are killed in the population by accidents. It is quite arguable that if it
is the fools and incompetents who are killed,
from the point of view of the population it is a
good thing and part of the adaptation to
changing environment. This is rather a harsh
way of dealing with incompetents, but there is a
limit to which one can go in dealing with
people’s reactions to change in environment.
Either we have to say we shall slow down the
rate of progress, or else face the fact that sooner
or later the elimination of quantities of unfit
people is inevitable because the cost of keeping
them alive would become too high.

Natural selection is operating continuously in
any environment we have been able to contrive
up to now, but natural selection left to its own
ends cannot do all the things which are desirable
to have done. Natural selection cannot work in
respect of characters which are displayed mainly
after the breeding period has passed ; for example,
selection involving a reduction of the incidence
of cancer, or concerned with rheumatism or
addiction to many drugs, can hardly be affected
by any process going on in the present population, because we have our children long before
these things become so serious as to stop us
having children.

Looked at in this way, humanitarian social
legislation which is effective before and during
the breeding age in humans is likely to be harmful to the population by increasing the proportion of unfit people. On the other hand, the
same type of legislation after the breeding period
does not do any harm at all, which is a somewhat
paradoxical situation. It suggests we should
reverse the way in which we are treating people
at the moment. We spend the absolute minimum
of money we can on old people, and do not

OLD BODIES

hesitate to spend a tremendous amount of money
on keeping unfit young people alive.

Variability of Populations

Fourthly, populations vary with respect to all
measurable characters. This variability of the
individuals in the population is partly genetical
and partly due to the exposure of people to
different environments. If we recognize this
inevitable biological fact it becomes clear that it
is useless to legislate for uniformity of behaviour.
If we do attempt to bring in social legislation
which requires uniformity of behaviour, we inevitably create new criminal classes with each
new type of legislation, because there will be a
minority of people who will not fall in with
anything that requires absolute uniformity.
Furthermore, any form of imposed uniformity is
almost certain to involve suffering to minorities.
That might, in a sense, be a good and acceptable
thing, because it brings a selection pressure to
bear. The pressure to impose uniformity naturally
arises where the emotional factor concerned is
strong; for example, in dealing with the colour
problem or sexual matters, with criminality, or
membership of trade unions, or what sort of
schools shall exist, the emotional factor tends to
overpower the factor of reason, and we tend to
make decisions for reasons which are largely
emotionally biased.

It is a fascinating thing that most people either
wish to join a trade union, or do not mind
joining a trade union, so that pressure to join
does not affect them adversely at all. A small
minority of people object to this degree of social
conformity, and although the actions of this
small minority can hardly ever do any harm to
the majority, this objection raises the absolute
devil in the minds of the conforming majority.

Viewing sexuality or criminality as a biologist,
it appears absurd to expect uniformity. I say at a
guess it is a disadvantage to be a homosexual,
and therefore different from the average in a
group, and it is irrational for us to add to this
disadvantage by persecution. Equally I think the
criminal behaviour of some people arises from
environmental reasons, and criminal behaviour
in other people for genetic reasons; and although
the crimes they commit may be the same, it is

141
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inadvisable to treat in the same way the two
different types of people.

If criminality in an individual is environmental
in origin, the endeavour, apart from the necessity
for protecting the community, should be to
reverse the initial psychological process. The
usual procedure is to shut up criminals with a
bunch of other criminals so that they may learn
to be more successful criminals, rather than an
endeavour to change the initial psychological
defect. It is possible that imprisonment and beating have some effect on some people, since many
young criminals do not repeat their offences, but
on the whole this way of treating criminals is not
likely to have a therapeutic effect. More probably
it is much the same type of behaviour displayed
by Russian peasants some years ago in beating
broken-down tractors. It is an emotionally
satisfying activity, but not designed in such a way
as to produce any other useful effect. Many
older criminals, on the other hand, repeat the
same offence in such a compulsive manner as to
lead us to suppose there may even be some genetic
basis for that particular type of behaviour. It
seems quite certain we shall not make much
progress in dealing with criminality unless we
do attempt a much more effective study of the
environmental and genetic factors than has been
attempted so far.

I want to emphasize that biological variability
of a population is a most valuable asset. It is
always the atypical members of a population who
permit survival after any disastrous environmental change. For example, the ravages of
penicillin in the bacterial world are being overcome, not by the average bacteria but by those
which happen to be penicillin-resistant mutants.
To turn to some more complex animal, one might
note that exceptional individuals such as
Churchill, Beaverbrook and Monty, who would
not find it easy to achieve political power in
times of peace, were necessary to pull us through
the difficulties of war.

It seems obvious that we should endeavour to
preserve variability in the population, and that
measures designed to produce uniformity are
undesirable from the point of view of the
development of the species. For example, we
ought to increase rather than to decrease the
variety of schools. On the other hand the over
142

whelming social pressure at the moment is to

decrease and make more uniform the education

we give our children. Another point which I
think is grossly neglected by all educational
authorities is the desirability of letting children
have some voice in the educational process to
which they are subjected. I see no reason why
children should not be allowed to leave school,
by consent, at a relatively early age, provided
the community provides facilities for them to go
back to school up to the age of twenty-five or
thirty, or even forty or fifty, should they wish.
There is no particular reason why education has
to be crammed into these early years of life,
when often it is not acceptable. Why not let
children go out and do a job, and go back if they
wish and become better educated when they see
the advantages of it. We waste large sums of
money on children who do not wish to be
educated, and are damn well determined they
will not be educated.

Compensation by Adaptation

My fifth point: adaptation rarely compensates
completely for genetic defect. By this I mean that
an individual who does not have the best genetic
equipment for coping with a situation will very
often attempt to compensate either by some
physiological adaptation which occasions a certain amount of stress, or some adaptation of
behaviour which also causes a certain amount of
stress: one cannot expect this to go very far.
In many cases it will not go far enough. People
with low intelligence quotients cannot become
adequate to deal with the modern environment.
Social legislation, such as that of the modern
welfare state, which is adequate for 95 per cent
of the population, is likely to result in acute
suffering of a minority of 1 per cent or less. With
the inevitable variation we have in the population, there are people who are not competent
and cannot deal with the present type of
impersonal approach to social welfare.

To turn to another field, defective renal
function can only be compensated for by the
provision of new kidneys. Turning this observation into something of practical consequence: if
medical care is to be continuously extended for
the chronic sick, it is going to be much cheaper
to find out how to replace defective organs than
NEW LIFE IN

to provide continuous medical service to those
with defective organs.

Point six. Novel adaptations become part of
the genotype. What this means roughly is that if
one makes a sufficiently successful physiological
adaptation to be able to cope with a change in
the environment, then, as a number of generations pass, the genetic structure of the population will change so that it becomes normally
adapted and fitted to the environment, and every
individual does not need to make a fresh
adaptation.

We might take this a little more seriously and
consider how it can be used in human populations, e.g. try to analyse how far we are making
adaptations of this sort by the use of artificial
agents to produce better adaptation. Why not
use chemical agents to offset radiation and to
increase longevity, and if we are to space travel,
consider hibernation as a useful adaptation produced by the combined action of drugs and cooling? It is important to note the drugs we
habitually use, such as caffeine, tobacco and
alcohol, are such chemical agents, which reduce
the adverse effect of the environment upon us.
We suffer stress in this environment in which we
live, and we resort to these drugs to enable us to
reduce the stress. Equally the services of
psychiatrists are used to reduce our unfitness for
the environment in which we find ourselves.
There is a lot of scope for enabling us to make
better physiological and behavioural adaptations
to our environment, since after all the rate at
which any genetic change could be produced is
slow.

Life Span
We come to the last point I mentioned, which
might be taken as an example of one of the
previous points. Populations are composed of
individuals having similar life spans. There is
selection against life spans which are short compared with the breeding age, but there cannot
be natural selection for longevity past the
effective breeding age. This means the life span
we have is largely an accident resulting from
selection for other properties and represents no
adequate adjustment to life in the environment
in which we live at the moment.

There is no reason that I am aware of to

OLD BODIES

suppose that the life span of man is close to what
is optimal for present-day society, and at present there are quite a number of sound reasons
for thinking increased longevity would be a good
thing. Increase of knowledge is going on at such
a rate that it cannot in fact be assimilated by
people in the present population. There is too
much information about to gather in and to
act upon effectively, and the result is we get an
ever increasing degree of over-specialization, not
only in education but throughout life. Some of
the squabbles going on in the medical world
nowadays as to what extent there should be
general exhaustive education in biological and
medical knowledge, preceding actual clinical
experience, are ridiculous. So long as people
continue to have their present life span, and
knowledge accumulates at the present rate, the
quantity of information available in twenty-five
years time will make it impossible for medical
students to have such an education. All sorts of
changes are being pressed on us due to the
accumulation of knowledge. This could be
handled much better if we could increase our
life span. I think we probably could do so,
although this is only an opinion.

There are a great many unknowns in this
field, and I would go for guidance to the field of
radiation hazard. The median lethal dose of
radiation for mammalian cells is about 50 or
100 rontgens, whereas there are some bacteria
for which a lethal dose is of the order of
5,000,000. There is no single or indeed any
complex of chemical or biological factors which
can be adduced to account for this difference.
This difference is one of the astronomically large
numbers which cannot be accounted for. The
effect of radiation is to damage the genetic
system directly or indirectly, and so long as we
cannot explain this large number in the radiation
hazard we are unable to place any assessment to
what extent life spans could, in fact, be changed.
Present life spans arise by accident, and we do
not know to what extent the accident is limited.
We have no way of assessing the situation. We
could approach a study of this possibly by using
chemical agents and possibly by mutation.

Conclusion
To sum up what all this amounts to: in nature

143
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

organisms become fitted for their environment
by, initially, physiological adaptation and behavioural adaptation, and subsequently by
changes in their genetic systems. At present man
is imperfectly adjusted to his environment
because of the enormous pace of man-made
changes in the environment. Some degree of
compensation is nowadays achieved by taking
drugs and by psychiatric treatment, but if the
present pace continues we shall have to consider
additional ways of coping with the situation by
additional drugs, replacement of organs, extension of the life span, legislation aimed at

144

producing non-uniform populations, use of
directed mutation and extra-terrestrial investigation to study forms of extra-terrestrial life.

The introspective attitude towards man must
be supplemented by objective studies. Man must
be regarded as an organism and not only as a
thinking creature. If man’s environment continues to change, man also must change, and we
can do this in two stages. Desirable transient
changes may be brought about by deliberate
changes in the social, psychological and physical
state of man, but permanent change can only be
effected by changing his genetic structure.
