INHERITANCE OF MENTAL ABILITY*.
By SIR CYRIL BURT, F.B.A.

Professor Emeritus of Psychology i in the University of London

wars, Dr. Walter Bingham played a

leading part in devising and in putting
into effect, the- ‘Ingenious scheme for classifying personnel in the American Fighting
Services by the aid of psychological procedures. The original ‘‘ Army Mental Tests,’’
compiled under his supervision, have provided
one of the most popular models for the
intelligence tests used in Britain for selecting
pupils at the age of eleven for entrance to
secondary grammar schools. In the course of
his work for the United States War Department, Bingham became more and more
convinced that, under ordinary peacetime
conditions, there was a vast and unsuspected
waste of human ability as a result of the
imperfect methods of educational selection
and vocational guidance ;! and, by the terms
of his will, he left funds from his own estate
in order to encourage, by the institution of
lectureships and other means, the study of
this problem.

In Britain, as a result of the new arrangements introduced by the Education Act of
1944, the problem has come once again to the
fore. Fifty years ago the traditional method
of discovering bright and promising pupils
was still based on scholarship examinations
in the ordinary school subjects. Most
British psychologists had by then accepted
the attractive theory originally formulated
by Francis Galton:? namely, that, during
childhood at any rate, intellectual efficiency
in all directions is determined mainly,
though not entirely, by a single general
factor called “general ability,’ and that
differences in this ability are largely the
effect of the individual’s genetic constitution.
This has several practical implications. Up

Dees the first and second world

* Substance of the Walter Bingham Lecture,
delivered at University College, London, on May a2ist.

Reprinted from Nature (June 29th, 1957) by kind
permission of the Editor and of Sir Cyril Burt.

137

to the prepubertal period, it seemed reasonable to place each elementary pupil in the
same class for all his subjects; the mentally
defective were certified and sent to special
schools on the ground that they suffered
from a general deficiency in intelligence; and
similarly, scholarship children were presumed
to be clever all round. A few special
disabilities, such as word blindness, were
occasionally recognized; and Galton himself
cited evidence for special aptitudes—for
mathematics, music, literary or artistic
achievement, and the like. But for the most
part these were assumed not to mature until
the onset of adolescence.

During the past twenty years, however,
owing to the remarkable success of recent
experimental research on the training of
animals, the attention of psychologists has
been directed more and more to the possibility of improved methods of teaching and »
learning. Influenced largely by the school of
behaviourism, which under the lead of J. B.
Watson? dominated American psychology
between the wars, many have even denied
the very possibility of mental inheritance;
while others, influenced by the statistical
work of Thurstone,‘ have rejected the notion
of general ability and have substituted a
miscellaneous set of relatively specialized
“primary” or “unitary ’”’ abilities. It was
indeed this revival of the old faculty doctrine
that was in part responsible for the belief
that children at eleven plus should be
classified, not so much according to the
degree of general ability, but rather according
to the kind of special aptitude that each
appeared to show: thus the “ abstract type,”
whether of a literary or mathematical bent,
was said to be suited for a grammar school;
the “‘technical’’ type for. the technical
school; and the “‘ concrete ”’ or “ practical ”’
type for the secondary modern school.

But quite recently, psychological research,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1957. 49, 3.
138

often on entirely novel lines, has been tending
‘to rehabilitate much of the old _ beliefs,
with the added recognition that both the
psychological and the genetic problems
involved are far more complicated than
psychologists of 1910 were inclined to
suppose. The doctrine of distinct and
independent abilities has hitherto drawn
much of its support from the early experiments on cerebral localization, which seemed
to indicate that sensory, motor and linguistic
functions could be assigned to definite
centres within the brain. These findings
appeared to be further corroborated by
maps of cortical cell structure published
later by histologists, such as Campbell,
Brodmann and von Economo. Their conclusions, however, have since been severely
criticized by such Continental workers as

Bok and Lorente de N6, and by Sholl in.

Britain. The latest studies of the microscopic structure of the human brain have
directed attention to the wide differences in
cell-architecture between one _ individual
brain and another, and have shown that
many of the alleged local differences are
more or less accidental consequences of
variations in growth, in blood supply, and in
the surface curvature of the cortex. It would
thus appear that, in the same individual,
nerve tissue, like every other tissue—hair,
bone, muscle and skin—tends to be of much
the same general quality throughout, with
only minor local variations. Even if we
cannot unreservedly accept Lashley’s theory
of the ‘‘ mass action ” of the brain, nevertheless the facts that he reports are much more
in keeping with Galton’s hypothesis of
general ability and minor special abilities
than with Thurstone’s doctrine of major
“special abilities’? and no general factor.
Dr. Sholl himself concludes that “ intelligence,” like retentivity, is a “ general
attribute of all cortical tissue.’”’ Finally, this
interpretation is independently confirmed by
wide-scale statistical investigations, based
on applications of the procedure known as
“factor analysis’’ to actual assessments
obtained for various types of intellectual
proficiency. §

If, therefore, differences in this general

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

capacity are the result of differences in brain
structure, we should expect that, like other
physical differences, they would largely
depend on hereditary transmission, and that
the mode of transmission would be that
which obtains in the case of almost all
physical characteristics, namely, the method
described by Mendel’s laws. The most
conclusive evidence is that furnished by
investigations among children of school age,
for whom the requisite data are most readily
procured. Where two alternative factors
such as heredity and environment are likely
to be involved, the obvious procedure is to
keep first one and then the other as constant
as possible, and observe the results. In
orphanages and other institutions, it is
possible to find children brought up under
much the same environmental conditions
almost from birth. Contrary to expectation,
it is found that the individual differences, so
far from being diminished, vary over an even
wider range. In the majority of cases they
seem to be associated with differences in the
intelligence of the parents. Many of the
brightest, for example, prove to be illegitimate children whose father, often a casual
stranger, was himself of a high intellectual
ability. In such a case it is out of the
question to attribute the child’s intelligence
to special opportunities provided by his
home or family.

To secure cases in which children’s genetic
endowment is the same, the psychologist
turns to assessments obtained from monozygotic or identical twins. In Britain nearly
thirty pairs have been investigated where the
twins have been brought up in separate
homes almost from birth. The correlations
are, for educational attainments, 0-68; for
group tests of intelligence, 0-77; for adjusted
assessments of intelligence, o-88—almost as
high as the correlation between two successive assessments for the same child.

Hitherto those psychologists who have
admitted the possibility that mental abilities
may be inherited have almost invariably
assumed that their transmission would
follow the principles of blended inheritance.
They repeat the old definition of heredity as
‘the tendency of like to beget like; ’’ and
INHERITANCE OF MENTAL ABILITY

consequently suppose that the arguments
for mental inheritance consist solely in
demonstrating resemblances between the
parent and his children by means of correlations; when the two parents differ, then the
child is still expected ‘to consist of an
intermediate blend of both.

The approach of the modern geneticist is
the reverse of all this. As he views it, the
real problem is rather to explain why in so
many instances “like begets unlike.”’ Both
for the environmentalist and for the believer
in blended inheritance, one of the most
puzzling phenomena is the appearance, not
only of extremely dull children in the
families of the well-to-do professional classes,
but also of extremely bright children in
families where the personal, cultural and
economic conditions of the parents would,
one might imagine, condemn every child to
failure on either count. On the Mendelian
hypothesis that is just what we should
expect. After all, Mendel himself suggested
the possibility that the inheritance of graded
characteristics might be interpreted in terms
of a multifactorial hypothesis; and during
recent years a vast and valuable amount of
work among plants and animals has been
done by the biometric school, in which that
hypothesis has not only been fully confirmed
but also has issued in results of the greatest
practical value.

In point of fact several investigations
recently published yield fairly clear indications that in the case of intelligence individual
variations are influenced by both unifactor.
and multi-factor inheritance; in other words,
they result from Mendelian factors of two
kinds: (I) major genes responsible for comparatively large deviations, usually of an ab
normal kind ; and (2) multiple genes, the effects

of which are small, similar, and cumulative.
The biometric techniques have been elaborated by R. A. Fisher and others; and on
applying their procedures it is found that,
with the ordinary tests of intelligence, about
three-quarters of the total variance is due
to genetic factors, that is, to what is loosely
called heredity. If the results of the tests
are corrected and adjusted in the light of all
available information, then the accuracy of

139

the predictions is greatly improved. In
practice, such intensive studies of individual
cases would be far too costly for education
authorities to carry out, except, perhaps, in
borderline cases.° |

Investigations made just before the war
showed that during the ten preceding years
about 40 per cent of those who had sufficient
ability to enter a university had apparently
failed to do so.” It is too early to inquire
what improvement has been effected by
improved economic conditions or by the
new arrangements made under the Education
Act of 1944. A series of studies recently
published by Dr. Floud® and her colleagues
shows that the grosser material handicaps
appear to have been lessened and in many
areas eliminated, but that the problem of
social wastage is as yet by no means overcome.

The whole issue is of such far-reaching
social importance that there is a most urgent
need for more research. Since school investigations undertaken by: outsiders are bound
to be incomplete, it is to be hoped that once
again the more progressive local education
authorities will allow their official psychologists time and full facilities for such inquiries.
But the underlying processes are so complex
and obscure that the psychogenetics of man
is not likely to make much headway without
carefully controlled experiments on the
nature and transmission of intelligence in
lower animals.

REFERENCES

1 Bingham, W. Aptitudes and Aptitude Testing. 1937

Houghton Mifflin.
2 Galton, F. Hereditary Genius. 1869. Macmillan.

8 Watson, J. B. Behaviourism. 1931. Kegan Paul.

« Thurstone, L. L. Primary Abilities. 1938. University
of Chicago Press.

§ Sholl, D. A. The Organization ov the Cerebral Cortex.
1956. Methuen.

6 Burt, C., and Howard, M. Brit. J. Statist. Psychol.
1956. 9, 95.

7 Burt, C. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol. 1943. 13, 83.

a Floud, J. E., Halsey, H. E., and Martin, F. M.
Social Class and Educational Opportunity. 1956.
Heinemann. .
