THE INTELLIGENCE OF TWINS
And of the Inmates of Orphanages

By ALEX. H. WINGFIELD, Ph.D.

Identical Twins in the April issue of
the EuGENICS REVIEW is one that
. should invoke considerable thought and discussion among students of the much-tangled
problem of nature versus nurture. While
he does not definitely conclude that environment and heredity have equal effects in producing the mental differences found among
human beings, he nevertheless allows his
facts to speak in such a manner that this is
the. logical conclusion to which one is led.

If the effects of different environment on
like heredity (identical twins) are really
equal to the effects of like environment on
different heredity (fraternal twins), then
such statements as ‘‘ heredity counts for 90
per cent. of the differences found among individuals ’’ stand very much in need of correction. But before making any such radical change in our concept that intelligence
(mental brightness) is a trait that is solely
inherited, we must examine most rigidly
Professor Newman’s facts as presented. Of
course, as he himself states, he thinks it
most unwise to attempt to draw any generalization from his sparse data.

Noting the results of his Stanford-Binet
test, we see that while there is a marked
difference in I.Q.’s (12 points) between the

Pres ESSOR NEWMAN’S article on

first and second pairs of identical twins
reared apart, still in the third case the difference is entirely negligible, being only two
points. But even in the first two cases
where the difference in I.Q.’s is 12 points,
it seems very unsafe to draw a definite conclusion that there is here any very significant difference in intelligence. We must
remember that even the same child, if tested
twice by this test, will show a variation in
his I.Q. In sixteen investigations of the
I.Q.’s of varying numbers of children who
had been given at least two tests, the median
difference in I.Q. from the first test to the
second is 4.6 points, which is the P.E. of
the test. It would be interesting to know
the results if these twins were tested again
at the end of another year and their respective I.Q.’s were compared.

While reviewing the results obtained by
the use of the Otis Self-administering Test,
we shall also incorporate the results of
Muller’s pair of identical twins which were
reared apart. Although he used the Army
Alpha Test and the Otis Advanced Test,
these are group tests quite similar to the
one used by Professor Newman.

The following table shows us the results
arising from their use of these group
tests.

TABLE 1.—IDENTICAL TWINS.

 

NEWMAN—3 Pairs
1.Q.’s—Otis Self-Administering Test

 

Case II Case III

 

MULLER—1 Pair

 

Army Alpha Scores | Otis Advanced Exam. Scores

 
184

We at once notice that, as far as Muller’s
set of twins is concerned, there is practical
identity in their scores in both tests. But
even the difference of 10 points in Case III
of Professor Newman’s twins is not statistically significant. We thus may say that in
two of the cases of identical twins reared
apart, as far as group tests can ascertain,
we find identical degrees of intelligence,
while in two other similar cases we do not
find this identity. We also noted that in
Professor Newman’s Stanford-Binet results
we had practical identity in one case out of
the three.

It would seem, therefore, that the results
obtained from measurements of intelligence
of four sets of identical twins reared apart
do not allow us to conclude that the members of all such twin pairs will be found to
have differing degrees of intelligence.

The errors of measurement in group tests
of intelligence are still so large that any
result, expressed either in mental age or intelligence quotient, when applied to a single
individual is of doubtful significance. For
determining the average intelligence of a
group, however, they have a fairly high
degree of reliability.

In a study of twins and orphans* made a
the University of Toronto, mental tests were
given to 102 pairs of twins, and also to 29
orphans who had spent a minimum of three
years and at least 25 per cent. of their lives
in the same orphanage. ‘The reliability of
the intelligence measurements was increased
by giving two intelligence tests to each
individual and averaging the mental ages
obtained.

These tests were used :

1. The National Intelligence Test, Scale
A., Form I.

2. The Multi-Mental Scale of McCall.

3. The Stanford Achievement Test. A
battery of nine sub-tests.

4. The British Columbia Test in the
Fundamentals of Arithmetic.

5. The Morrison-McCall Spelling Scale.

en

* Wingfield, A. H. Twins and Orphans—The
Inheritance of Intelligence. London, 1928. J. M.
Dent & Sons.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Since in twin data it is impossible to
determine which should be considered the
X-variable and which the Y-variable, the

. od? :
Otis formula r=1-¥% (~) was used instead

of Pearson product-moment formula. In
this formula od is the standard deviation of
the differences between the scores of each
twin pair for the trait measured, and gy
is the standard deviation of the scores of all
children in general for the same trait. In
no part of the study was the constancy of
the I.Q. assumed, although most researches
show it to be fairly constant for the same
child throughout its school life. The technique of partial coefficients of correlation
was used to eliminate any possible effect
that age might have on the I.Q.’s of the
children tested. A negative correlation
about —.27, was found between the chronological age and I.Q.

The method of mean differences was also
used, since it is very easy to calculate and
the results are readily interpreted by nonmathematical people. But this is a rather
crude method, since no account is taken of
the variability of the scores, and the effect
of age on the scores ¢annot be eliminated.

It is interesting to note the mean differences for identical and fraternal twins, as
determined by Professor Newman at
Chicago and by myself at Toronto. |

MEAN DIFFERENCES IN I.Q.’S.

ann

NEWMAN
(Stanford-Binet) | WinGFIELD
Results
Identical Twins 5°9 6-2
Fraternal Twins 9°9 II-7

—_—— eee dt

We see that both groups of identical twins
are practically similar, while there is a
difference of 1.8 points between the fraternal
groups.

The following are the summaries of the
results :
INTELLIGENCE OF TWINS 185

TABLE II.—RESEMBLANCES OF TWINS IN GENERAL INTELLIGENCE.

 
 
 

No. of Standard y for
Pairs Deviation Constant Age

 
 
  

 
 
    
    

| All twin pairs I3°5 -75+ +029
Unlike-sex pairs. . 12°9 -59+ +086
Like-sex pairs 13°6 -82+ 025
Fraternal pairs .. 12°6 "70+ *045
Identical pairs .. 14°3 "90+ °O0I9 |

  

TABLE I1l.—_RESEMBLANCE OF YOUNGER TWINS AND OLDER TWINS.

 

Twins—8-11 years Twins—12-15 years

Trait y for Stand. error y for Stand. error

Constant Age | of Estimate || Constant Age| of Estimate
Gener. Intelligence (1.Q.) os “71 8-09 9:16
Stanford Achievement (E.Q.) .. “64 8-13 5°35
Stanford Achievement (A.Q.) .. -82 3°95 5°10
Arithmetic ‘a aa as -89 2°70 4°00
Spelling .. ws . . *85 4°18 4°41
Average .. we ws . 782 5°41 5:60

 

 

It is here seen that older twins are no average r for all the traits shows that
more alike than younger twins in general younger and older twins are alike in general
intelligence, a lower standard error of esti- intelligence and general educational achievemate signifying a closer resemblance. The ments.

In none of the differences found between

TABLE IV.—RESEMBLANCE OF ALL TWIN the resemblance in general intelligence and

the resemblance in trained traits is the
PAIRS IN NATIVE AND ACQUIRED TRAITS. difference greater than three times the
E.Q.’s (Stanford Achievement) r=.76+.029

I.Q.’s (Gen. Intelligence) r=.75+.029 TABLE V.—ORPHANS PAIRED AT
Difference = .OI+.041 RANDOM.
A.Q.’s (Stanford Achievement) r= .83 + .021 Trait. r for constant age.
1.Q.’s (Gen. Intelligence) r=.75+.029 1.0.’s _
Difference = .08 + .040 E O So — _ “94
Arithmetic Scores r=.78+ .028 AO? o -_ - _ 79
I.Q.’s (Gen. Intelligence) r=.75+.029 Qos ~ ~ 79
; Diff Oy Arithmetic bee was — .30
, imerence *03 = -040 Spelling ... ves ve —.49
Spelling Scores r= .85+.019 P
I.Q.’s (Gen. Intelligence) r=.75+ .029 Average... 7 — 58

Difference 10+ .035
186

probable error of the difference. In fact, in
two of the cases the P.E. of the difference is
greater than the difference itself.

TABLE VI.—_ORPHANS PAIRED TO
NEAREST AGE.

 

Trait. for constant age.
I.Q.’s 13
E.Q.’s — .07
A.Q.’s... 47
Arithmetic . . .18
Spelling ... bes bee £35

Average bee bas .2I

6. Coefficients of correlation for intelligence among groups exhibiting different
degrees of genetic relationship are :

GROUP. CORRELATION.
Physically identical twins .9O
Like-sex twins... vee 82
Fraternal twins... _ .70
Unlike-sex twins ... _ 59
Siblings ... a bee 50
Parent-child _ bes 30
Cousins vee wee _ .27
Grandparent-grandchild ... 15
Orphans _... Lee 4 00
Unrelated children wee .00

 

. In the study here reported it is to be noted
that the word ‘‘ physical ’’ is placed in front
of identical twins. Since the necessary embryological evidence could not be secured
to isolate definitely the true group of identical twins, physical identity was the criterion
for placing twins in the identical group.
This probably accounts for the rather high
correlation found in the so-called fraternal
group, as a few identical pairs may have in
THE EUGENICS REVIEW. ’

advertently been placed in the fraternal
group.

The biological principle of homology
maintains that closeness of resemblance in
a given trait is in proportion to closeness of
kinship. This law is generally considered
to apply to the realm of physical] traits only.
But since it is noted that throughout the
whole scale of animal life we obtain an increasing complexity of behaviour with increase in the complexity of the nervous system, we may, therefore, state that behaviour
is a function of the central nervous system.
Now neurological structure is certainly a
physical entity and obeys the law of homology. Hence we should, a priori, expect

intelligence (which is a function of the cen
tral nervous system) to obey this general
law too.

When one bears in mind the genetic relationship existing among the individuals
comprising the various groups given above,
one is literally forced to draw the conclusion
that the closer the genetic relationship between individuals, the closer is the degree
with which they resemble each other in
general intelligence. Ergo, intelligence is
an inherited trait.

Such studies of the inheritance of intellect
as have been made in the last few years,
with all our refined measuring instruments
and statistics, tend more and more to confirm the remarkable prescience of Sir Francis Galton, when, sixty years ago, he said:

“ I acknowledge freely the great power of
education and social influence in developing
the active power of the mind, just as I
acknowledge the effect of use in developing
the muscles of a blacksmith’s arm, and no
further... . Toeach of usa limit is set—
a limit, as far as one can see at present, due
to heredity rather than to opportunity, and
to the intelligence of our parents and ancestors rather than to the educational system
under which we were reared.”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.
