8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The third question was in effect answered
by Mrs. Grant Duff in the article* that
provoked Mr. Kerr’s criticism. Even if the
allowances fail, as we believe they will, to
raise the birth rate, they will serve for the
better sustenance of the boys and girls for

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1940, 82, 95.

whose world we are fighting to-day. This is
not a very great eugenic achievement, but
it is an instalment to go on with. Even if it
does not help us far forward, it will do something to keep us from slipping back. And in
war-time that is perhaps as much as could be
hoped for.

 

POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES
By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

policies Mr. Glass’s book* is an invaluable encyclopaedia. In years to come,
says Mr. Glass in his preface,

We may be faced with a population considerably reduced by war casualties. We shall
almost certainly be faced with one which is at
least on the verge of decline. Some writers have
already made up their minds that a declining
population is undesirable ; others believe that,
at least for some years, a decline may bring, or
may be used to bring, considerable advantages.
But many writers agree that to adjust ourselves
to population changes of the kind most likely
to occur, or to adjust the population to our
aims, will need much forethought and planning.
In this book I do not deal with the question of
planning. Instead I have tried, by summarizing
the work I have done in recent years as Research
Secretary of the Population Investigation Committee, to give a general background which may
be helpful when we come to consider which way
we ought to go, and what we should do to go
there.

Whenever and however Britain’s population problem is ultimately tackled, Mr.
Glass’s work, with its 373 pages of closely
argued analysis and its ample footnotes and
appendixes summarizing or referring to
nearly all the important research in this
field, will become an indispensable reference
book. It sums up the demographic experiences of an epoch—an epoch in which all the

Pros students of population trends and

 

* Population Policies and Movements in Europe.
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1940. See also EUGENICS
ReEvizEw, 1940, 82, 49.

immanent contradictions—social, political,
moral, spiritual—of European civilization
culminated in the paroxysms of social and
military strife which have convulsed Europe
for at least thirty years.

In his review of past and possible future
population trends and of policies designed to
influence those trends, Mr. Glass sticks
closely to his special field, covering this with
meticulous accuracy but passing few judgments. His facts speak largely for themselves and form an unforgettable picture of
an epoch that can never return. It is a
picture of outspoken, purposive and efficient
militarism and nihilism in Germany attempting to master population trends, as it
attempts to master all other social and
economic problems, with a terrifyingly
thorough use of modern techniques combined
with a brutal, degrading and reactionary
“ideology ’’; of Fascist Italy, Germany’s
precursor in population policy, but without
the forward-looking dynamism of the Nazis,
inefficiently and unsuccessfully striving in
the same direction; of France, Italy’s
precursor, its official mind even more rooted
in the past, more and more coming to
imitate Italian and German techniques ; of
Britain, shirking the issue and hoping to
muddle through ; of the progressive Scandinavian democracies, making what may later
be seen to have been the first faltering steps
towards a human, democratic, civilized
POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES 9

solution of the population problem which
confronts most European nations. Mr. Glass
himself does not make these generalizations ;
I cannot see any other generalizations which
fit the facts he records.

Chapter I surveys British population
trends since 1801 and analyses present-day
regional and social differences in fertility. It
also discusses the causes of the falling birthrate. Mr. Glass mghtly concludes that
changes in the amount of marriage or age at
marriage are not responsible, and that
involuntary factors (such as a growth of
physiological sterility, greater use of soap,
etc.) are probably not important. The really
important factor is that people are less
willing to have children and voluntarily
control their reproductivity. Mr. Glass
remarks that “ the desire to control reproduction has probably always been present in
society, even when it did not imply a serious
restriction of births, and at almost all times
and among most peoples some knowledge of
methods of birth prevention has been
available.”” But the vital point is that ‘‘ the
conditions specifically favouring small
families were lacking in Europe until the
nineteenth century, though individuals, especially in wealthy and fashionable circles,
refused to be burdened with large families.”’

Mr. Glass’s account of how fertility has
been reduced in the past seventy-five years
by contraception, abortion and other methods
is a fascinating piece of original research in
English social history. His explanation of
why precisely since mid-Victorian times
people generally have come to want to limit
their families is less satisfactory. He rightly
ascribes this changed attitude towards
parenthood to the growth of a “ new cultural
pattern ’’ and sketches briefly some of the
main economic and social factors which
gave rise to this pattern. I do not feel, however, that this analysis goes deep enough:
it merely mentions some of the obvious
features. Yet a careful and detailed socio
logical analysis of the “new cultural pat-’

tern ’’ is required, for without such a diagnosis we cannot prescribe any certain
remedy. Mr. Glass rules out such speculation from his strictly factual survey, but it

is to be hoped that he will later devote
himself to the topic.

Chapter VIII and an appendix contain an
authoritative discussion of the methods of
projecting present population trends into
the future and a review of the most important “estimates ’’ which have so far been
made for this country. Mr. Glass draws
attention to a relatively new method of
extrapolating mortality and fertility trends,
by “ plotting each specific death-rate against
the period of birth of the persons to whom
the rate applies, instead of the period in which
the rate was observed.” This generation
method, developed by Derrick, Kermack,
McKendrick, McKinlay, Barclay, Cramér,
Wold and others, may prove to be very
fruitful, especially in the interpretation of
mortality trends. It suggests, for instance,
that “‘ each generation, at least from the age
of 10 onwards, tends to carry its own mortality with it.” Its application to fertility
trends is less evident, but the implications
for the forecasting of population trends are
obvious. Mr. Glass presents a set of three
new projections made by himself. In general
his curves follow those of Enid Charles,
although they suggest a considerably slower
decline in total numbers. It is a pity that
expense has prevented publication of the full
tables setting forth these “‘ estimates.”

The bulk of the book is devoted to an
examination of ‘“ pro-natalist ’’ policies in
France, Belgium, Italy, Germany and Scandinavia, discussing measures, motives and
results in the light of population movements.
It is so learned, so exhaustive, so masterly,
and for all the difficulties of the subject such
interesting reading, that it well repays the
initiative of the Eugenics Society in making
Mr. Glass’s work possible. The biggest
generalization which he permits himself is
the following : :

Evidence given in the chapters on France,
Germany, and Italy shows that in those countries
there is far less concern with the economic than
with the political implications of a declining
population. France has been affected largely by
her anxiety over the possibility of invasion and
relative military strength of her neighbours,
while Italy and Germany have been concerned
largely with the desire to justify their statements
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on the question of ‘‘ living space.”’ . . . It would
be no exaggeration to say that Italian population
policy, when stripped of its fascist mysticism
about the individual, the family, and the State,
is to a large extent concerned with proving the
validity of its claims for more territory. Other
political factors may have more Justification,
and, in the present state of the world, it is
certain that differential rates of growth of the
populations of the Great Powers give a genuine
basis for anxiety. But here, again, it would
probably be much cheaper, as well as more
satisfactory, to solve the problem by thorough
international control of migration and settlement
than if each nation were to rush headlong into a
demographic armaments race.

On family allowances in France, Belgium
and Italy Mr. Glass has written what is
probably as authoritative a study as will
be needed for many years to come. He shows
conclusively that the French-Belgian-Italian
systems, whatever their undoubted merits
as welfare measures, almost certainly had no
influence at all on the birth rate. The same
would seem to apply to all the other petty
monetary inducements offered to parents in
France and Belgium—rebates on various
taxes and charges, loans, subsidies, welfare
facilities, medals, a shallow social prestige.
After all, if the retreat from parenthood is
bound up with a “new cultural pattern,”
a host of minor modifications and palliatives
which left that pattern fundamentally unaltered were not likely to bring about a new
attitude to child-bearing. There still remain
the basic frustrations of French social life—
the aspiration of the masses for a fuller freer
life which they felt to be possible, the force
of ‘social capillarity ’’ in an economically
competitive society, the feelings of insecurity
engendered by unemployment and the growing threat of war. Nor, as Mr. Glass shows,
was the other aspect of French “ pronatalist ’’ policy—in the ill-inspired and
ineffective repression of both contraception
and abortion—likely to succeed in raising
the birth rate; not, at least, as long as
personal liberty was cherished in France.
The main inspiration of much “ pro-natalist ”’
propaganda was the fear of German invasion.
It was largely a defensive outlook, rooted in
the past, harking back to 1870 and I0914,
inspired not, as the Nazi policy is, by the

need for greater numbers to build up a
Herrenvolk holding all the best jobs in a
unified and enslaved Europe, but simply by
the desire for large armies to defend the
status quo, both within France and in
Europe generally. As war drew nearer
French “ pro-natalist ’’ measures were intensified on essentially similar lines: more
petty inducements, more repression. It
ended logically enough in Marshal Pétain’s
despairing outburst in June 1940: “ Too
few children, too few arms, too few allies.”
“Too few technicians, too many vested
interests, too many traitors’’ would have
been nearer the mark. It was tanks, aircraft
and honest men, not troops, that were
lacking.

Italian policy largely resembles that of
France, with the addition of land reclamation,
free portraits of Mussolini and a larger dose
of repression. Measures which on examination amount to very little are put over with
a windy bombast of which only the Duce is
capable. Family allowances began largely
as an ingredient in a scientific wage-cutting
policy; ‘ pro-natalist ’’ measures were
almost entirely inspired by aggressive imperialist ambitions and not by the social
welfare motives that might lead a democratic
country to wish to control its demographic
development. Of the period before 1937 Mr.
Glass writes :

First, a large part of the policy was directed
towards restricting emigration, in so far as
economic conditions made this _ possible.
Secondly, another considerable section concentrated on “ negative’’ or repressive measures
—imposing economic penalties on bachelors and
childless married couples, and making it more
difficult for women to prevent conception or
procure abortion. Of the positive measures,
many were not directly pro-natalist . . . Thus
the general system of land reclamation and
improvement coming under the head of bonifica
integrale is not a direct population policy, though
it may enable a larger population to be supported
at the current or at a higher standard of life.
Similar schemes of reclamation have been
undertaken in many countries for reasons quite
unconnected with a desire to increase the birth
rate. The same applies to the legislation for the
protection of maternity and childhood. This is
not to deny that such measures are of very great
value. . . . But it is somewhat inappropriate to
POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES II

invest them with the title of demographic
measures, when there is scarcely any modern
State which has not been passing similar
legislation in the last fifty years. If we subtract
these measures from the general group of positive
measures introduced in Italy, we are left with
very little specifically in the category of encouragements to the raising of families.

After 1937 the family-allowance system
was developed on a much larger scale and
marriage loans were introduced. Mr. Glass
finds no evidence that any of these measures
has so far influenced fertility. The slight rise
of the birth rate in 1937-38 probably resulted
mainly from the return of troops from
Abyssinia. The new marriage loans may have
proved a stimulus but, as in Germany, this
may only mean a concentration of births in
the early years of married life rather than
an increase in the total number of births per

marriage.
Nazi Germany is a different proposition.
Here repression, positive inducements

and “‘ pro-natalist’” propaganda have been
systematized and perfected to a pitch which
makes the efforts of Belgium, France and
Italy look childish in comparison. Mr. Glass’s
examination of the Nazis’ apparent success
in promoting births is of great interest. He
establishes that
while a considerable part of the rise since 1933
is due to the increased number of marriages, a
much greater proportion is due to the increase
of fertility within marriage. Both the recent
marriages and those contracted before 1933 have
shown this increase. Two-thirds of the increase
in legitimate births, says Burgdorfer, must be
attributed to a genuine rise in fertility.

But he rightly points out (as Burgdorfer .

has admitted) that

the economic depression of 1930-32 may have
caused married couples to postpone having any
or having additional children. An improvement
in economic circumstances, under whatever
government, might therefore not only have
increased the annual number of marriages but
also the number of children per marriage. .. .
If this criticism is valid, then the increase in
births attributable to the special measures of
National-Socialist Germany is considerably less
than the total increase. But there has been,
nevertheless, some real increase.

The Nazi theorists attribute this genuine
increase to the “ psychic rebirth of Germany.” Mr. Glass is sceptical :

If ‘‘ psychic rebirth ’’ is an important factor
in affecting population trends, it should be noted
that quite a large section of the population
appears as yet untouched by it. Of the 615,630
marriages contracted in 1933 and still in
existence on December 31st 1936, 219,334, or
36 per cent., had borne only one child each, and
240,793, or 39 per cent., had borne none. Of the
722,764 Marriages contracted in 1934 and still in
existence at the end of 1936, 287,888, or 40 per
cent., had borne only one child each, and a
further 328,295, or 45 per cent, had not borne
any children. The present writer believes,
however, that the material measures have been
more important than the “ psychic’’ changes, and
that, in particular, the suppression of illegal
abortion has been a major factor.

He gives statistical evidence in support of
this assertion, and concludes: “ If the suppression of illegal abortion has been as successful as it is said to be, that by itself would
account for the increase in births in recent
years.”’ It is curious that Mr. Glass does not
refer to the changed attitude to illegitimacy
in Germany, which may have some bearing
on the decline of illegal abortion. There is
no mention either of the stud-farm uses
which the Nazis made of the Labour Camps
and the Landjahr for young women.

In contrast to all these countries, Sweden
especially, Denmark and Norway to some.
extent, present a different position. As Mr.
Glass points out :

The Scandinavian approach to the population problem is distinguished by two special
characteristics. First, that the passing of
legislation should be preceded by detailed
investigations of the various aspects of the
population problem. Of no other countries is
this true. Evenin France .. . no really serious
inquiry has been made at any time, either by the
Commissions set up early in the twentieth
century, or by the Conseil Supérieur de la
Natalité . . . Secondly . . . in Scandinavia the
initial assumption is that parenthood shall be
voluntary. The mandate of the Swedish Commission categorically states that homes which
are economically badly off should not be
burdened by too many children, while the
Mandate of the Danish Commission specifies
that no repressive measures shall be considered.
In Sweden population discussions were

launched by Alva and Gunnar Myrdal’s
book, Crisis in the Population Problem
(1934),* which had an enormous influence on

* See EuGcEenics REvIEw, 1937, 10, 58.
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the thinking public of all Scandinavian
countries. It pointed out to Neo-Malthusian
optimists the social and economic disadvantages which might result from a
declining and ageing population. To Conservative pessimists it replied that, whether
or not a rise in the standard of living would
increase fertility, there were in any case
strong grounds for removing the major
social and economic disadvantages of childrearing. It proposed that measures to promote parenthood should go hand in hand
with measures to enhance personal freedom
by promoting voluntary parenthood—the
willing production of wanted children.

The seventeen reports of the Swedish
Royal Commission on Population and the
legislation to which they led were all
inspired by this general outlook. Abortion
was allowed on therapeutic, eugenic and
ethical grounds both in Sweden and Denmark,* and measures to diffuse contraceptive
knowledge were adopted in both countries.
The magnificent work of voluntary bodies,
such as the Swedish Reksforbund for Sexuell
Upplysning (National Association for Sex
Education), received a great stimulus in the
years immediately preceding the outbreak of
war. A beginning was made with a programme to get parenthood on to a planned,
rational and eugenic footing. At the same
time in Sweden a series of measures was
adopted—with emphasis on community services—to make parenthood easier. Better
housing, nutrition, maternity services and
direct provision of benefits in kind were
preferred to children’s allowances. Homefurnishing loans to assist young married
couples were introduced, but interest was
charged and there were no cancellations of
repayment at the birth of children. Nor was
there any attempt, as in Germany and
France, to use these loans to drive women
out of employment.

 

* In Norway abortion law reform was demanded by
the Medical Congress in 1930 and by a petition organized
by the Free Churches in 1934 and signed by 200,000
persons over 18. A Government Committee recommended reform in 1935, but nothing was done. The full
text of the Danish law is published in the EUGENICS
Review of April 1938 (p. 43), and of the Swedish law
in the issue of July 1939 (p. 109).

On the contrary, says Mr. Glass, the Population Commission is very anxious to safeguard
and guarantee the employment of married
women, and to establish their right to have
children and take the required absence during
pregnancy and childbirth without being subject
to the fear of losing their jobs.

In Sweden up to the outbreak of war,

‘the economic assistance actually given to
families is still relatively small, and whether the
proposals suggested and measures actually
introduced will have any significant effect upon
the trend of fertility is, of course, impossible to
predict. But of the general proposals and
measures two things may be said. First, they
are in keeping with the thesis of democratic
government, for they all emphasize the need for
voluntary parenthood. Secondly, whatever their
effect upon fertility, they are in any case all
socially desirable.

The Swedish measures were only the
earliest beginnings of what was frankly an
experiment which might or might not have
succeeded. The outbreak of war has probably
frustrated this democratic attempt to solve
the population problem, as it will almost
certainly nullify the different type of experiment in Germany. In a sense Fascism and
Nazism are short cuts to a solution of the
major social and economic problems of
European civilization. Much the same may
also be said of the population policies of
France and Belgium: they are short cuts,
their spirit is wrong, their intentions those
of despair and reaction. In the long run
they are doomed to failure, because they are
short cuts to a road along which humanity
refuses any more to travel.

But it must not be ignored that in war
time Nazi population policy is still developing. The Herrenvolk is actually taking over
Europe and new attempts to increase its
fertility are being made. War-time separation of man and wife is an impediment to
fertility which the Nazis are seeking to overcome by indiscriminate exhortations to
breed. The German soldier is urged to leave
his wife pregnant when he returns to his
unit. If not his wife, any echtdeutsche woman
wili deem it an honour to bear his progeny.
On the other hand separation is being used
to reduce the fertility of the conquered
POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES 13

nations. Polish, Czech, Dutch, Belgian,
French man-power is drafted into Germany
for semi-forced labour. Jewish men in
Poland are apparently herded into reservations away from their stranded womenfolk.
Many thousands of French soldiers are
retained as prisoners. Hitler’s dream of a
Europe repopulated by 100 million “ racially
superior’ Germans is more than ever the

inspiration of Nazi policy. I feel nevertheless
that all this will lead nowhere. One day,
when the nightmare is over and Europe faces
once more the problems of reconstruction,
the Swedish attempt to influence demographic trends by enhancing personal welfare
and freedom will be found to have contained
important hints for a British approach to the
problem.

 

FAMILY ALLOWANCES IN WAR TIME
By EVA M. HUBBACK

Vice-Chairman, Family Endowment Soctety

of the House of Commons drawn from
all parties have put their names to a
resolution asking the Government to formulate a scheme for “a national State-paid

p | ‘HE fact that as many as 150 Members

scheme of allowances for dependent children, |

payable to their mothers or acting guardians,
as a means of safe-guarding the health and
well-being of the rising generation,” is a sure
sign that the support for Family Allowances
is growing every day. Women’s organizations, religious bodies, professional societies
and economists of note are also increasingly
giving their support, not only to the principle
of Family Allowances, but also to a universal
state scheme.

It often happens in war that the national
social conscience is strengthened, and that
reforms which have been asked for im peace
time for many years are adopted and dreams
become facts. It would not be surprising
should this happen in the case of Family
Allowances, for the need is so greatly
strengthened as a result of war conditions.
The main ground on which it is being put
forward is the need for maintaining an
adequate standard of living for the children
of the nation.

Readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW will be
familiar with the peace-time figures—for

instance, Sir John Orr’s estimate that at
least 25 per cent of our children come from
homes in which the income is too low to
allow for adequate nourishment. But they
may not be so familiar with the recent
figures as to child-dependency drawn by
Mr. Seebohm Rowntree from a recent social
survey of 15,577 men in York. In this group:
57°8 per cent. had no children ; 21 per cent.
had one child; 12-3 per cent. had two
children ; 5 per cent. had three children ;
2°3 per cent. had four children ; and 1-6 per
cent. had five or more children. It is significant that the 3-9 per cent. with more
than three children accounted for over 23
per cent. of the total number.

Since the beginning of the war it has been
estimated that the cost of living for workingclass families has risen by at least 30 per
cent. In some industries wages have risen as
much, if not more, and overtime and the
employment of more members of the family
have resulted in higher incomes. But in
other cases it has not been so, and incomes
have risen much less than prices or even not
at all. Often, moreover, when the man has
been called up his wife has to manage ona
greatly reduced weekly sum. The result is
that many families who were previously
above the poverty line are now below, and
