THE

RELATION BETWEEN

EYE-COLOUR

AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION
By CYRIL BURT, M.A., D.Se., LLD.

Professor of Psychology, University of London

REVIEW* dealing with inheritable characteristics in man, I cited as suitable
instances where systematic study might
throw new light on the relations between
physical and mental constitution, the pigmentation of the iris, on the one hand, and
defects of colour-vision, on the other. Many
psychologists have believed that differences
in hair- and eye-colour are connected,
though no. doubt indirectly, with differences
in mental and temperamental qualities ; and
among the latter, differences in sensory
discrimination are the easiest to detect and
“assess.
‘ In conformity with these suggestions,
during inquiries on backward and subnormal
children carried out for the London County
Council and other authorities, I have endeavoured to secure records of the more obvious
inheritable physical characteristics and to
apply systematic tests of colour-vision, in
addition to the usual tests of more complex
abilities and traits. In nearly every survey
I found consistent indications of a correlation
between pigmentation and colour-discrimination ; but the size of the correlation was too
small to be accepted as conclusive without a
far more extensive inquiry. The results,
however, more recently obtained during the
examination of recruits for the fighting services provide material which well repays
analysis from this particular standpoint.
It, is the object of this paper to summarize
the evidence so far available, and to review
the possible hypotheses which that evidence
suggests, in the hope that readers may be
sufficiently interested to submit further
data, in the shape of pedigrees, family
records and individual cases. for psychological investigation.

E an early paper in the EUGENICS

* 1912, 4, 36-50.

_ usual headings ”’ ;

Defective Colour-Vision among Children ; :
School Surveys

In my earlier surveys of school children,*
I relied mainly on Stilling’s pseudo-isochromatic charts; these can be used as a
group-test, and borderline cases thus detected
were examined individually by wool, bead
or lantern tests, and in the more doubtful
instances by tests of colour mixture. Among
the boys I found 3-1 per cent suffering from
a defect of colour-vision sufficiently pronounced to be regarded as “ partial colourblindness’’ (nearly all instances of redgreen colour-blindness, with darkening of the
red end of the spectrum in about one-third
of the cases). In addition there were another
3 per cent suffering from milder deficiencies
of colour-vision of various degrees and types
—e.g., less pronounced forms of red-green
confusion and various anomalous deviations.t Among the girls only 0-2 per cent
were found to be suffering from “ partial
colour-blindness’”’; but cases of weak or
anomalous colour-vision were not uncommon
(1-3 per cent),.and appeared disproportionately frequent among relatives of colourblind boys. Altogether, it will be seen,
defects of colour-vision, innate and probably
inheritable, and often severe enough to constitute a grave handicap in practical life if
they pass unrecognized, are far more fre
* Cf. The Backward Child, p. 217.

+ The large proportion of defective cases included im
Table I is due to the fact that many were referred by
teachers and that additional efforts were made to
investigate the brothers and sisters of cases of deficiency
found in the survey. I should like to emphasize what I
have said elsewhere (l.c., p. 217), that, in addition to
the more familiar types of colour-blindness, there‘are a
number of deficiencies ‘‘ difficult to classify under the
some of these may be regarded as
extreme deviations in the normal distribution of
ordinary trichromatic vision; but others—the “ red
weak,” the ‘“‘ green weak,’’ and other anomalous forms

(as well as detinite red-green blindness)—differ qualitatively as well as quantitatively.

149
150

quent and ‘far more various than has
commonly been supposed. The total figure
for males cannot be far short of 8-10 per cent.

For colour of hair and eyes, a grade was
assigned on a sevenfold scale, the various
degrees being roughly defined in accordance
with a normal distribution, with the probable error as unit (giving frequencies in
round figures of 5, 10, 20, 30, 20, I0, 5 per
cent). The numbers observed are shown in
Table I. The figures after eye-colour denote
the specimens in the Martin scale corresponding to each grade.*

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

seven categories for eye-colour to a twofold
classification (dark and not dark), and apply
the tetrachoric method, we obtain much the
same figure, namely 0-193. The correlation
would therefore seem to be of the same low
order as correlations between other physical
and mental characteristics, such as bodytype and temperamental tendency.

For hair cqlour the correlation with defective colour-vision was somewhat smaller,
0-104—a figure which in a group of this size
is well below the level of statistical significance. Here and elsewhere, on partialling out

TABLE I
- DISTRIBUTION OF EYE-COLOUR AMONG CHILDREN WITH NORMAL AND DEFICIENT COLOUR-VISION

Eye-Colour Colour-Vision |
Grading Martin Normal Deficient Total
Scale Number Percent Number’ Percent | Number Per cent
Blue-Grey ... 16, 15, 14 24 4°96 | 2 1°6 26 4:0
Light Grey wis 12 48 9:2 a 5°6 55 8-5
Light Mixed 13, 8 122 23°2 21 16-9 143 22°0 *
Medium Mixed ... on II, 10, 9 164 31°2 39 31°5 203 31°3
Dark Mixed Bee 2 we ws 7,6 89 17:0 28 22°6 117 18-0
Medium Brown ... ao 5,4 60 II-4 18 14°5 78 12-0
Dark Brown 3, 2,1 18 3°4 9 7°3 27 4°2
Total - 100°O 124 100-0 649 100:0

 

In the first three categories (light-eyed)
there are decidedly fewer colour-blind children
than we should expect; in the last three
(dark-eyed) decidedly more. Applying the
usual test for statistical significance, we find
x’=11°8; with 6 degrees of freedom this
gives P = 0-068. In non-technical language
that means that the odds are only 14 to 1
against such a set of differences arising by
the chances of random sampling; so that
the relationship cannot be accepted as conclusively established.

It is instructive to estimate the probable

amount of correlation, supposing it to exist.
For purposes of calculation we may assume
that both pigmentation and variations in
colour-discrimination are distributed more
or less in accordance with the normal curve.
With the biserial method we find a correlation of 0-174; if we prefer to reduce the

* Prof. Riddell has drawn attention to the fact that
the various sets issued by the manufacturers are not
quite the same (*‘ Classification of Eye Colour,’ Aun.
Eug., 1942, 11, 252).

the correlations of both hair-pigmentation
and colour-vision with eye-pigmentation,
that between colour-vision and _hair-pigmentation is reduced virtually to zero. So
far as the present data go, therefore, any
association between defective colour-vision
and dark hair-colour is apparently due
simply to the fact that both happen to be
associated with dark eye-colour.

Defective Colour-Vision among Adults

(a) Regional Surveys. During the present
‘war, results obtained with the Ishihara tests,
when applied to naval candidates, have
exhibited remarkable differences at different
centres. The investigators inferred that
there must be “‘ genuine geographical differences in the distribution of colour defect,
analogous to differences in the distribution of
blood groups or intelligence ’’ ; and the data
were referred to me with an inquiry for a
possible explanation. On plotting a map to
show the relative frequencies in various
regions of Great Britain, I found that they
EYE-COLOUR AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

at once displayed a striking correspondence
with the known distribution of hair- and eyecolour. The proportions ranged from 4 per
cent in S.E. Scotland to 10 per cent in Mid
Wales. Grouping the figures by counties, .

and correlating the percentages in each
county with the best available estimates for
pigmentation, I found a correlation between
defective colour-vision and dark eye-colour
of 0:73, and between defective colour-vision
and dark hair-colour of 0:62. A correlation
of 0-73 based on-gvoups might easily be
produced by correlations of about 0-15 to
0:20 among individuals.* In passing it will
be observed that the high percentage
reported for the country as a whole (7 per
cent) confirms what was noted during the
school surveys—namely that defects of
colour-vision are far more numerous than
the figures usually quoted for colourblindness might lead one to suppose.

(6) Individual Surveys. From the Royal
Air Force, data are available for over 3,000
individuals. Every candidate was first
examined with the Ishihara tests; and
those making more than a few slips were
subjected to two lantern tests.f. The dis
* Burt, Cyril, Local Differences in Defective Colour
Viston (Memorandum to Senior Psychologist’s Department, Admiralty, Aug. 31st, 1943). For help with the
estimates of pigmentation, I am much indebted to Dr.
Bowen, Lecturer on Anthropology in the. University
College of Wales, Aberystwyth, and to one of myresearch
students, Miss Crawford, who has also assisted in the calculations : a more detailed analysis of the data, with map,
is contained in her thesis on the subject (Psychological
Laboratory, University College, London). Through the
kindness of the Editor of Man I have recently received
more up-to-date figures for pigmentation for certain
parts of the country ; and we should be most grateful to
receive data on this point from readers of this journal.

t+ The data were obtained by Dr. J. Grieve, who was
good enough to send me the figures for statistical
analysis. Since, in individual studies, such as the
present, the grading for hair- and eye-colour is dependent on the investigator's judgment, and the reader
may suspect the possibility of unconscious bias, it may
be noted that Dr. Grieve’s expectations differed from
mine. He himself had formed “ the clinical impression
that defective colour-vision was more common in redhaired candidates’’; but from an inspection of his
data at a later stage he concluded, not only that this
*‘ clinical impression was ill-founded,’ but also that
‘‘there was no relationship between the presence of
poor colour perception and the nature of the pigmentation of the iris.” Our more detailed tabulations of the
results, with a full statistical analysis, will be found in
an article on ‘‘ Defective Colour Vision in relation to
Pigmentation ’’ (Man, 1945, 82, 103 f.).

151

tribution of eye-colour and visual deficiency
is summarized in Table II. “ Dark-eyed ”’
includes all whose irises show a “ medium
grey’”’ or ‘‘dark grey’”’ background together
with “‘medium brown”’ or ‘“ dark brown ”’
colouring; “‘light-eyed’”’ includes the remainder.
TABLE II

ASSOCIATION OF DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION WITH
EYeE-CoLour : ADULTS

Colour-Vision Percentage

  
   
   

Eye-colour

Normal Defective) Total | Defective
Light-Eyed ... 2,461 322 | 2,783 11-6
Dark-Eyed 368 80 448 47°9
Total . 2,829 402 3,231 |Diff. 6-3

 

 

It will be seen that among the dark-eyed
the number of colour-defectives is more than
half as many again as among the light-eyed.
The difference observed (6-3 per cent) is
nearly four times its standard error (+ 1-69)
and therefore fully significant. The odds
against such a difference arising from the
fluctuations of sampling are about 50,000
to I.

To compare the amount of correlation

_ with that obtained for children, I have re
classified the records into seven grades for
eye-colour (Table III); but, since the
method of recording eye-colour differed
somewhat from my own, it was not always
possible to make each grade exactly identical
with the corresponding grade in Table [.
With the larger numbers now available, we
can here calculate not only the percentage
from each grade found among the normals
and the colour-defectives, but also (what is
far more suggestive) the percentage of
colour-defectives found in each grade; with
one exception, the increase is steady and
striking.

A biserial correlation based on the sevenfold classification yields a coefficient. of
0-134: a tetrachoric correlation based on
the fourfold table above yields a figure of
0-162. The correlation for adults is thus of
the same order as that found for children.

For hair-colour the correlation is much
lower, and statistically non-significant. To
some extent it appears to be reduced by the
fact that, in these islands, dark hair is not
 

152 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
TABLE III
DISTRIBUTION OF EyE-CoLOUR AMONG ADULTS WITH NoRMAL AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

' Colour-Vision Percentage

Eye-Colour Normal Defective — Total Colour-”

Number Percent Number Percent | Number Percent | Defective
Blue-Grey “* 362 12°8 35 8-7 397 12°3 8-8
Light Grey or Mixed ... 814 28-8 90 - 22°4 904 28-0 10-0
Moderate Grey or Mixed 888 31°4 138 34°3 1,026 31°7 13°4
Dark Grey or Mixed 397 14°0 59 14°7 | 456 14-1 12°9
Medium Brown ... a sm 313 II-1 65 ' 16-2 | 378 Il-7 I7°2
Dark Brown ... 2 wma 55 1-9 15 377. | 70 2°2 21°4
Total _ wa 8 see eee 2,829 100-0 100-0 3,231 100°0 12°4

 

infrequently accompanied by light or bluish
eyes. With the present data it is not easy to
allow for this with any exactitude; but,
when an approximate deduction is made,
there are indications of a small but just
significant relationship: What slight: correlation exists, therefore, could be fully
accounted for as an indirect consequence of
the’ correlation of hair-colour with eyecolour.

Genetic Linkage

In view of the agreement between these
three independent inquiries, there can, I
think, be no question about the existence of

some kind of correlation between defects of °

colour-vision, on the one hand, and pigmentation of the iris, on the other. Since the
same correlation is discernible from comparatively early years, and since (apart
from slight changes with increasing age) eyecolour remains almost unaffected by postnatal factors, it would seem that the relation
must either be itself innate or else rest on
some innate characteristic of the individual
constitution. The simplest explanation
would be to postulate some kind of genetic
linkage. Evidence has already been found
for linkage between colour-blindness and one
or two other characteristics (chiefly those for
which the genes are supposed to lie on the
non-pairing portion of the X-chromosome,
e.g., heemophilia) ; and more than one writer
has suggested that eye-colour may itself be
in some small degree sex-linked.

Among my cases there were eighty-eight
pairs of brothers whom I could classify as
definitely normal or deficient in colour-vision
and also as definitely light-eyed or dark-eyed.

If linkage is present,* we should expect the

number (a) of those who were similar in both
colour-vision and eye-colour and (2) of those
who were dissimilar in both to be disproportionately large. The numbers actually
observed are shown in Table IV.

TABLE IV
NUMBER OF BROTHERS SIMILAR OR DISSIMILAR IN

CoLouUR-VISION OR IN EYE-CoLour oR .IN BotTH

Colour-Vision
Similar Dissimilar | Total

 

 

Similar 35 ' 22 57

Eye-Colour Dissimilar 14 17 31

Total eee er (eae 39 88
x2#=2°15 P=o0-14

The chi-squared test shows that it is quite
possible, though perhaps not very probable,
that these slightly excessive numbers have
arisen by chance. Four out of the five pairs
that included a case of definite colourblindness are in the doubly similar or doubly
dissimilar sub-groups. If, therefore, we could
separate out certain types of colour deficiency
instead of being forced by lack of numbers to
pool all types together indiscriminately, we
might eventually obtain clearer and more
cogent evidence. But the most pressing need
is a collection of relevant pedigrees, giving
precise indications about both characteristics
for three or more generations.

Physical and Bio-Chemical Explanations

It seems clear, however, that, even could
it be demonstrated for certain special types,
genetic linkage will not cover all the phenomena. For these, alternative interpretations

* The statistical test here adopted is that used by
Penrose for testing linkage between'eye-colour and
blood-grouping (Ann. Eug., 1935, 6, 133).
EYE-COLOUR AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

must therefore be sought in the more direct

effects of pigmentation (or its underlying:

causes) on colour-perception. To determine
the possible explanations we may briefly
summarize what is known about the chief
pigments present in the eye.*

(i) A small area on the retina, in the
neighbourhood of the part of clearest vision,
is somewhat pigmented, and on this account
is known as the macula lutea or “ yellow
spot.’’ Except when the translucent tissues
are discoloured by jaundice or old age, the
yellow-brown pigment of the macula is the
only pigment through which the focused
light-rays pass. Its intensity is known to
differ widely in different individuals and in
different races. Clerk Maxwell believed that
such differences in macular pigmentation
would account for certain anomalies of bluevisionf; and Hering invoked them to
explain the distinction between the two
main forms of red-green blindness.{ Hering’s

theories, on this and other points, were

strongly opposed by McDougall, in whose
laboratory I myself received my training ;
and it occurred to me that, since the macular

pigment is apparently related to the melanin 
pigment of the hair, iris, and skin, light
would be thrown on the problem by examining the colour-vision of dark-haired and
dark-eyed persons. This, in fact, was one of
the original motives which led to the investigations here recorded. |
The yellow pigment of the macula chiefly
absorbs spectral rays from the blue region of
the spectrum. We should therefore expect
blue-vision to be chiefly disturbed ; and the
disturbance would be confined to the central
part of the visual field. Both these effects
are noticeable in test results from darkskinned foreign races§; but they do not

*I am much indebted to personal communications
from Sir John Parsons and Dr. Katherine Lythgoe, who
have been good enough to check my statement of
present knowledge on these matters.

¢ Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., 1860, 150, 57.

t Lotos, 1885, 6, 142: cf. Trendelenburg, Klin. Med.,
1939, 102, 769.

§ Cf. Parsons, Colour Vision, 1924, 160. For summaries of more recent work, cf. P. Clements, ‘‘ Racial
Differences in Colour-Blindness,”’ Am. J. Phys. Anthrop.,
1930, 14, 4, and T. H. Garth, “‘ Incidence of ColourBlindness among Races,’’ Science, 1933, 77, 333
153,

explain more than a small proportion of my
own colour-defective cases.

(ii) The photochemical substances responsible for colour-vision in daylight are almost
certainly pigments ; but their existence has
not as yet been definitely established.
Unfortunately, therefore, their chemical
nature remains unknown.

(iii) The only retinal pigment about which
much is known is the photo-sensitive pigment of the rods, usually called “ visual
purple,” or “‘ visual yellow ’’ when acted on
by light. It is a pigment of the carotenoid
group, and is essential to the colourless
vision of the dark-adapted eye. Before the
war, researches on individual differences in
dark-adaptation were carried out in my
laboratory by Lythgoe and Phillips. However, no correlation was found between such
differences and variations in eye- or haircolour.*

(iv) The outer stratum of the retina, which
is continuous with the posterior pigment
layer of the iris, contains a pigment (fuscin)
related to melanin; and, like melanin, is
also acted on by sunlight. It appears to play
a part in the regeneration of the rod-pigment |
and possibly in that of the cone-pigment.

(v) The pigment which mainly determines
differences in the visible colour of the iris is
identical with, or at any rate closely related:
to, the melanin pigment responsible for dark
hair- and skin-colour. Melanin is a pigment
of the indol group: dopa, its precursor,

appears to mark a stage in the conversion

of tyrosine into adrenalin. Its formation
appears to be affected by disturbances of the
adrenalin glands and (like that of rodpigment) by deficiency of vitamin C.

From these various facts we may infer
that differences in eye-colour might conceivably be related to differences in colour-.
vision in at least two ways—physical or
chemical. The physical effects are more
likely to influence blue-vision than red- or
green-vision. And, if we prefer a chemical
explanation, two slightly different theories
are still conceivable: first, the amount of
pigment present in the iris might prove to be,
a rough but comparatively direct indication

* Phillips, Proc. Roy. Soc., 1938, 127B, 405.
154

of the amount of pigment present in the
related epithelial layer of the retina ; second,
and more indirectly, differences in the
amount of pigment produced in all the visible
tissues—skin and hair perhaps as well as
iris—might indicate differences in the general
chemical metabolism of such pigments in the
body as a whole and therefore in the retina in
particular. In either case, if, as some writers
have argued, the chemical substances responsible for red and green vision are the
latest to be evolved, we might expect these
to be the substances that would most
readily be affected by individual variations.*

It seems evident, therefore, that the chains
of causation must be far more complex than
might at first have been supposed; quite
possibly we have to deal not with one, but
with several different influences. Consequently, pending further knowledge of the
underlying physico-chemical processes, the
most profitable line of study will consist in
an endeavour to discover with greater precision what is the nature of the various
deficiencies in colour-vision, which are at
present, in a more or less indiscriminate
fashion, picked out by the tests in current
use.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

children and young adults. In addition to

the usual mosaic and wool tests, I have used

size-, speed-, and colour-mixture tests, for
nine standard colours about equidistant on
the colour-circle. The observations* were
made upon 146 school children (boys aged
11-14) and 81 students (men and women
aged 19-25). Owing to slight differences in
technique, the correlations were calculated
separately for the different groups and then.
averaged. With a total number of 227 any
correlation below 0-134, and any factorsaturation below 0-366, will be of doubtful
significance.

The intercorrelations are shown in Table
V. They have been factorized first of all by
simple summation (Table VI,a).¢ With this
method the first factor has positive saturations for all nine colours, and thus suggests
the existence of a single ‘‘ general factor ”’
for colour-discrimination entering into every
test; roughly speaking, this cagnclusion

-means that, if a person fails badly in dis
criminating (say) yellow, he is likely to be
poor at discriminating most other colours,
e.g., red, green, and (in a lesser degree) blue.

However, the contribution of this factor

to the total variance (see foot of table) is

TABLE V
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN TESTS FOR COLOUR-PERCEPTION .
Colour C R O Y YG G GB B V
Crimson sas = 276) *162 -089 *256 "043. —:018 —-:005 -261 -286
Red -162 = (+710) 502 -489 *120 ‘013. —*I47 —-650 "125
Orange... “089 °502- (+443) -496 +226 “212 004 —-006 *109
Yellow me +256 *489 -496 (+705) *204 *340 -063 "214 ‘277
Yellow-Green .. we ws 1043 *120 *226 +204 (+402) *462 *253 *096 "052
Green ... on 5 ase ... — 018 "O13 ‘212 +340 *462 (+598) °377 -118 ‘O15
Blue-Green _.... vest ue = 1005 ~— +147 *004 +063 "253 °377. = (- 298) *19Q1 “O21
Blue ves -261 —-050° —-006 214 -096 "118 =: IQI (-438) * 301
Violet *286 "125 “109 ‘277 "052 “O15 -O21 *301 (+292)

Factor-Analysis of Colour-Vision Tests
With a view to learning more about the
reliability, the mutual consistency, and the
differential effects of the simpler tests of
examining colour-vision, I-have employed a
number of different methods with groups of

* It is conceivable that the evolution of the fair
skinned, light-eyed races of the ill-lit North have been .

accompanied by a further evolution or stabilization of
colour-perception. In the older races of the South the
‘darker pigmentation of the retina, like that of the iris
and skin, may have served in part as a protection
against the intenser light of the southern sun.

only 22-5 per cent, and consequently this
“general factor’? must here play a smaller
part than general factors usually obtained
from testing other cognitive processes.

* For help with the earlier experiments I am indebted to Mr. W. J. Williamson. Mr. P. Chatterji had
planned to repeat the inquiry with improved methods,
but his work was interrupted by the war. The investigations reported above were intended merely as a
preliminary trial ; but in view of the increasing interest
in the whole subject they are briefly reported here.

{t For the method used, see Factors of the Mind,
pp. 461-6, 477-82. On the applicability of such methods
to problems of colour-vision, cf. ibid., pp. 20, 84. I am
indebted to Miss M. Cast for checking my calculations.
EYE-COLOUR AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

On the other hand, the bipolar factors
play a larger part than usual. The first
divides the colour-tests into two main groups
—those concerned with the warmer end of
the spectrum (including violet) and those
concerned with the cooler end, with red and
green respectively as the most dominant
colour in positive and negative portions.
The second (less marked) introduces a crossclassification, ‘with blue or blue-violet as
most dominant in one-part and yellow as the
central test of the other.

Secondly, the factors thus obtained by
simple summation were “ rotated’’ to eliminate the negative saturations. The rotation
was effected in the usual way by making a
preliminary group factor-analysis, and then
introducing allowances for overlap by an
orthogonal transformation. The final results
are shown in Table VI,B.

155

display a marked overlap in the case of
yellow. They are by far the most important
elements in the analysis of defective colourdiscrimination.* The third group-factor
appears chiefly concerned with differences in
bluish tints (including crimson) ; there is a
small but doubtful overlap on yellow.

It was hoped that the two modes of
factorization might throw light on the controversy between the rival theories of colourvision. It will be noted that the results of
the group-factor analysis—three specialized
factors, each displaying for the most part
positive effects, with red, green, and blue
respectively giving the largest factor-saturations—is in keeping with the three-colour
theory of Young, Helmholtz and McDougall ;
nevertheless, with the wide margin allowed
by the probable errors, the observed correlations can be accounted for almost as well

TABLE VI

A. Bipolar Factors

FacToR SATURATIONS

B. Group Factors
Blue

General Red-Green Blue-Yellow | General Red Green

Colour ;
Crimson _... bee wee da *331 "175 -351 -149 -245 —*103 +427
Red a8 aes se wee ‘473 -613_ — +264 “121 *821 —-+134 "094 Orange. ... bee amd wee “501 -274 — +313 *221 -580 “161 “151
Yellow eT wma wee -769 *229 —*145 "342 -689 "265 -176
Yellow-Green a ais stb -478 — +299 — +230 "025 -248 -574. +078
Green -_—.... as ams awe *520 — +492 — +288 -082 *127 "751 *053
Blue-Green ... ve sae es "259 — +473 "O17 “17a *149 *474 +137
Blue sia a0 sus ema -384 —*157 “501 -389 *040 -OOI +520
Violet _ eas an 7 +363 +130 *371 *194 *158 —-o61 *455
Percentage of Common Factor

’ Variance . ase = 50°8 28°3 20°9 10°5 40°6 30°5 18-4
Percentage of Total Variance 22°5 12°6 9°3 4°8 18-6 13°9 8-4

With the elimination of negative saturations the general factor (as usual) is greatly
reduced in importance ; it is now a “ basic ”
general factor rather than an “average”
general factor. Could we take its low saturations at their face value, they would suggest
that, if we wanted only one or two tests for
general discrimination, the best would be
tests of blue and yellow discrimination. The
bipolar red-green factor of Table VI,a is now
split into two group-factors in Table VI,B,
with red the most dominant in the one, and
green in the other; but the two factors

by the bipolar analysis, where each factor
comprises two antithetical or antagonistic
tendencies, on the lines of the Hering theory.
However, it is doubtful whether the factors
as they stand can be taken as representing
simple causal agencies.

The immediate practical use of the fac
* The fact that the red-factor contributes more to the
variance than the green-factor appears to mean (i)
that individuals differ more widely in their sensitivity
to red than in their sensitivity to green, and (ii) that
these individual differences affect a larger range of
colours. Variations in sensitivity to green appear
commoner, but more restricted in degree and in effect.
156

torial analysis is this. It enables the investigator to re-weight the several tests, so as to
obtain a measure for each of the chief components. These measurements we can then
correlate with degree of pigmentation. With
the final form of the analysis the correlations
are aS follows: (i) general factor, 0-218;
(iia) red factor, 0-169; (ib) green factor,
0-086; (iii) last factor, 0-127. Only the
first two coefficients are large enough to be
statistically significant. The factor: most
affected by pigmentation is the factor for
general colour-discrimination ; in this factor
the largest factor saturations are for blue and
yellow, which we might suppose to be most
disturbed by yellow-brown pigmentation.
But the factor for red discrimination also
shows a significant, if somewhat smaller,
correlation. The last two coefficients are too
small to be significant. On correlating the
factor-measurements obtained by members
of the same family, we get the following
figures for family-resemblance: (i) 0-124,
(iia) 0°332, (1ib) 0°278, (iii) 0-098. Here it

is differences in the red- and green-factors 
which alone are statistically significant ; and
the small correlation for the first (or general)
factor is reduced practically to zero, when
the influence of pigmentation is partialled
out.

Conclusions

We may sum up the main results as
follows. (x) There is a small but wellestablished correlation between deficiencies
of colour-vision and dark pigmentation of
the iris. The correlation is discernible even
during childhood. (2) Defects of colourvision, however, appear to be more numerous
and more various than geneticists have
commonly assumed. Previous statements
about inheritance of colour-blindness have
too readily supposed that such defects consist of only one or two sharply distinguishable types, such.as might be accounted for
by the presence or absence of a single sexlinked gene. In addition, it is essential to
recognize the existence of intermediate and

THE EUGENICS REVIE'W

anomalous types. (3) The cases responsible
for the correlations with pigmentation are

~mot so much the.severer and restricted

defects that would jasually be classified as
red-green blindness; but (at any rate in a
large degree) the milder and more anomalous
defects. And it seems probable that the
correlation revealed by the statistical exami-.
nation of groups is due to more causal processes than one. (a) A tendency towards
weakness in red-green discrimination appears
to be to some extent of genetic origin and (so
far as my pedigrees go) is rather more
common among relatives (including female
relatives) of the definitely red-green blind ;
some of these may therefore represent a
heterozygotic form. The disproportionate
frequency of dark pigmentation in such
cases may be due either to genetic linkage or
to the fact that exceptional pigmentation (or
some characteristic underlying it) may
aggravate these latent tendencies. (0) In
other cases the correlation with pigmentation
seems best explained as an effect of differences in pigment-metabolism. (c) Defects in
blue- and possibly in yellow-discrimination
seem to be due, not to innate peculiarities in
the photo-chemical reactions, but rather to
the absorption of certain light-rays by the
more densely pigmented macula. (4) Pend
ing further knowledge of the biochemical.

processes involved, factor-analysis may usefully be employed to distinguish the chief
classes or types. Owing, however, to the
comparatively small number so far tested
for this purpose, and the somewhat crude
technique employed, the inferences drawn
must be regarded as tentative only. (5)
There is an urgent need for more detailed
studies of such cases and their relatives by a
wider variety of laboratory tests. Relatives

‘whose vision is apparently normal require as

intensive an examination as the so-called
colour-blind. And it is hoped that readers’
who may be acquainted with such families
(which are far commoner than is usually
supposed) will bring them to the notice of a
competent psychological investigator.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVII, No. 4.
