MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS
The Galton Lecture, Thursday, February 16th, 1933
By the Honble. MR. JUSTICE McCARDIE

HAVE been asked to speak to-night

on my ‘‘ Outlook on Eugenics.’’ I

chose that title because I am addressing
you not cs a lawyer or biologist, but as a
British citizen with a deep and abiding
interest in the welfare of the nation.

No one can speak at a gathering such as
this without paying a tribute to the late
Sir Francis Galton. It was he who first
gave impulse to the eugenic movement and
brought home to the minds of thinking
people the vital significance of the hereditary factor in each individual life. It was
he also who exposed the dangerous fallacy
that good environment could of itself
restore health and strength to the nation.
He loved the truth and he had the courage
to proclaim it. His name will live in the
social history of this country as a great
pioneer in the work of racial improvement.

If Sir Francis Galton could be here
to-night he would find that his work and
inspiration had produced a rich harvest of
results. It is just over sixty years since
he published his famous book on Hereditary Genius. It is fifty years since he
created the great word ‘ Eugenics.’ What
magnificent progress has been made since
then. It stirs my heart to know that with
every decade, aye, with every year, the
rate of advance is accelerated and that men
and women in all ranks are now demanding
that the truth shall no longer be concealed,
that the facts of life shall be faced with
unswerving courage, and that ignorance
and prejudice shall no longer be allowed
to menace the happiness and the advance
of our race.

You have already captured many outposts, and you will, I hope, soon overcome
the citadel of opposition—with the strong
weapons of argument, of fact, and of
unconquerable truth. For truth is greater

7

than false modesty, and knowledge is a
nobler thing than ignorance. The certainties of modern science are more than the
baseless theories of former centuries. [|
hope that before long we shall find that
mere tradition has ceased to be an excuse
for the continued existence of preventable
human misery.

THE BASIS OF EUGENICS

I speak on matters which have long
occupied my attention, on which I have
collected information and statistics from
many quarters, on which I have read
widely, and thought much. But to-night I
must speak in broad outline only. You know
the foundations laid by Mendel, the experiments of Bateson, the brilliant work of
Morgan and his colleagues, and the
distinguished labours of De Vries, of
Gates, of Punnett, of Castle and of many
others. Biology and bio-chemistry are
contributing in full measure to our knowledge. Eugenics is now a science. It rests
on the rock of established fact. An
excellent summary of the results achieved
is given in the recent volume by Dr. Hurst
entitled The Mechanism of Creative Evolution.

To-night is not an occasion for technical
detail, but rather for general review and
broad outlook. There are some things, I
suppose, which are clear to all of us:

First: That many of the habits and
traditions of the nation are still profoundly
anti-eugenic and that we are suffering
gravely from centuries of false ideas.

Secondly : That eugenics is in fact the
most momentous issue before the nation
to-day. It transcends all mere political
controversy. The problem of tariffs, for
example, is from the racial point of view
a transitory one only. The problem of
8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

taxation is also a passing one from the like
point of view. It can be dealt with by a
few Acts of Parliament. But the sound life
of our nation, not for a decade only, but for
the long range of years ahead, depends on
the views which the people of this country
adopt on the great matter of eugenics.

What path shall we choose? National
strength or national decay? National
fitness or national inefficiency? Nature
cares nothing for the catchwords of politicians. She will always enforce her
penalties in the end.

In my view eugenics and national welfare
must stand or fall together.

For a long time past not only have we
produced the unfit to an appalling extent,
but we have preserved them with all the
ingenious and kindly resources that the
modern humanitarian instinct can command. We have already created a burden
under which the nation begins to stagger.
Let us face the far-reaching truth that the
more we procreate and then preserve those
who are unfit in mind or body, the lower
the nation must ultimately sink. The
strength of a people depends, in the final
result, on the physical and mental quality
of its citizens. A nation cannot thrive if
the basis of its physical life becomes
increasingly wrong.

THE BURDEN OF THE UNFIT

As I speak to-night I do not trouble with
minor variations of statistical result. The
actually insane may be 150,000 instead of
200,000. Those who are actually mentally
defective may be 300,000 instead of
400,000. But there is still one grave and
predominant fact which no honest investigator can doubt. It is this: One-tenth of
those who make up the nation are physically or mentally unfitted to be citizens.
It is this terrible aggregate of defective
stock which is sapping our life as a people,
and which exists and grows like a cancer
in our midst.

It is significant indeed that about one
in every ten of our people is either too dull
or too weakly to earn a living unaided.

Let us remember that we can never

separate the economic and financial life of
the nation from its eugenic life. The two
are interlinked and they react in the closest
fashion. ‘The public of this country will
soon, I hope, begin to realize the position
as it is to-day. May we not hope that
statesmen and politicians will in due course
give their thought and their public utterances to the gravest evils and problems of
all?

Let us glance for a moment round the
world. Mark the position of Great Britain.
She is ringed round with powerful, with
splendidly equipped and merciless competitors in every branch of world trade and
industrial activity. She stands at bay.
She is struggling not for mere prosperity
but for the very standards of life. She
has a vast population on a very small
island. She must fight for her needed
share in world trade. She must fight for
her commercial existence. By the issue of
that struggle we shall stand or fall in the
great contest which is taking place before
our eyes.

How can the British maintain their place
amongst the nations if they are cumbered
and weighed down by an ever growing
mass of the physically and mentally unfit?

The back of the nation is bending
beneath the burden. I abstain from statistical detail. It can only emphasize the
weight of the load we already carry. A
nation can only survive in the world
struggle if the units of national life are
healthy and strong.

I venture to emphasize that eugenics—
the science and the duty of racial improvement—is the paramount issue at the
present time. He who can awaken a
eugenic conscience amongst our people will
in very truth be the saviour of the race.

THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE

We have reached a critical period in our
history. The march of science is bringing
freedom to men and women. The future
of Britain depends on our response to the
new knowledge and the new principles, and
on the resolve of all classes to achieve a
higher standard of mental and physical
efficiency.

We must all be forced to realize the grim
facts of heredity. And so I feel that every
member of the Society should be a
crusader. He represents a great cause. He
must not flinch from opposition. He can
ask for the support of all who place the
welfare of the people above the appeal of
obsolete tradition and ill-founded dogma.

There are some broad truths which I
wish we could drive home at once to every
‘member of the public.
| First: that the physically unfit usually
beget the physically unfit.
| Secondly: that the mentally unfit
usually beget the mentally unfit.

Thirdly : that mental defectives, whether
low grade or high grade, usually beget
mental defectives.

Fourthly : that we shall never improve
the general standard of life in this country
until we greatly lessen the proportion of
the mentally and physically unfit to the
general population.

THE DEMUCRACY OF EUGENICS

Eugenics is not a science which exists
to help the well-to-do. It is a science which
will give its best and noblest results when
applied by the poor, the suffering, and the
afflicted. It is, in my view, the greatest
single instrument which thought could
devise or theology suggest for raising the
masses of England to a higher level of life.

I wish that each one of the general public
would realize that the birth of each single
defective child helps to thrust down the

standard of living throughout the whole of
the country.

DIVORCE REFORM

I have spoken of the broader aspects of
eugenics. If I am asked to name the first
practical proposal that I make, my answer
is that I would at once reform the divorce
law of this country. I think that such a
reform is desirable for psychological as well
as practical reasons. Until we achieve an
improvement in the present system of
divorce we shall find it the more difficult

MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS 9

to make rapid progress in the general
adoption of eugenic principles.

In my view the existing divorce law of
this country represents in striking degree
that narrow vision and erroneous prejudice
which hinder so greatly the march of social
progress. We can never separate eugenics
from the question of marriage and we can
never separate the question of marriage
itself from the question of the dissolution
of the marriage tie. Marriage is an institution, a great institution, which touches
most closely the main objects of eugenic
reformers. The vast majority of the
physically and mentally deficient are born
within and not outside the marriage bond.
We cannot divide the social and family life
of the people into separate compartments,
any more than we can divide that social and
family life from the grave economic
problems of to-day.

I need not dweil on the significance, from
a eugenic point of view, of the vast number
of separation orders made throughout the
country by Courts of Summary Jurisdiction. By judicial decree the husband and
wife live apart, but the marriage tie
remains. ‘The widespread evils are known
to every social reformer.

But there is something graver still when
we look with unbiased eyes at the law which
must be administered by Act of Parliament
in the Divorce Division of the High Court.
For over twenty years the report of Lord
Gorrell’s Commission has been, to a large
extent, ignored.

I can feel no doubt that those who live
in Great Britain thirty years hence will
look upon our existing divorce law as
unworthy of the civilization we claim to
possess. It will seem as incredible to them
as it is to me that divorce should be granted
for a single act of adultery, whilst it should
be denied where the whole purpose of
marriage has been utterly frustrated by
deliberate and permanent desertion.

Equally strange will it seem that the
law should insist on the lifelong continuance of the marriage tie although one
of the spouses should become incurably
insane; and perhaps it will seem even
ro

stranger that divorce should be denied to
a wife who has suffered the most brutal and
repeated physical violence from _ her
husband.

These are only a few of the illustrations.
There are others just as cogent. I do not
wonder at the indignation expressed by the
late Lord Birkenhead in his great speech
on divorce reform in the House of Lords
on March 4th, 1920. It seems to me that
when once the principle of dissolution was
established by the famous Act of 1857, it
should have been applied long before this
in accordance with the rules of obvious
justice and good sense.

A future generation will also think it
remarkable that in the year 1933 the law
still was that if only one of the spouses
has committed adultery a divorce would
be granted, whereas if both spouses had
committed adultery (even in pursuance
of a permanent attachment on each side to
a third person) a divorce would often be
refused. I abstain from technical detail.
It is enough to state things broadly. I
trust the time is not far distant when the
repulsive duties of the King’s Proctor will
be swept away and when the unhappy
doctrine of collusion as it at present exists
will be reduced to a narrower and more
reasonable compass. The doctrine of
collusion is a relic of a deplorable past, and
it is the ugly concomitant of a code which
is entirely out of date.

The restricted nature of our existing
divorce law is, in my view, opposed to the
eugenic interests of this country. I do not
forget that the children of a marriage must
be considered. But, in ny view, it is never
in the true interests of the children that
a repugnant or worthless marriage tie
shovld be permanently maintained.

I should like to point out that never
before has there been so large a body of
those who criticize our existing marriage
institution. The dissatisfaction grows day
by day. It is gripping the minds of many
of the ablest amongst the younger writers
and speakers. The area of resentment is
ever widening owing to the harshness of
our present law of divorce and its disdain

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the realities of life. The fabric of
marriage can only be preserved in
order by the repair and reform which are
long overdue. I have long held the opinion
that those who oppose the reform of the
divorce law are in fact the worst enemies
of the great institution of marriage. They
are undermining the fabric itself.

THE NEED FOR STERILIZATION

The eugenist is bound to face the
question of the sterilization of the
mentally defective and of certain types of
the physically unfit.

You are familiar, I know, with the literature and statistics on the matter both as
to Britain and other countries. The task
that lies before you is to make the nation
realize the need of measures for sterilization. We may take it that there are about
350,000 at least of mental defectives scattered throughout Great Britain. Of these
only a small percentage are under institutional treatment ; and a certain number are
under supervision, which may or may not
be effective. But a vast number of mental
defectives are to be found throughout the
country who are not only free to beget
chiidren outside the marriage tie, but are
also free to marry at their own will and
to beget offspring as often as they wish.

Now heredity is, by far, the largest
single cause of mental deficiency. The
hideous taint is transmitted on and on and
on, and many thousands of innocent
children are thereby brought into the
world with the doom of misery and degradation about them. I need scarcely pause
to give illustrations. You will find them
not only in official reports, but in any
source of information you care to consult.
They are appalling. Again and again I
have myself come upon cases where a
mentally defective mother has produced
seven or eight mentally defective children.
I recall one case where a mentally defective
woman, who was unmarried, had produced
eight ‘mentally defective ‘children, and
where several of those mentally defective
children had in their turn Produced
mentally defective offspring.
MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS

This stream of tainted children is still
flowing throughout the country. It may
be said that about one in every 110 of the
population is a mental defective. Do the
public realize what that means?

The cost of institutional treatment for
all mental defectives would be gigantic.
The country cannot afford the burden.
Hospitals, institutions, schools, organizations of every sort already sap our
resources.

Unless something be done on this and
on allied eugenic matters we may almost
take the view that the democracy of this
country is slowly committing suicide. ‘The
physically and mentally unfit, together
'with this great army of mental defectives,
is indeed one of the greatest problems of
to-day. Mere political phrases afford no
help. Politicians prefer to blame the slums
for the inefficient (whether certifiable or
not) rather than the inefficient for much of
the degradation of the slums.

What is to be done?

We are not concerned with political
tactics. The truth and the remedy alone
are our concern. Can anyone doubt that
sterilization is essential in many cases?
What else of a practical nature can be suggested as a first barrier against the terrible
output of the tainted ?

I do not over-estimate the immediate
effects of any legislation that may be passed
permitting sterilization. I know the points
in dispute and the difficulties that have to
be faced. But if we can only secure legislation which will permit, under proper
safeguards, the voluntary sterilization of
those who are either mentally defective or
who rightly fear to transmit hereditary
taints to their children we shall have made
a great advance.

It is necessary to go step by step in the
great work of creating a eugenic conscience
in the nation at large. I cannot myself
see any good reason which can be urged
against sterilization in suitable cases, and
under adequate safeguards. I believe also
that there are many thousands throughout
the country who would welcome, not only
in the public interest but for themselves,

II

a system of voluntary sterilization which
would prevent the transmission of hereditary taints.

ABORTION AND THE LAW

I should like (before I speak briefly on
Birth Control) to say a few words on the
disputable subject of abortion.

I do not hesitate to repeat to-night what
I have said before, that in my view the
existing law of abortion requires amendment. I know that this subject gives rise
to acute differences of view. But those who
press for amendment have just as deep a
belief in righteousness and the moral welfare of the nation as those who oppose the
suggestion of revision.

I do not propose to deal with the general
subject of abortion. It is a wide and
serious matter. But in my own view there
are clearly some circumstances in which
abortion, now forbidden, should under
proper safeguards be allowed.

May I take some of the illustrations
given by me publicly some time ago.

Too often a mentally defective woman
or girl is pregnant either by a normal man
or by one who is himself a mental defective. Should the child be born with the
horrible taint upon it and with all that
the taint implies?

Sometimes a young girl is pregnant by
her own father or brother: incest is not
uncommon. If a child be actually born,
what will be its future, particularly if the
girl herself be mentally defective? I speak
of cases which you and I know only too
well.

Not infrequently a man, released from a
mental hospital, after a long term of treatment, will return home to make his wife
pregnant against her wish. For she knows
or suspects that the taint of insanity is still
latent within him. What of the child—and
what of the wife?

But take two illustrations more—quite
apart from the well-known medical aspects
of abortion. I remember well the case
where a beautiful and delicate girl of fourteen, the daughter of a country gentleman,
was raped by a drunken tramp. She
I2

became pregnant. What of the future of
the child born to her? What of the untold
misery of the girl, her parents, and of the
child itself?

I remember also the case where a young
and respectable married woman with a baby
five months old, was raped in brutal
fashion by an epileptic. She became
pregnant. What was the future, after the
child was born, for the woman, her
husband, and the offspring of the rape?

May I remind you that from time to
time all over the country there have been
and are cases where girls of 15, 14, or even
13 years of age have become pregnant
either by grown men or by those who are
little more than boys? What is the future
of the offspring when once born? In my
view the law of abortion calls for consideration and amendment.

BIRTH CONTROL AND POPULATION

May I be allowed to occupy a few
minutes only on the subject of birth
control ?

In mv view the question of birth control
must affect in large measure the future of
this country. It is now over fifty years
since the movement started. In spite of
opposition from those who should have
supported it, it has slowly but surely
gained ground. The common sense of
many of the nation has been steadily asserting itself. The instinct of the people is
turning in the right direction. I am glad
to recognize the great work that has been
done in past years by so many devoted
women and men. The birth control movement is now seen to be one of international
importance.

The future will call on the nations to face
the problems created by the rapid and
perilous increase of populations. When I
look to the East’I see, in certain regions,
a growth of population sc great that it may
burst the barriers of normal territory and
involve the outbreak of long and terrible
war. Everyone of international vision will
appreciate what I say. When I look at
Europe I see again, in certain regions a
growth of population so serious as to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

presage an outpouring which may lead to
appalling conflict. If the nations cannot
control their populations they will not be
able to control the outbreak of war. Birth
control will, I hope, become in due course
one of the greatest agencies for the
furtherance of international peace, through
international co-operation.

But I must limit myself io-night to the
subject of birth control in Great Britain.
I have long held the view that this country
is heavily, and indeed dangerously, overpopulated. The question of birth control is
not only a matter of health and efficiency.
It is interwoven in vital fashion with the
serious economic problems that confront us.
As a nation we are at the cross-roads and
we must face the question of population
with resolute minds. The vast extent of

unemployment is more than a transitory
thing.

THE MACHINE AGE

Let us be under no illusion. The incredible growth in the productive power
of mechanical apparatus is one of the most
significant factors in the unemployment
problem. The application of science and
mechanics to industry and agriculture will
not cease. It will become more intense
and more widespread. Every year will
show that less and less manual labour is
required for many purposes. What is to
become of those who are not needed for the
tasks of production? And, above all, what
are we to do with the four or five millions
of the nation, the submerged tenth, who
are physically and mentally inefficient?

Emigration will not help. The Dominions
will never take our inefficients.

Let us grasp the full significance of the
fact that at the present time a large proportion of the nation represents not assets but
heavy liabilities.

If birth control had been widely practised
by the poor and inefficient during the last
thirty years, the national difficulties of
to-day would be infinitely less and the
general standards of life would be considerably higher. It is a matter of regret
that birth control started at the wrong end.
' MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS

It has developed amongst those who represented the best of our racial stock, including the strongest sections of well-organized
labour. If it had started at and spread
upward from below we should have been
saved from the menacing fact that there
is now a larger rate of growth amongst the
physically or mentally inferior than
amongst the mentally and physically fit.

To get a strong and healthy nation it is
essential that we breed from the right
stocks. There is no other way. The time
has surely come when statesmen should
face the grim realities of the present position and when it should become the duty
of the State to spread amongst the poor
and inefficient a knowledge of birth control
methods which will begin to rectify the
present deplorable situation.

Every year will show more acutely the
terrible results that flow from the random
output of unrestricted breeding. Those
results are with us to-day largely because
the knowledge of birth control methods has
been so harshly and unwisely withheld
from those who needed it most.

A knowledge of birth control methods
should not remain as a privilege of the
well-to-do. It should become the right,
yes, the right, of the millions of poor and
struggling women who seek for a fuller
measure of well-being and for the opportunity so to limit their families as to permit
of health and strength not only for their
children but also for themselves.

THE ETHICS OF BIRTH CONTROL

Let those who are unfit for maternity
have the opportunity of saving the nation
and themselves from the tragedy of unfit
offspring. Let those who are fit for
maternity have the opportunity of restrict‘ng and spacing the birth of their children
in order that health may be where misery
tow exists. As Lord Buckmaster so well
said. ‘‘ To regulate and control birth is
not to degrade but to elevate human
nature.’’

Everyone of us is deeply concerned with
the repulsive conditions which prevail in
the slums of London and of all the great

13

cities. It is, I think, beyond dispute that
there are innumerable women who, through
ignorance of birth-control methods, are
bearing unwanted children under conditions
which make for misery and degradation.

CHILDREN IN THE SLUMS

The absence of proper birth spacing is
responsible for infinite suffering and injury
to women and children throughout the
country. Every social reformer knows the
facts. Throughout every slum and in all
depressed areas women already exhausted
with child-begetting, already over-burdened
with many children born in _ successive
years, are faced with yet another unwanted
child to add to the existing wretchedness.
Can we wonder that self-abortion is prevalent to an extent not realized by the general
public, and that the demand amongst the
poor for assisted abortion is so incessant
and so widespread ?

A woman, however poor she be, should
be taught to realize that she is a responsible
citizen of the State and not the mere instrument for the reckless begetting of offspring.
In my view, it is the duty of every suitable
Local Authority throughout the country to
provide for married women the birth-control
knowledge they may ask for.

The unwanted child who is born to
neglect and wretchedness is one of the great
causes of the misery in our midst. It is
far better that the nation should have a
smaller number of healthy children than
a large multitude of neglected and useless
weaklings.

Statesmen, I am told, have wept in public
when they have mentioned the slums. I
respect their emotion. I share it. But I
profoundly wish that some amongst them
would have the courage to announce to the
public generally the great ameliorating
power of birth-control methods.

The present state of things cannot go on.
The instinct of the people is, I believe,
awakening to the truth of the present
situation. I hope, I deeply hope, that the
instinct already stirring will soon be
translated into a widespread demand for
action.
14

I believe that those who now
so strongly the spread of birth-control
knowledge amongst the miserable and the
distressed will be condemned emphatically
by a future and more enlightened generation. In my view they are hostile to social
progress, and enemies to the true interests
of the poor.

The birth-control movement is, I think,
the greatest hope yet offered to the multitude of women in this country who live not
only in the dark places of poverty, but also
under the grim shadow of unwanted pregnancies. Birth control is one of the sure
foundations of social progress and happy
motherhood, and it is the absolute prerequisite to national eugenic advance.

CONCLUSIONS
I have dealt in broad outlines to-night

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with several subjects. I have abstained,
through pressure of time, from detailed
arguments and elaborate statistics. I have
used no technical phrases. I have merely
touched on vital matters. I do not forget
that the world is a place of conflict and
that the pathway of reform is a pathway
of effort. But let us remember that truth
will make its advance in spite of all
obstacles and that it gains its victory in
the end.

I rejoice to think that this Society represents the ideals of which the future will
approve. I believe with all my heart that

in the coming years the great principles
of eugenics will be adopted and applied by
the vast majority in this realm as the only
true guides to national health and national
happiness.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 1.
