Sex and Culture
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

S1r,—Mr. Fyson’s reply to my letter in your last
issue calls for some comment. He still ‘supports
Dr. Unwin in the assumption that so-called “‘ laws ”’
discovered in the observation of primitive tribes
can be expected to operate in the case of modern
civilizations. He says that discoveries made with
regard to plants in the laboratory hold good in the
field and hedgerow. It seems to me that a truer
analogy is to ask whether, because: many of the
lower organisms flourish in captivity, we can argue
that this “‘ law ’’ must necessarily apply to higher
organisms like the primates ? a |

For it is moral captivity that Dr. Unwin recommends for civilized men and women. He makes it
perfectly clear all the time that what he is talking’
about is coercive sexual restraint. In his letter Mr.
Fyson claims that it is self-control he is advocating.
Then Sex and Culture is irrelevant to his thesis ;
and I am prepared to agree with him. But is he
prepared to recognize that there is no reason to
suppose that self-control and responsibility, coexistent with freedom from external coercion, will
result in an acceptance of the narrow choice
between celibacy and life-long monogamy which
organized Christianity has tried (never entirely
successfully) to rivet on European civilization ?

Why the fact that those who think with me, have
an “‘intense animosity ’’ against ‘‘ any idea of
control ’’ proves Dr. Unwin’s anthropological
thesis, I am at a loss to understand. It is true that
we have an “ intense animosity ”’ against the sexual
control of the young, the poor, and the vigorous by
the old, the rich, and the impotent—a control that
is in its nature primitive and uncivilized. Near this
house on Hampstead Heath, any fine night, a
little drama (or comedy) is enacted. Lovers seek
the solitude of the darkness and the stars. They are
watched by policemen, usually healthy young men
with no taste of the job. The policemen in their
turn are watched by the emissaries of the Public
Morality Council, while here and there a prowling

blackmailer seeks his prey. Such a scene must have.

been re-enacted in essence down the ages from the
time when Dr. Unwin’s deistic civilizations and
virginity tests represented the general level of
culture. I have maintained that the one hope for

the race is to take sexual conduct out of this.

atmosphere of tribal taboo, and by education and
the inculcation of a sense of social responsibility to
place it under the control of the enlightened conscience. This theme Mr. Fyson will find developed
in my Sex and Revolution which also contains my
views on the two other points raised in his original
etter. |

ALEC CRAIG.
London, N.W.3. |

| 310

CORRESPOND

referring. (and I submit my words were cle,

‘sO warm against in the second ‘sentence? I don}

lished by Dr. Unwin, that sexual restraint amoy

But he will find, I think, that men and women, »

  

pot gs =e eo cat : . a ive oe! hy 1m 3g
. “9 7 : . : 1 H :
‘ oa é .
2! + 4 eee

To the Editor, Eugenics Review. I

sir,—Taking Mr. Craig’s paragraphs seriatip .
. I. He fails, it-seems to me, to distinguish .
Unwin’s facts; which appear incontrovertible, from
his psychological explanation which we are free tg
reject. |

2. Idon’tagree. If he will read p. 432 of Sex anj
Culture again he will see that Dr. Unwin by ,
means recommended coercive measures. I am oi
sure that I grasp the full significance of the rath,
involved question, but so far as I do my answer jg
*“‘ No, why should I? ” | |

3. Mr. Craig misrepresents what I wrote. | Wag

 
  
  
  
 
    
   
 

enough) not to Dr. Unwin’s anthropological thegi
but to Mr. Craig’s suggestion that both control apj
cultural rise were due to the same urge, and Dot
cause and effect. Surely if both were due to th
same inheritable urge, they would grow in strep

together and among the people of highest culty,
we should expect the greatest desire for contr
On Mr. Craig’s own (and others’) showing this is ng
the case. And who are the people Mr. Craig waxg

know of any such proposals. Certainly Dr. Unyi
made none. . | !

To return to Dr. Unwin’s psychological explana,
tion. In spite of the joie de vivre which we have |
suppose, all experienced after a union (or becaug
of it), we may concede that continence makes {y
increased social.energy. It is significant that som
of the greatest thinkers and most resolute leaden
of men have eschewed sex. But I for one find}
difficult to follow Dr. Unwin in his belief that suq
social energy is communicated by the mother to he
young children, and may accumulate down ty
generations. For their improved mentality (Un
win’s “‘ cultural rise ’’) we must I believe look t
better brain material, and for this to the selection,
in periods of continence, of sperms carrying th
more valuable genes. But this is theory. Th
immediate need is a recognition of the fact, estab.

the more influential members of a society hy
always preceded social and cultural progress, and;
lessening of it has preceded national decay. _

Mr. Craig’s penultimate sentence sounds hopeftl

longer subject to priestly authority, will need:
reason ; and where will he find it except in Dr
Unwin’s book ?

. a P. F. Fyson. |
Nature and Nurture
Lo the Editor, Eugenics Review ,

Srr,—Tacitly to assume the truth of a lie is ofta

more deceptive than to tell the lie outright.
CORRESPONDENCE

| 1t litera ature the view is imp plicit that food
pouch ther © environmental factors are che sole deter
inants of fitness. I do not wish to underestimate
‘ importan ortance of nutrition, but as a farmer I know
nat it is possible for two animals to be born at

»proximately the same time in the same paddock.
P Fake the same food and water and to experience

 
 
  
  
 

31X

healthily and the other not. It is wrong to over
emphasize the importance of heredity ; but is it as
wrong as the implication in the literature to which
I have referred that heredity is supremely unimportant ?

Guy Porter.

 

24 Regent Road,

no same weather and yet. for one to develop ersey, C.I

‘eal (ee Me TT Rt eee eee ee eee
-_- > @&

— Se ee ee ek -— eS aw FP Ow BS a,

will be held at

THE WALDORF HOTEL
ALDWYCH, W.C.2
On Thursday, February 16th, at 7.30 p.m. (for 7.45)
The Galton Lecture

“ POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY ”
will be given by

Dr. C. G. DARWIN, M.C., M.A., ScD. ERS.
Chairman: The Lord Horder, G.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

A vote of thanks to the Lecturer will be proposed by
The Lord Trent, J.P.
and seconded by Noel Hall, M.A., A.M.

Tickets, 7/6, may be obtained from the Business Secretary, The Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square,
London, S.W.1. Please purchase as early as possible, as it may not be easy to increase the number
| : So arranged for at the last moment. 7
