212 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Fair and dark ; is there a predominant type P

By H. ONSLOW.

The work of Friedrich Nietzsche has for a countless number
of people, who have scarcely ever glanced at his writing, and who
but for the war could not conceivably have taken any interest in it,
now become a subject of controversy. The discussion has been carried
on by those who mistakenly consider that Nietzsche’s work is a
philosophical system, and those who realise that it merely contains
the poetical exposition of an ideal; the result has been distressing, as
the daily press testifies, without even being interesting. A philosopher usually tries to prove his thesis, but Nietzsche scorned to use
argument. Like Bergson he despised reason, exalting in its place
the Will, as Bergson does Intuition. Now a poet may indulge in
the luxury of self-contradiction—a philosopher must not; hence
arises the argument and the injustice. Not that a poet cannot have
a philosophy; far from it. If, however, a poet is quoted
to prove a certain philosophical point of view, there is little
doubt, that no matter what the point of view may be, numerous
passages in his poetry can be found to prove it.

In this way the disputants in the press will always be able to
prove their respective arguments by quoting from the statements
of opinion, which Nietzsche has made about life. Thus the most
rabid anti-Germans have depicted Nietzsche as the archetype
of the coarse, crime-besotted Hun, and yet at the same time Stephen
Graham with equal plausibility has written that he is the spirit of
Holy Russia, which will work her redemption and lead her on to
triumph.

To attempt to decide which view is the right one would be impossible in the scope of a few pages, but fortunately there is still one
phase of Nietzsche’s work which can be dealt with without becoming
involved in this controversy, for he was a philologist, like that other
surprising personality, Borrow. Philology! What a strange bond
between two such dissimilar figures, and what a strange study for
either. Borrow, the scholar gipsy, friend of pugilists, Armenians,
and all the motley following who called him ‘‘brother’’ on the road—
and Nietzsche, son of a Lutheran pastor, lecturer in a German
university, and the passionate poet of Zarathustra. That Nietzsche
was a philologist is very often overlooked, for though philology was
his real business, in it he never achieved success, possibly because he
never really had it at heart. And yet he was never loth to seek
philology’s assisance from it, when he thought it might serve the
purpose of strengthening an argument, or of forming the foundation
to one of his castles in the air.

For instance, he derived from the words ‘‘good’’ and ‘‘bad’’
an etymological basis for his doctrine of Good and Evil—that moral
FAIR AND DARK ; IS THERE A PREDOMINANT TYPE ? 213

standard which was created from the very essence of his nature—
but there is no doubt that with a character like his, the same theory
would have been developed, if the scientific evidence had been wanting
or even contradictory. Asa matter of fact his etymology was not always
without fault, as we learn from the interesting correspondence between
him and the Scandinavian literary critic, Brandes, recently published.
He expresses the opinion in a letter to Brandes that ‘‘Goth’’ has
the same derivation as gut and ‘‘God’’—the god-like race, the fair
race. Brandes, however, replies that ‘‘Gothic’’ has certainly nothing
to do with ‘‘God,’’ nor with ‘‘good.’’ ‘‘It is connected with giessen,
to pour, (he who emits the sperm) and signifies ‘‘stallion’’ or ‘‘male.’’
On the other hand, philologists here hold that your suggestion bonus,
duonus, is extremely apt.’’

On this last derivation (bonus) was based the doctrine of Good
and Evil, the Master Morality and the Slave Morality. For Nietzsche
contended that the Latin word bonus originally meant a ‘‘warrior,’’
being a later form of duonus, from duo, ‘‘two,’’ whence the idea
of opposition, duel, war. (In the same way, bellum is a later form
of duellum, which also is derived from duo). The ‘‘good’’ man
was therefore the war-like man or warrior, who led and composed
the aristocratic classes. In the judgment ‘‘good’’ throughout the
world, the root idea is the same, namely, aristocratic and noble.
The good were the powerful, the commanders, and often as the sign
of their superiority, the rich; as is found for instance to be the case
in the Slav languages, where arya means ‘‘rich’’; or again the ‘‘real
ones,’’ the ‘‘truthful’’? which was indeed the title by which the Greek
nobility styled themselves in a passage from the poet Theognis.

The ruling class was always fair complexioned like the Aryans
who invaded India from the north. That they prided themselves
on their fairness is indicated by the Sanscrit word for ‘‘colour’’
varna, which came to mean ‘‘race’’ or ‘‘caste.’’? Their divinities
mentioned in the }’edas, whose names were often identical with those
of the Roman gods, were called davata, ‘‘the shining ones.’’ The RigVeda, speaking of the conquest of the dark-skinned aboriginal inhabitants, known as dasas, which means ‘‘enemies’’ or ‘‘slaves,’’ describes how the gods ‘‘slaying the dasas protected the Aryan colour,
and subjected the black-skin to the Aryan man.’’ Another great
Sanscrit epic, the Ramayana, describes the race of a non-Aryan chief
as ‘‘of fearful swiftness, unyielding in battle, in colour like a dark
black cloud.’’ When caste first arose in India the dasas of the Vedas
became the lowest caste and were called the Sudras, ‘‘the slave bands
of black descent,’’ who could never rise from their servile condition.
In addition to this connection between ‘‘the noble’’ (bonus) and ‘‘fair,’’
there is a parallel connection between ‘‘the vulgar,’’ ‘‘the plebeian’’
(malus) and ‘‘the dark,’’ or ‘‘dark-haired’’; thus it is found that
malus, ‘‘bad,’’ is derived from the Sanscrit mala, ‘‘dirt,’’ from
which is also derived the Greek pédAas, ‘‘black,’’ and hence the
dark-coloured, vulgar man.

Further, the word ‘‘bad’’ signifies ‘‘vulgar,’’ ‘‘plebeian,’’ as
is exemplified in the German schlecht, ‘‘bad,’’ which is identical
with schlicht, ‘‘simple,’’ ‘‘homely,’’ ‘‘plebeian,’’ in contrast to
214 EUGENICS REVIEW.
‘‘aristocratic.’’ The dark-haired men referred to were no doubt
the pre-Aryan inhabitants of Italy, who contrasted with the fair,
conquering race.

This correlation between ‘‘bad’’ and ‘‘dark,’’ and ‘‘good’’
and ‘‘fair’? is a most striking one, and is far more wide-spread
than in the derivation of a few words. It may, therefore, be worth
while to follow the matter somewhat more closely, and see whether
any further explanation can be given as to why the judgment ‘‘fair’’
should signify ‘‘good’’; why, in fact, the fair were preferred to the
dark.

The population of Kurope may be roughly divided into three
races, the fair race, the medium race, and the dark race. Now, of
these three races, the fairest is always found to be the ruling class,
and the darkest the lowest class; hence of course the fairest men are
the noblest, the best; and the best are the fairest. The first race
are the tall, light-haired, blue-eyed northern type, to be found on
the shores of the North Sea, and south-west of the Baltic. In Britain,
they settled on the east coast of England, in Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, in the east of Seotland, and in the north
of Ireland. The second or Alpine race, with intermediate stature
and colouring, and with distinctive mental and physical qualities,
inhabited the Highlands of Europe, from the Levennes to the Balkan
Peninsula, and even as far as Asia Minor and Turkestan; but in
Great Britain this race has left only the slightest traces. The third
and darkest type inhabit the shores of the Mediterranean. They
are characterised by their short stature, long skulls, and dark hair
and eyes. They are the fundamental race, remnants of which are
still to be found on the Atlantic coast of France, in the extreme south
west of England and Wales, in the west of Scotland, and the southwest of Ireland. This type is also found to be particularly attracted
to urban areas.

Throughout history it has been noticed that the fair, northern
type has been the conquering and ruling race, and that the small, dark
type has been the conquered and enslaved, or has succumbed to poverty
in the economic struggle for wealth. These fair men have also excelled in the study of the natural sciences, as opposed to craftsmanship, and most of the great English scientists have been of the fair
type, as for instance, Newton, Darwin, Kelvin, and J. J. Thomson.
This fact, taken in connection with the observation that the tall
fair race settled by preference on the east coast of England (an observation confirmed by Dr. Beddoe, who made a map showing that
fair people were distributed most densely on the east coast
of Britain, and dark people most densely on the west coast) furnishes perhaps a reason why the University of Cambridge has given
the world more famous natural scientists than any other. For since,
by geographical position, the University is situated in the heart of
the country settled by the fair-haired race, in time past they have
gone to Cambridge in greater numbers than to any other university,
so that Cambridge has had a greater proportion of the men best adapted
to acquire natural science than the other universities, and this advanFAIR AND DARK ; IS THERE A PREDOMINANT TYPE ? 215

tage originally gained by geographical position, may have _ subsequently become intensified by tradition. |

But there are still stranger facts to be considered. This widespread preference may be traced throughout art and history, even
from before the time when Pope Gregory exclaimed ‘‘Non Angli sed
angel1.’> Among other influences, this predilection had of course
the effect of creating a preferential selection in favour of the faircomplexioned race. In English, the very word ‘‘fair,’’ which
comes from the Anglo-Saxon ‘faeger, ‘‘bright,’’ is synonymous
with both ‘‘light-complexioned’’ and ‘‘good,’’ or ‘‘beautiful’’;
and the language is rich in expressions such as ‘‘a dark horse’’ or a
‘*blackguard.’’*

Even from the earliest times a similar preference for the fair is
noticeable; thus Homer describes the gods and heroes as fair, Helen of
Troy was golden-haired, and Venus was nearly always depicted asa
blonde, as indeed was Milton’s Eve. Moreover, in Greek sculpture the
hair of the statues was gilded, to indicate fairness, and the Romans
also by preference dyed their hair light. In Italy, the early poets
like Firenzuola and Petrarch, admired fair people, as well as almost
the entire Venetian school of painters, and a similar feeling may be
found at the same date in French literature. Ste. Godeline of Bruges,
though otherwise beautiful, unfortunately possessed black hair and
eye-brows, and was hence contemptuously called ‘‘a crow,’’ in the Acta
Sanctorum. In French mediaeval poetry the eyes of beautiful women
were often described as vert, an epithet which probably means ‘‘of
various colours,’’ or commonly ‘‘grey,’’ and not ‘‘green’’ as has
been falsely stated to be the case, in this passage from the Chanson
de Roland

‘*Noir je veux lVoeil, et brun le teint,
Bien que Voewl vert toute la France adore.’’
Cervantes loved the fairer women of Spain, and the great English
beauties like Nell Gwyn and Venetia Stanley were all fair. It
would be possible to swell the catalogue indefinitely with lists
of the fair women like la reine Margot, who have received worldwide admiration, for even in the East, preference is always given
to the fairest, the Circassians and the Kabyles.

The surest proof of the admiration granted to the fair, hes in
the fact that the dark and ill-favoured (sic) people try to remedy
their defect, as for instance in Venice in the 16th century, where
it was the custom for women of all classes to practice ‘‘l’arte biondeggiante,’ by sitting upon a wooden terrace constructed on the roof
of the house, with their heads in crownless hats, the broad brims
of which protected their faces and necks, while their hair, previously
steeped in a mixture called la bionda, was exposed to the rays of the
sun. In winter they even went so far as to replace the sun-light by
fires.

The most definite piece of scientific evidence on the subject,
is that collected by Professor Karl Pearson. He discovered that in

 

* This word is said to be derived from the retinue of cooks, scullions and
hangers-on who followed a noble when he was travelling.
216 EUGENICS REVIEW.

England husbands are very decidedly fairer than men in general,
and wives somewhat fairer than women in general; that is to say,
there is a preferential mating among the fairest of mankind, so that
a fair man is on the average more likely to be married than a
dark man, and a fair woman is more likely to marry a fair man than
a dark one. For the popular idea that dissimilar people tend to
marry each other is entirely wrong. As a matter of fact, it has been
shown statistically by Professor Pearson, that there is a very marked
preference for like to marry like, not only with regard to such
obvious characteristics as general colouring, but also with regard to
almost unnoticed or unnoticeable ones such as stature and span. The
actual figures arrived at show that husbands are lighter than
ordinary males by nearly three times the probable error.

The English stage affords an excellent example of the public
attitude towards fairness and darkness; there the ballet and chorus
usually wear yellow wigs, and the heroine of the old-fashioned melodrama was invariably a blonde and the feminine villain a brunnette.
But, nevertheless, preference for fairness is not carried to the extent
of admiring the extremely flaxen-haired, blue-eyed, doll-like type of
woman, especially in England where the predominant type is already
fair.

An interesting observation has been made by Dr. Havelock
Ellis, in the National Portrait Gallery. In spite of the difficulty
of judging accurately of a person’s colouring from a picture, because
it must necessarily include the error of the painter as well as that
of the observer, he has worked out a table which gives the co-efficient
of fairness of the various classes of people represented in the gallery.
The advantage of these observations lies in the fact that the sole
qualification of being placed in the National Portrait Gallery is that
of celebrity. The degree of fairness was indicated, by taking 100
to represent the mean, so that an index of over 100 represented so many
units of fairness, and an index of under 100 represented so many units
of darkness (e.g., 120 represented 20 units of fairness, and 80 represented 20 units of darkness). After placing a value, in as unprejudiced a manner as possible, on every picture, the results were
represented in a table, in which it was found that men of low birth
(35) had an index nearly three times as low as that of created
peers (102). Newly created peers (102) were found to be fairer than
hereditary peers (82). Political agitators and reformers (233), soldiers and sailors (150), lawyers (107), all men of irrepressible energy
and sanguine personal force, have the highest indices. Men of science
(121), are very fair, as has already been said, and it would be expected
that explorers would without doubt belong to the fairest category, but
unfortunately there are no figures available. This interesting sentence,
however, is taken from an account of Shackleton’s polar expedition :—
‘A curious point was noted, namely that all the fifteen men of the
shore party had blue-grey or blue eyes.’’

Philosophers and men of letters have a low index, and divines
(59), men whose mission in life is to preach resignation to a higher
will, are very dark, and belong to the small, dark, Mediterranean race.
It is evident from these figures that the fair man is bold, enerFAIR AND DARK ; IS THERE A PREDOMINANT TYPE ? 217

getic, restless and domineering, and the dark man resigned, religious,
intellectual and conservative. This distinction in character between
the two types is confirmed by an investigation of Dr. A. H. Hansen’s.
He found that in Woneray, the fair population, who furnished three
times as many men for the volunteers as the dark population, was
active, outspoken and progressive, possessing a ‘‘passion of freedom
and independence, caring nothing for equality.’’ Hansen’s method
was to mark on the map the areas in which the tall and fair, and the
short and dark types respectively predominated. When this had been
done it was found that this anthropological map coincided almost
exactly with the political map of electors for the Storthing; the Con-servatives being found in the dark-haired districts and the Liberals in
the fair-haired districts. The Conservatives are described as being
reserved, suspicious, lacking in initiative, caring little for freedom,
with a passion for equality, hating war, regardless of money and very
religious. This last characteristic is ev idenced by the fact that they
subscribed three times as much money as the fair people for purposes of
religious propaganda.

Thus it has been shown that the good people were the masters,
the aristocratic people. They happened to be the fair-haired race
who have predominated throughout history; whereas the bad people,
the plebeians, the slaves, were the small dark, Mediterranean men.
It has also been seen that throughout art and literature, there has
been a preference for the fair, and a certain contempt for the dark.
It does not then appear very difficult to account for this preference for
the fair members of mankind; for if nobles are fair, the preference
for fairness rather than darkness becomes immediately obvious. The
aesthetic judgment that ‘‘fair’’ is ‘‘good’’ was originally caused by the
fact that the fair were also the noble, the rich, the conquerors, whom
the slaves of mankind would always strive to emulate. It is clear,
therefore, that the moral judgment ‘‘good’’ is ultimately based
upon a very concrete foundation, involving the pigments of the hair,
skin and eyes.

LITERATURE CITED.

‘*The Genealogy of Morals.’’ By Friedrich Nietzsche. (‘‘Good and
Evil,’’ ‘‘Good and Bad.’’)

‘*Tuberculosis, heredity and environment’’ p. 11 et seq. By Karl

Pearson. And other publications of the Eugenics Laboratory,
especially ‘‘The Treasury of Human Inheritance.’’

‘*The Comparative Abilities of the Fair and Dark.’’ By Havelock
Ellis. (Monthly Review, August, 1901).

‘*A Study of British Genius.’’ By Havelock Ellis.

‘*Men of the Time.’’ By Conan Doyle.

‘*Men of Science.’’ By Galton.
‘*Genius and Stature.’’ Havelock Ellis. (Nineteenth Century, July,
1897.)

‘*Races of Britain.’’ By Dr. Beddoe. 1885.
**Anthropological History of Europe.’’? By Dr. Beddoe. 1912,
