THE BIOLOGICAL THEORY OF NURTURE.

By PRor. J]. ARTHUR THOMSON, M.A., LL.D., University

of Aberdeen. .
HOROSCOPES are not much in fashion nowadays except among
the undisciplined, but the problem is always with us as we
look at a child. What manner of person lies there in possibility ?
How far is the final result already fixed, how far is the outcome
an open question? Is life in some measure an unpredictable
adventure ?

What are the factors or influences that determine the
shaping of an organism and its life? Man’s case is in some
measure peculiar, since he is, more or less, a rational, social
person, €6,ovroXrixov, as Aristotle put it, and super-organic
influences, such as social tradition, play upon him potently ;
but, biologically considered, all living creatures are subject to
the same laws. For all alike there are, sub specie vita, three
biological ‘‘ Fates ’’—Heredity, Function and Environment.
The influence of function and environment is technically called
‘‘Nurture’’ in contrast to what is implied in the inherited
“* Nature.”’

The first Fate is Heredity—which means the relation of
genetic continuity between successive generations. The natural
inheritance is all that the living creature is or has to start with in
virtue of its hereditary relation. ‘‘ Bless not thyself,’’ said Sir
Thomas Browne, ‘‘ that thou wert born in Athens; but, among
thy multiplied acknowledgments, lift up one hand to heaven
that thou wert born of honest parents, that modesty, humility,
and veracity lay in the same egg, and came into the world with
thee.”’ ‘‘ A man,’’ as Heine said, ‘‘ cannot be too careful in
the selection of his parents.’’ Heredity, the past living on in
the present, is the first Fate, and the greatest of the three.

The second Fate is Envtronment—all manner of surrounding influences that play upon the living creature, making deep
dints or giving light touches, awakening some buds and frostbiting others, encouraging and depressing, training and
THE BIOLOGICAL THEORY OF NURTURE. 51

thwarting. Environment is the second Fate, and some of us
think that it comes a better second than others of us will allow.

The third Fate is Functton—what the creature does or does
not do, the influence of use and disuse, of work and play, of
exercise and rest. When we consult a book like Arlidge’s
Diseases of Occupations—a grim curiosity for future ages—we
realise what an important factor function is for evil as well as
good in the individual life. The importance of function as a lifeshaping factor is expressed in various wise sayings: ‘* By
force of striking one becomes a blacksmith,’’ ‘‘ What you have
inherited from your ancestors you must use if it is to be your
very own.”’ In the language of the immortal parable, we must
trade with our talents.

Before leaving the metaphor of the three Fates, one is
tempted to ask if there are not four. A swallow born and bred
in Britain flies south at the end of summer, and the Aberdeen.
University Bird Migration Inquiry has helped to prove that
such a swallow may return the following spring to the farmsteading of its birth and youth—a wonderful homing. That it
can make the double journey successfully depends mainly on its
inheritance, but partly on its functioning, its early training in
flight, and partly on environment, e.g., the nutrition which
gives it strength to fly and the stimuli which pull the trigger
of the migratory instinct. But is there not also a cosmic factor,
quite uncontrollable by the creature itself and careless of it,
which offers or withholds opportunities, which meets some
migrants with a fatal storm and offers others a fair haven? Is
not one of the factors in our own life a giving or withholding of
opportunities which we, at any rate, have nothing to do with,
which we call providence when it is with us, and chance when
it is against us. But, perhaps, this is just part of our environment.

The modern idea of the biological controllability of life,
perhaps dating from Darwin and Pasteur, led, not unnaturally,
to an indulgence in over-sanguine hopes as to the ameliorative
influences of function and environment. This was held to be
demonstrable for the individual, and before the days of Galton’s
and Weismann’s wholesome scepticism as to the transmission
52 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of bodily modifications or individually acquired characters, it
was often held to be true as regards the race. But a strong
reaction has set in. Let us briefly consider why.

(1) If we take the eggs of, say, the blackheaded gull and
hatch them in an incubator in the laboratory, and rear the results
in confinement, we get, as everyone knows, a number of normal,
well-endowed young birds, which will migrate months afterwards when their kinsfolk fly about overhead. The environment, the whole nurture, was very peculiar, but it did not seem
to make much difference. There is evidence, indeed, that
birds which have not known freedom are badly handicapped
when liberated, because they do not know their way about. But
the clear fact seems to be that for many creatures changes of
nurture do not fundamentally matter as long as the essential
conditions of life are not interfered with. The full inheritance
may not be expressed, but a large proportion of it is realised as
usual. There are many delicate creatures, such as the larve of
sea-urchins, which are difficult to rear, which do not readily
stand even slight nurtural changes, but many other creatures
can within limits adjust themselves to, and develop normally
in quite peculiar conditions of life. It is a very striking fact
that the ovum of a rabbit can develop for two days normally
outside of the body, and Man is peculiarly master of his Fate.
What then is the importance of nurture ?

(2) It is likewise a familiar fact that there is often an extraordinary tenacity in the persistence of hereditary characters, no
matter how the nurture is changed. Having all the fingers thumbs
has been known to persist for six generations, night-blindness
in a lineage for two and a half centuries, a particular kind of
dwarf for four generations. A peculiar variety of the Greater
Celandine with cut-up leaves which appeared suddenly in an
apothecary’s garden at the end of the 16th century has bred true
ever since. ‘‘ He that will to Cupar maun to Cupar,’’ we sadly
say in Scotland. ‘‘ Each man’s nature is his fate,’’ said
Democritus, and the modern students of heredity agree. What
then is the importance of nurture ?

(3) Another consideration is this. It is not difficult to impose
peculiarities on organisms by subjecting them to peculiarities of
THE BIOLOGICAL THEORY OF NURTURE. 53

nurture. A goldfish kept continuously in the dark becomes
quite blind; caterpillars subjected to cold may turn into darkcoloured butterflies; birds, such as the bobolink, may be dieted
so that they keep their breeding plumage through the year and
will sing their spring song in mid-winter. These are three
instances out of three hundred instances of the power of nurture,
to which we shall return. But everyone knows that we cannot
assert that any one of these extrinsic modifications is as such,
or in any representative degree, entailed on the next generation.
So what is the importance of nurture ?

(4) We have the statistical evidence furnished by Professor
Pearson and the Galton Laboratory—which leads to the
important conclusion that the results of changes in nurture are
of relatively small importance compared with the results of
variation in the physique, the mentality and the habits of
parents—that ‘‘the degree of dependence of the child on the
characters of its parentage is ten times as intense as its degree
of dependence on the character of its home or uprearing.”’
‘It is five to ten times as profitable for a child to be born of
parents of sound physique and of brisk, orderly mentality as for
a child to be born and nurtured in a good physical environ
ment.”’
Having given four reasons which warrant us in regarding

the first Fate—Heredity—as fundamental, let us state some of
the reasons for continuing to attach great importance to Nurture.
I regret that I have no statistics to offer nor experiments of
my own to which to refer; but I venture to think that what I
have to say would be subscribed to by all well-informed
biologists as a fair statement of the biological theory of nurture.
Professor Pearson has emphasised the importance of the
inherited nature, and I agree; my aim is to emphasise the

importance of nurture.
I. I would say first that since both are indispensable there

is no antithesis. As one of the leaders of the experimental
study of heredity—-Professor T. H. Morgan—has recently said :*
a ‘‘ character is the product of a number of genetic factors and

of environmental conditions ’’; or, again, ‘‘ every character is
1T, H. Morgan and others: The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity. New York
1915.
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the realised result of the reaction of hereditary factors with each
other and with their environment ’’; or again, ‘‘ it is a commonplace that the environment is essential for the development of
any trait, and that traits may differ according to the environment in which they develop.”’

We have admitted that the strength of an (inherited)
individuality may be such that it expresses itself almost in the
face of inappropriate nurture, but there is a minimum nurture
necessary if there is to be development at all, and the conditions
of nurture determine whether the expression of the inheritance
is to be full or partial, abundant or stunted, or it may be, as
regards a particular feature, absent altogether.

Gudernatsch has shown that in tadpoles fed on thyroid
there is differentiation without growth, while in tadpoles fed on
thymus and spleen there is growth without differentiation.’

A character known to be part of the inheritance may
remain entirely unexpressed in the individual development
because certain environmental conditions are lacking, yet the
heritable character may be handed on all the same.

Fruit-flies (Drosophila) of a Mendelian race with a
peculiar abnormality may appear perfectly normal if raised in
a dry bottle, but the presence within them of the ‘‘ factor ’’ for
abnormal may be demonstrated by rearing their offspring in
a wet bottle.?

A diagrammatic illustration of my point concerns the red
Chinese primrose (Primula sinensis rubra). Reared at 15-20°
it has red flowers; reared at 30-35° C., with moisture and shade,
the same plants have pure white flowers. The development, so
far as colour goes, depends on its nurture.*

Take another illustration from the Fruit-fly. There is a
mutant stock that produces supernumerary legs, a considerable
percentage in winter, few or none insummer. Miss Hoge finds
that when the flies are kept in an ice chest at a temperature of
about 10° C., a high percentage of flies with supernumerary
legs occurs. In a hot climate there would be no evidence that

1 Amer, Journ. Anat., XV. (1914), pp. 431-78, 2 pls.

* T. H. Morgan and others, op. cit. p 47.
3 Ibid., op. cit. p. 38.
THE BIOLOGICAL THEORY OF NURTURE. 55

the peculiarity was part of the inheritance; in a cold region
it would be obvious. This shows that the expression of the
inheritance as regards a particular character sometimes depends
on nurture.’

In the dark caves of Dalmatia lives the well-known blind
salamander Proteus, nearly a foot long, with a white skin, a
little pinkish because of the blood. Its white skin is like a
photographic plate, as Dr. Gadow put it, for if there is
the least light it becomes spotted with grey patches, and in
diffuse light it becomes black. The newly-hatched descendants
of these dark parents are also dark, but this is probably because
the light gets through the body of the parent, and influences
the eggs before they are laid. In any case, it depends on
nurture whether a Proteus is white or black.

II. While some developing organisms are strikingly
indifferent to changes in their environment, there are others
which respond sensitively, sometimes in a startling way, to
changes which do not seem very drastic. MacDougal’s wellknown experiments? of injecting solutions of sugar, calcium,
potassium, and zinc into the developing ovaries of one of the
Evening Primroses resulted in a small percentage of notably
atypical individuals, which bred true to the third generation.
The chemical reagents introduced were not very different from
those which might occur naturally in the sap of the plant.
Among the changes induced there were not only losses and
augmentations of what was previously present, there were
distinct novelties which maintained their distinctness when
crossed with the parental strains.

Loeb? has recently shown that it is very easy to produce a
percentage of fish-embryos (Fundulus) with defective eyes by
adding a minute quantity of potassium cyanide to the water
or by exposing the newly fertilised eggs to low temperature.
That is to say, relatively slight environmental changes may so
alter the constitution of the developing embryo that a leap is
taken in the direction of blindness.

1 Morgan op. cit. p. 41.

2In lecture on “The Direct Influence of Environment” in “Fifty Years of
Darwinism ” (1909).

3 Biol: Bulletin xxix., 1915, p. 50.
56 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Similarly Stockard’? has shown for the same fish that the
addition of a very minute quantity of magnesium salt to the
water induces in a large number of them the development of a
single Cyclopean eye in place of the normal two eyes.

Such cases are to be borne in mind in connection with
man and mammals where even slight extrinsic or exogenous
changes in the blood of the mother may affect the development
of the unborn offspring living in intimate symbiosis with her.
It is very important to realise the difficulty of distinguishing
between what is due to inherited nature and what is due to some
peculiarity in ante-natal nurture.

The effect of negative nurture on the individual is sometimes very remarkable. It is well known that certain simple
worms (Planarians) can be starved for months without fatal
effects. They become smaller and smaller, living on their own
internal resources. Some of their cells disappear altogether and
others are greatly reduced in size. This is an old story, but
Professor Child has recently shown that the reduction in size
is associated with a remarkable rejuvenescence, and that the
vital processes are quickened. The starveling becomes young
again—surely a quaint biological justification of asceticism.
Many similar facts are given in Child’s recently published book
on ‘‘ Senescence and Rejuvenescence.” 2

And what is true of nutrition is true of other factors in
nurture; they alter the punctuation of the life-cycle. A herring’s
egg in the sea hatches in a little over a week; put it in a
refrigerator, and the development is slowed down so that the egg
takes fifty days to hatch.

III. Without assuming that a peculiarity of the body,
acquired as the direct result of a peculiarity in nurture, can be
as such or in any representative degree entailed on the offspring,
of which there is no convincing proof, we may recognise that
nurture may be of considerable importance to the race. The
modification may give the individual a life of conspicuous success
or failure, which may result in a subsequent increase or decrease
in the numbers of the type which it represents, thus obviously

working for both good and ill to the race. Vigour acquired
1Journ. Exper. Zoology, February, 1909.
2 Chicago, 1915.
THE BIOLOGICAL THEORY OF NURTURE. 57

by open-air exercise gives a man resisting power against
infection; it may keep bad constitutions alive; it will also keep
gocd constitutions from being gratuitously weakened. Reduction of the likelihood of infection will also work both ways.

It has often been pointed out that an individually acquired
modification may serve as a life-saving screen until an innate
variation with similar result has time to establish itself. Thus
artificial immunity may be a useful temporary modification
until natural immunity arrives—if it does arrive.

In the case of mammals the unborn offspring may be
damaged by the ill-nourished, over-strained, or poisoned
state of the maternal body. There is not transmission of
acquired characters in the technical sense, but there is antenatal deterioration and arrestment of the offspring as the result
of abnormal nurture on the parent’s part. Some evidence exists
which goes to show that deeply-saturating parental modifications, such as the results of poisoning, may affect the germ-cells.
The influence very probably affects the cytoplasm rather than
the chromosomes.

There is little likelihood that we are at an end of the
question as to the possible effect of modifications (nurture-effects)
on inheritance, and a useful hint of the subtlety of the problem
may be got from a brief consideration of the most important
British investigation on the subject—Dr. Agar’s study’—of a
water-flea (Simocephalus), a little crustacean with two valves.
Under certain nutritive conditions the crustaceans acquired a
peculiar reversal of their shell-valves, doubtless as the result
of altered metabolism. After the eggs had appeared and
grown in the ovary the animals were restored to normal conditions. In due time the eggs developed into forms with
reflexed shell-valves such as their parents had acquired. Later
on, however, when the parents laid again the abnormal effect
was seen only to a very slight degree, and in a third brood it
had dwindled away. The probability is that the abnormal
nurture resulted not in any disturbance of the inheritance, but
in the formation of some peculiar non-living metabolic product,
which was included in the cytoplasm of the egg, passed

* Phil, Trans. Series B. cciii. (1913) pp. 319-50.
58 EUGENICS REVIEW.

passively into the body which developed from the egg, and
there produced on the body of the offspring the same effect as
it originally produced on the body of the parent which acquired
the character in question.

In this connection reference may be made to a view
sketched by an ingenious French biologist, Bohn. In one
aspect the organism is a vast system of correlated chemical processes. There are numerous main lines of metabolism which
work together. If conditions demand it, there may be a great
local increase along any one of these lines, just as in the activities of a country. Thus, hard exercise of the limbs may induce
unusually intense myogenic metabolism—the making of muscle
substance. This is seen in the professional dancer for instance.
But because of correlation—a fact imperfectly understood—
the myogenic fashion, so to speak, spreads, and affects other
parts of the body, such as the dancer’s heart. Now it may be
that although the germ-cells remain unaffected by any particular
muscular modification, they may be specifically affected by a
general dominance of myogenic metabolism.

Very striking and suggestive are Professor Child’s experiments on the effect of altered diet on Planarian worms.’ Thus
a diet of freshwater mussels depresses the vitality, 1.e., lessens
the rate of metabolism and the power of resistance. The stock
becomes senescent, and if the diet be continued for several
generations there is an aggravation of senescence, for they
begin to be born old. The effect of the mussel diet is cumulative. One does not dream of arguing from worm to man, but
one recognises the importance of competent experiments which
show that the course of the life-cycle may be greatly altered by
changing the character of the food.

Bordage made some interesting observations on European
peach trees transported to Réunion. As has been noticed in
similar cases, they dropped their deciduous habit and became—it
took some of them twenty years—evergreen. The individual constitution was altered. Still more interesting was the fact that when
seeds of these pseudo-evergreens were sown in certain mountainous districts with a considerable amount of frost, they pro
1 «* Senescence and Rejuvenescence ” 1915.
THE BIOLOGICAL THEORY OF NURTURE. 59

duced young peach trees which were also evergreen. European
seeds sown in similar places produced ordinary deciduous trees.
It is probable that the apparent inheritance in the case of the
peach trees was the result of an influence on the body of the
seed before it was separated from the parent. A similar result
in mammals may be readily confused with inheritance.

IV. There is an increasing body of facts pointing to the
conclusion that changes in nurture may serve as variational
stimuli, that is to say that they may affect the germ-cells through
the parent, so that a variation occurs in the offspring. Thus,
Professor Tower subjected potato beetles, at a certain stage of
their development, to unusual conditions of temperature: and
humidity. The body of the beetles exhibited no modification,
and that was not to be expected. But ina number of cases the
offspring of these beetles showed remarkable changes in colour
and markings, and even in minute details of structure. And
there was no reversion to the parental condition. It looks as if
a peculiarity in the environment might serve as a liberating
stimulus to variability.

Just in a sentence let me refer to the probability that much
may depend upon the nurtural reception that a natural variation
meets with. Unless the nurture evolves progressively along with
the nature, in mankind especially, many new departures may
be blocked at the outset, many promising variations may be
born only to die.

On no account whatsoever are we to countenance, if we
can help it, spoiling good stock by bad; but it is a dubious
inference that the bad is hopeless. It may often be that it is not
so bad as it looks. In her interesting study, ‘‘ Environment
and Efficiency,’’* Miss Mary Horner Thomson tells of her
study of 265 children, mostly of ‘‘ the lowest class ’’ (Class A,
fourth below the poverty level!), who had been sent to institutions and trained. She found that 192 (72 per cent.) turned out
well; that 44 (16 per cent.) were doubtful; and that only 29 (less
than 11 per cent.) were unsatisfactory, and of these 13 were
defectives. These figures, which should be checked and multiplied, afford some evidence of the controllability of life.

7 Longmans, 1912.
60 EUGENICS REVIEW.

IN CONCLUSION. Illustrations have been given of a number
of facts:—that nurture is important as a condition of normal
development; that on its richness in liberating stimuli the
degree of development in part depends; that even a slight
change in nurture may mean a great deal; that in mammals
especially it is not always easy to distinguish what is in the
strict sense inherited from what is due to ante-natal nurture;
that nurtural effects though not transmissible may be in several
ways of indirect racial importance. It has also been pointed
out that there are some facts suggesting the theory that
peculiarities of nurture may act as variational stimuli—tending
to the emergence of the new.

It would be quite fallacious to argue from any of the
illustrations I have given to man, but, perhaps, I have said
enough to suggest the undesirability of losing faith too utterly
in the potency of nurture in shaping the individual life. Of
the danger of arguing from one case to another, let me give
an interesting illustration concerning the influence of alcohol.
D. D. Whitney studied the effect of minute traces of alcohol
in the water in which Rotifers or wheel animalcules were kept.
The result was a decrease in reproductive power and a weakening in the power of resistence to deleterious influences. Twentyeight generations were studied and the evil effects of the alcohol
were proved. But from the eleventh to the twenty-second
generation at least it was found that removal of the alcohol was
followed by rapid individual recovery, and that the grandchildren showed none of the defects caused by alcohol in their
grandparents. |

Siockard subjected male guinea-pigs for three years to
vapours of alcohol, which does not spoil their stomach, and
found that an alcoholised male guinea-pig almost invariably
begets defective offspring even when mated with a vigorous
normal female. The effects were manifest in the second generation also. ‘‘ The poison injures the cells and tissues of the
body, the germ-cells as well as other cells, and the offspring
derived from the weakened or affected germ-cells have all the
cells of their bodies defective.”
THE BIOLOGICAL THEORY OF NURTURE. 61

In previous attempts to appreciate the importance of
nurture for the individual I have laid emphasis on its réle in the
development of the human mind, and for this I have been
severely taken to task. If I have erred, it is in company with
many biologists and psychologists of high standing who have
declared that our mind is in large measure a social product.
One of the sanest of them, Professor G. H. Parker, writes : “‘ our
intellectual outfit comes to us more in the nature of a social
contribution than an organic one.’’ While our mental capacity
is primarily determined by heredity, it can be encouraged and
augmented, or inhibited and depressed, within wide limits, by
nurture.

Especially as regards the mind, do we feel that while the
inheritance is the seed-corn, ‘‘ nurture ’’ is the soil and the sunshine, the wind and the rain. Nurture can create nothing, but
without it the buds that are there may fail to open or to unfold
freely or to blossom. We cannot make a silk purse out of a
sow’s ear, but by trading with our talent we may make it two,
or peradventure five talents.
